




Sketches by Boz



by Charles Dickens

Boz is a pseudonym of Charles Dickens












OUR PARISH









CHAPTER I - THE BEADLE.  THE PARISH ENGINE.  THE SCHOOLMASTER.







How much is conveyed in those two short words - 'The Parish!'  And

with how many tales of distress and misery, of broken fortune and

ruined hopes, too often of unrelieved wretchedness and successful

knavery, are they associated!  A poor man, with small earnings, and

a large family, just manages to live on from hand to mouth, and to

procure food from day to day; he has barely sufficient to satisfy

the present cravings of nature, and can take no heed of the future.

His taxes are in arrear, quarter-day passes by, another quarter-day

arrives:  he can procure no more quarter for himself, and is

summoned by - the parish.  His goods are distrained, his children

are crying with cold and hunger, and the very bed on which his sick

wife is lying, is dragged from beneath her.  What can he do?  To

whom is he to apply for relief?  To private charity?  To benevolent

individuals?  Certainly not - there is his parish.  There are the

parish vestry, the parish infirmary, the parish surgeon, the parish

officers, the parish beadle.  Excellent institutions, and gentle,

kind-hearted men.  The woman dies - she is buried by the parish.

The children have no protector - they are taken care of by the

parish.  The man first neglects, and afterwards cannot obtain, work

- he is relieved by the parish; and when distress and drunkenness

have done their work upon him, he is maintained, a harmless

babbling idiot, in the parish asylum.



The parish beadle is one of the most, perhaps THE most, important

member of  the local administration.  He is not so well off as the

churchwardens, certainly, nor is he so learned as the vestry-clerk,

nor does he order things quite so much his own way as either of

them.  But his power is very great, notwithstanding; and the

dignity of his office is never impaired by the absence of efforts

on his part to maintain it.  The beadle of our parish is a splendid

fellow.  It is quite delightful to hear him, as he explains the

state of the existing poor laws to the deaf old women in the board-

room passage on business nights; and to hear what he said to the

senior churchwarden, and what the senior churchwarden said to him;

and what 'we' (the beadle and the other gentlemen) came to the

determination of doing.  A miserable-looking woman is called into

the boardroom, and represents a case of extreme destitution,

affecting herself - a widow, with six small children.  'Where do

you live?' inquires one of the overseers.  'I rents a two-pair

back, gentlemen, at Mrs. Brown's, Number 3, Little King William's-

alley, which has lived there this fifteen year, and knows me to be

very hard-working and industrious, and when my poor husband was

alive, gentlemen, as died in the hospital' - 'Well, well,'

interrupts the overseer, taking a note of the address, 'I'll send

Simmons, the beadle, to-morrow morning, to ascertain whether your

story is correct; and if so, I suppose you must have an order into

the House - Simmons, go to this woman's the first thing to-morrow

morning, will you?'  Simmons bows assent, and ushers the woman out.

Her previous admiration of 'the board' (who all sit behind great

books, and with their hats on) fades into nothing before her

respect for her lace-trimmed conductor; and her account of what has

passed inside, increases - if that be possible - the marks of

respect, shown by the assembled crowd, to that solemn functionary.

As to taking out a summons, it's quite a hopeless case if Simmons

attends it, on behalf of the parish.  He knows all the titles of

the Lord Mayor by heart; states the case without a single stammer:

and it is even reported that on one occasion he ventured to make a

joke, which the Lord Mayor's head footman (who happened to be

present) afterwards told an intimate friend, confidentially, was

almost equal to one of Mr. Hobler's.



See him again on Sunday in his state-coat and cocked-hat, with a

large-headed staff for show in his left hand, and a small cane for

use in his right.  How pompously he marshals the children into

their places! and how demurely the little urchins look at him

askance as he surveys them when they are all seated, with a glare

of the eye peculiar to beadles! The churchwardens and overseers

being duly installed in their curtained pews, he seats himself on a

mahogany bracket, erected expressly for him at the top of the

aisle, and divides his attention between his prayer-book and the

boys.  Suddenly, just at the commencement of the communion service,

when the whole congregation is hushed into a profound silence,

broken only by the voice of the officiating clergyman, a penny is

heard to ring on the stone floor of the aisle with astounding

clearness.  Observe the generalship of the beadle.  His involuntary

look of horror is instantly changed into one of perfect

indifference, as if he were the only person present who had not

heard the noise.  The artifice succeeds.  After putting forth his

right leg now and then, as a feeler, the victim who dropped the

money ventures to make one or two distinct dives after it; and the

beadle, gliding softly round, salutes his little round head, when

it again appears above the seat, with divers double knocks,

administered with the cane before noticed, to the intense delight

of three young men in an adjacent pew, who cough violently at

intervals until the conclusion of the sermon.



Such are a few traits of the importance and gravity of a parish

beadle - a gravity which has never been disturbed in any case that

has come under our observation, except when the services of that

particularly useful machine, a parish fire-engine, are required:

then indeed all is bustle.  Two little boys run to the beadle as

fast as their legs will carry them, and report from their own

personal observation that some neighbouring chimney is on fire; the

engine is hastily got out, and a plentiful supply of boys being

obtained, and harnessed to it with ropes, away they rattle over the

pavement, the beadle, running - we do not exaggerate - running at

the side, until they arrive at some house, smelling strongly of

soot, at the door of which the beadle knocks with considerable

gravity for half-an-hour.  No attention being paid to these manual

applications, and the turn-cock having turned on the water, the

engine turns off amidst the shouts of the boys; it pulls up once

more at the work-house, and the beadle 'pulls up' the unfortunate

householder next day, for the amount of his legal reward.  We never

saw a parish engine at a regular fire but once.  It came up in

gallant style - three miles and a half an hour, at least; there was

a capital supply of water, and it was first on the spot.  Bang went

the pumps - the people cheered - the beadle perspired profusely;

but it was unfortunately discovered, just as they were going to put

the fire out, that nobody understood the process by which the

engine was filled with water; and that eighteen boys, and a man,

had exhausted themselves in pumping for twenty minutes, without

producing the slightest effect!



The personages next in importance to the beadle, are the master of

the workhouse and the parish schoolmaster.  The vestry-clerk, as

everybody knows, is a short, pudgy little man, in black, with a

thick gold watch-chain of considerable length, terminating in two

large seals and a key.  He is an attorney, and generally in a

bustle; at no time more so, than when he is hurrying to some

parochial meeting, with his gloves crumpled up in one hand, and a

large red book under the other arm.  As to the churchwardens and

overseers, we exclude them altogether, because all we know of them

is, that they are usually respectable tradesmen, who wear hats with

brims inclined to flatness, and who occasionally testify in gilt

letters on a blue ground, in some conspicuous part of the church,

to the important fact of a gallery having being enlarged and

beautified, or an organ rebuilt.



The master of the workhouse is not, in our parish - nor is he

usually in any other - one of that class of men the better part of

whose existence has passed away, and who drag out the remainder in

some inferior situation, with just enough thought of the past, to

feel degraded by, and discontented with the present.  We are unable

to guess precisely to our own satisfaction what station the man can

have occupied before; we should think he had been an inferior sort

of attorney's clerk, or else the master of a national school -

whatever he was, it is clear his present position is a change for

the better.  His income is small certainly, as the rusty black coat

and threadbare velvet collar demonstrate:  but then he lives free

of house-rent, has a limited allowance of coals and candles, and an

almost unlimited allowance of authority in his petty kingdom.  He

is a tall, thin, bony man; always wears shoes and black cotton

stockings with his surtout; and eyes you, as you pass his parlour-

window, as if he wished you were a pauper, just to give you a

specimen of his power.  He is an admirable specimen of a small

tyrant:  morose, brutish, and ill-tempered; bullying to his

inferiors, cringing to his superiors, and jealous of the influence

and authority of the beadle.



Our schoolmaster is just the very reverse of this amiable official.

He has been one of those men one occasionally hears of, on whom

misfortune seems to have set her mark; nothing he ever did, or was

concerned in, appears to have prospered.  A rich old relation who

had brought him up, and openly announced his intention of providing

for him, left him 10,000L. in his will, and revoked the bequest in

a codicil.  Thus unexpectedly reduced to the necessity of providing

for himself, he procured a situation in a public office.  The young

clerks below him, died off as if there were a plague among them;

but the old fellows over his head, for the reversion of whose

places he was anxiously waiting, lived on and on, as if they were

immortal.  He speculated and lost.  He speculated again and won -

but never got his money.  His talents were great; his disposition,

easy, generous and liberal.  His friends profited by the one, and

abused the other.  Loss succeeded loss; misfortune crowded on

misfortune; each successive day brought him nearer the verge of

hopeless penury, and the quondam friends who had been warmest in

their professions, grew strangely cold and indifferent.  He had

children whom he loved, and a wife on whom he doted.  The former

turned their backs on him; the latter died broken-hearted.  He went

with the stream - it had ever been his failing, and he had not

courage sufficient to bear up against so many shocks - he had never

cared for himself, and the only being who had cared for him, in his

poverty and distress, was spared to him no longer.  It was at this

period that he applied for parochial relief.  Some kind-hearted man

who had known him in happier times, chanced to be churchwarden that

year, and through his interest he was appointed to his present

situation.



He is an old man now.  Of the many who once crowded round him in

all the hollow friendship of boon-companionship, some have died,

some have fallen like himself, some have prospered - all have

forgotten him.  Time and misfortune have mercifully been permitted

to impair his memory, and use has habituated him to his present

condition.  Meek, uncomplaining, and zealous in the discharge of

his duties, he has been allowed to hold his situation long beyond

the usual period; and he will no doubt continue to hold it, until

infirmity renders him incapable, or death releases him.  As the

grey-headed old man feebly paces up and down the sunny side of the

little court-yard between school hours, it would be difficult,

indeed, for the most intimate of his former friends to recognise

their once gay and happy associate, in the person of the Pauper

Schoolmaster.

