






CHAPTER VI - THE LADIES' SOCIETIES







Our Parish is very prolific in ladies' charitable institutions.  In

winter, when wet feet are common, and colds not scarce, we have the

ladies' soup distribution society, the ladies' coal distribution

society, and the ladies' blanket distribution society; in summer,

when stone fruits flourish and stomach aches prevail, we have the

ladies' dispensary, and the ladies' sick visitation committee; and

all the year round we have the ladies' child's examination society,

the ladies' bible and prayer-book circulation society, and the

ladies' childbed-linen monthly loan society.  The two latter are

decidedly the most important; whether they are productive of more

benefit than the rest, it is not for us to say, but we can take

upon ourselves to affirm, with the utmost solemnity, that they

create a greater stir and more bustle, than all the others put

together.



We should be disposed to affirm, on the first blush of the matter,

that the bible and prayer-book society is not so popular as the

childbed-linen society; the bible and prayer-book society has,

however, considerably increased in importance within the last year

or two, having derived some adventitious aid from the factious

opposition of the child's examination society; which factious

opposition originated in manner following:- When the young curate

was popular, and all the unmarried ladies in the parish took a

serious turn, the charity children all at once became objects of

peculiar and especial interest.  The three Miss Browns

(enthusiastic admirers of the curate) taught, and exercised, and

examined, and re-examined the unfortunate children, until the boys

grew pale, and the girls consumptive with study and fatigue.  The

three Miss Browns stood it out very well, because they relieved

each other; but the children, having no relief at all, exhibited

decided symptoms of weariness and care.  The unthinking part of the

parishioners laughed at all this, but the more reflective portion

of the inhabitants abstained from expressing any opinion on the

subject until that of the curate had been clearly ascertained.



The opportunity was not long wanting.  The curate preached a

charity sermon on behalf of the charity school, and in the charity

sermon aforesaid, expatiated in glowing terms on the praiseworthy

and indefatigable exertions of certain estimable individuals.  Sobs

were heard to issue from the three Miss Browns' pew; the pew-opener

of the division was seen to hurry down the centre aisle to the

vestry door, and to return immediately, bearing a glass of water in

her hand.  A low moaning ensued; two more pew-openers rushed to the

spot, and the three Miss Browns, each supported by a pew-opener,

were led out of the church, and led in again after the lapse of

five minutes with white pocket-handkerchiefs to their eyes, as if

they had been attending a funeral in the churchyard adjoining.  If

any doubt had for a moment existed, as to whom the allusion was

intended to apply, it was at once removed.  The wish to enlighten

the charity children became universal, and the three Miss Browns

were unanimously besought to divide the school into classes, and to

assign each class to the superintendence of two young ladies.



A little learning is a dangerous thing, but a little patronage is

more so; the three Miss Browns appointed all the old maids, and

carefully excluded the young ones.  Maiden aunts triumphed, mammas

were reduced to the lowest depths of despair, and there is no

telling in what act of violence the general indignation against the

three Miss Browns might have vented itself, had not a perfectly

providential occurrence changed the tide of public feeling.  Mrs.

Johnson Parker, the mother of seven extremely fine girls - all

unmarried - hastily reported to several other mammas of several

other unmarried families, that five old men, six old women, and

children innumerable, in the free seats near her pew, were in the

habit of coming to church every Sunday, without either bible or

prayer-book.  Was this to be borne in a civilised country?  Could

such things be tolerated in a Christian land?  Never!  A ladies'

bible and prayer-book distribution society was instantly formed:

president, Mrs. Johnson Parker; treasurers, auditors, and

secretary, the Misses Johnson Parker:  subscriptions were entered

into, books were bought, all the free-seat people provided

therewith, and when the first lesson was given out, on the first

Sunday succeeding these events, there was such a dropping of books,

and rustling of leaves, that it was morally impossible to hear one

word of the service for five minutes afterwards.



The three Miss Browns, and their party, saw the approaching danger,

and endeavoured to avert it by ridicule and sarcasm.  Neither the

old men nor the old women could read their books, now they had got

them, said the three Miss Browns.  Never mind; they could learn,

replied Mrs. Johnson Parker.  The children couldn't read either,

suggested the three Miss Browns.  No matter; they could be taught,

retorted Mrs. Johnson Parker.  A balance of parties took place.

The Miss Browns publicly examined - popular feeling inclined to the

child's examination society.  The Miss Johnson Parkers publicly

distributed - a reaction took place in favour of the prayer-book

distribution.  A feather would have turned the scale, and a feather

did turn it.  A missionary returned from the West Indies; he was to

be presented to the Dissenters' Missionary Society on his marriage

with a wealthy widow.  Overtures were made to the Dissenters by the

Johnson Parkers.  Their object was the same, and why not have a

joint meeting of the two societies?  The proposition was accepted.

The meeting was duly heralded by public announcement, and the room

was crowded to suffocation.  The Missionary appeared on the

platform; he was hailed with enthusiasm.  He repeated a dialogue he

had heard between two negroes, behind a hedge, on the subject of

distribution societies; the approbation was tumultuous.  He gave an

imitation of the two negroes in broken English; the roof was rent

with applause.  From that period we date (with one trifling

exception) a daily increase in the popularity of the distribution

society, and an increase of popularity, which the feeble and

impotent opposition of the examination party, has only tended to

augment.



Now, the great points about the childbed-linen monthly loan society

are, that it is less dependent on the fluctuations of public

opinion than either the distribution or the child's examination;

and that, come what may, there is never any lack of objects on

which to exercise its benevolence.  Our parish is a very populous

one, and, if anything, contributes, we should be disposed to say,

rather more than its due share to the aggregate amount of births in

the metropolis and its environs.  The consequence is, that the

monthly loan society flourishes, and invests its members with a

most enviable amount of bustling patronage.  The society (whose

only notion of dividing time, would appear to be its allotment into

months) holds monthly tea-drinkings, at which the monthly report is

received, a secretary elected for the month ensuing, and such of

the monthly boxes as may not happen to be out on loan for the

month, carefully examined.



We were never present at one of these meetings, from all of which

it is scarcely necessary to say, gentlemen are carefully excluded;

but Mr. Bung has been called before the board once or twice, and we

have his authority for stating, that its proceedings are conducted

with great order and regularity:  not more than four members being

allowed to speak at one time on any pretence whatever.  The regular

committee is composed exclusively of married ladies, but a vast

number of young unmarried ladies of from eighteen to twenty-five

years of age, respectively, are admitted as honorary members,

partly because they are very useful in replenishing the boxes, and

visiting the confined; partly because it is highly desirable that

they should be initiated, at an early period, into the more serious

and matronly duties of after-life; and partly, because prudent

mammas have not unfrequently been known to turn this circumstance

to wonderfully good account in matrimonial speculations.



In addition to the loan of the monthly boxes (which are always

painted blue, with the name of the society in large white letters

on the lid), the society dispense occasional grants of beef-tea,

and a composition of warm beer, spice, eggs, and sugar, commonly

known by the name of 'candle,' to its patients.  And here again the

services of the honorary members are called into requisition, and

most cheerfully conceded.  Deputations of twos or threes are sent

out to visit the patients, and on these occasions there is such a

tasting of candle and beef-tea, such a stirring about of little

messes in tiny saucepans on the hob, such a dressing and undressing

of infants, such a tying, and folding, and pinning; such a nursing

and warming of little legs and feet before the fire, such a

delightful confusion of talking and cooking, bustle, importance,

and officiousness, as never can be enjoyed in its full extent but

on similar occasions.



In rivalry of these two institutions, and as a last expiring effort

to acquire parochial popularity, the child's examination people

determined, the other day, on having a grand public examination of

the pupils; and the large school-room of the national seminary was,

by and with the consent of the parish authorities, devoted to the

purpose.  Invitation circulars were forwarded to all the principal

parishioners, including, of course, the heads of the other two

societies, for whose especial behoof and edification the display

was intended; and a large audience was confidently anticipated on

the occasion.  The floor was carefully scrubbed the day before,

under the immediate superintendence of the three Miss Browns; forms

were placed across the room for the accommodation of the visitors,

specimens in writing were carefully selected, and as carefully

patched and touched up, until they astonished the children who had

written them, rather more than the company who read them; sums in

compound addition were rehearsed and re-rehearsed until all the

children had the totals by heart; and the preparations altogether

were on the most laborious and most comprehensive scale.  The

morning arrived:  the children were yellow-soaped and flannelled,

and towelled, till their faces shone again; every pupil's hair was

carefully combed into his or her eyes, as the case might be; the

girls were adorned with snow-white tippets, and caps bound round

the head by a single purple ribbon:  the necks of the elder boys

were fixed into collars of startling dimensions.



The doors were thrown open, and the Misses Brown and Co. were

discovered in plain white muslin dresses, and caps of the same -

the child's examination uniform.  The room filled:  the greetings

of the company were loud and cordial.  The distributionists

trembled, for their popularity was at stake.  The eldest boy fell

forward, and delivered a propitiatory address from behind his

collar.  It was from the pen of Mr. Henry Brown; the applause was

universal, and the Johnson Parkers were aghast.  The examination

proceeded with success, and terminated in triumph.  The child's

examination society gained a momentary victory, and the Johnson

Parkers retreated in despair.



A secret council of the distributionists was held that night, with

Mrs. Johnson Parker in the chair, to consider of the best means of

recovering the ground they had lost in the favour of the parish.

What could be done?  Another meeting!  Alas! who was to attend it?

The Missionary would not do twice; and the slaves were emancipated.

A bold step must be taken.  The parish must be astonished in some

way or other; but no one was able to suggest what the step should

be.  At length, a very old lady was heard to mumble, in indistinct

tones, 'Exeter Hall.'  A sudden light broke in upon the meeting.

It was unanimously resolved, that a deputation of old ladies should

wait upon a celebrated orator, imploring his assistance, and the

favour of a speech; and the deputation should also wait on two or

three other imbecile old women, not resident in the parish, and

entreat their attendance.  The application was successful, the

meeting was held; the orator (an Irishman) came.  He talked of

green isles - other shores - vast Atlantic - bosom of the deep -

Christian charity - blood and extermination - mercy in hearts -

arms in hands - altars and homes - household gods.  He wiped his

eyes, he blew his nose, and he quoted Latin.  The effect was

tremendous - the Latin was a decided hit.  Nobody knew exactly what

it was about, but everybody knew it must be affecting, because even

the orator was overcome.  The popularity of the distribution

society among the ladies of our parish is unprecedented; and the

child's examination is going fast to decay.
