






CHAPTER VII - OUR NEXT-DOOR NEIGHBOUR







We are very fond of speculating as we walk through a street, on the

character and pursuits of the people who inhabit it; and nothing so

materially assists us in these speculations as the appearance of

the house doors.  The various expressions of the human countenance

afford a beautiful and interesting study; but there is something in

the physiognomy of street-door knockers, almost as characteristic,

and nearly as infallible.  Whenever we visit a man for the first

time, we contemplate the features of his knocker with the greatest

curiosity, for we well know, that between the man and his knocker,

there will inevitably be a greater or less degree of resemblance

and sympathy.



For instance, there is one description of knocker that used to be

common enough, but which is fast passing away - a large round one,

with the jolly face of a convivial lion smiling blandly at you, as

you twist the sides of your hair into a curl or pull up your shirt-

collar while you are waiting for the door to be opened; we never

saw that knocker on the door of a churlish man - so far as our

experience is concerned, it invariably bespoke hospitality and

another bottle.



No man ever saw this knocker on the door of a small attorney or

bill-broker; they always patronise the other lion; a heavy

ferocious-looking fellow, with a countenance expressive of savage

stupidity - a sort of grand master among the knockers, and a great

favourite with the selfish and brutal.



Then there is a little pert Egyptian knocker, with a long thin

face, a pinched-up nose, and a very sharp chin; he is most in vogue

with your government-office people, in light drabs and starched

cravats; little spare, priggish men, who are perfectly satisfied

with their own opinions, and consider themselves of paramount

importance.



We were greatly troubled a few years ago, by the innovation of a

new kind of knocker, without any face at all, composed of a wreath

depending from a hand or small truncheon.  A little trouble and

attention, however, enabled us to overcome this difficulty, and to

reconcile the new system to our favourite theory.  You will

invariably find this knocker on the doors of cold and formal

people, who always ask you why you DON'T come, and never say DO.



Everybody knows the brass knocker is common to suburban villas, and

extensive boarding-schools; and having noticed this genus we have

recapitulated all the most prominent and strongly-defined species.



Some phrenologists affirm, that the agitation of a man's brain by

different passions, produces corresponding developments in the form

of his skull.  Do not let us be understood as pushing our theory to

the full length of asserting, that any alteration in a man's

disposition would produce a visible effect on the feature of his

knocker.  Our position merely is, that in such a case, the

magnetism which must exist between a man and his knocker, would

induce the man to remove, and seek some knocker more congenial to

his altered feelings.  If you ever find a man changing his

habitation without any reasonable pretext, depend upon it, that,

although he may not be aware of the fact himself, it is because he

and his knocker are at variance.  This is a new theory, but we

venture to launch it, nevertheless, as being quite as ingenious and

infallible as many thousands of the learned speculations which are

daily broached for public good and private fortune-making.



Entertaining these feelings on the subject of knockers, it will be

readily imagined with what consternation we viewed the entire

removal of the knocker from the door of the next house to the one

we lived in, some time ago, and the substitution of a bell.  This

was a calamity we had never anticipated.  The bare idea of anybody

being able to exist without a knocker, appeared so wild and

visionary, that it had never for one instant entered our

imagination.



We sauntered moodily from the spot, and bent our steps towards

Eaton-square, then just building.  What was our astonishment and

indignation to find that bells were fast becoming the rule, and

knockers the exception!  Our theory trembled beneath the shock.  We

hastened home; and fancying we foresaw in the swift progress of

events, its entire abolition, resolved from that day forward to

vent our speculations on our next-door neighbours in person.  The

house adjoining ours on the left hand was uninhabited, and we had,

therefore, plenty of leisure to observe our next-door neighbours on

the other side.



The house without the knocker was in the occupation of a city

clerk, and there was a neatly-written bill in the parlour window

intimating that lodgings for a single gentleman were to be let

within.



It was a neat, dull little house, on the shady side of the way,

with new, narrow floorcloth in the passage, and new, narrow stair-

carpets up to the first floor.  The paper was new, and the paint

was new, and the furniture was new; and all three, paper, paint,

and furniture, bespoke the limited means of the tenant.  There was

a little red and black carpet in the drawing-room, with a border of

flooring all the way round; a few stained chairs and a pembroke

table.  A pink shell was displayed on each of the little

sideboards, which, with the addition of a tea-tray and caddy, a few

more shells on the mantelpiece, and three peacock's feathers

tastefully arranged above them, completed the decorative furniture

of the apartment.



This was the room destined for the reception of the single

gentleman during the day, and a little back room on the same floor

was assigned as his sleeping apartment by night.



The bill had not been long in the window, when a stout, good-

humoured looking gentleman, of about five-and-thirty, appeared as a

candidate for the tenancy.  Terms were soon arranged, for the bill

was taken down immediately after his first visit.  In a day or two

the single gentleman came in, and shortly afterwards his real

character came out.



First of all, he displayed a most extraordinary partiality for

sitting up till three or four o'clock in the morning, drinking

whiskey-and-water, and smoking cigars; then he invited friends

home, who used to come at ten o'clock, and begin to get happy about

the small hours, when they evinced their perfect contentment by

singing songs with half-a-dozen verses of two lines each, and a

chorus of ten, which chorus used to be shouted forth by the whole

strength of the company, in the most enthusiastic and vociferous

manner, to the great annoyance of the neighbours, and the special

discomfort of another single gentleman overhead.



Now, this was bad enough, occurring as it did three times a week on

the average, but this was not all; for when the company DID go

away, instead of walking quietly down the street, as anybody else's

company would have done, they amused themselves by making alarming

and frightful noises, and counterfeiting the shrieks of females in

distress; and one night, a red-faced gentleman in a white hat

knocked in the most urgent manner at the door of the powdered-

headed old gentleman at No. 3, and when the powdered-headed old

gentleman, who thought one of his married daughters must have been

taken ill prematurely, had groped down-stairs, and after a great

deal of unbolting and key-turning, opened the street door, the red-

faced man in the white hat said he hoped he'd excuse his giving him

so much trouble, but he'd feel obliged if he'd favour him with a

glass of cold spring water, and the loan of a shilling for a cab to

take him home, on which the old gentleman slammed the door and went

up-stairs, and threw the contents of his water jug out of window -

very straight, only it went over the wrong man; and the whole

street was involved in confusion.



A joke's a joke; and even practical jests are very capital in their

way, if you can only get the other party to see the fun of them;

but the population of our street were so dull of apprehension, as

to be quite lost to a sense of the drollery of this proceeding:

and the consequence was, that our next-door neighbour was obliged

to tell the single gentleman, that unless he gave up entertaining

his friends at home, he really must be compelled to part with him.



The single gentleman received the remonstrance with great good-

humour, and promised from that time forward, to spend his evenings

at a coffee-house - a determination which afforded general and

unmixed satisfaction.



The next night passed off very well, everybody being delighted with

the change; but on the next, the noises were renewed with greater

spirit than ever.  The single gentleman's friends being unable to

see him in his own house every alternate night, had come to the

determination of seeing him home every night; and what with the

discordant greetings of the friends at parting, and the noise

created by the single gentleman in his passage up-stairs, and his

subsequent struggles to get his boots off, the evil was not to be

borne.  So, our next-door neighbour gave the single gentleman, who

was a very good lodger in other respects, notice to quit; and the

single gentleman went away, and entertained his friends in other

lodgings.



The next applicant for the vacant first floor, was of a very

different character from the troublesome single gentleman who had

just quitted it.  He was a tall, thin, young gentleman, with a

profusion of brown hair, reddish whiskers, and very slightly

developed moustaches.  He wore a braided surtout, with frogs

behind, light grey trousers, and wash-leather gloves, and had

altogether rather a military appearance.  So unlike the roystering

single gentleman.  Such insinuating manners, and such a delightful

address!  So seriously disposed, too!  When he first came to look

at the lodgings, he inquired most particularly whether he was sure

to be able to get a seat in the parish church; and when he had

agreed to take them, he requested to have a list of the different

local charities, as he intended to subscribe his mite to the most

deserving among them.



Our next-door neighbour was now perfectly happy.  He had got a

lodger at last, of just his own way of thinking - a serious, well-

disposed man, who abhorred gaiety, and loved retirement.  He took

down the bill with a light heart, and pictured in imagination a

long series of quiet Sundays, on which he and his lodger would

exchange mutual civilities and Sunday papers.



The serious man arrived, and his luggage was to arrive from the

country next morning.  He borrowed a clean shirt, and a prayer-

book, from our next-door neighbour, and retired to rest at an early

hour, requesting that he might be called punctually at ten o'clock

next morning - not before, as he was much fatigued.



He WAS called, and did not answer:  he was called again, but there

was no reply.  Our next-door neighbour became alarmed, and burst

the door open.  The serious man had left the house mysteriously;

carrying with him the shirt, the prayer-book, a teaspoon, and the

bedclothes.



Whether this occurrence, coupled with the irregularities of his

former lodger, gave our next-door neighbour an aversion to single

gentlemen, we know not; we only know that the next bill which made

its appearance in the parlour window intimated generally, that

there were furnished apartments to let on the first floor.  The

bill was soon removed.  The new lodgers at first attracted our

curiosity, and afterwards excited our interest.



They were a young lad of eighteen or nineteen, and his mother, a

lady of about fifty, or it might be less.  The mother wore a

widow's weeds, and the boy was also clothed in deep mourning.  They

were poor - very poor; for their only means of support arose from

the pittance the boy earned, by copying writings, and translating

for booksellers.



They had removed from some country place and settled in London;

partly because it afforded better chances of employment for the

boy, and partly, perhaps, with the natural desire to leave a place

where they had been in better circumstances, and where their

poverty was known.  They were proud under their reverses, and above

revealing their wants and privations to strangers.  How bitter

those privations were, and how hard the boy worked to remove them,

no one ever knew but themselves.  Night after night, two, three,

four hours after midnight, could we hear the occasional raking up

of the scanty fire, or the hollow and half-stifled cough, which

indicated his being still at work; and day after day, could we see

more plainly that nature had set that unearthly light in his

plaintive face, which is the beacon of her worst disease.



Actuated, we hope, by a higher feeling than mere curiosity, we

contrived to establish, first an acquaintance, and then a close

intimacy, with the poor strangers.  Our worst fears were realised;

the boy was sinking fast.  Through a part of the winter, and the

whole of the following spring and summer, his labours were

unceasingly prolonged:  and the mother attempted to procure needle-

work, embroidery - anything for bread.



A few shillings now and then, were all she could earn.  The boy

worked steadily on; dying by minutes, but never once giving

utterance to complaint or murmur.



One beautiful autumn evening we went to pay our customary visit to

the invalid.  His little remaining strength had been decreasing

rapidly for two or three days preceding, and he was lying on the

sofa at the open window, gazing at the setting sun.  His mother had

been reading the Bible to him, for she closed the book as we

entered, and advanced to meet us.



'I was telling William,' she said, 'that we must manage to take him

into the country somewhere, so that he may get quite well.  He is

not ill, you know, but he is not very strong, and has exerted

himself too much lately.'  Poor thing!  The tears that streamed

through her fingers, as she turned aside, as if to adjust her close

widow's cap, too plainly showed how fruitless was the attempt to

deceive herself.



We sat down by the head of the sofa, but said nothing, for we saw

the breath of life was passing gently but rapidly from the young

form before us.  At every respiration, his heart beat more slowly.



The boy placed one hand in ours, grasped his mother's arm with the

other, drew her hastily towards him, and fervently kissed her

cheek.  There was a pause.  He sunk back upon his pillow, and

looked long and earnestly in his mother's face.



'William, William!' murmured the mother, after a long interval,

'don't look at me so - speak to me, dear!'



The boy smiled languidly, but an instant afterwards his features

resolved into the same cold, solemn gaze.



'William, dear William! rouse yourself; don't look at me so, love -

pray don't!  Oh, my God! what shall I do!' cried the widow,

clasping her hands in agony - 'my dear boy! he is dying!'  The boy

raised himself by a violent effort, and folded his hands together -

'Mother! dear, dear mother, bury me in the open fields - anywhere

but in these dreadful streets.  I should like to be where you can

see my grave, but not in these close crowded streets; they have

killed me; kiss me again, mother; put your arm round my neck - '



He fell back, and a strange expression stole upon his features; not

of pain or suffering, but an indescribable fixing of every line and

muscle.



The boy was dead.
