






CHAPTER V - THE BROKER'S MAN







The excitement of the late election has subsided, and our parish

being once again restored to a state of comparative tranquillity,

we are enabled to devote our attention to those parishioners who

take little share in our party contests or in the turmoil and

bustle of public life.  And we feel sincere pleasure in

acknowledging here, that in collecting materials for this task we

have been greatly assisted by Mr. Bung himself, who has imposed on

us a debt of obligation which we fear we can never repay.  The life

of this gentleman has been one of a very chequered description:  he

has undergone transitions - not from grave to gay, for he never was

grave - not from lively to severe, for severity forms no part of

his disposition; his fluctuations have been between poverty in the

extreme, and poverty modified, or, to use his own emphatic

language, 'between nothing to eat and just half enough.'  He is

not, as he forcibly remarks, 'one of those fortunate men who, if

they were to dive under one side of a barge stark-naked, would come

up on the other with a new suit of clothes on, and a ticket for

soup in the waistcoat-pocket:' neither is he one of those, whose

spirit has been broken beyond redemption by misfortune and want.

He is just one of the careless, good-for-nothing, happy fellows,

who float, cork-like, on the surface, for the world to play at

hockey with:  knocked here, and there, and everywhere:  now to the

right, then to the left, again up in the air, and anon to the

bottom, but always reappearing and bounding with the stream

buoyantly and merrily along.  Some few months before he was

prevailed upon to stand a contested election for the office of

beadle, necessity attached him to the service of a broker; and on

the opportunities he here acquired of ascertaining the condition of

most of the poorer inhabitants of the parish, his patron, the

captain, first grounded his claims to public support.  Chance threw

the man in our way a short time since.  We were, in the first

instance, attracted by his prepossessing impudence at the election;

we were not surprised, on further acquaintance, to find him a

shrewd, knowing fellow, with no inconsiderable power of

observation; and, after conversing with him a little, were somewhat

struck (as we dare say our readers have frequently been in other

cases) with the power some men seem to have, not only of

sympathising with, but to all appearance of understanding feelings

to which they themselves are entire strangers.  We had been

expressing to the new functionary our surprise that he should ever

have served in the capacity to which we have just adverted, when we

gradually led him into one or two professional anecdotes.  As we

are induced to think, on reflection, that they will tell better in

nearly his own words, than with any attempted embellishments of

ours, we will at once entitle them.





MR BUNG'S NARRATIVE





'It's very true, as you say, sir,' Mr. Bung commenced, 'that a

broker's man's is not a life to be envied; and in course you know

as well as I do, though you don't say it, that people hate and

scout 'em because they're the ministers of wretchedness, like, to

poor people.  But what could I do, sir?  The thing was no worse

because I did it, instead of somebody else; and if putting me in

possession of a house would put me in possession of three and

sixpence a day, and levying a distress on another man's goods would

relieve my distress and that of my family, it can't be expected but

what I'd take the job and go through with it.  I never liked it,

God knows; I always looked out for something else, and the moment I

got other work to do, I left it.  If there is anything wrong in

being the agent in such matters - not the principal, mind you - I'm

sure the business, to a beginner like I was, at all events, carries

its own punishment along with it.  I wished again and again that

the people would only blow me up, or pitch into me - that I

wouldn't have minded, it's all in my way; but it's the being shut

up by yourself in one room for five days, without so much as an old

newspaper to look at, or anything to see out o' the winder but the

roofs and chimneys at the back of the house, or anything to listen

to, but the ticking, perhaps, of an old Dutch clock, the sobbing of

the missis, now and then, the low talking of friends in the next

room, who speak in whispers, lest "the man" should overhear them,

or perhaps the occasional opening of the door, as a child peeps in

to look at you, and then runs half-frightened away - it's all this,

that makes you feel sneaking somehow, and ashamed of yourself; and

then, if it's wintertime, they just give you fire enough to make

you think you'd like more, and bring in your grub as if they wished

it 'ud choke you - as I dare say they do, for the matter of that,

most heartily.  If they're very civil, they make you up a bed in

the room at night, and if they don't, your master sends one in for

you; but there you are, without being washed or shaved all the

time, shunned by everybody, and spoken to by no one, unless some

one comes in at dinner-time, and asks you whether you want any

more, in a tone as much to say, "I hope you don't," or, in the

evening, to inquire whether you wouldn't rather have a candle,

after you've been sitting in the dark half the night.  When I was

left in this way, I used to sit, think, think, thinking, till I

felt as lonesome as a kitten in a wash-house copper with the lid

on; but I believe the old brokers' men who are regularly trained to

it, never think at all.  I have heard some on 'em say, indeed, that

they don't know how!



'I put in a good many distresses in my time (continued Mr. Bung),

and in course I wasn't long in finding, that some people are not as

much to be pitied as others are, and that people with good incomes

who get into difficulties, which they keep patching up day after

day and week after week, get so used to these sort of things in

time, that at last they come scarcely to feel them at all.  I

remember the very first place I was put in possession of, was a

gentleman's house in this parish here, that everybody would suppose

couldn't help having money if he tried.  I went with old Fixem, my

old master, 'bout half arter eight in the morning; rang the area-

bell; servant in livery opened the door:  "Governor at home?" -

"Yes, he is," says the man; "but he's breakfasting just now."

"Never mind," says Fixem, "just you tell him there's a gentleman

here, as wants to speak to him partickler."  So the servant he

opens his eyes, and stares about him all ways - looking for the

gentleman, as it struck me, for I don't think anybody but a man as

was stone-blind would mistake Fixem for one; and as for me, I was

as seedy as a cheap cowcumber.  Hows'ever, he turns round, and goes

to the breakfast-parlour, which was a little snug sort of room at

the end of the passage, and Fixem (as we always did in that

profession), without waiting to be announced, walks in arter him,

and before the servant could get out, "Please, sir, here's a man as

wants to speak to you," looks in at the door as familiar and

pleasant as may be.  "Who the devil are you, and how dare you walk

into a gentleman's house without leave?" says the master, as fierce

as a bull in fits.  "My name," says Fixem, winking to the master to

send the servant away, and putting the warrant into his hands

folded up like a note, "My name's Smith," says he, "and I called

from Johnson's about that business of Thompson's." - "Oh," says the

other, quite down on him directly, "How IS Thompson?" says he;

"Pray sit down, Mr. Smith:  John, leave the room."  Out went the

servant; and the gentleman and Fixem looked at one another till

they couldn't look any longer, and then they varied the amusements

by looking at me, who had been standing on the mat all this time.

"Hundred and fifty pounds, I see," said the gentleman at last.

"Hundred and fifty pound," said Fixem, "besides cost of levy,

sheriff's poundage, and all other incidental expenses." - "Um,"

says the gentleman, "I shan't be able to settle this before to-

morrow afternoon." - "Very sorry; but I shall be obliged to leave

my man here till then," replies Fixem, pretending to look very

miserable over it.  "That's very unfort'nate," says the gentleman,

"for I have got a large party here to-night, and I'm ruined if

those fellows of mine get an inkling of the matter - just step

here, Mr. Smith," says he, after a short pause.  So Fixem walks

with him up to the window, and after a good deal of whispering, and

a little chinking of suverins, and looking at me, he comes back and

says, "Bung, you're a handy fellow, and very honest I know.  This

gentleman wants an assistant to clean the plate and wait at table

to-day, and if you're not particularly engaged," says old Fixem,

grinning like mad, and shoving a couple of suverins into my hand,

"he'll be very glad to avail himself of your services."  Well, I

laughed:  and the gentleman laughed, and we all laughed; and I went

home and cleaned myself, leaving Fixem there, and when I went back,

Fixem went away, and I polished up the plate, and waited at table,

and gammoned the servants, and nobody had the least idea I was in

possession, though it very nearly came out after all; for one of

the last gentlemen who remained, came down-stairs into the hall

where I was sitting pretty late at night, and putting half-a-crown

into my hand, says, "Here, my man," says he, "run and get me a

coach, will you?"  I thought it was a do, to get me out of the

house, and was just going to say so, sulkily enough, when the

gentleman (who was up to everything) came running down-stairs, as

if he was in great anxiety.  "Bung," says he, pretending to be in a

consuming passion.  "Sir," says I.  "Why the devil an't you looking

after that plate?" - "I was just going to send him for a coach for

me," says the other gentleman.  "And I was just a-going to say,"

says I - "Anybody else, my dear fellow," interrupts the master of

the house, pushing me down the passage to get out of the way -

"anybody else; but I have put this man in possession of all the

plate and valuables, and I cannot allow him on any consideration

whatever, to leave the house.  Bung, you scoundrel, go and count

those forks in the breakfast-parlour instantly."  You may be sure I

went laughing pretty hearty when I found it was all right.  The

money was paid next day, with the addition of something else for

myself, and that was the best job that I (and I suspect old Fixem

too) ever got in that line.



'But this is the bright side of the picture, sir, after all,'

resumed Mr. Bung, laying aside the knowing look and flash air, with

which he had repeated the previous anecdote - 'and I'm sorry to

say, it's the side one sees very, very seldom, in comparison with

the dark one.  The civility which money will purchase, is rarely

extended to those who have none; and there's a consolation even in

being able to patch up one difficulty, to make way for another, to

which very poor people are strangers.  I was once put into a house

down George's-yard - that little dirty court at the back of the

gas-works; and I never shall forget the misery of them people, dear

me!  It was a distress for half a year's rent - two pound ten, I

think.  There was only two rooms in the house, and as there was no

passage, the lodgers up-stairs always went through the room of the

people of the house, as they passed in and out; and every time they

did so -which, on the average, was about four times every quarter

of an hour - they blowed up quite frightful:  for their things had

been seized too, and included in the inventory.  There was a little

piece of enclosed dust in front of the house, with a cinder-path

leading up to the door, and an open rain-water butt on one side.  A

dirty striped curtain, on a very slack string, hung in the window,

and a little triangular bit of broken looking-glass rested on the

sill inside.  I suppose it was meant for the people's use, but

their appearance was so wretched, and so miserable, that I'm

certain they never could have plucked up courage to look themselves

in the face a second time, if they survived the fright of doing so

once.  There was two or three chairs, that might have been worth,

in their best days, from eightpence to a shilling a-piece; a small

deal table, an old corner cupboard with nothing in it, and one of

those bedsteads which turn up half way, and leave the bottom legs

sticking out for you to knock your head against, or hang your hat

upon; no bed, no bedding.  There was an old sack, by way of rug,

before the fireplace, and four or five children were grovelling

about, among the sand on the floor.  The execution was only put in,

to get 'em out of the house, for there was nothing to take to pay

the expenses; and here I stopped for three days, though that was a

mere form too:  for, in course, I knew, and we all knew, they could

never pay the money.  In one of the chairs, by the side of the

place where the fire ought to have been, was an old 'ooman - the

ugliest and dirtiest I ever see - who sat rocking herself backwards

and forwards, backwards and forwards, without once stopping, except

for an instant now and then, to clasp together the withered hands

which, with these exceptions, she kept constantly rubbing upon her

knees, just raising and depressing her fingers convulsively, in

time to the rocking of the chair.  On the other side sat the mother

with an infant in her arms, which cried till it cried itself to

sleep, and when it 'woke, cried till it cried itself off again.

The old 'ooman's voice I never heard:  she seemed completely

stupefied; and as to the mother's, it would have been better if she

had been so too, for misery had changed her to a devil.  If you had

heard how she cursed the little naked children as was rolling on

the floor, and seen how savagely she struck the infant when it

cried with hunger, you'd have shuddered as much as I did.  There

they remained all the time:  the children ate a morsel of bread

once or twice, and I gave 'em best part of the dinners my missis

brought me, but the woman ate nothing; they never even laid on the

bedstead, nor was the room swept or cleaned all the time.  The

neighbours were all too poor themselves to take any notice of 'em,

but from what I could make out from the abuse of the woman up-

stairs, it seemed the husband had been transported a few weeks

before.  When the time was up, the landlord and old Fixem too, got

rather frightened about the family, and so they made a stir about

it, and had 'em taken to the workhouse.  They sent the sick couch

for the old 'ooman, and Simmons took the children away at night.

The old 'ooman went into the infirmary, and very soon died.  The

children are all in the house to this day, and very comfortable

they are in comparison.  As to the mother, there was no taming her

at all.  She had been a quiet, hard-working woman, I believe, but

her misery had actually drove her wild; so after she had been sent

to the house of correction half-a-dozen times, for throwing

inkstands at the overseers, blaspheming the churchwardens, and

smashing everybody as come near her, she burst a blood-vessel one

mornin', and died too; and a happy release it was, both for herself

and the old paupers, male and female, which she used to tip over in

all directions, as if they were so many skittles, and she the ball.



'Now this was bad enough,' resumed Mr. Bung, taking a half-step

towards the door, as if to intimate that he had nearly concluded.

'This was bad enough, but there was a sort of quiet misery - if you

understand what I mean by that, sir - about a lady at one house I

was put into, as touched me a good deal more.  It doesn't matter

where it was exactly:  indeed, I'd rather not say, but it was the

same sort o' job.  I went with Fixem in the usual way - there was a

year's rent in arrear; a very small servant-girl opened the door,

and three or four fine-looking little children was in the front

parlour we were shown into, which was very clean, but very scantily

furnished, much like the children themselves.  "Bung," says Fixem

to me, in a low voice, when we were left alone for a minute, "I

know something about this here family, and my opinion is, it's no

go."  "Do you think they can't settle?" says I, quite anxiously;

for I liked the looks of them children.  Fixem shook his head, and

was just about to reply, when the door opened, and in come a lady,

as white as ever I see any one in my days, except about the eyes,

which were red with crying.  She walked in, as firm as I could have

done; shut the door carefully after her, and sat herself down with

a face as composed as if it was made of stone.  "What is the

matter, gentlemen?" says she, in a surprisin' steady voice.  "IS

this an execution?"  "It is, mum," says Fixem.  The lady looked at

him as steady as ever:  she didn't seem to have understood him.

"It is, mum," says Fixem again; "this is my warrant of distress,

mum," says he, handing it over as polite as if it was a newspaper

which had been bespoke arter the next gentleman.



'The lady's lip trembled as she took the printed paper.  She cast

her eye over it, and old Fixem began to explain the form, but saw

she wasn't reading it, plain enough, poor thing.  "Oh, my God!"

says she, suddenly a-bursting out crying, letting the warrant fall,

and hiding her face in her hands.  "Oh, my God! what will become of

us!"  The noise she made, brought in a young lady of about nineteen

or twenty, who, I suppose, had been a-listening at the door, and

who had got a little boy in her arms:  she sat him down in the

lady's lap, without speaking, and she hugged the poor little fellow

to her bosom, and cried over him, till even old Fixem put on his

blue spectacles to hide the two tears, that was a-trickling down,

one on each side of his dirty face.  "Now, dear ma," says the young

lady, "you know how much you have borne.  For all our sakes - for

pa's sake," says she, "don't give way to this!" - "No, no, I

won't!" says the lady, gathering herself up, hastily, and drying

her eyes; "I am very foolish, but I'm better now - much better."

And then she roused herself up, went with us into every room while

we took the inventory, opened all the drawers of her own accord,

sorted the children's little clothes to make the work easier; and,

except doing everything in a strange sort of hurry, seemed as calm

and composed as if nothing had happened.  When we came down-stairs

again, she hesitated a minute or two, and at last says,

"Gentlemen," says she, "I am afraid I have done wrong, and perhaps

it may bring you into trouble.  I secreted just now," she says,

"the only trinket I have left in the world - here it is."  So she

lays down on the table a little miniature mounted in gold.  "It's a

miniature," she says, "of my poor dear father!  I little thought

once, that I should ever thank God for depriving me of the

original, but I do, and have done for years back, most fervently.

Take it away, sir," she says, "it's a face that never turned from

me in sickness and distress, and I can hardly bear to turn from it

now, when, God knows, I suffer both in no ordinary degree."  I

couldn't say nothing, but I raised my head from the inventory which

I was filling up, and looked at Fixem; the old fellow nodded to me

significantly, so I ran my pen through the "MINI" I had just

written, and left the miniature on the table.



'Well, sir, to make short of a long story, I was left in

possession, and in possession I remained; and though I was an

ignorant man, and the master of the house a clever one, I saw what

he never did, but what he would give worlds now (if he had 'em) to

have seen in time.  I saw, sir, that his wife was wasting away,

beneath cares of which she never complained, and griefs she never

told.  I saw that she was dying before his eyes; I knew that one

exertion from him might have saved her, but he never made it.  I

don't blame him:  I don't think he COULD rouse himself.  She had so

long anticipated all his wishes, and acted for him, that he was a

lost man when left to himself.  I used to think when I caught sight

of her, in the clothes she used to wear, which looked shabby even

upon her, and would have been scarcely decent on any one else, that

if I was a gentleman it would wring my very heart to see the woman

that was a smart and merry girl when I courted her, so altered

through her love for me.  Bitter cold and damp weather it was, yet,

though her dress was thin, and her shoes none of the best, during

the whole three days, from morning to night, she was out of doors

running about to try and raise the money.  The money WAS raised and

the execution was paid out.  The whole family crowded into the room

where I was, when the money arrived.  The father was quite happy as

the inconvenience was removed - I dare say he didn't know how; the

children looked merry and cheerful again; the eldest girl was

bustling about, making preparations for the first comfortable meal

they had had since the distress was put in; and the mother looked

pleased to see them all so.  But if ever I saw death in a woman's

face, I saw it in hers that night.



'I was right, sir,' continued Mr. Bung, hurriedly passing his coat-

sleeve over his face; 'the family grew more prosperous, and good

fortune arrived.  But it was too late.  Those children are

motherless now, and their father would give up all he has since

gained - house, home, goods, money:  all that he has, or ever can

have, to restore the wife he has lost.'
