





CHAPTER III - THE FOUR SISTERS







The row of houses in which the old lady and her troublesome

neighbour reside, comprises, beyond all doubt, a greater number of

characters within its circumscribed limits, than all the rest of

the parish put together.  As we cannot, consistently with our

present plan, however, extend the number of our parochial sketches

beyond six, it will be better perhaps, to select the most peculiar,

and to introduce them at once without further preface.



The four Miss Willises, then, settled in our parish thirteen years

ago.  It is a melancholy reflection that the old adage, 'time and

tide wait for no man,' applies with equal force to the fairer

portion of the creation; and willingly would we conceal the fact,

that even thirteen years ago the Miss Willises were far from

juvenile.  Our duty as faithful parochial chroniclers, however, is

paramount to every other consideration, and we are bound to state,

that thirteen years since, the authorities in matrimonial cases,

considered the youngest Miss Willis in a very precarious state,

while the eldest sister was positively given over, as being far

beyond all human hope.  Well, the Miss Willises took a lease of the

house; it was fresh painted and papered from top to bottom:  the

paint inside was all wainscoted, the marble all cleaned, the old

grates taken down, and register-stoves, you could see to dress by,

put up; four trees were planted in the back garden, several small

baskets of gravel sprinkled over the front one, vans of elegant

furniture arrived, spring blinds were fitted to the windows,

carpenters who had been employed in the various preparations,

alterations, and repairs, made confidential statements to the

different maid-servants in the row, relative to the magnificent

scale on which the Miss Willises were commencing; the maid-servants

told their 'Missises,' the Missises told their friends, and vague

rumours were circulated throughout the parish, that No. 25, in

Gordon-place, had been taken by four maiden ladies of immense

property.



At last, the Miss Willises moved in; and then the 'calling' began.

The house was the perfection of neatness - so were the four Miss

Willises.  Everything was formal, stiff, and cold - so were the

four Miss Willises.  Not a single chair of the whole set was ever

seen out of its place - not a single Miss Willis of the whole four

was ever seen out of hers.  There they always sat, in the same

places, doing precisely the same things at the same hour.  The

eldest Miss Willis used to knit, the second to draw, the two others

to play duets on the piano.  They seemed to have no separate

existence, but to have made up their minds just to winter through

life together.  They were three long graces in drapery, with the

addition, like a school-dinner, of another long grace afterwards -

the three fates with another sister - the Siamese twins multiplied

by two.  The eldest Miss Willis grew bilious - the four Miss

Willises grew bilious immediately.  The eldest Miss Willis grew

ill-tempered and religious - the four Miss Willises were ill-

tempered and religious directly.  Whatever the eldest did, the

others did, and whatever anybody else did, they all disapproved of;

and thus they vegetated - living in Polar harmony among themselves,

and, as they sometimes went out, or saw company 'in a quiet-way' at

home, occasionally icing the neighbours.  Three years passed over

in this way, when an unlooked for and extraordinary phenomenon

occurred.  The Miss Willises showed symptoms of summer, the frost

gradually broke up; a complete thaw took place.  Was it possible?

one of the four Miss Willises was going to be married!



Now, where on earth the husband came from, by what feelings the

poor man could have been actuated, or by what process of reasoning

the four Miss Willises succeeded in persuading themselves that it

was possible for a man to marry one of them, without marrying them

all, are questions too profound for us to resolve:  certain it is,

however, that the visits of Mr. Robinson (a gentleman in a public

office, with a good salary and a little property of his own,

besides) were received - that the four Miss Willises were courted

in due form by the said Mr Robinson - that the neighbours were

perfectly frantic in their anxiety to discover which of the four

Miss Willises was the fortunate fair, and that the difficulty they

experienced in solving the problem was not at all lessened by the

announcement of the eldest Miss Willis, - 'WE are going to marry

Mr. Robinson.'



It was very extraordinary.  They were so completely identified, the

one with the other, that the curiosity of the whole row - even of

the old lady herself - was roused almost beyond endurance.  The

subject was discussed at every little card-table and tea-drinking.

The old gentleman of silk-worm notoriety did not hesitate to

express his decided opinion that Mr. Robinson was of Eastern

descent, and contemplated marrying the whole family at once; and

the row, generally, shook their heads with considerable gravity,

and declared the business to be very mysterious.  They hoped it

might all end well; - it certainly had a very singular appearance,

but still it would be uncharitable to express any opinion without

good grounds to go upon, and certainly the Miss Willises were QUITE

old enough to judge for themselves, and to be sure people ought to

know their own business best, and so forth.



At last, one fine morning, at a quarter before eight o'clock, A.M.,

two glass-coaches drove up to the Miss Willises' door, at which Mr.

Robinson had arrived in a cab ten minutes before, dressed in a

light-blue coat and double-milled kersey pantaloons, white

neckerchief, pumps, and dress-gloves, his manner denoting, as

appeared from the evidence of the housemaid at No. 23, who was

sweeping the door-steps at the time, a considerable degree of

nervous excitement.  It was also hastily reported on the same

testimony, that the cook who opened the door, wore a large white

bow of unusual dimensions, in a much smarter head-dress than the

regulation cap to which the Miss Willises invariably restricted the

somewhat excursive tastes of female servants in general.



The intelligence spread rapidly from house to house.  It was quite

clear that the eventful morning had at length arrived; the whole

row stationed themselves behind their first and second floor

blinds, and waited the result in breathless expectation.



At last the Miss Willises' door opened; the door of the first

glass-coach did the same.  Two gentlemen, and a pair of ladies to

correspond - friends of the family, no doubt; up went the steps,

bang went the door, off went the first class-coach, and up came the

second.



The street door opened again; the excitement of the whole row

increased - Mr. Robinson and the eldest Miss Willis.  'I thought

so,' said the lady at No. 19; 'I always said it was MISS Willis!' -

'Well, I never!' ejaculated the young lady at No. 18 to the young

lady at No. 17. - 'Did you ever, dear!' responded the young lady at

No. 17 to the young lady at No. 18.  'It's too ridiculous!'

exclaimed a spinster of an UNcertain age, at No. 16, joining in the

conversation.  But who shall portray the astonishment of Gordon-

place, when Mr. Robinson handed in ALL the Miss Willises, one after

the other, and then squeezed himself into an acute angle of the

glass-coach, which forthwith proceeded at a brisk pace, after the

other glass-coach, which other glass-coach had itself proceeded, at

a brisk pace, in the direction of the parish church!  Who shall

depict the perplexity of the clergyman, when ALL the Miss Willises

knelt down at the communion-table, and repeated the responses

incidental to the marriage service in an audible voice - or who

shall describe the confusion which prevailed, when - even after the

difficulties thus occasioned had been adjusted - ALL the Miss

Willises went into hysterics at the conclusion of the ceremony,

until the sacred edifice resounded with their united wailings!



As the four sisters and Mr. Robinson continued to occupy the same

house after this memorable occasion, and as the married sister,

whoever she was, never appeared in public without the other three,

we are not quite clear that the neighbours ever would have

discovered the real Mrs. Robinson, but for a circumstance of the

most gratifying description, which WILL happen occasionally in the

best-regulated families.  Three quarter-days elapsed, and the row,

on whom a new light appeared to have been bursting for some time,

began to speak with a sort of implied confidence on the subject,

and to wonder how Mrs. Robinson - the youngest Miss Willis that was

- got on; and servants might be seen running up the steps, about

nine or ten o'clock every morning, with 'Missis's compliments, and

wishes to know how Mrs. Robinson finds herself this morning?'  And

the answer always was, 'Mrs. Robinson's compliments, and she's in

very good spirits, and doesn't find herself any worse.'  The piano

was heard no longer, the knitting-needles were laid aside, drawing

was neglected, and mantua-making and millinery, on the smallest

scale imaginable, appeared to have become the favourite amusement

of the whole family.  The parlour wasn't quite as tidy as it used

to be, and if you called in the morning, you would see lying on a

table, with an old newspaper carelessly thrown over them, two or

three particularly small caps, rather larger than if they had been

made for a moderate-sized doll, with a small piece of lace, in the

shape of a horse-shoe, let in behind:  or perhaps a white robe, not

very large in circumference, but very much out of proportion in

point of length, with a little tucker round the top, and a frill

round the bottom; and once when we called, we saw a long white

roller, with a kind of blue margin down each side, the probable use

of which, we were at a loss to conjecture.  Then we fancied that

Dr. Dawson, the surgeon, &c., who displays a large lamp with a

different colour in every pane of glass, at the corner of the row,

began to be knocked up at night oftener than he used to be; and

once we were very much alarmed by hearing a hackney-coach stop at

Mrs. Robinson's door, at half-past two o'clock in the morning, out

of which there emerged a fat old woman, in a cloak and night-cap,

with a bundle in one hand, and a pair of pattens in the other, who

looked as if she had been suddenly knocked up out of bed for some

very special purpose.



When we got up in the morning we saw that the knocker was tied up

in an old white kid glove; and we, in our innocence (we were in a

state of bachelorship then), wondered what on earth it all meant,

until we heard the eldest Miss Willis, IN PROPRIA PERSONA say, with

great dignity, in answer to the next inquiry, 'MY compliments, and

Mrs. Robinson's doing as well as can be expected, and the little

girl thrives wonderfully.'  And then, in common with the rest of

the row, our curiosity was satisfied, and we began to wonder it had

never occurred to us what the matter was, before.

