





CHAPTER II - THE CURATE.  THE OLD LADY.  THE HALF-PAY CAPTAIN







We commenced our last chapter with the beadle of our parish,

because we are deeply sensible of the importance and dignity of his

office.  We will begin the present, with the clergyman.  Our curate

is a young gentleman of such prepossessing appearance, and

fascinating manners, that within one month after his first

appearance in the parish, half the young-lady inhabitants were

melancholy with religion, and the other half, desponding with love.

Never were so many young ladies seen in our parish church on Sunday

before; and never had the little round angels' faces on Mr.

Tomkins's monument in the side aisle, beheld such devotion on earth

as they all exhibited.  He was about five-and-twenty when he first

came to astonish the parishioners.  He parted his hair on the

centre of his forehead in the form of a Norman arch, wore a

brilliant of the first water on the fourth finger of his left hand

(which he always applied to his left cheek when he read prayers),

and had a deep sepulchral voice of unusual solemnity.  Innumerable

were the calls made by prudent mammas on our new curate, and

innumerable the invitations with which he was assailed, and which,

to do him justice, he readily accepted.  If his manner in the

pulpit had created an impression in his favour, the sensation was

increased tenfold, by his appearance in private circles.  Pews in

the immediate vicinity of the pulpit or reading-desk rose in value;

sittings in the centre aisle were at a premium:  an inch of room in

the front row of the gallery could not be procured for love or

money; and some people even went so far as to assert, that the

three Miss Browns, who had an obscure family pew just behind the

churchwardens', were detected, one Sunday, in the free seats by the

communion-table, actually lying in wait for the curate as he passed

to the vestry!  He began to preach extempore sermons, and even

grave papas caught the infection.  He got out of bed at half-past

twelve o'clock one winter's night, to half-baptise a washerwoman's

child in a slop-basin, and the gratitude of the parishioners knew

no bounds - the very churchwardens grew generous, and insisted on

the parish defraying the expense of the watch-box on wheels, which

the new curate had ordered for himself, to perform the funeral

service in, in wet weather.  He sent three pints of gruel and a

quarter of a pound of tea to a poor woman who had been brought to

bed of four small children, all at once - the parish were charmed.

He got up a subscription for her - the woman's fortune was made.

He spoke for one hour and twenty-five minutes, at an anti-slavery

meeting at the Goat and Boots - the enthusiasm was at its height.

A proposal was set on foot for presenting the curate with a piece

of plate, as a mark of esteem for his valuable services rendered to

the parish.  The list of subscriptions was filled up in no time;

the contest was, not who should escape the contribution, but who

should be the foremost to subscribe.  A splendid silver inkstand

was made, and engraved with an appropriate inscription; the curate

was invited to a public breakfast, at the before-mentioned Goat and

Boots; the inkstand was presented in a neat speech by Mr. Gubbins,

the ex-churchwarden, and acknowledged by the curate in terms which

drew tears into the eyes of all present - the very waiters were

melted.



One would have supposed that, by this time, the theme of universal

admiration was lifted to the very pinnacle of popularity.  No such

thing.  The curate began to cough; four fits of coughing one

morning between the Litany and the Epistle, and five in the

afternoon service.  Here was a discovery - the curate was

consumptive.  How interestingly melancholy!  If the young ladies

were energetic before, their sympathy and solicitude now knew no

bounds.  Such a man as the curate - such a dear - such a perfect

love - to be consumptive!  It was too much.  Anonymous presents of

black-currant jam, and lozenges, elastic waistcoats, bosom friends,

and warm stockings, poured in upon the curate until he was as

completely fitted out with winter clothing, as if he were on the

verge of an expedition to the North Pole:  verbal bulletins of the

state of his health were circulated throughout the parish half-a-

dozen times a day; and the curate was in the very zenith of his

popularity.



About this period, a change came over the spirit of the parish.  A

very quiet, respectable, dozing old gentleman, who had officiated

in our chapel-of-ease for twelve years previously, died one fine

morning, without having given any notice whatever of his intention.

This circumstance gave rise to counter-sensation the first; and the

arrival of his successor occasioned counter-sensation the second.

He was a pale, thin, cadaverous man, with large black eyes, and

long straggling black hair:  his dress was slovenly in the extreme,

his manner ungainly, his doctrines startling; in short, he was in

every respect the antipodes of the curate.  Crowds of our female

parishioners flocked to hear him; at first, because he was SO odd-

looking, then because his face was SO expressive, then because he

preached SO well; and at last, because they really thought that,

after all, there was something about him which it was quite

impossible to describe.  As to the curate, he was all very well;

but certainly, after all, there was no denying that - that - in

short, the curate wasn't a novelty, and the other clergyman was.

The inconstancy of public opinion is proverbial:  the congregation

migrated one by one.  The curate coughed till he was black in the

face - it was in vain.  He respired with difficulty - it was

equally ineffectual in awakening sympathy.  Seats are once again to

be had in any part of our parish church, and the chapel-of-ease is

going to be enlarged, as it is crowded to suffocation every Sunday!



The best known and most respected among our parishioners, is an old

lady, who resided in our parish long before our name was registered

in the list of baptisms.  Our parish is a suburban one, and the old

lady lives in a neat row of houses in the most airy and pleasant

part of it.  The house is her own; and it, and everything about it,

except the old lady herself, who looks a little older than she did

ten years ago, is in just the same state as when the old gentleman

was living.  The little front parlour, which is the old lady's

ordinary sitting-room, is a perfect picture of quiet neatness; the

carpet is covered with brown Holland, the glass and picture-frames

are carefully enveloped in yellow muslin; the table-covers are

never taken off, except when the leaves are turpentined and bees'-

waxed, an operation which is regularly commenced every other

morning at half-past nine o'clock - and the little nicknacks are

always arranged in precisely the same manner.  The greater part of

these are presents from little girls whose parents live in the same

row; but some of them, such as the two old-fashioned watches (which

never keep the same time, one being always a quarter of an hour too

slow, and the other a quarter of an hour too fast), the little

picture of the Princess Charlotte and Prince Leopold as they

appeared in the Royal Box at Drury Lane Theatre, and others of the

same class, have been in the old lady's possession for many years.

Here the old lady sits with her spectacles on, busily engaged in

needlework - near the window in summer time; and if she sees you

coming up the steps, and you happen to be a favourite, she trots

out to open the street-door for you before you knock, and as you

must be fatigued after that hot walk, insists on your swallowing

two glasses of sherry before you exert yourself by talking.  If you

call in the evening you will find her cheerful, but rather more

serious than usual, with an open Bible on the table, before her, of

which 'Sarah,' who is just as neat and methodical as her mistress,

regularly reads two or three chapters in the parlour aloud.



The old lady sees scarcely any company, except the little girls

before noticed, each of whom has always a regular fixed day for a

periodical tea-drinking with her, to which the child looks forward

as the greatest treat of its existence.  She seldom visits at a

greater distance than the next door but one on either side; and

when she drinks tea here, Sarah runs out first and knocks a double-

knock, to prevent the possibility of her 'Missis's' catching cold

by having to wait at the door.  She is very scrupulous in returning

these little invitations, and when she asks Mr. and Mrs. So-and-so,

to meet Mr. and Mrs. Somebody-else, Sarah and she dust the urn, and

the best china tea-service, and the Pope Joan board; and the

visitors are received in the drawing-room in great state.  She has

but few relations, and they are scattered about in different parts

of the country, and she seldom sees them.  She has a son in India,

whom she always describes to you as a fine, handsome fellow - so

like the profile of his poor dear father over the sideboard, but

the old lady adds, with a mournful shake of the head, that he has

always been one of her greatest trials; and that indeed he once

almost broke her heart; but it pleased God to enable her to get the

better of it, and she would prefer your never mentioning the

subject to her again.  She has a great number of pensioners:  and

on Saturday, after she comes back from market, there is a regular

levee of old men and women in the passage, waiting for their weekly

gratuity.  Her name always heads the list of any benevolent

subscriptions, and hers are always the most liberal donations to

the Winter Coal and Soup Distribution Society.  She subscribed

twenty pounds towards the erection of an organ in our parish

church, and was so overcome the first Sunday the children sang to

it, that she was obliged to be carried out by the pew-opener.  Her

entrance into church on Sunday is always the signal for a little

bustle in the side aisle, occasioned by a general rise among the

poor people, who bow and curtsey until the pew-opener has ushered

the old lady into her accustomed seat, dropped a respectful

curtsey, and shut the door:  and the same ceremony is repeated on

her leaving church, when she walks home with the family next door

but one, and talks about the sermon all the way, invariably opening

the conversation by asking the youngest boy where the text was.



Thus, with the annual variation of a trip to some quiet place on

the sea-coast, passes the old lady's life.  It has rolled on in the

same unvarying and benevolent course for many years now, and must

at no distant period be brought to its final close.  She looks

forward to its termination, with calmness and without apprehension.

She has everything to hope and nothing to fear.



A very different personage, but one who has rendered himself very

conspicuous in our parish, is one of the old lady's next-door

neighbours.  He is an old naval officer on half-pay, and his bluff

and unceremonious behaviour disturbs the old lady's domestic

economy, not a little.  In the first place, he WILL smoke cigars in

the front court, and when he wants something to drink with them -

which is by no means an uncommon circumstance - he lifts up the old

lady's knocker with his walking-stick, and demands to have a glass

of table ale, handed over the rails.  In addition to this cool

proceeding, he is a bit of a Jack of all trades, or to use his own

words, 'a regular Robinson Crusoe;' and nothing delights him better

than to experimentalise on the old lady's property.  One morning he

got up early, and planted three or four roots of full-grown

marigolds in every bed of her front garden, to the inconceivable

astonishment of the old lady, who actually thought when she got up

and looked out of the window, that it was some strange eruption

which had come out in the night.  Another time he took to pieces

the eight-day clock on the front landing, under pretence of

cleaning the works, which he put together again, by some

undiscovered process, in so wonderful a manner, that the large hand

has done nothing but trip up the little one ever since.  Then he

took to breeding silk-worms, which he WOULD bring in two or three

times a day, in little paper boxes, to show the old lady, generally

dropping a worm or two at every visit.  The consequence was, that

one morning a very stout silk-worm was discovered in the act of

walking up-stairs - probably with the view of inquiring after his

friends, for, on further inspection, it appeared that some of his

companions had already found their way to every room in the house.

The old lady went to the seaside in despair, and during her absence

he completely effaced the name from her brass door-plate, in his

attempts to polish it with aqua-fortis.



But all this is nothing to his seditious conduct in public life.

He attends every vestry meeting that is held; always opposes the

constituted authorities of the parish, denounces the profligacy of

the churchwardens, contests legal points against the vestry-clerk,

will make the tax-gatherer call for his money till he won't call

any longer, and then he sends it:  finds fault with the sermon

every Sunday, says that the organist ought to be ashamed of

himself, offers to back himself for any amount to sing the psalms

better than all the children put together, male and female; and, in

short, conducts himself in the most turbulent and uproarious

manner.  The worst of it is, that having a high regard for the old

lady, he wants to make her a convert to his views, and therefore

walks into her little parlour with his newspaper in his hand, and

talks violent politics by the hour.  He is a charitable, open-

hearted old fellow at bottom, after all; so, although he puts the

old lady a little out occasionally, they agree very well in the

main, and she laughs as much at each feat of his handiwork when it

is all over, as anybody else.

