





CHAPTER IV - THE ELECTION FOR BEADLE







A great event has recently occurred in our parish.  A contest of

paramount interest has just terminated; a parochial convulsion has

taken place.  It has been succeeded by a glorious triumph, which

the country - or at least the parish - it is all the same - will

long remember.  We have had an election; an election for beadle.

The supporters of the old beadle system have been defeated in their

stronghold, and the advocates of the great new beadle principles

have achieved a proud victory.



Our parish, which, like all other parishes, is a little world of

its own, has long been divided into two parties, whose contentions,

slumbering for a while, have never failed to burst forth with

unabated vigour, on any occasion on which they could by possibility

be renewed.  Watching-rates, lighting-rates, paving-rates, sewer's-

rates, church-rates, poor's-rates - all sorts of rates, have been

in their turns the subjects of a grand struggle; and as to

questions of patronage, the asperity and determination with which

they have been contested is scarcely credible.



The leader of the official party - the steady advocate of the

churchwardens, and the unflinching supporter of the overseers - is

an old gentleman who lives in our row.  He owns some half a dozen

houses in it, and always walks on the opposite side of the way, so

that he may be able to take in a view of the whole of his property

at once.  He is a tall, thin, bony man, with an interrogative nose,

and little restless perking eyes, which appear to have been given

him for the sole purpose of peeping into other people's affairs

with.  He is deeply impressed with the importance of our parish

business, and prides himself, not a little, on his style of

addressing the parishioners in vestry assembled.  His views are

rather confined than extensive; his principles more narrow than

liberal.  He has been heard to declaim very loudly in favour of the

liberty of the press, and advocates the repeal of the stamp duty on

newspapers, because the daily journals who now have a monopoly of

the public, never give VERBATIM reports of vestry meetings.  He

would not appear egotistical for the world, but at the same time he

must say, that there are SPEECHES - that celebrated speech of his

own, on the emoluments of the sexton, and the duties of the office,

for instance - which might be communicated to the public, greatly

to their improvement and advantage.



His great opponent in public life is Captain Purday, the old naval

officer on half-pay, to whom we have already introduced our

readers.  The captain being a determined opponent of the

constituted authorities, whoever they may chance to be, and our

other friend being their steady supporter, with an equal disregard

of their individual merits, it will readily be supposed, that

occasions for their coming into direct collision are neither few

nor far between.  They divided the vestry fourteen times on a

motion for heating the church with warm water instead of coals:

and made speeches about liberty and expenditure, and prodigality

and hot water, which threw the whole parish into a state of

excitement.  Then the captain, when he was on the visiting

committee, and his opponent overseer, brought forward certain

distinct and specific charges relative to the management of the

workhouse, boldly expressed his total want of confidence in the

existing authorities, and moved for 'a copy of the recipe by which

the paupers' soup was prepared, together with any documents

relating thereto.'  This the overseer steadily resisted; he

fortified himself by precedent, appealed to the established usage,

and declined to produce the papers, on the ground of the injury

that would be done to the public service, if documents of a

strictly private nature, passing between the master of the

workhouse and the cook, were to be thus dragged to light on the

motion of any individual member of the vestry.  The motion was lost

by a majority of two; and then the captain, who never allows

himself to be defeated, moved for a committee of inquiry into the

whole subject.  The affair grew serious:  the question was

discussed at meeting after meeting, and vestry after vestry;

speeches were made, attacks repudiated, personal defiances

exchanged, explanations received, and the greatest excitement

prevailed, until at last, just as the question was going to be

finally decided, the vestry found that somehow or other, they had

become entangled in a point of form, from which it was impossible

to escape with propriety.  So, the motion was dropped, and

everybody looked extremely important, and seemed quite satisfied

with the meritorious nature of the whole proceeding.



This was the state of affairs in our parish a week or two since,

when Simmons, the beadle, suddenly died.  The lamented deceased had

over-exerted himself, a day or two previously, in conveying an aged

female, highly intoxicated, to the strong room of the work-house.

The excitement thus occasioned, added to a severe cold, which this

indefatigable officer had caught in his capacity of director of the

parish engine, by inadvertently playing over himself instead of a

fire, proved too much for a constitution already enfeebled by age;

and the intelligence was conveyed to the Board one evening that

Simmons had died, and left his respects.



The breath was scarcely out of the body of the deceased

functionary, when the field was filled with competitors for the

vacant office, each of whom rested his claims to public support,

entirely on the number and extent of his family, as if the office

of beadle were originally instituted as an encouragement for the

propagation of the human species.  'Bung for Beadle.  Five small

children!' - 'Hopkins for Beadle.  Seven small children!!' -

'Timkins for Beadle.  Nine small children!!!'  Such were the

placards in large black letters on a white ground, which were

plentifully pasted on the walls, and posted in the windows of the

principal shops.  Timkins's success was considered certain:

several mothers of families half promised their votes, and the nine

small children would have run over the course, but for the

production of another placard, announcing the appearance of a still

more meritorious candidate.  'Spruggins for Beadle.  Ten small

children (two of them twins), and a wife!!!'  There was no

resisting this; ten small children would have been almost

irresistible in themselves, without the twins, but the touching

parenthesis about that interesting production of nature, and the

still more touching allusion to Mrs. Spruggins, must ensure

success.  Spruggins was the favourite at once, and the appearance

of his lady, as she went about to solicit votes (which encouraged

confident hopes of a still further addition to the house of

Spruggins at no remote period), increased the general prepossession

in his favour.  The other candidates, Bung alone excepted, resigned

in despair.  The day of election was fixed; and the canvass

proceeded with briskness and perseverance on both sides.



The members of the vestry could not be supposed to escape the

contagious excitement inseparable from the occasion.  The majority

of the lady inhabitants of the parish declared at once for

Spruggins; and the QUONDAM overseer took the same side, on the

ground that men with large families always had been elected to the

office, and that although he must admit, that, in other respects,

Spruggins was the least qualified candidate of the two, still it

was an old practice, and he saw no reason why an old practice

should be departed from.  This was enough for the captain.  He

immediately sided with Bung, canvassed for him personally in all

directions, wrote squibs on Spruggins, and got his butcher to

skewer them up on conspicuous joints in his shop-front; frightened

his neighbour, the old lady, into a palpitation of the heart, by

his awful denunciations of Spruggins's party; and bounced in and

out, and up and down, and backwards and forwards, until all the

sober inhabitants of the parish thought it inevitable that he must

die of a brain fever, long before the election began.



The day of election arrived.  It was no longer an individual

struggle, but a party contest between the ins and outs.  The

question was, whether the withering influence of the overseers, the

domination of the churchwardens, and the blighting despotism of the

vestry-clerk, should be allowed to render the election of beadle a

form - a nullity:  whether they should impose a vestry-elected

beadle on the parish, to do their bidding and forward their views,

or whether the parishioners, fearlessly asserting their undoubted

rights, should elect an independent beadle of their own.



The nomination was fixed to take place in the vestry, but so great

was the throng of anxious spectators, that it was found necessary

to adjourn to the church, where the ceremony commenced with due

solemnity.  The appearance of the churchwardens and overseers, and

the ex-churchwardens and ex-overseers, with Spruggins in the rear,

excited general attention.  Spruggins was a little thin man, in

rusty black, with a long pale face, and a countenance expressive of

care and fatigue, which might either be attributed to the extent of

his family or the anxiety of his feelings.  His opponent appeared

in a cast-off coat of the captain's - a blue coat with bright

buttons; white trousers, and that description of shoes familiarly

known by the appellation of 'high-lows.'  There was a serenity in

the open countenance of Bung - a kind of moral dignity in his

confident air - an 'I wish you may get it' sort of expression in

his eye - which infused animation into his supporters, and

evidently dispirited his opponents.



The ex-churchwarden rose to propose Thomas Spruggins for beadle.

He had known him long.  He had had his eye upon him closely for

years; he had watched him with twofold vigilance for months.  (A

parishioner here suggested that this might be termed 'taking a

double sight,' but the observation was drowned in loud cries of

'Order!')  He would repeat that he had had his eye upon him for

years, and this he would say, that a more well-conducted, a more

well-behaved, a more sober, a more quiet man, with a more well-

regulated mind, he had never met with.  A man with a larger family

he had never known (cheers).  The parish required a man who could

be depended on ('Hear!' from the Spruggins side, answered by

ironical cheers from the Bung party).  Such a man he now proposed

('No,' 'Yes').  He would not allude to individuals (the ex-

churchwarden continued, in the celebrated negative style adopted by

great speakers).  He would not advert to a gentleman who had once

held a high rank in the service of his majesty; he would not say,

that that gentleman was no gentleman; he would not assert, that

that man was no man; he would not say, that he was a turbulent

parishioner; he would not say, that he had grossly misbehaved

himself, not only on this, but on all former occasions; he would

not say, that he was one of those discontented and treasonable

spirits, who carried confusion and disorder wherever they went; he

would not say, that he harboured in his heart envy, and hatred, and

malice, and all uncharitableness.  No!  He wished to have

everything comfortable and pleasant, and therefore, he would say -

nothing about him (cheers).



The captain replied in a similar parliamentary style.  He would not

say, he was astonished at the speech they had just heard; he would

not say, he was disgusted (cheers).  He would not retort the

epithets which had been hurled against him (renewed cheering); he

would not allude to men once in office, but now happily out of it,

who had mismanaged the workhouse, ground the paupers, diluted the

beer, slack-baked the bread, boned the meat, heightened the work,

and lowered the soup (tremendous cheers).  He would not ask what

such men deserved (a voice, 'Nothing a-day, and find themselves!').

He would not say, that one burst of general indignation should

drive them from the parish they polluted with their presence ('Give

it him!').  He would not allude to the unfortunate man who had been

proposed - he would not say, as the vestry's tool, but as Beadle.

He would not advert to that individual's family; he would not say,

that nine children, twins, and a wife, were very bad examples for

pauper imitation (loud cheers).  He would not advert in detail to

the qualifications of Bung.  The man stood before him, and he would

not say in his presence, what he might be disposed to say of him,

if he were absent.  (Here Mr. Bung telegraphed to a friend near

him, under cover of his hat, by contracting his left eye, and

applying his right thumb to the tip of his nose).  It had been

objected to Bung that he had only five children ('Hear, hear!' from

the opposition).  Well; he had yet to learn that the legislature

had affixed any precise amount of infantine qualification to the

office of beadle; but taking it for granted that an extensive

family were a great requisite, he entreated them to look to facts,

and compare DATA, about which there could be no mistake.  Bung was

35 years of age.  Spruggins - of whom he wished to speak with all

possible respect - was 50.  Was it not more than possible - was it

not very probable - that by the time Bung attained the latter age,

he might see around him a family, even exceeding in number and

extent, that to which Spruggins at present laid claim (deafening

cheers and waving of handkerchiefs)?  The captain concluded, amidst

loud applause, by calling upon the parishioners to sound the

tocsin, rush to the poll, free themselves from dictation, or be

slaves for ever.



On the following day the polling began, and we never have had such

a bustle in our parish since we got up our famous anti-slavery

petition, which was such an important one, that the House of

Commons ordered it to be printed, on the motion of the member for

the district.  The captain engaged two hackney-coaches and a cab

for Bung's people - the cab for the drunken voters, and the two

coaches for the old ladies, the greater portion of whom, owing to

the captain's impetuosity, were driven up to the poll and home

again, before they recovered from their flurry sufficiently to

know, with any degree of clearness, what they had been doing.  The

opposite party wholly neglected these precautions, and the

consequence was, that a great many ladies who were walking

leisurely up to the church - for it was a very hot day - to vote

for Spruggins, were artfully decoyed into the coaches, and voted

for Bung.  The captain's arguments, too, had produced considerable

effect:  the attempted influence of the vestry produced a greater.

A threat of exclusive dealing was clearly established against the

vestry-clerk - a case of heartless and profligate atrocity.  It

appeared that the delinquent had been in the habit of purchasing

six penn'orth of muffins, weekly, from an old woman who rents a

small house in the parish, and resides among the original settlers;

on her last weekly visit, a message was conveyed to her through the

medium of the cook, couched in mysterious terms, but indicating

with sufficient clearness, that the vestry-clerk's appetite for

muffins, in future, depended entirely on her vote on the

beadleship.  This was sufficient:  the stream had been turning

previously, and the impulse thus administered directed its final

course.  The Bung party ordered one shilling's-worth of muffins

weekly for the remainder of the old woman's natural life; the

parishioners were loud in their exclamations; and the fate of

Spruggins was sealed.



It was in vain that the twins were exhibited in dresses of the same

pattern, and night-caps, to match, at the church door:  the boy in

Mrs. Spruggins's right arm, and the girl in her left - even Mrs.

Spruggins herself failed to be an object of sympathy any longer.

The majority attained by Bung on the gross poll was four hundred

and twenty-eight, and the cause of the parishioners triumphed.
