




                                NOTES



    * Christ's Hospital Costume. It is most reasonable to regard the

dress as copied from the costume of the citizens of London of that

period, when long blue coats were the common habit of apprentices

and serving-men, and yellow stockings were generally worn; the coat

fits closely to the body, but has loose sleeves, and beneath is worn a

sleeveless yellow undercoat; around the waist is a red leathern

girdle; a clerical band around the neck, and a small flat black cap,

about the size of a saucer, completes the costume.- Timbs's

'Curiosities of London.'



    *(2) It appears that Christ's Hospital was not originally

founded as a school; its object was to rescue children from the

streets, to shelter, feed, clothe them, etc.- Timb's 'Curiosities of

London.'



    *(3) The Duke of Norfolk's Condemnation Commanded. The King was

now approaching fast toward his end; and fearing lest Norfolk should

escape him, he sent a message to the Commons, by which he desired them

to hasten the bill, on pretense that Norfolk enjoyed the dignity of

earl marshal, and it was necessary to appoint another, who might

officiate at the ensuing ceremony of installing his son Prince of

Wales.- Hume, vol. iii, p. 307



    *(4) It was not till the end of this reign (Henry VIII) that any

salads, carrots, turnips, or other edible roots were produced in

England. The little of these vegetables that was used was formerly

imported from Holland and Flanders. Queen Catherine, when she wanted a

salad, was obliged to despatch a messenger thither on purpose.- Hume's

History of England, vol. iii, p. 314.



    *(5) Attainder of Norfolk. The house of peers, without examining

the prisoner, without trial or evidence, passed a bill of attainder

against him and sent it down to the commons.... The obsequious commons

obeyed his (the King's) directions; and the King, having affixed the

royal assent to the bill by commissioners, issued orders for the

execution of Norfolk on the morning of the twenty-ninth of January

(the next day).- Hume's England, vol. iii, p. 306.



    *(6) The Loving-Cup. The loving-cup, and the peculiar ceremonies

observed in drinking from it, are older than English history. It is

thought that both are Danish importations. As far back as knowledge

goes, the loving-cup has always been drunk at English banquets.

Tradition explains the ceremonies in this way: in the rude ancient

times it was deemed a wise precaution to have both hands of both

drinkers employed, lest while the pledger pledged his love and

fidelity to the pledgee the pledgee take that opportunity to slip a

dirk into him!



    *(7) The Duke of Norfolks Narrow Escape. Had Henry VIII survived a

few hours longer, his order for the duke's execution would have been

carried into effect. 'But news being carried to the Tower that the

King himself had expired that night, the lieutenant deferred obeying

the warrant; and it was not thought advisable by the council to

begin a new reign by the death of the greatest nobleman in the

Kingdom, who had been condemned by a sentence so unjust and

tyrannical.'- Hume's England, vol. iii, p 307.



    *(8) He refers to the order of baronets, or baronettes- the

barones minor, as distinct from the parliamentary barons;- not, it

need hardly be said, the baronets of later creation.



    *(9) The lords of Kingsale, descendants of De Courcy, still

enjoy this curious privilege.



    *(10) Hume.



    *(11) Hume.



    *(12) The Whipping-Boy. James I and Charles II had whipping-boys

when they were little fellows, to take their punishment for them

when they fell short in their lessons; so I have ventured to furnish

my small prince with one, for my own purposes.



    *(13) Character of Hertford. The young king discovered an

extreme attachment to his uncle, who was, in the main, a man of

moderation and probity.- Hume's England, vol. iii, p. 324.

    But if he (the Protector) gave offense by assuming too much state,

he deserves great praise on account of the laws passed this session,

by which the rigor of former statutes was much mitigated, and some

security given to the freedom of the constitution. All laws were

repealed which extended the crime of treason beyond the statute of the

twenty-fifth of Edward III; all laws enacted during the late reign

extending the crime of felony; all the former laws against Lollardy or

heresy, together with the statute of the Six Articles. None were to be

accused for words, but within a month after they were spoken. By these

repeals several of the most rigorous laws that ever had passed in

England were annulled; and some dawn, both of civil and religious

liberty, began to appear to the people. A repeal also passed of that

law, the destruction of all laws, by which the king's proclamation was

made of equal force with a statute.- Ibid., vol. iii, p. 339.

    Boiling to Death. In the reign of Henry VIII, poisoners were, by

act of parliament condemned to be boiled to death. This act was

repealed in the following reign.

    In Germany, even in the 17th century, this horrible punishment was

inflicted on coiners and counterfeiters. Taylor, the Water Poet,

describes an execution he witnessed in Hamburg, in 1616. The judgement

pronounced against a coiner of false money was that he should 'be

boiled to death in oil: not thrown into the vessel at once, but with a

pulley or rope to be hanged under the armpits, and then let down

into the oil by degrees; first the feet, and next the legs, and so

to boil his flesh from his bones alive.'- Dr. J. Hammond Trumbull's

'Blue Laws, True and False,' p. 13.

    The Famous Stocking Case. A woman and her daughter, nine years

old, were hanged in Huntingdon for selling their souls to the devil,

and raising a storm by pulling off their stockings!- Ibid., p. 20.



    *(14) Leigh Hunt's The Town, p. 408, quotation from an early

tourist.



    *(15) From 'The English Rogue': London, 1665.



    *(16) Canting terms for various kinds of thieves, beggars and

vagabonds, and their female companions.



    *(17) Enslaving. So young a king, and so ignorant a peasant were

likely to make mistakes- and this is an instance in point. This

peasant was suffering from this law by anticipation; the king was

venting his indignation against a law which was not yet in

existence: for this hideous statute was to have birth in this little

king's own reign. However, we know, from the humanity of his

character, that it could never have been suggested by him.



    *(18) From 'The English Rogue': London, 1665.



    *(19) Death for Trifling Larcenies. When Connecticut and New Haven

were framing their first codes, larceny above the value of twelve

pence was a capital crime in England, as it had been since the time of

Henry I.- Dr. J. Hammond Trumbull's 'Blue Laws, True and False.' p.

17.

    The curious old book called The English Rogue makes the limit

thirteen pence ha'penny; death being the portion of any who steal a

thing 'above the value of thirteen pence ha'penny.'



    *(20) From many descriptions of larceny, the law expressly took

away the benefit of clergy; to steal a horse, or a hawk, or woolen

cloth from the weaver, was a hanging matter. So it was to kill a

deer from the king's forest, or to export sheep from the Kingdom.- Dr.

J. Hammond Trumbull's 'Blue Laws, True and False,' p. 13.

    William Prynne, a learned barrister, was sentenced- (long after

Edward the Sixth's time)- to lose both his ears in the pillory; to

degradation from the bar; a fine of L3,000, and imprisonment for life.

Three years afterward, he gave new offense to Laud, by publishing a

pamphlet against the hierarchy. He was again prosecuted, and was

sentenced to lose what remained of his ears; to pay a fine of

L5,000; to be branded on both his cheeks with the letters S. L. (for

Seditious Libeler), and to remain in prison for life. The severity

of this sentence was equaled by the savage rigor of its execution.-

Ibid., p. 12.



    *(21) Hume's England.



    *(22) Christ's Hospital or Blue Coat Scbool, 'the Noblest

Institution in the World.'

    The ground on which the Priory of the Grey Friars stood was

conferred by Henry the Eighth on the Corporation of London (who caused

the institution there of a home for poor boys and girls).

Subsequently, Edward the Sixth caused the old Priory to be properly

repaired, and founded within it that noble establishment called the

Blue Coat School, or Christ's Hospital, for the education and

maintenance of orphans and the children of indigent persons.... Edward

would not let him (Bishop Ridley) depart till the letter was written

(to the Lord Mayor), and then charged him to deliver it himself, and

signify his special request and commandment that no time might be lost

in proposing what was convenient, and apprising him of the

proceedings. The work was zealously undertaken, Ridley himself

engaging in it; and the result was, the founding of Christ's

Hospital for the Education of Poor Children. (The king endowed several

other charities at the same time.) 'Lord God,' said he, 'I yield

thee most hearty thanks that thou hast given me life thus long, to

finish this work to the glory of thy name!' That innocent and most

exemplary life was drawing rapidly to its close, and in a few days

he rendered up his spirit to his Creator, praying God to defend the

realm from Papistry.- J. Heneage Jesse's 'London,its Celebrated

Characters and Places.'

    In the Great Hall hangs a large picture of King Edward VI seated

on his throne, in a scarlet and ermined robe, holding the scepter in

his left hand, presenting with the other the Charter to the kneeling

Lord Mayor. By his side stands the Chancellor, holding the seals,

and next to him are other officers of state. Bishop Ridley kneels

before him with uplifted hands, as if supplicating a blessing on the

event; while the Aldermen, etc, with the Lord Mayor, kneel on both

sides, occupying the middle ground of the picture; and lastly, in

front, are a double row of boys on one side, and girls on the other,

from the master and matron down to the boy and girl who have stepped

forward from their respective rows, and kneel with raised hands before

the king.- Timbs's 'Curiosities of London,' p. 98.

    Christ's Hospital, by ancient custom, possesses the privilege of

addressing the Sovereign on the occasion of his or her coming into the

City to partake of the hospitality of the Corporation of London.-

Ibid.

    The Dining-Hall, with its lobby and organ-gallery, occupies the

entire story, which is 187 feet long, 51 feet wide, and 47 feet

high; it is lit by nine large windows, filled with stained glass on

the south side; that is, next to Westminster Hall, the noblest room in

the metropolis. Here the boys, now about 800 in number, dine; and here

are held the 'Suppings in Public,' to which visitors are admitted by

tickets, issued by the Treasurer and by the Governors of Christ's

Hospital. The tables are laid with cheese in wooden bowls; beer in

wooden piggins, poured from leathern jacks; and bread brought in large

baskets. The official company enter; the Lord Mayor, or President,

takes his seat in a state chair, made of oak from St. Catherine's

Church by the Tower; a hymn is sung, accompanied by the organ; a

'Grecian,' or head boy, reads the prayers from the pulpit, silence

being enforced by three drops of a wooden hammer. After prayer the

supper commences, and the visitors walk between the tables. At its

close, the 'trade-boys' take up the baskets, bowls, jacks, piggins,

and candlesticks, and pass in procession, the bowing to the

Governors being curiously formal. This spectacle was witnessed by

Queen Victoria and Prince Albert in 1845.

    Among the more eminent Blue Coat Boys are Joshua Bames, editor

of Anacreon and Euripides; Jeremiah Markland, the eminent critic,

particularly in Greek literature; Camden, the antiquary; Bishop

Stillingfleet; Samuel Richardson, the novelist; Thomas Mitchell, the

translator of Aristophanes; Thomas Barnes, many years editor of the

London Times; Coleridge, Charles Lamb, and Leigh Hunt.

    No boy is admitted before he is seven years old, or after he is

nine; and no boy can remain in the school after he is fifteen,

King's boys and 'Grecians' alone excepted. There are about 500

Governors, at the head of whom are the Sovereign and the Prince of

Wales. The qualification for a Governor is payment of L500.- Ibid.

                             GENERAL NOTE

    One hears much about the 'hideous Blue-Laws of Connecticut,' and

is accustomed to shudder piously when they are mentioned. There are

people in America- and even in England!- who imagine that they were

a very monument of malignity, pitilessness, and inhumanity; whereas,

in reality they were about the first sweeping departure from judicial

atrocity which the 'civilized' world had seen. This humane and kindly

Blue-Law code, of two hundred and forty years ago, stands all by

itself, with ages of bloody law on the further side of it, and a

century and three-quarters of bloody English law on this side of it.

    There has never been a time- under the Blue-Laws or any other-

when above fourteen crimes were punishable by death in Connecticut.

But in England, within the memory of men who are still hale in body

and mind, two hundred and twenty-three crimes were punishable by

death!* These facts are worth knowing- and worth thinking about, too.



    * See Dr. J. Hammond Trumbull's Blue Laws, True and False, p. 11.



                                    THE END

