





History of the Conquest of Peru



by William Hickling Prescott



Book 3



Chapter 1



Pizarro's Reception At Court--His Capitulation With The Crown -

He Visits His Birthplace--Returns To The New World-

Difficulties With Almagro--His Third Expedition-

Adventures On The Coast--Battles In The Isle Of Puna



1528--1531



Pizarro and his officer, having crossed the Isthmus, embarked at Nombre

de Dios for the old country, and, after a good passage, reached Seville

early in the summer of 1528.  There happened to be at that time in port a

person well known in the history of Spanish adventure as the Bachelor

Enciso.  He had taken an active part in the colonization of Tierra Firme,

and had a pecuniary claim against the early colonists of Darien, of whom

Pizarro was one.  Immediately on the landing of the latter, he was seized

by Enciso's orders, and held in custody for the debt.  Pizarro, who had

fled from his native land as a forlorn and houseless adventurer, after an

absence of more than twenty years, passed, most of them, in

unprecedented toil and suffering, now found himself on his return the

inmate of a prison.  Such was the commencement of those brilliant

fortunes which, as he had trusted, awaited him at home.  The

circumstance excited general indignation; and no sooner was the Court

advised of his arrival in the country, and the great purpose of his

mission, than orders were sent for his release, with permission to proceed

at once on his journey.



Pizarro found the emperor at Toledo, which he was soon to quit, in order

to embark for Italy.  Spain was not the favorite residence of Charles the

Fifth, in the earlier part of his reign.  He was now at that period of it

when he was enjoying the full flush of his triumphs over his gallant rival

of France, whom he had defeated and taken prisoner at the great battle of

Pavia; and the victor was at this moment preparing to pass into Italy to

receive the imperial crown from the hands of the Roman Pontiff.  Elated

by his successes and his elevation to the German throne, Charles made

little account of his hereditary kingdom, as his ambition found so

splendid a career thrown open to it on the wide field of European

politics.



He had hitherto received too inconsiderable returns from his transatlantic

possessions to give them the attention they deserved.  But, as the recent

acquisition of Mexico and the brilliant anticipations in respect to the

southern continent were pressed upon his notice, he felt their importance

as likely to afford him the means of prosecuting his ambitious and most

expensive enterprises.



Pizarro, therefore, who had now come to satisfy the royal eyes, by visible

proofs, of the truth of the golden rumors which, from time to time, had

reached Castile, was graciously received by the emperor.  Charles

examined the various objects which his officer exhibited to him with

great attention.  He was particularly interested by the appearance of the

llama, so remarkable as the only beast of burden yet known on the new

continent; and the fine fabrics of woollen cloth, which were made from

its shaggy sides, gave it a much higher value, in the eyes of the sagacious

monarch, than what it possessed as an animal for domestic labor.  But

the specimens of gold and silver manufacture, and the wonderful tale

which Pizarro had to tell of the abundance of the precious metals, must

have satisfied even the cravings of royal cupidity.



Pizarro, far from being embarrassed by the novelty of his situation,

maintained his usual self-possession, and showed that decorum and even

dignity in his address which belong to the Castilian.  He spoke in a

simple and respectful style, but with the earnestness and natural

eloquence of one who had been an actor in the scenes he described, and

who was conscious that the impression he made on his audience was to

decide his future destiny.  All listened with eagerness to the account of

his strange adventures by sea and land, his wanderings in the forests, or

in the dismal and pestilent swamps on the sea-coast, without food, almost

without raiment, with feet torn and bleeding at every step, with his few

companions becoming still fewer by disease and death, and yet pressing

on with unconquerable spirit to extend the empire of Castile, and the

name and power of her sovereign; but when he painted his lonely

condition on the desolate island, abandoned by the government at home,

deserted by all but a handful of devoted followers, his royal auditor,

though not easily moved, was affected to tears.  On his departure from

Toledo, Charles commended the affairs of his vassal in the most

favorable terms to the consideration of the Council of the Indies.1



There was at this time another man at court, who had come there on a

similar errand from the New World, but whose splendid achievements

had already won for him a name that threw the rising reputation of

Pizarro comparatively into the shade.  This man was Hernando Cortes,

the Conqueror of Mexico.  He had come home to lay an empire at the

feet of his sovereign, and to demand in return the redress of his wrongs,

and the recompense of his great services.  He was at the close of his

career, as Pizarro was at the commencement of his; the Conqueror of the

North and of the South; the two men appointed by Providence to

overturn the most potent of the Indian dynasties, and to open the golden

gates by which the treasures of the New World were to pass into the

coffers of Spain.



Notwithstanding the emperor's recommendation, the business of Pizarro

went forward at the tardy pace with which affairs are usually conducted

in the court of Castile.  He found his limited means gradually sinking

under the expenses incurred by his present situation, and he represented,

that, unless some measures were speedily taken in reference to his suit,

however favorable they might be in the end, he should be in no condition

to profit by them.  The queen, accordingly, who had charge of the

business, on her husband's departure, expedited the affair, and on the

twenty sixth of July, 1529, she executed the memorable Capitulation,

which defined the powers and privileges of Pizarro.



The instrument secured to that chief the right of discovery and conquest

in the province of Peru, or New Castile,--as the country was then

called, in the same manner as Mexico had received the name of New

Spain,--for the distance of two hundred leagues south of Santiago.  He

was to receive the titles and rank of Governor and Captain-General of

the province, together with those of Adelantado, and Alguacil Mayor, for

life; and he was to have a salary of seven hundred and twenty-five

thousand maravedis, with the obligation of maintaining certain officers

and military retainers, corresponding with the dignity of his station.  He

was to have the right to erect certain fortresses, with the absolute

government of them; to assign encomiendas of Indians, under the

limitations prescribed by law; and, in fine, to exercise nearly all the

prerogatives incident to the authority of a viceroy.



His associate, Almagro, was declared commander of the fortress of

Tumbez, with an annual rent of three hundred thousand maravedis, and

with the further rank and privileges of an hidalgo.  The reverend Father

Luque received the reward of his services in the Bishopric of Tumbez,

and he was also declared Protector of the Indians of Peru.  He was to

enjoy the yearly stipend of a thousand ducats,--to be derived, like the

other salaries and gratuities in this instrument, from the revenues of the

conquered territory.



Nor were the subordinate actors in the expedition forgotten.  Ruiz

received the title of Grand Pilot of the Southern Ocean, with a liberal

provision; Candia was placed at the head of the artillery; and the

remaining eleven companions on the desolate island were created

hidalgos and cavalleros, and raised to certain municipal dignities,--in

prospect.



Several provisions of a liberal tenor were also made, to encourage

emigration to the country.  The new settlers were to be exempted from

some of the most onerous, but customary taxes, as the alcabala, or to be

subject to them only in a mitigated form.  The tax on the precious metals

drawn from mines was to be reduced, at first, to one tenth, instead of the

fifth imposed on the same metals when obtained by barter or by rapine.



It was expressly enjoined on Pizarro to observe the existing regulations

for the good government and protection of the natives; and he was

required to carry out with him a specified number of ecclesiastics, with

whom he was to take counsel in the conquest of the country, and whose

efforts were to be dedicated to the service and conversion of the Indians;

while lawyers and attorneys, on the other hand, whose presence was

considered as boding ill to the harmony of the new settlements, were

strictly prohibited from setting foot in them.



Pizarro, on his part, was bound, in six months from the date of the

instrument, to raise a force, well equipped for the service, of two

hundred and fifty men, of whom one hundred might be drawn from the

colonies; and the government engaged to furnish some trifling assistance

in the purchase of artillery and military stores.  Finally, he was to be

prepared, in six months after his return to Panama, to leave that port and

embark on his expedition.2



Such are some of the principal provisions of this Capitulation, by which

the Castilian government, with the sagacious policy which it usually

pursued on the like occasions, stimulated the ambitious hopes of the

adventurer by high-sounding titles, and liberal promises of reward

contingent on his success, but took care to stake nothing itself on the

issue of the enterprise.  It was careful to reap the fruits of his toil, but not

to pay the cost of them.



A circumstance, that could not fail to be remarked in these provisions,

was the manner in which the high and lucrative posts were accumulated

on Pizarro, to the exclusion of Almagro, who, if he had not taken as

conspicuous a part in personal toil and exposure, had, at least, divided

with him the original burden of the enterprise, and, by his labors in

another direction, had contributed quite as essentially to its success.

Almagro had willingly conceded the post of honor to his confederate; but

it had been stipulated, on Pizarro's departure for Spain, that, while he

solicited the office of Governor and Captain-General for himself, he

should secure that of Adelantado for his companion.  In like manner, he

had engaged to apply for the see of Tumbez for the vicar of Panama, and

the office of Alguacil Mayor for the pilot Ruiz.  The bishopric took the

direction that was concerted, for the soldier could scarcely claim the

mitre of the prelate; but the other offices, instead of their appropriate

distribution, were all concentred in himself.  Yet it was in reference to

his application for his friends, that Pizarro had promised on his departure

to deal fairly and honorably by them all.3



It is stated by the military chronicler, Pedro Pizarro, that his kinsman did,

in fact, urge the suit strongly in behalf of Almagro; but that he was

refused by the government, on the ground that offices of such paramount

importance could not be committed to different individuals.  The ill

effects of such an arrangement had been long since felt in more than one

of the Indian colonies, where it had led to rivalry and fatal collision.4

Pizarro, therefore, finding his remonstrances unheeded, had no

alternative but to combine the offices in his own person, or to see the

expedition fall to the ground.  This explanation of the affair has not

received the sanction of other contemporary historians.  The

apprehensions expressed by Luque, at the time of Pizarro's assuming the

mission, of some such result as actually occurred, founded, doubtless, on

a knowledge of his associate's character, may warrant us in distrusting

the alleged vindication of his conduct, and our distrust will not be

diminished by familiarity with his subsequent career.  Pizarro's virtue

was not of a kind to withstand temptation,--though of a much weaker sort

than that now thrown in his path.



The fortunate cavalier was also honored with the habit of St. Jago;5 and

he was authorized to make an important innovation in his family

escutcheon,--for by the father's side he might claim his armorial bearings.

The black eagle and the two pillars emblazoned on the royal arms were

incorporated with those of the Pizarros; and an Indian city, with a vessel

in the distance on the waters, and the llama of Peru, revealed the theatre

and the character of his exploits; while the legend announced, that

"under the auspices of Charles, and by the industry, the genius, and the

resources of Pizarro, the country had been discovered and reduced to

tranquillity,"---thus modestly intimating both the past and prospective

services of the Conqueror.6



These arrangements having been thus completed to Pizarro's satisfaction,

he left Toledo for Truxillo, his native place, in Estremadura, where he

thought he should be most likely to meet with adherents for his new

enterprise, and where it doubtless gratified his vanity to display himself

in the palmy, or at least promising, state of his present circumstances.  If

vanity be ever pardonable, it is certainly in a man who, born in an

obscure station in life, without family, interest, or friends to back him,

has carved out his own fortunes in the world, and, by his own resources,

triumphed over all the obstacles which nature and accident had thrown in

his way.  Such was the condition of Pizarro, as he now revisited the place

of his nativity, where he had hitherto been known only as a poor outcast,

without a home to shelter, a father to own him, or a friend to lean upon.

But he now found both friends and followers, and some who were eager

to claim kindred with him, and take part in his future fortunes.  Among

these were four brothers.  Three of them, like himself, were illegitimate;

one of whom, named Francisco Martin de Alcantara, was related to him

by the mother's side; the other two, named Gonzalo and Juan Pizarro,

were descended from the father.  "They were all poor, and proud as they

were poor," says Oviedo, who had seen them; "and their eagerness for

gain was in proportion to their poverty." 7



The remaining and eldest brother, named Hernando, was a legitimate

son,--'legitimate," continues the same caustic authority, "by his pride, as

well as by his birth." His features were plain, even disagreeably so; but

his figure was good.  He was large of stature, and, like his brother

Francis, had on the whole an imposing presence.8  In his character, he

combined some of the worst defects incident to the Castilian.  He was

jealous in the extreme; impatient not merely of affront, but of the least

slight, and implacable in his resentment.  He was decisive in his

measures, and unscrupulous in their execution.  No touch of pity had

power to arrest his arm.  His arrogance was such, that he was constantly

wounding the self-love of those with whom he acted; thus begetting an

ill-will which unnecessarily multiplied obstacles in his path.  In this he

differed from his brother Francis, whose plausible manners smoothed

away difficulties, and conciliated confidence and cooperation in his

enterprises.  Unfortunately, the evil counsels of Hernando exercised an

influence over his brother which more than compensated the advantages

derived from his singular capacity for business.



Notwithstanding the general interest which Pizarro's adventures excited

in his country, that chief did not find it easy to comply with the

provisions of the Capitulation in respect to the amount of his levies.

Those who were most astonished by his narrative were not always most

inclined to take part in his fortunes.  They shrunk from the unparalleled

hardships which lay in the path of the adventurer in that direction; and

they listened with visible distrust to the gorgeous pictures of the golden

temples and gardens of Tumbez, which they looked upon as indebted in

some degree, at least, to the coloring of his fancy, with the obvious

purpose of attracting followers to his banner.  It is even said that Pizarro

would have found it difficult to raise the necessary funds, but for the

seasonable aid of Cortes, a native of Estremadura like himself, his

companion in arms in early days, and, according to report, his kinsman.9

No one was in a better condition to hold out a helping hand to a brother

adventurer, and, probably, no one felt greater sympathy in Pizarro's

fortunes, or greater confidence in his eventual success, than the man who

had so lately trod the same career with renown.



The six months allowed by the Capitulation had elapsed, and Pizarro had

assembled somewhat less than his stipulated complement of men, with

which he was preparing to embark in a little squadron of three vessels at

Seville; but, before they were wholly ready, he received intelligence that

the officers of the Council of the Indies proposed to inquire into the

condition of the vessels, and ascertain how far the requisitions had been

complied with.



Without loss of time therefore, Pizarro afraid, if the facts were known,

that his enterprise might be nipped in the bud, slipped his cables, and

crossing the bar of San Lucar, in January, 1530, stood for the isle of

Gomera,--one of the Canaries,--where he ordered his brother Hernando,

who had charge of the remaining vessels, to meet him.



Scarcely had he gone, before the officers arrived to institute the search.

But when they objected the deficiency of men, they were easily--perhaps

willingly--deceived by the pretext that the remainder had gone forward in

the vessel with Pizarro.  At all events, no further obstacles were thrown

in Hernando's way, and he was permitted, with the rest of the squadron,

to join his brother, according to agreement, at Gomera.



After a prosperous voyage, the adventurers reached the northern coast of

the great southern continent, and anchored off the port of Santa Marta.

Here they received such discouraging reports of the countries to which

they were bound, of forests teeming with insects and venomous serpents,

of huge alligators that swarmed on the banks of the streams, and of

hardships and perils such as their own fears had never painted, that

several of Pizarro's men deserted; and their leader, thinking it no longer

safe to abide in such treacherous quarters, set sail at once for Nombre de

Dios.



Soon after his arrival there, he was met by his two associates, Luque and

Almagro, who had crossed the mountains for the purpose of hearing

from his own lips the precise import of the capitulation with the Crown.

Great, as might have been expected, was Almagro's discontent at

learning the result of what he regarded as the perfidious machinations of

his associate.  "Is it thus," he exclaimed, "that you have dealt with the

friend who shared equally with you in the trials, the dangers, and the cost

of the enterprise; and this, notwithstanding your solemn engagements on

your departure to provide for his interests as faithfully as your own?

How could you allow me to be thus dishonored in the eyes of the world

by so paltry a compensation, which seems to estimate my services as

nothing in comparison with your own?" 10



Pizarro, in reply, assured his companion that he had faithfully urged his

suit, but that the government refused to confide powers which intrenched

so closely on one another to different hands.  He had no alternative, but

to accept all himself or to decline all; and he endeavored to mitigate

Almagro's displeasure by representing that the country was large enough

for the ambition of both, and that the powers conferred on himself were,

in fact, conferred on Almagro, since all that he had would ever be at his

friend's disposal, as if it were his own.  But these honeyed words did not

satisfy the injured party; and the two captains soon after returned to

Panama with feelings of estrangement, if not hostility, towards one

another, which did not augur well for their enterprise.



Still, Almagro was of a generous temper, and might have been appeased

by the politic concessions of his rival, but for the interference of

Hernando Pizarro, who, from the first hour of their meeting, showed

little respect for the veteran, which, indeed, the diminutive person of the

latter was not calculated to inspire, and who now regarded him with

particular aversion as an impediment to the career of his brother.



Almagro's friends--and his frank and liberal manners had secured him

many--were no less disgusted than himself with the overbearing conduct

of this new ally.  They loudly complained that it was quite enough to

suffer from the perfidy of Pizarro, without being exposed to the insults of

his family, who had now come over with him to fatten on the spoils of

conquest which belonged to their leader.  The rupture soon proceeded to

such a length, that Almagro avowed his intention to prosecute the

expedition without further cooperation with his partner, and actually

entered into negotiations for the purchase of vessels for that object.  But

Luque, and the Licentiate Espinosa, who had fortunately come over at

that time from St. Domingo, now interposed to repair a breach which

must end in the ruin of the enterprise, and the probable destruction of

those most interested in its success.  By their mediation, a show of

reconciliation was at length effected between the parties, on Pizarro's

assurance that he would relinquish the dignity of Adelantado in favor of

his rival, and petition the emperor to confirm him in the possession of it;-

-an assurance, it may be remarked, not easy to reconcile with his former

assertion in respect to the avowed policy of the Crown in bestowing this

office.  He was, moreover, to apply for a distinct government for his

associate, so soon as he had become master of the country assigned to

himself; and was to solicit no office for either of his own brothers, until

Almagro had been first provided for.  Lastly, the former contract in

regard to the division of the spoil into three equal shares between the

three original associates was confirmed in the most explicit manner.  The

reconciliation thus effected among the parties answered the temporary

purpose of enabling them to go forward in concert in the expedition.  But

it was only a thin scar that had healed ever the wound, which, deep and

rankling within, waited only fresh cause of irritation to break out with a

virulence more fatal than ever.11



No time was now lost in preparing for the voyage.  It found little

encouragement, however, among the colonists of Panama, who were too

familiar with the sufferings on the former expeditions to care to

undertake another, even with the rich bribe that was held out to allure

them.  A few of the old company were content to follow out the

adventure to its close; and some additional stragglers were collected

from the province of Nicaragua,--a shoot, it may be remarked, from the

colony of Panama.  But Pizarro made slender additions to the force

brought over with him from Spain, though this body was in better

condition, and, in respect to arms, ammunition, and equipment generally,

was on a much better footing than his former levies.  The whole number

did not exceed one hundred and eighty men, with twenty-seven horses

for the cavalry.  He had provided himself with three vessels, two of them

of a good size, to take the place of those which he had been compelled to

leave on the opposite side of the isthmus at Nombre de Dios; an

armament small for the conquest of an empire, and far short of that

prescribed by the capitulation with the Crown.  With this the intrepid

chief proposed to commence operations, trusting to his own successes,

and the exertions of Almagro, who was to remain behind, for the present,

to muster reinforcements.12



On St. John the Evangelist's day, the banners of the company and the

royal standard were consecrated in the cathedral church of Panama; a

sermon was preached before the little army by Fray Juan de Vargas, one

of the Dominicans selected by the government for the Peruvian mission;

and mass was performed, and the sacrament administered to every

soldier previous to his engaging in the crusade against the infidel.13

Having thus solemnly invoked the blessing of Heaven on the enterprise,

Pizarro and his followers went on board their vessels, which rode at

anchor in the Bay of Panama, and early in January, 1531, sallied forth on

his third and last expedition for the conquest of Peru.



It was his intention to steer direct for Tumbez, which held out so

magnificent a show of treasure on his former voyage.  But head winds

and currents, as usual, baffled his purpose, and after a run of thirteen

days, much shorter than the period formerly required for the same

distance, his little squadron came to anchor in the Bay of St. Matthew,

about one degree north; and Pizarro, after consulting with his officers,

resolved to disembark his forces and advance along the coast, while the

vessels, held their course at a convenient distance from the shore.



The march of the troops was severe and painful in the extreme; for the

road was constantly intersected by streams, which, swollen by the winter

rains, widened at their mouths into spacious estuaries.  Pizarro, who had

some previous knowledge of the country, acted as guide as well as

commander of the expedition.  He was ever ready to give aid where it

was needed, encouraging his followers to ford or swim the torrents as

they best could, and cheering the desponding by his own buoyant and

courageous spirit.



At length they reached a thick-settled hamlet, or rather town, in the

province of Coaque.  The Spaniards rushed on the place, and the

inhabitants, without offering resistance, fled in terror to the neighboring

forests, leaving their effects--of much greater value than had been

anticipated--in the hands of the invaders.  "We fell on them, sword in

hand," says one of the Conquerors, with some naivete; "for, if we had

advised the Indians of our approach, we should never have found there

such store of gold and precious stones." 14  The natives, however,

according to another authority, stayed voluntarily; "for, as they had done

no harm to the white men, they flattered themselves none would be

offered to them, but that there would be only an interchange of good

offices with the strangers," 15---an expectation founded, it may be, on

the good character which the Spaniards had established for themselves

on their preceding visit, but in which the simple people now found

themselves most unpleasantly deceived.



Rushing into the deserted dwellings, the invaders found there, besides

stuffs of various kinds, and food most welcome in their famished

condition, a large quantity of gold and silver wrought into clumsy

ornaments, together with many precious stones; for this was the region of

the esmeraldas, or emeralds, where that valuable gem was most

abundant.  One of these jewels that fell into the hands of Pizarro, in this

neighborhood, was as large as a pigeon's egg.  Unluckily, his rude

followers did not know the value of their prize; and they broke many of

them in pieces by pounding them with hammers.16  They were led to this

extraordinary proceeding, it is said, by one of the Dominican

missionaries, Fray Reginaldo de Pedraza, who assured them that this was

the way to prove the true emerald, which could not be broken.  It was

observed that the good father did not subject his own jewels to this wise

experiment; but, as the stones, in consequence of it, fell in value, being

regarded merely as colored glass, he carried back a considerable store of

them to Panama.17



The gold and silver ornaments rifled from the dwellings were brought

together and deposited in a common heap; when a fifth was deducted for

the Crown, and Pizarro distributed the remainder in due proportions

among the officers and privates of his company.  This was the usage

invariably observed on the like occasions throughout the Conquest.  The

invaders had embarked in a common adventure.  Their interest was

common, and to have allowed every one to plunder on his own account

would only have led to insubordination and perpetual broils.  All were

required, therefore, on pain of death, to contribute whatever they

obtained, whether by bargain or by rapine, to the general stock; and all

were too much interested in the execution of the penalty to allow the

unhappy culprit, who violated the law, any chance of escape.18



Pizarro, with his usual policy, sent back to Panama a large quantity of

the gold, no less than twenty thousand castellanos in value, in the belief

that the sight of so much treasure, thus speedily acquired, would settle

the doubt of the wavering, and decide them on joining his banner.19  He

judged right.  As one of the Conquerors piously expresses it, "It pleased

the Lord that we should fall in with the town of Coaque, that the riches of

the land might find credit with the people, and that they should flock to

it." 20



Pizarro, having refreshed his men, continued his march along the coast,

but no longer accompanied by the vessels, which had returned for

recruits to Panama.  The road, as he advanced, was checkered with strips

of sandy waste, which, drifted about by the winds, blinded the soldiers,

and afforded only treacherous footing for man and beast.  The glare was

intense; and the rays of a vertical sun beat fiercely on the iron mail and

the thick quilted doublets of cotton, till the fainting troops were almost

suffocated with the heat.  To add to their distresses, a strange epidemic

broke out in the little army.  It took the form of ulcers, or rather hideous

warts of great size, which covered the body, and when lanced, as was the

case with some, discharged such a quantity of blood as proved fatal to

the sufferer.  Several died of this frightful disorder, which was so sudden

in its attack, and attended with such prostration of strength, that those

who lay down well at night were unable to lift their hands to their heads

in the morning.21  The epidemic, which made its first appearance during

this invasion, and which did not long survive it, spread over the country,

sparing neither native nor white man.22  It was one of those plagues

from the vial of wrath, which the destroying angel, who follows in the

path of the conqueror, pours out on the devoted nations.



The Spaniards rarely experienced on their march either resistance or

annoyance from the inhabitants, who, instructed by the example of

Coaque, fled with their effects into the woods and neighboring

mountains.  No one came out to welcome the strangers and offer the rites

of hospitality, as on their last visit to the land.  For the white men were

no longer regarded as good beings that had come from heaven, but as

ruthless destroyers, who, invulnerable to the assaults of the Indians, were

borne along on the backs of fierce animals, swifter than the wind, with

weapons in their hands, that scattered fire and desolation as they went.

Such were the stories now circulated of the invaders, which, preceding

them everywhere on their march, closed the hearts, if not the doors, of

the natives against them.  Exhausted by the fatigue of travel and by

disease, and grievously disappointed at the poverty of the land, which

now offered no compensation for their toils, the soldiers of Pizarro

cursed the hour in which they had enlisted under his standard, and the

men of Nicaragua, in particular, says the old chronicler, calling to mind

their pleasant quarters in their luxurious land, sighed only to return to

their Mahometan paradise.23



At this juncture the army was gladdened by the sight of a vessel from

Panama, which brought some supplies, together with the royal treasurer,

the veedor or inspector, the comptroller, and other high officers

appointed by the Crown to attend the expedition.  They had been left in

Spain by Pizarro, in consequence of his abrupt departure from the

country; and the Council of the Indies, on learning the circumstance, had

sent instructions to Panama to prevent the sailing of his squadron from

that port.  But the Spanish government, with more wisdom,

countermanded the order, only requiring the functionaries to quicken

their own departure, and take their place without loss of time in the

expedition.



The Spaniards in their march along the coast had now advanced as far as

Puerto Viejo.  Here they were soon after joined by another small

reinforcement of about thirty men, under an officer named Belalcazar,

who subsequently rose to high distinction in this service.  Many of the

followers of Pizarro would now have halted at this spot and established a

colony there.  But that chief thought more of conquering than of

colonizing, at least for the present; and he proposed, as his first step, to

get possession of Tumbez, which he regarded as the gate of the Peruvian

empire.  Continuing his march, therefore, to the shores of what is now

called the Gulf of Guayaquil, he arrived off the little island of Puna,

lying at no great distance from the Bay of Tumbez.  This island, he

thought, would afford him a convenient place to encamp until he was

prepared to make his descent on the Indian city.



The dispositions of the islanders seemed to favor his purpose.  He had

not been long in their neighborhood, before a deputation of the natives,

with their cacique at their head, crossed over in their balsas to the main

land to welcome the Spaniards to their residence.  But the Indian

interpreters of Tumbez, who had returned with Pizarro from Spain, and

continued with the camp, put their master on his guard against the

meditated treachery of the islanders, whom they accused of designing to

destroy the Spaniards by cutting the ropes that held together the floats,

and leaving those upon them to perish in the waters.  Yet the cacique,

when charged by Pizarro with this perfidious scheme, denied it with such

an air of conscious innocence, that the Spanish commander trusted

himself and his followers, without further hesitation, to his conveyance,

and was transported in safety to the shores of Puna.



Here he was received in a hospitable manner, and his troops were

provided with comfortable quarters.  Well satisfied with his present

position, Pizarro resolved to occupy it until the violence of the rainy

season was passed, when the arrival of the reinforcements he expected

would put him in better condition for marching into the country of the

Inca.



The island, which lies in the mouth of the river of Guayaquil, and is

about eight leagues in length by four in breadth, at the widest part, was at

that time partially covered with a noble growth of timber.  But a large

portion of it was subjected to cultivation, and bloomed with plantations

of cacao, of the sweet potato, and the different products of a tropical

climes evincing agricultural knowledge as well as industry in the

population.  They were a warlike race; but had received from their

Peruvian foes the appellation of "perfidious." It was the brand fastened

by the Roman historians on their Carthaginian enemies,--with perhaps no

better reason.  The bold and independent islanders opposed a stubborn

resistance to the arms of the Incas; and, though they had finally yielded,

they had been ever since at feud, and often in deadly hostility, with their

neighbors of Tumbez.



The latter no sooner heard of Pizarro's arrival on the island than, trusting,

probably, to their former friendly relations with him, they came over in

some number to the Spanish quarters.  The presence of their detested

rivals was by no means grateful to the jealous inhabitants of Puna, and

the prolonged residence of the white men on their island could not be

otherwise than burdensome.  In their outward demeanor they still

maintained the same show of amity; but Pizarro's interpreters again put

him on his guard against the proverbial perfidy of their hosts.  With his

suspicions thus roused, the Spanish commander was informed that a

number of the chiefs had met together to deliberate on a plan of

insurrection.  Not caring to wait for the springing of the mine, he

surrounded the place of meeting with his soldiers and made prisoners of

the suspected chieftains.  According to one authority, they confessed

their guilt.24  This is by no means certain.  Nor is it certain that they

meditated an insurrection.  Yet the fact is not improbable, in itself;

though it derives little additional probability from the assertion of the

hostile interpreters.  It is certain, however, that Pizarro was satisfied of

the existence of a conspiracy; and, without further hesitation, he

abandoned his wretched prisoners, ten or twelve in number, to the tender

mercies of their rivals of Tumbez, who instantly massacred them before

his eyes.25



Maddened by this outrage, the people of Puna sprang to arms, and threw

themselves at once, with fearful yells and the wildest menaces of despair,

on the Spanish camp.  The odds of numbers were greatly in their favor,

for they mustered several thousand warriors.  But the more decisive odds

of arms and discipline were on the side of their antagonists; and, as the

Indians rushed forward in a confused mass to the assault, the Castilians

coolly received them on their long pikes, or swept them down by the

volleys of their musketry.  Their ill-protected bodies were easily cut to

pieces by the sharp sword of the Spaniard; and Hernando Pizarro, putting

himself at the head of the cavalry, charged boldly into the midst, and

scattered them far and wide over the field, until, panic-struck by the

terrible array of steel-clad horsemen, and the stunning reports and the

flash of fire-arms, the fugitives sought shelter in the depths of their

forests.  Yet the victory was owing, in some degree, at least,--if we may

credit the Conquerors,--to the interposition of Heaven; for St. Michael

and his legions were seen high in the air above the combatants,

contending with the arch-enemy of man, and cheering on the Christians

by their example! 26



Not more than three or four Spaniards fell in the fight; but many were

wounded, and among them Hernando Pizarro, who received a severe

injury in the leg from a javelin.  Nor did the war end here; for the

implacable islanders, taking advantage of the cover of night, or of any

remissness on the part of the invaders, were ever ready to steal out of

their fastnesses and spring on their enemy's camp, while, by cutting off

his straggling parties, and destroying his provisions, they kept him in

perpetual alarm.



In this uncomfortable situation, the Spanish commander was gladdened

by the appearance of two vessels off the island.  They brought a

reinforcement consisting of a hundred volunteers besides horses for the

cavalry.  It was commanded by Hernando de Soto, a captain afterwards

famous as the discoverer of the Mississippi, which still rolls its majestic

current over the place of his burial,--a fitting monument for his remains,

as it is of his renown.27



The reinforcement was most welcome to Pizarro, who had been long

discontented with his position on an island, where he found nothing to

compensate the life of unintermitting hostility which he was compelled to

lead.  With these recruits, he felt himself in sufficient strength to cross

over to the continent, and resume military operations in the proper

theatre for discovery and conquest.  From the Indians of Tumbez he

learned that the country had been for some time distracted by a civil war

between two sons of the late monarch, competitors for the throne.  This

intelligence he regarded as of the utmost importance, for he remembered

the use which Cortes had made of similar dissensions among the tribes of

Anahuac.  Indeed, Pizarro seems to have had the example of his great

predecessor before his eyes on more occasions than this.  But he fell far

short of his model; for, notwithstanding the restraint he sometimes put

upon himself, his coarser nature and more ferocious temper often

betrayed him into acts most repugnant to sound policy, which would

never have been countenanced by the Conqueror of Mexico.







Book 3



Chapter 2



Peru At The Time Of The Conquest--Reign Of Huayna Capac-

The Inca Brothers--Conquest For The Empire-

Triumph And Cruelties Of Atahuallpa



Before accompanying the march of Pizarro and his followers into the

country of the Incas, it is necessary to make the reader acquainted with

the critical situation of the kingdom at that time.  For the Spaniards

arrived just at the consummation of an important revolution,--at a crisis

most favorable to their views of conquest, and but for which, indeed, the

conquest, with such a handful of soldiers, could never have been

achieved.



In the latter part of the fifteenth century died Tupac Inca Yupanqui, one

of the most renowned of the "Children of the Sun," who, carrying the

Peruvian arms across the burning sands of Atacama, penetrated to the

remote borders of Chili, while in the opposite direction he enlarged the

limits of the empire by the acquisition of the southern provinces of

Quito.  The war in this quarter was conducted by his son Huayna Capac,

who succeeded his father on the throne, and fully equalled him in

military daring and in capacity for government.



Under this prince, the whole of the powerful state of Quito, which

rivalled that of Peru itself in wealth and refinement, was brought under

the sceptre of the Incas; whose empire received, by this conquest, the

most important accession yet made to it since the foundation of the

dynasty of Manco Capac.  The remaining days of the victorious monarch

were passed in reducing the independent tribes on the remote limits of

his territory, and, still more, in cementing his conquests by the

introduction of the Peruvian polity.  He was actively engaged in

completing the great works of his father, especially the high-roads which

led from Quito to the capital.  He perfected the establishment of posts,

took great pains to introduce the Quichua dialect throughout the empire,

promoted a better system of agriculture, and, in fine, encouraged the

different branches of domestic industry and the various enlightened plans

of his predecessors for the improvement of his people.  Under his sway,

the Peruvian monarchy reached its most palmy state; and under both him

and his illustrious father it was advancing with such rapid strides in the

march of civilization as would soon have carried it to a level with the

more refined despotisms of Asia, furnishing the world, perhaps, with

higher evidence of the capabilities of the American Indian than is

elsewhere to be found on the great western continent.--But other and

gloomier destinies were in reserve for the Indian races.



The first arrival of the white men on the South American shores of the

Pacific was about ten years before the death of Huayna Capac, when

Balboa crossed the Gulf of St. Michael, and obtained the first clear

report of the empire of the Incas.  Whether tidings of these adventurers

reached the Indian monarch's ears is doubtful.  There is no doubt,

however, that he obtained the news of the first expedition under Pizarro

and Almagro, when the latter commander penetrated as far as the Rio de

San Juan, about the fourth degree north.  The accounts which he received

made a strong impression on the mind of Huayna Capac.  He discerned

in the formidable prowess and weapons of the invaders proofs of a

civilization far superior to that of his own people.  He intimated his

apprehension that they would return, and that at some day, not far

distant, perhaps, the throne of the Incas might be shaken by these

strangers, endowed with such incomprehensible powers.1  To the vulgar

eye, it was a little speck on the verge of the horizon; but that of the

sagacious monarch seemed to descry in it the dark thunder-cloud, that

was to spread wider and wider till it burst in fury on his nation!



There is some ground for believing thus much.  But other accounts,

which have obtained a popular currency, not content with this, connect

the first tidings of the white men with predictions long extant in the

country, and with supernatural appearances, which filled the hearts of the

whole nation with dismay.  Comets were seen flaming athwart the

heavens.  Earthquakes shook the land; the moon was girdled with rings

of fire of many colors; a thunderbolt fell on one of the royal palaces and

consumed it to ashes; and an eagle, chased by several hawks, was seen,

screaming in the air, to hover above the great square of Cuzco, when,

pierced by the talons of his tormentors, the king of birds fell lifeless in

the presence of many of the Inca nobles, who read in this an augury of

their own destruction!  Huayna Capac himself, calling his great officers

around him, as he found he was drawing near his end, announced the

subversion of his empire by the race of white and bearded strangers, as

the consummation predicted by the oracles after the reign of the twelfth

Inca, and he enjoined it on his vassals not to resist the decrees of

Heaven, but to yield obedience to its messengers.2



Such is the report of the impressions made by the appearance of the

Spaniards in the country, reminding one of the similar feelings of

superstitious terror occasioned by their appearance in Mexico.  But the

traditions of the latter land rest on much higher authority than those of

the Peruvians, which, unsupported by contemporary testimony, rest

almost wholly on the naked assertion of one of their own nation, who

thought to find, doubtless, in the inevitable decrees of Heaven, the best

apology for the supineness of his countrymen.



It is not improbable that rumors of the advent of a strange and

mysterious race should have spread gradually among the Indian tribes

along the great table-land of the Cordilleras, and should have shaken the

hearts of the stoutest warriors with feelings of undefined dread, as of

some impending calamity.  In this state of mind, it was natural that

physical convulsions, to which that volcanic country is peculiarly

subject, should have made an unwonted impression on their minds; and

that the phenomena, which might have been regarded only as

extraordinary, in the usual seasons of political security, should now be

interpreted by the superstitious soothsayer as the handwriting on the

heavens, by which the God of the Incas proclaimed the approaching

downfall of their empire.



Huayna Capac had, as usual with the Peruvian princes, a multitude of

concubines, by whom he left a numerous posterity.  The heir to the

crown, the son of his lawful wife and sister, was named Huascar.3  At the

period of the history at which we are now arrived, he was about thirty

years of age.  Next to the heir-apparent, by another wife, a cousin of the

monarch's, came Manco Capac, a young prince who will occupy an

important place in our subsequent story.  But the best-beloved of the

Inca's children was Atahuallpa.  His mother was the daughter of the last

Scyri of Quito, who had died of grief, it was said, not long after the

subversion of his kingdom by Huayna Capac.  The princess was

beautiful, and the Inca, whether to gratify his passion, or, as the

Peruvians say, willing to make amends for the ruin of her parents,

received her among his concubines.  The historians of Quito assert that

she was his lawful wife; but this dignity, according to the usages of the

empire, was reserved for maidens of the Inca blood.



The latter years of Huayna Capac were passed in his new kingdom of

Quito.  Atahuallpa was accordingly brought up under his own eye,

accompanied him, while in his tender years, in his campaigns, slept in

the same tent with his royal father, and ate from the same plate.4  The

vivacity of the boy, his courage and generous nature, won the affections

of the old monarch to such a degree, that he resolved to depart from the

established usages of the realm, and divide his empire between him and

his elder brother Huascar.  On his death-bed, he called the great officers

of the crown around him, and declared it to be his will that the ancient

kingdom of Quito should pass to Atahuallpa, who might be considered as

having a natural claim on it, as the dominion of his ancestors.  The rest

of the empire he settled on Huascar; and he enjoined it on the two

brothers to acquiesce in this arrangement, and to live in amity with each

other.  This was the last act of the heroic monarch; doubtless, the most

impolitic of his whole life.  With his dying breath he subverted the

fundamental laws of the empire; and, while he recommended harmony

between the successors to his authority, he left in this very division of it

the seeds of inevitable discord.5



His death took place, as seems probable, at the close of 1525, not quite

seven years before Pizarro's arrival at Puna.6  The tidings of his decease

spread sorrow and consternation throughout the land; for, though stern

and even inexorable to the rebel and the long-resisting foe, he was a

brave and magnanimous monarch, and legislated with the enlarged views

of a prince who regarded every part of his dominions as equally his

concern.  The people of Quito, flattered by the proofs which he had

given of preference for them by his permanent residence in that country,

and his embellishment of their capital, manifested unfeigned sorrow at

his loss; and his subjects at Cuzco, proud of the glory which his arms and

his abilities had secured for his native land, held him in no less

admiration;7 while the more thoughtful and the more timid, in both

countries, looked with apprehension to the future, when the sceptre of

the vast empire, instead of being swayed by an old and experienced

hand, was to be consigned to rival princes, naturally jealous of one

another, and, from their age, necessarily exposed to the unwholesome

influence of crafty and ambitious counsellors.  The people testified their

regret by the unwonted honors paid to the memory of the deceased Inca.

His heart was retained in Quito, and his body, embalmed after the

fashion of the country, was transported to Cuzco, to take its place in the

great temple of the Sun, by the side of the remains of his royal ancestors.

His obsequies were celebrated with sanguinary splendor in both the

capitals of his far-extended empire; and several thousand of the imperial

concubines, with numerous pages and officers of the palace, are said to

have proved their sorrow, or their superstition, by offering up their own

lives, that they might accompany their departed lord to the bright

mansions of the Sun.8



For nearly five years after the death of Huayna Capac, the royal brothers

reigned, each over his allotted portion of the empire, without distrust of

one another, or, at least, without collision.  It seemed as if the wish of

their father was to be completely realized, and that the two states were to

maintain their respective integrity and independence as much as if they

had never been united into one.  But, with the manifold causes for

jealousy and discontent, and the swarms of courtly sycophants, who

would find their account in fomenting these feelings, it was easy to see

that this tranquil state of things could not long endure.  Nor would it

have endured so long, but for the more gentle temper of Huascar, the

only party who had ground for complaint.  He was four or five years

older than his brother, and was possessed of courage not to be doubted;

but he was a prince of a generous and easy nature, and perhaps, if left to

himself, might have acquiesced in an arrangement which, however

unpalatable, was the will of his deified father.  But Atahuallpa was of a

different temper.  Warlike, ambitious, and daring, he was constantly

engaged in enterprises for the enlargement of his own territory, though

his crafty policy was scrupulous not to aim at extending his acquisitions

in the direction of his royal brother.  His restless spirit, however, excited

some alarm at the court of Cuzco, and Huascar, at length, sent an envoy

to Atahuallpa, to remonstrate with him on his ambitious enterprises, and

to require him to render him homage for his kingdom of Quito.



This is one statement.  Other accounts pretend that the immediate cause

of rupture was a claim instituted by Huascar for the territory of

Tumebamba, held by his brother as part of his patrimonial inheritance.  It

matters little what was the ostensible ground of collision between

persons placed by circumstances in so false a position in regard to one

another, that collision must, at some time or other, inevitably occur.



The commencement, and, indeed, the whole course, of hostilities which

soon broke out between the rival brothers are stated with irreconcilable,

and, considering the period was so near to that of the Spanish invasion,

with unaccountable discrepancy.  By some it is said, that, in Atahuallpa's

first encounter with the troops of Cuzco, he was defeated and made

prisoner near Tumebamba, a favorite residence of his father in the

ancient territory of Quito, and in the district of Canaris.  From this

disaster he recovered by a fortunate escape from confinement, when,

regaining his capital, he soon found himself at the head of a numerous

army, led by the most able and experienced captains in the empire.  The

liberal manners of the young Atahuallpa had endeared him to the

soldiers, with whom, as we have seen, he served more than one campaign

in his father's lifetime.  These troops were the flower of the great army of

the Inca, and some of them had grown gray in his long military career,

which had left them at the north, where they readily transferred their

allegiance to the young sovereign of Quito.  They were commanded by

two officers of great consideration, both possessed of large experience in

military affairs, and high in the confidence of the late Inca.  One of them

was named Quizquiz; the other, who was the maternal uncle of

Atahuallpa, was called Chalicuchima.



With these practised warriors to guide him, the young monarch put

himself at the head of his martial array, and directed his march towards

the south.  He had not advanced farther than Ambato, about sixty miles

distant from his capital, when he fell in with a numerous host, which had

been sent against him by his brother, under the command of a

distinguished chieftain, of the Inca family.  A bloody battle followed,

which lasted the greater part of the day; and the theatre of combat was

the skirts of the mighty Chimborazo.9



The battle ended favorably for Atahuallpa, and the Peruvians were

routed with great slaughter, and the loss of their commander.  The prince

of Quito availed himself of his advantage to push forward his march until

he arrived before the gates of Tumebamba, which city, as well as the

whole district of Canaris, though an ancient dependency of Quito, had

sided with his rival in the contest.  Entering the captive city like a

conqueror, he put the inhabitants to the sword, and razed it with all its

stately edifices, some of which had been reared by his own father, to the

ground.  He carried on the same war of extermination, as he marched

through the offending district of Canaris.  In some places, it is said, the

women and children came out, with green branches in their hands, in

melancholy procession, to deprecate his wrath; but the vindictive

conqueror, deaf to their entreaties, laid the country waste with fire and

sword, sparing no man capable of bearing arms who fell into his

hands.10



The fate of Canaris struck terror into the hearts of his enemies, and one

place after another opened its gates to the victor, who held on his

triumphant march towards the Peruvian capital.  His arms experienced a

temporary check before the island of Puna, whose bold warriors

maintained the cause of his brother.  After some days lost before this

place, Atahuallpa left the contest to their old enemies, the people of

Tumbez, who had early given in their adhesion to him, while he resumed

his march and advanced as far as Caxamalca, about seven degrees south.

Here he halted with a detachment of the army, sending forward the main

body under the command of his two generals, with orders to move

straight upon Cuzco.  He preferred not to trust himself farther in the

enemy's country, where a defeat might be fatal.  By establishing his

quarters at Caxamalca, he would be able to support his generals, in case

of a reverse, or, at worst, to secure his retreat on Quito, until he was

again in condition to renew hostilities.



The two commanders, advancing by rapid marches, at length crossed the

Apurimac river, and arrived within a short distance of the Peruvian

capital.--Meanwhile, Huascar had not been idle.  On receiving tidings of

the discomfiture of his army at Ambato, he made every exertion to raise

levies throughout the country.  By the advice, it is said, of his priests--the

most incompetent advisers in times of danger--he chose to await the

approach of the enemy in his own capital; and it was not till the latter had

arrived within a few leagues of Cuzco, that the Inca, taking counsel of

the same ghostly monitors, sallied forth to give him battle.



The two armies met on the plains of Quipaypan, in the neighborhood of

the Indian metropolis.  Their numbers are stated with the usual

discrepancy; but Atahuallpa's troops had considerably the advantage in

discipline and experience, for many of Huascar's levies had been drawn

hastily together from the surrounding country.  Both fought, however,

with the desperation of men who felt that every thing was at stake.  It was

no longer a contest for a province, but for the possession of an empire.

Atahuallpa's troops, flushed with recent success, fought with the

confidence of those who relied on their superior prowess; while the loyal

vassals of the Inca displayed all the self-devotion of men who held their

own lives cheap in the service of their master.



The fight raged with the greatest obstinacy from sunrise to sunset; and

the ground was covered with heaps of the dying and the dead, whose

bones lay bleaching on the battle-field long after the conquest by the

Spaniards.  At length, fortune declared in favor of Atahuallpa; or rather,

the usual result of superior discipline and military practice followed.

The ranks of the Inca were thrown into irretrievable disorder, and gave

way in all directions.  The conquerors followed close on the heels of the

flying.  Huascar himself, among the latter, endeavored to make his

escape with about a thousand men who remained round his person.  But

the royal fugitive was discovered before he had left the field; his little

party was enveloped by clouds of the enemy, and nearly every one of the

devoted band perished in defence of their Inca.  Huascar was made

prisoner, and the victorious chiefs marched at once on his capital, which

they occupied in the name of their sovereign.11



These events occurred in the spring of 1532, a few months before the

landing of the Spaniards.  The tidings of the success of his arms and the

capture of his unfortunate brother reached Atahuallpa at Caxamalca.  He

instantly gave orders that Huascar should be treated with the respect due

to his rank, but that he should be removed to the strong fortress of

Xauxa, and held there in strict confinement.  His orders did not stop

here,--if we are to receive the accounts of Garcilasso de la Vega, himself

of the Inca race, and by his mother's side nephew of the great Huayna

Capac.



According to this authority, Atahuallpa invited the Inca nobles

throughout the country to assemble at Cuzco in order to deliberate on the

best means of partitioning the empire between him and his brother.

When they had met in the capital, they were surrounded by the soldiery

of Quito, and butchered without mercy.  The motive for this perfidious

act was to exterminate the whole of the royal family, who might each one

of them show a better title to the crown than the illegitimate Atahuallpa.

But the massacre did not end here.  The illegitimate offspring, like

himself, half-brothers of the monster, all, in short, who had any of the

Inca blood in their veins, were involved in it; and with an appetite for

carnage unparalleled in the annals of the Roman Empire or of the French

Republic, Atahuallpa ordered all the females of the blood royal, his

aunts, nieces, and cousins, to be put to death, and that, too, with the most

refined and lingering tortures.  To give greater zest to his revenge, many

of the executions took place in the presence of Huascar himself, who was

thus compelled to witness the butchery of his own wives and sisters,

while, in the extremity of anguish, they in vain called on him to protect

them! 12



Such is the tale told by the historian of the Incas, and received by him, as

he assures us, from his mother and uncle, who, being children at the

time, were so fortunate as to be among the few that escaped the massacre

of their house.13  And such is the account repeated by many a Castilian

writer since, without any symptom of distrust.  But a tissue of

unprovoked atrocities like these is too repugnant to the principles of

human nature,--and, indeed, to common sense, to warrant our belief in

them on ordinary testimony.



The annals of semi-civilized nations unhappily show that there have been

instances of similar attempts to extinguish the whole of a noxious race,

which had become the object of a tyrant's jealousy; though such an

attempt is about as chimerical as it would be to extirpate any particular

species of plant, the seeds of which had been borne on every wind over

the country.  But, if the attempt to exterminate the Inca race was actually

made by Atahuallpa, how comes it that so many of the pure descendants

of the blood royal--nearly six hundred in number--are admitted by the

historian to have been in existence seventy years after the imputed

massacre?14  Why was the massacre, instead of being limited to the

legitimate members of the royal stock, who could show a better title to

the crown than the usurper, extended to all, however remotely, or in

whatever way, connected with the race?  Why were aged women and

young maidens involved in the proscription, and why were they

subjected to such refined and superfluous tortures, when it is obvious

that beings so impotent could have done nothing to provoke the jealousy

of the tyrant?  Why, when so many were sacrificed from some vague

apprehension of distant danger, was his rival Huascar, together with his

younger brother Manco Capac, the two men from whom the conqueror

had most to fear, suffered to live?  Why, in short, is the wonderful tale

not recorded by others before the time of Garcilasso, and nearer by half a

century to the events themselves?15



That Atahuallpa may have been guilty of excesses, and abused the rights

of conquest by some gratuitous acts of cruelty, may be readily believed;

for no one, who calls to mind his treatment of the Canaris,-which his own

apologists do not affect to deny,16--will doubt that he had a full measure

of the vindictive temper which belongs to



"Those souls of fire, and Children of the Sun,

With whom revenge was virtue."



But there is a wide difference between this and the monstrous and most

unprovoked atrocities imputed to him; implying a diabolical nature not to

be admitted on the evidence of an Indian partisan, the sworn foe of his

house, and repeated by Castilian chroniclers, who may naturally seek, by

blazoning the enormities of Atahuallpa, to find some apology for the

cruelty of their countrymen towards him.



The news of the great victory was borne on the wings of the wind to

Caxamalca; and loud and long was the rejoicing, not only in the camp of

Atahuallpa, but in the town and surrounding country; for all now came

in, eager to offer their congratulations to the victor, and do him homage.

The prince of Quito no longer hesitated to assume the scarlet borla, the

diadem of the Incas.  His triumph was complete.  He had beaten his

enemies on their own ground; had taken their capital; had set his foot on

the neck of his rival, and won for himself the ancient sceptre of the

Children of the Sun.  But the hour of triumph was destined to be that of

his deepest humiliation.  Atahuallpa was not one of those to whom, in the

language of the Grecian bard, "the Gods are willing to reveal

themselves." 17  He had not read the handwriting on the heavens.  The

small speck, which the clear-sighted eye of his father had discerned on

the distant verge of the horizon, though little noticed by Atahuallpa,

intent on the deadly strife with his brother, had now risen high towards

the zenith, spreading wider and wider, till it wrapped the skies in

darkness, and was ready to burst in thunders on the devoted nation.







Book3



Chapter 3



The Spaniards Land At Tumbez--Pizarro Reconnoitres The Country--

Foundation Of San Miguel--March Into The Interior-

Embassy From The Inca--Adventures On The March-

Reach The Foot Of The Andes



1532



We left the Spaniards at the island of Puna, preparing to make their

descent on the neighboring continent at Tumbez.  This port was but a

few leagues distant, and Pizarro, with the greater part of his followers,

passed over in the ships, while a few others were to transport the

commander's baggage and the military stores on some of the Indian

balsas.  One of the latter vessels which first touched the shore was

surrounded, and three persons who were on the raft were carried off by

the natives to the adjacent woods and there massacred.  The Indians then

got possession of another of the balsas containing Pizarro's wardrobe;

but, as the men who defended it raised loud cries for help, they reached

the ears of Hernando Pizarro, who, with a small body of horse, had

effected a landing some way farther down the shore.  A broad tract of

miry ground, overflowed at high water, lay between him and the party

thus rudely assailed by the natives.  The tide was out, and the bottom was

soft and dangerous.  With little regard to the danger, however, the bold

cavalier spurred his horse into the slimy depths, and followed by his

men, with the mud up to their saddle-girths, they plunged forward until

they came into the midst of the marauders, who, terrified by the strange

apparition of the horsemen, fled precipitately, without show of fight, to

the neighboring forests.



This conduct of the natives of Tumbez is not easy to be explained;

considering the friendly relations maintained with the Spaniards on their

preceding visit, and lately renewed in the island of Puna.  But Pizarro

was still more astonished, on entering their town, to find it not only

deserted, but, with the exception of a few buildings, entirely demolished.

Four or five of the most substantial private dwellings, the great temple,

and the fortress--and these greatly damaged, and wholly despoiled of

their interior decorations--alone survived to mark the site of the city, and

attest its former splendor.1  The scene of desolation filled the conquerors

with dismay; for even the raw recruits, who had never visited the coast

before, had heard the marvellous stories of the golden treasures of

Tumbez, and they had confidently looked forward to them as an easy

spoil after all their fatigues.  But the gold of Peru seemed only like a

deceitful phantom, which, after beckoning them on through toil and

danger, vanished the moment they attempted to grasp it.



Pizarro despatched a small body of troops in pursuit of the fugitives;

and, after some slight skirmishing, they got possession of several of the

natives, and among them, as it chanced, the curaca of the place.  When

brought before the Spanish commander, he exonerated himself from any

share in the violence offered to the white men, saying that it was done by

a lawless party of his people, without his knowledge at the time; and he

expressed his willingness to deliver them up to punishment, if they could

be detected.  He explained the dilapidated condition of the town by the

long wars carried on with the fierce tribes of Puna, who had at length

succeeded in getting possession of the place, and driving the inhabitants

into the neighboring woods and mountains.  The Inca, to whose cause

they were attached, was too much occupied with his own feuds to protect

them against their enemies.



Whether Pizarro gave any credit to the cacique's exculpation of himself

may be doubted.  He dissembled his suspicions, however, and, as the

Indian lord promised obedience in his own name, and that of his vassals,

the Spanish general consented to take no further notice of the affair.  He

seems now to have felt for the first time, in its full force, that it was his

policy to gain the good-will of the people among whom he had thrown

himself in the face of such tremendous odds.  It was, perhaps, the

excesses of which his men had been guilty in the earlier stages of the

expedition that had shaken the confidence of the people of Tumbez, and

incited them to this treacherous retaliation.



Pizarro inquired of the natives who now, under promise of impunity,

came into the camp, what had become of his two followers that remained

with them in the former expedition.  The answers they gave were obscure

and contradictory.  Some said, they had died of an epidemic; others, that

they had perished in the war with Puna; and others intimated, that they

had lost their lives in consequence of some outrage attempted on the

Indian women.  It was impossible to arrive at the truth.  The last account

was not the least probable.  But, whatever might be the cause, there was

no doubt they had both perished.



This intelligence spread an additional gloom over the Spaniards; which

was not dispelled by the flaming pictures now given by the natives of the

riches of the land, and of the state and magnificence of the monarch in

his distant capital among the mountains.  Nor did they credit the

authenticity of a scroll of paper, which Pizzaro had obtained from an

Indian, to whom it had been delivered by one of the white men left in the

country.  "Know, whoever you may be," said the writing, "that may

chance to set foot in this country, that it contains more gold and silver

than there is iron in Biscay." This paper, when shown to the soldiers,

excited only their ridicule, as a device of their captain to keep alive their

chimerical hopes.2



Pizarro now saw that it was not politic to protract his stay in his present

quarters, where a spirit of disaffection would soon creep into the ranks of

his followers, unless their spirits were stimulated by novelty or a life of

incessant action.  Yet he felt deeply anxious to obtain more particulars

than he had hitherto gathered of the actual condition of the Peruvian

empire, of its strength and resources, of the monarch who ruled over it,

and of his present situation.  He was also desirous, before taking any

decisive step for penetrating the country, to seek out some commodious

place for a settlement, which might afford him the means of a regular

communication with the colonies, and a place of strength, on which he

himself might retreat in case of disaster.



He decided, therefore, to leave part of his company at Tumbez, including

those who, from the state of their health, were least able to take the field,

and with the remainder to make an excursion into the interior, and

reconnoitre the land, before deciding on any plan of operations.  He set

out early in May, 1532; and, keeping along the more level regions

himself, sent a small detachment under the command of Hernando de

Soto to explore the skirts of the vast sierra.



He maintained a rigid discipline on the march, commanding his soldiers

to abstain from all acts of violence, and punishing disobedience in the

most prompt and resolute manner.3  The natives rarely offered

resistance.  When they did so, they were soon reduced, and Pizarro, far

from vindictive measures, was open to the first demonstrations of

submission.  By this lenient and liberal policy, he soon acquired a name

among the inhabitants which effaced the unfavorable impressions made

of him in the earlier part of the campaign.  The natives, as he marched

through the thick-settled hamlets which sprinkled the level region

between the Cordilleras and the ocean, welcomed him with rustic

hospitality, providing good quarters for his troops, and abundant

supplies, which cost but little in the prolific soil of the tierra caliente.

Everywhere Pizarro made proclamation that he came in the name of the

Holy Vicar of God and of the sovereign of Spain, requiring the

obedience of the inhabitants as true children of the Church, and vassals

of his lord and master.  And as the simple people made no opposition to

a formula, of which they could not comprehend a syllable, they were

admitted as good subjects of the Crown of Castile, and their act of

homage--or what was readily interpreted as such--was duly recorded and

attested by the notary.4



At the expiration of some three or four weeks spent in reconnoitring the

country, Pizarro came to the conclusion that the most eligible site for his

new settlement was in the rich valley of Tangarala, thirty leagues south

of Tumbez, traversed by more than one stream that opens a

communication with the ocean.  To this spot, accordingly, he ordered the

men left at Tumbez to repair at once in their vessels; and no sooner had

they arrived, than busy preparations were made for building up the town

in a manner suited to the wants of the colony.  Timber was procured

from the neighboring woods.  Stones were dragged from their quarries,

and edifices gradually rose, some of which made pretensions to strength,

if not to elegance.  Among them were a church, a magazine for public

stores, a hall of justice, and a fortress.  A municipal government was

organized, consisting of regidores, alcaldes, and the usual civic

functionaries.  The adjacent territory was parcelled out among the

residents, and each colonist had a certain number of the natives allotted

to assist him in his labors; for, as Pizarro's secretary remarks, "it being

evident that the colonists could not support themselves without the

services of the Indians, the ecclesiastics and the leaders of the expedition

all agreed that a repartimiento of the natives would serve the cause of

religion, and tend greatly to their spiritual welfare, since they would thus

have the opportunity of being initiated in the true faith." 5



Having made these arrangements with such conscientious regard to the

welfare of the benighted heathen, Pizarro gave his infant city the name of

San Miguel, in acknowledgment of the service rendered him by that saint

in his battles with the Indians of Puna.  The site originally occupied by

the settlement was afterward found to be so unhealthy, that it was

abandoned for another on the banks of the beautiful Piura.  The town is

still of some note for its manufactures, though dwindled from its ancient

importance; but the name of San Miguel de Piura, which it bears, still

commemorates the foundation of the first European colony in the empire

of the Incas.



Before quitting the new settlement, Pizarro caused the gold and silver

ornaments which he had obtained in different parts of the country to be

melted down into one mass, and a fifth to be deducted for the Crown.

The remainder, which belonged to the troops, he persuaded them to

relinquish for the present; under the assurance of being repaid from the

first spoils that fell into their hands.6  With these funds, and other

articles collected in the course of the campaign, he sent back the vessels

to Panama.  The gold was applied to paying off the ship-owners, and

those who had furnished the stores for the expedition.  That he should so

easily have persuaded his men to resign present possession for a future

contingency is proof that the spirit of enterprise was renewed in their

bosoms in all its former vigor, and that they looked forward with the

same buoyant confidence to the results.



In his late tour of observation, the Spanish commander had gathered

much important intelligence in regard to the state of the kingdom.  He

had ascertained the result of the struggle between the Inca brothers, and

that the victor now lay with his army encamped at the distance of only

ten or twelve days' journey from San Miguel.  The accounts he heard of

the opulence and power of that monarch, and of his great southern

capital, perfectly corresponded with the general rumors before received;

and contained, therefore, something to stagger the confidence, as well as

to stimulate the cupidity, of the invaders.



Pizarro would gladly have seen his little army strengthened by

reinforcements, however small the amount; and on that account

postponed his departure for several weeks.  But no reinforcement

arrived; and, as he received no further tidings from his associates, he

judged that longer delay would, probably, be attended with evils greater

than those to be encountered on the march; that discontents would

inevitably spring up in a life of inaction, and the strength and spirits of

the soldier sink under the enervating influence of a tropical climate.  Yet

the force at his command, amounting to less than two hundred soldiers in

all, after reserving fifty for the protection of the new settlement, seemed

but a small one for the conquest of an empire.  He might, indeed, instead

of marching against the Inca, take a southerly direction towards the rich

capital of Cuzco.  But this would only be to postpone the hour of

reckoning.  For in what quarter of the empire could he hope to set his

foot, where the arm of its master would not reach him? By such a course,

moreover, he would show his own distrust of himself.  He would shake

that opinion of his invincible prowess, which he had hitherto endeavored

to impress on the natives, and which constituted a great secret of his

strength; which, in short, held sterner sway over the mind than the

display of numbers and mere physical force.  Worse than all, such a

course would impair the confidence of his troops in themselves and their

reliance on himself.  This would be to palsy the arm of enterprise at

once.  It was not to be thought of.



But while Pizarro decided to march into the interior, it is doubtful

whether he had formed any more definite plan of action.  We have no

means of knowing his intentions, at this distance of time, otherwise than

as they are shown by his actions.  Unfortunately, he could not write, and

he has left no record, like the inestimable Commentaries of Cortes, to

enlighten us as to his motives.  His secretary, and some of his

companions in arms, have recited his actions in detail; but the motives

which led to them they were not always so competent to disclose.



It is possible that the Spanish general, even so early as the period of his

residence at San Miguel, may have meditated some daring stroke, some

effective coup-de-main, which, like that of Cortes, when he carried off

the Aztec monarch to his quarters, might strike terror into the hearts of

the people, and at once decide the fortunes of the day.  It is more

probable, however, that he now only proposed to present himself before

the Inca, as the peaceful representative of a brother monarch, and, by

these friendly demonstrations, disarm any feeling of hostility, or even of

suspicion.  When once in communication with the Indian prince, he

could regulate his future course by circumstances.



On the 24th of September, 1532, five months after landing at Tumbez,

Pizarro marched out at the head of his little body of adventurers from the

gates of San Miguel, having enjoined it on the colonists to treat their

Indian vassals with humanity, and to conduct themselves in such a

manner as would secure the good-will of the surrounding tribes.  Their

own existence, and with it the safety of the army and the success of the

undertaking, depended on this course.  In the place were to remain the

royal treasurer, the veedor, or inspector of metals, and other officers of

the crown; and the command of the garrison was intrusted to the

contador, Antonio Nayafro.7  Then putting himself at the head of his

troops, the chief struck boldly into the heart of the country in the

direction where, as he was informed, lay the camp of the Inca.  It was a

daring enterprise, thus to venture with a handful of followers into the

heart of a powerful empire, to present himself, face to face, before the

Indian monarch in his own camp, encompassed by the flower of his

victorious army!  Pizarro had already experienced more than once the

difficulty of maintaining his ground against the rude tribes of the north,

so much inferior in strength and numbers to the warlike legions of Peru.

But the hazard of the game, as I have already more than once had

occasion to remark, constituted its great charm with the Spaniard.  The

brilliant achievements of his countrymen, on the like occasions, with

means so inadequate, inspired him with confidence in his own good star;

and this confidence was one source of his success.  Had he faltered for a

moment, had he stopped to calculate chances, he must inevitably have

failed; for the odds were too great to be combated by sober reason.  They

were only to be met triumphantly by the spirit of the knight-errant.



After crossing the smooth waters of the Piura, the little army continued

to advance over a level district intersected by streams that descended

from the neighboring Cordilleras.  The face of the country was shagged

over with forests of gigantic growth, and occasionally traversed by ridges

of barren land, that seemed like shoots of the adjacent Andes breaking up

the surface of the region into little sequestered valleys of singular

loveliness.  The soil, though rarely watered by the rains of heaven, was

naturally rich, and wherever it was refreshed with moisture, as on the

margins of the streams, it was enamelled with the brightest verdure.  The

industry of the inhabitants, moreover, had turned these streams to the

best account, and canals and aqueducts were seen crossing the low lands

in all directions, and spreading over the country, like a vast network,

diffusing fertility and beauty around them.  The air was scented with the

sweet odors of flowers, and everywhere the eye was refreshed by the

sight of orchards laden with unknown fruits, and of fields waving with

yellow grain and rich in luscious vegetables of every description that

teem in the sunny clime of the equator.  The Spaniards were among a

people who had carried the refinements of husbandry to a greater extent

than any yet found on the American continent; and, as they journeyed

through this paradise of plenty, their condition formed a pleasing

contrast to what they had before endured in the dreary wilderness of the

mangroves.



Everywhere, too, they were received with confiding hospitality by the

simple people; for which they were no doubt indebted, in a great

measure, to their own inoffensive deportment.  Every Spaniard seemed

to be aware, that his only chance of success lay in conciliating the good

opinion of the inhabitants, among whom he had so recklessly cast his

fortunes.  In most of the hamlets, and in every place of considerable size,

some fortress was to be found, or royal caravansary, destined for the Inca

on his progresses, the ample halls of which furnished abundant

accommodations for the Spaniards; who were thus provided with

quarters along their route at the charge of the very government which

they were preparing to overturn.8



On the fifth day after leaving San Miguel, Pizarro halted in one of these

delicious valleys, to give his troops repose, and to make a more complete

inspection of them.  Their number amounted in all to one hundred and

seventy-seven, of which sixty-seven were cavalry.  He mustered only

three arquebusiers in his whole company, and a few crossbow-men,

altogether not exceeding twenty.9  The troops were tolerably well

equipped, and in good condition.  But the watchful eye of their

commander noticed with uneasiness, that, notwithstanding the general

heartiness, in the cause manifested by his followers, there were some

among them whose countenances lowered with discontent, and who,

although they did not give vent to it in open murmurs, were far from

moving with their wonted alacrity.



He was aware, that, if this spirit became contagious, it would be the ruin

of the enterprise; and he thought it best to exterminate the gangrene; at

once, and at whatever cost, than to wait until it had infected the whole

system.  He came to an extraordinary resolution.



Calling his men together, he told them that "a crisis had now arrived in

their affairs, which it demanded all their courage to meet.  No man

should think of going forward in the expedition, who could not do so

with his whole heart, or who had the least misgiving as to its success.  If

any repented of his share in it, it was not too late to turn back.  San

Miguel was but poorly garrisoned, and he should be glad to see it in

greater strength.  Those who chose might return to this place, and they

should be entitled to the same proportion of lands and Indian vassals as

the present residents.  With the rest, were they few or many, who chose

to take their chance with him, he should pursue the adventure to the

end."10



It was certainly a remarkable proposal for a commander, who was

ignorant of the amount of disaffection in his ranks, and who could not

safely spare a single man from his force, already far too feeble for the

undertaking.  Yet, by insisting on the wants of the little colony of San

Miguel, he afforded a decent pretext for the secession of the

malecontents, and swept away the barrier of shame which might have

still held them in the camp.  Notwithstanding the fair opening thus

afforded, there were but few, nine in all, who availed themselves of the

general's permission.  Four of these belonged to the infantry, and five to

the horse.  The rest loudly declared their resolve to go forward with their

brave leader; and, if there were some whose voices were faint amidst the

general acclamation, they, at least, relinquished the right of complaining

hereafter, since they had voluntarily rejected the permission to return.11

This stroke of policy in their sagacious captain was attended with the

best effects.  He had winnowed out the few grains of discontent, which,

if left to themselves, might have fermented in secret till the whole mass

had swelled into mutiny.  Cortes had compelled his men to go forward

heartily in his enterprise, by burning their vessels, and thus cutting off

the only means of retreat.  Pizarro, on the other hand, threw open the

gates to the disaffected and facilitated their departure.  Both judged right,

under their peculiar circumstances, and both were perfectly successful.



Feeling himself strengthened, instead of weakened, by his loss, Pizarro

now resumed his march, and, on the second day, arrived before a place

called Zaran, situated in a fruitful valley among the mountains.  Some of

the inhabitants had been drawn off to swell the levies of Atahuallpa.  The

Spaniards had repeated experience on their march of the oppressive

exactions of the Inca, who had almost depopulated some of the valleys to

obtain reinforcements for his army.  The curaca of the Indian town where

Pizarro now arrived, received him with kindness and hospitality, and the

troops were quartered as usual in one of the royal tambos or

caravansaries, which were found in all the principal places.12



Yet the Spaniards saw no signs of their approach to the royal

encampment, though more time had already elapsed than was originally

allowed for reaching it.  Shortly before entering Zaran, Pizarro had heard

that a Peruvian garrison was established in a place called Caxas, lying

among the hills, at no great distance from his present quarters.  He

immediately despatched a small party under Hernando de Soto in that

direction, to reconnoitre the ground, and bring him intelligence of the

actual state of things, at Zaran, where he would halt until his officer's

return.



Day after day passed on, and a week had elapsed before tidings were

received of his companions, and Pizarro was becoming seriously alarmed

for their fate, when on the eighth morning Soto appeared, bringing with

him an envoy from the Inca himself.  He was a person of rank, and was

attended by several followers of inferior condition.  He had met the

Spaniards at Caxas, and now accompanied them on their return, to

deliver his sovereign's message, with a present to the Spanish

commander.  The present consisted of two fountains, made of stone, in

the form of fortresses; some fine stuffs of woollen embroidered with gold

and silver; and a quantity of goose-flesh, dried and seasoned in a peculiar

manner, and much used as a perfume, in a pulverized state, by the

Peruvian nobles.13  The Indian ambassador came charged also with his

master's greeting to the strangers, whom Atahuallpa welcomed to his

country, and invited to visit him in his camp among the mountains.14



Pizarro well understood that the Inca's object in this diplomatic visit was

less to do him courtesy, than to inform himself of the strength and

condition of the invaders.  But he was well pleased with the embassy,

and dissembled his consciousness of its real purpose.  He caused the

Peruvian to be entertained in the best manner the camp could afford, and

paid hint the respect, says one of the Conquerors, due to the ambassador

of so great a monarch.15  Pizarro urged him to prolong his visit for some

days, which the Indian envoy declined, but made the most of his time

while there, by gleaning all the information he could in respect to the

uses of every strange article which he saw, as well as the object of the

white men's visit to the land, and the quarter whence they came.



The Spanish captain satisfied his curiosity in all these particulars.  The

intercourse with the natives, it may be here remarked, was maintained by

means of two of the youths who had accompanied the Conquerors on

their return home from their preceding voyage.  They had been taken by

Pizarro to Spain, and, as much pains had been bestowed on teaching

them the Castilian, they now filled the office of interpreters, and opened

an easy communication with their countrymen.  It was of inestimable

service; and well did the Spanish commander reap the fruits of his

forecast.16



On the departure of the Peruvian messenger, Pizarro presented hint with

a cap of crimson cloth, some cheap but showy ornaments of glass, and

other toys, which he had brought for the purpose from Castile.  He

charged the envoy to tell his master, that the Spaniards came from a

powerful prince, who dwelt far beyond the waters; that they had heard

much of the fame of Atahuallpa's victories, and were come to pay their

respects to him, and to offer their services by aiding him with their arms

against his enemies; and he might be assured, they would not halt on the

road, longer than was necessary, before presenting themselves before

him.



Pizarro now received from Soto a full account of his late expedition.

That chief, on entering Caxas, found the inhabitants mustered in hostile

array, as if to dispute his passage.  But the cavalier soon convinced them

of his pacific intentions, and, laying aside their menacing attitude, they

received the Spaniards with the same courtesy which had been shown

them in most places on their march.



Here Soto found one of the royal officers, employed in collecting the

tribute for the government.  From this functionary he learned that the

Inca was quartered with a large army at Caxamalca, a place of

considerable size on the other side of the Cordillera, where he was

enjoying the luxury of the warm baths, supplied by natural springs, for

which it was then famous, as it is at the present day.  The cavalier

gathered, also, much important information in regard to the resources

and the general policy of government, the state maintained by the Inca,

and the stern severity with which obedience to the law was everywhere

enforced.  He had some opportunity of observing this for himself, as, on

entering the village, he saw several Indians hanging dead by their heels,

having been executed for some violence offered to the Virgins of the

Sun, of whom there was a convent in the neighborhood.17



From Caxas, De Soto had passed to the adjacent town of Guancabamba,

much larger, more populous, and better built than the preceding.  The

houses, instead of being made of clay baked in the sun, were many of

them constructed of solid stone, so nicely put together, that it was

impossible to detect the line of junction.  A river, which passed through

the town, was traversed by a bridge, and the high road of the Incas,

which crossed this district, was far superior to that which the Spaniards

had seen on the sea-board.  It was raised in many places, like a

causeway, paved with heavy stone flags, and bordered by trees that

afforded a grateful shade to the passenger, while streams of water were

conducted through aqueducts along the sides to slake his thirst. At

certain distances, also, they noticed small houses, which, they were told,

were for the accommodation of the traveller, who might thus pass,

without inconvenience, from one end of the kingdom to the other.18  In

another quarter they beheld one of those magazines destined for the

army, filled with grain, and with articles of clothing; and at the entrance

of the town was a stone building, occupied by a public officer, whose

business it was to collect the toils or duties on various commodities

brought into the place, or carried out of it.19  These accounts of De Soto

not only confirmed all that the Spaniards had heard of the Indian empire,

but greatly raised their ideas of its resources and domestic policy.  They

might well have shaken the confidence of hearts less courageous.



Pizarro, before leaving his present quarters, despatched a messenger to

San Miguel with particulars of his movements, sending, at the same time,

the articles received from the Inca, as well as those obtained at different

places on the route.  The skill shown in the execution of some of these

fabrics excited great admiration, when sent to Castile.  The fine woollen

cloths, especially, with their rich embroidery, were pronounced equal to

silk, from which it was not easy to distinguish them.  It was probably the

delicate wool of the vicuna, none of which had then been seen in

Europe.20



Pizarro, having now acquainted himself with the most direct route to

Caxamalca,--the Caxamarca of the present day,--resumed his march,

taking a direction nearly south.  The first place of any size at which he

halted was Motupe, pleasantly situated in a fruitful valley, among hills of

no great elevation, which cluster round the base of the Cordilleras.  The

place was deserted by its curaca, who, with three hundred of its warriors,

had gone to join the standard of their Inca.  Here the general,

notwithstanding his avowed purpose to push forward without delay,

halted four days.  The tardiness of his movements can be explained only

by the hope, which he may have still entertained of being joined by

further reinforcements before crossing the Cordilleras.  None such

appeared, however; and advancing across a country in which tracts of

sandy plain were occasionally relieved by a broad expanse of verdant

meadow, watered by natural streams and still more abundantly by those

brought through artificial channels, the troops at length arrived at the

borders of a river.  It was broad and deep, and the rapidity of the current

opposed more than ordinary difficulty to the passage.  Pizarro,

apprehensive lest this might be disputed by the natives on the opposite

bank, ordered his brother Hernando to cross over with a small

detachement under cover of night, and secure a safe landing for the rest

of the troops.  At break of day Pizarro made preparations for his own

passage, by hewing timber in the neighboring woods, and constructing a

sort of floating bridge, on which before nightfall the whole company

passed in safety, the horses swimming, being led by the bridle.  It was a

day of severe labor, and Pizarro took his own share in it freely, like a

common soldier, having ever a word of encouragement to say to his

followers.



On reaching the opposite side, they learned from their comrades that the

people of the country, instead of offering resistance, had fled in dismay.

One of them, having been taken and brought before Hernando Pizarro,

refused to answer the questions put to him respecting the Inca and his

army; till, being put to the torture, he stated that Atahuallpa was

encamped, with his whole force, in three separate divisions, occupying

the high grounds and plains of Caxamalca.  He further stated, that the

Inca was aware of the approach of the white men and of their small

number, and that he was purposely decoying them into his own quarters,

that he might have them more completely in his power.



This account, when reported by Hernando to his brother, caused the

latter much anxiety.  As the timidity of the peasantry, however, gradually

wore off, some of them mingled with the troops, and among them the

curaca or principal person of the village.  He had himself visited the

royal camp, and he informed the general that Atahuallpa lay at the strong

town of Guamachucho, twenty leagues or more south of Caxamalca, with

an army of at least fifty thousand men.



These contradictory statements greatly perplexed the chieftain; and he

proposed to one of the Indians who had borne him company during a

great part of the march, to go as a spy into the Inca's quarters, and bring

him intelligence of his actual position, and, as far as he could learn them,

of his intentions towards the Spaniards.  But the man positively declined

this dangerous service, though he professed his willingness to go as an

authorized messenger of the Spanish commander.



Pizarro acquiesced in this proposal, and instructed his envoy to assure

the Inca that he was advancing with all convenient speed to meet him.

He was to acquaint the monarch with the uniformly considerate conduct

of the Spaniards towards his subjects, in their progress through the land,

and to assure him that they were now coming in full confidence of

finding in him the same amicable feelings towards themselves.  The

emissary was particularly instructed to observe if the strong passes on the

road were defended, or if any preparations of a hostile character were to

be discerned.  This last intelligence he was to communicate to the

general by means of two or three nimble-footed attendants, who were to

accompany him on his mission.21



Having taken this precaution, the wary commander again resumed his

march, and at the end of three days reached the base of the mountain

rampart, behind which lay the ancient town of Caxamalca.  Before him

rose the stupendous Andes, rock piled upon rock, their skirts below dark

with evergreen forests, varied here and there by terraced patches of

cultivated garden, with the peasant's cottage clinging to their shaggy

sides, and their crests of snow glittering high in the heavens,--presenting

altogether such a wild chaos of magnificence and beauty as no other

mountain scenery in the world can show.  Across this tremendous

rampart, through a labyrinth of passes, easily capable of defence by a

handful of men against an army, the troops were now to march.  To the

right ran a broad and level road, with its border of friendly shades, and

wide enough for two carriages to pass abreast. It was one of the great

routes leading to Cuzco, and seemed by its pleasant and easy access to

invite the wayworn soldier to choose it in preference to the dangerous

mountain defiles.  Many were accordingly of opinion that the army

should take this course, and abandon the original destination to

Caxamalca.  But such was not the decision of Pizarro.



The Spaniards had everywhere proclaimed their purpose, he said, to visit

the Inca in his camp.  This purpose had been communicated to the Inca

himself.  To take an opposite direction now would only be to draw on

them the imputation of cowardice, and to incur Atahuallpa's contempt.

No alternative remained but to march straight across the sierra to his

quarters "Let every one of you," said the bold cavalier, "take heart and

go forward like a good soldier, nothing daunted by the smallness of your

numbers.  For in the greatest extremity God ever fights for his own; and

doubt not he will humble the pride of the heathen, and bring him to the

knowledge of the true faith, the great end and object of the Conquest."

22



Pizarro, like Cortes, possessed a good share of that frank and manly

eloquence which touches the heart of the soldier more than the parade of

rhetoric or the finest flow of elocution.  He was a soldier himself, and

partook in all the feelings of the soldier, his joys, his hopes, and his

disappointments.  He was not raised by rank and education above

sympathy with the humblest of his followers.  Every chord in their

bosoms vibrated with the same pulsations as his own, and the conviction

of this gave him a mastery over them.  "Lead on," they shouted, as he

finished his brief but animating address, "lead on wherever you think

best. We will follow with good-will, and you shall see that we can do our

duty in the cause of God and the King!" 23  There was no longer

hesitation.  All thoughts were now bent on the instant passage of the

Cordilleras.







Book 3



Chapter 4



Severe Passage Of The Andes--Embassies From Atahuallpa--

The Spaniards Reach Caxamalca--Embassy To The Inca--

Interview With The Inca--Despondency Of The Spaniards



1532



That night Pizarro held a council of his principal officers, and it was

determined that he should lead the advance, consisting of forty horse and

sixty foot, and reconnoitre the ground; while the rest of the company,

under his brother Hernando, should occupy their present position till they

received further orders.



At early dawn the Spanish general and his detachment were under arms,

and prepared to breast the difficulties of the sierra.  These proved even

greater than had been foreseen.  The path had been conducted in the

most judicious manner round the rugged and precipitous sides of the

mountains, so as best to avoid the natural impediments presented by the

ground.  But it was necessarily so steep, in many places, that the cavalry

were obliged to dismount, and, scrambling up as they could, to lead their

horses by the bridle.  In many places, too, where some huge crag or

eminence overhung the road, this was driven to the very verge of the

precipice; and the traveller was compelled to wind along the narrow

ledge of rock, scarcely wide enough for his single steed, where a misstep

would precipitate him hundreds, nay, thousands, of feet into the dreadful

abyss!  The wild passes of the sierra, practicable for the half-naked

Indian, and even for the sure and circumspect mule,--an animal that

seems to have been created for the roads of the Cordilleras,--were

formidable to the man-at-arms encumbered with his panoply of mail.

The tremendous fissures or quebradas, so frightful in this mountain

chain, yawned open, as if the Andes had been split asunder by some

terrible convulsion, showing a broad expanse of the primitive rock on

their sides, partially mantled over with the spontaneous vegetation of

ages; while their obscure depths furnished a channel for the torrents, that,

rising in the heart of the sierra, worked their way gradually into light, and

spread over the savannas and green valleys of the tierra caliente on their

way to the great ocean.



Many of these passes afforded obvious points of defence; and the

Spaniards, as they entered the rocky defiles, looked with apprehension

lest they might rouse some foe from his ambush.  This apprehension was

heightened, as, at the summit of a steep and narrow gorge, in which they

were engaged, they beheld a strong work, rising like a fortress, and

frowning, as it were, in gloomy defiance on the invaders.  As they drew

near this building, which was of solid stone, commanding an angle of the

road, they almost expected to see the dusky forms of the warriors rise

over the battlements, and to receive their tempest of missiles on their

bucklers; for it was in so strong a position, that a few resolute men might

easily have held there an army at bay.  But they had the satisfaction to

find the place untenanted, and their spirits were greatly raised by the

conviction that the Indian monarch did not intend to dispute their

passage, when it would have been easy to do so with success.



Pizarro now sent orders to his brother to follow without delay; and, after

refreshing his men, continued his toilsome ascent, and before nightfall

reached an eminence crowned by another fortress, of even greater

strength than the preceding.  It was built of solid masonry, the lower part

excavated from the living rock, and the whole work executed with skill

not inferior to that of the European architect.1



Here Pizarro took up his quarters for the night.  Without waiting for the

arrival of the rear, on the following morning he resumed his march,

leading still deeper into the intricate gorges of the sierra.  The climate

had gradually changed, and the men and horses, especially the latter,

suffered severely from the cold, so long accustomed as they had been to

the sultry climate of the tropics.2  The vegetation also had changed its

character; and the magnificent timber which covered the lower level of

the country had gradually given way to the funereal forest of pine, and,

as they rose still higher, to the stunted growth of numberless Alpine

plants, whose hardy natures found a congenial temperature in the icy

atmosphere of the more elevated regions.  These dreary solitudes seemed

to be nearly abandoned by the brute creation as well as by man.  The

light-looted vicuna, roaming in its native state, might be sometimes seen

looking down from some airy cliff, where the foot of the hunter dared not

venture.  But instead of the feathered tribes whose gay plumage sparkled

in the deep glooms of the tropical forests, the adventurers now beheld

only the great bird of the Andes, the loathsome condor, who, sailing high

above the clouds, followed with doleful cries in the track of the army, as

if guided by instinct in the path of blood and carnage.



At length they reached the crest of the Cordillera, where it spreads out

into a bold and bleak expanse, with scarce the vestige of vegetation,

except what is afforded by the pajonal, a dried yellow grass, which, as it

is seen from below, encircling the base of the snow-covered peaks,

looks, with its brilliant straw-color lighted up in the rays of an ardent

sun, like a setting of gold round pinnacles of burnished silver.  The land

was sterile, as usual in mining districts, and they were drawing near the

once famous gold quarries on the way to Caxamalca;



"Rocks rich in gems, and mountains big with mines,

That on the high equator ridgy rise."



Here Pizarro halted for the coming up of the rear.  The air was sharp and

frosty; and the soldiers, spreading their tents, lighted fires, and, huddling

round them, endeavored to find some repose after their laborious

march.3



They had not been long in these quarters, when a messenger arrived, one

of those who had accompanied the Indian envoy sent by Pizarro to

Atahuallpa.  He informed the general that the road was free from

enemies, and that an embassy from the Inca was on its way to the

Castilian camp.  Pizarro now sent back to quicken the march of the rear,

as he was unwilling that the Peruvian envoy should find him with his

present diminished numbers.  The rest of the army were not far distant,

and not long after reached the encampment.



In a short time the Indian embassy also arrived, which consisted of one

of the Inca nobles and several attendants, bringing a welcome present of

llamas to the Spanish commander.  The Peruvian bore, also, the

greetings of his master, who wished to know when the Spaniards would

arrive at Caxamalca, that he might provide suitable refreshments for

them.  Pizarro learned that the Inca had left Guamachucho, and was now

lying with a small force in the neighborhood of Caxamalca, at a place

celebrated for its natural springs of warm water.  The Peruvian was an

intelligent person, and the Spanish commander gathered from him many

particulars respecting the late contests which had distracted the empire.



As the envoy vaunted in lofty terms the military prowess and resources

of his sovereign, Pizarro thought it politic to show that it had no power to

overawe him.  He expressed his satisfaction at the triumphs of

Atahuallpa, who, he acknowledged, had raised himself high in the rank

of Indian warriors.  But he was as inferior, he added with more policy

than politeness, to the monarch who ruled over the white men, as the

petty curacas of the country were inferior to him.  This was evident from

the ease with which a few Spaniards had overrun this great continent,

subduing one nation after another, that had offered resistance to their

arms.  He had been led by the fame of Atahuallpa to visit his dominions,

and to offer him his services in his wars; and, if he were received by the

Inca in the same friendly spirit with which he came, he was willing, for

the aid he could render him, to postpone awhile his passage across the

country to the opposite seas.  The Indian, according to the Castilian

accounts, listened with awe to this strain of glorification from the

Spanish commander.  Yet it is possible that the envoy was a better

diplomatist than they imagined; and that he understood it was only the

game of brag at which he was playing with his more civilized

antagonist.4



On the succeeding morning, at an early hour, the troops were again on

their march, and for two days were occupied in threading the airy defiles

of the Cordilleras.  Soon after beginning their descent on the eastern

side, another emissary arrived from the Inca, bearing a message of

similar import to the preceding, and a present, in like manner, of

Peruvian sheep.  This was the same noble that had visited Pizarro in the

valley.  He now came in more state, quaffing chicha--the fermented juice

of the maize-from golden goblets borne by his attendants, which sparkled

in the eyes of the rapacious adventurers.5



While he was in the camp, the Indian messenger, originally sent by

Pizarro to the Inca, returned, and no sooner did he behold the Peruvian,

and the honorable reception which he met with from the Spaniards, than

he was filled with wrath, which would have vented itself in personal

violence, but for the interposition of the by-standers.  It was hard, he

said, that this Peruvian dog should be thus courteously treated, when he

himself had nearly lost his life on a similar mission among his

countrymen.  On reaching the Inca's camp, he had been refused

admission to his presence, on the ground that he was keeping a fast and

could not be seen.  They had paid no respect to his assertion that he came

as an envoy from the white men, and would, probably, not have suffered

him to escape with life, if he had not assured them that any violence

offered to him would be retaliated in full measure on the persons of the

Peruvian envoys, now in the Spanish quarters.  There was no doubt, he

continued of the hostile intentions of Atahuallpa; for he was surrounded

with a powerful army, strongly encamped about a league from

Caxamalca, while that city was entirely evacuated by its inhabitants.



To all this the Inca's envoy coolly replied, that Pizarro's messenger might

have reckoned on such a reception as he had found, since he seemed to

have taken with him no credentials of his mission.  As to the Inca's fast,

that was true; and, although he would doubtless have seen the messenger,

had he known there was one from the strangers, yet it was not safe to

disturb him at these solemn seasons, when engaged in his religious

duties.  The troops by whom he was surrounded were not numerous,

considering that the Inca was at that time carrying on an important war;

and as to Caxamalca, it was abandoned by the inhabitants in order to

make room for the white men, who were so soon to occupy it.6



This explanation, however plausible, did not altogether satisfy the

general; for he had too deep a conviction of the cunning of Atahuallpa,

whose intentions towards the Spaniards he had long greatly distrusted As

he proposed, however, to keep on friendly relations with the monarch for

the present, it was obviously not his cue to manifest suspicion.

Affecting, therefore, to give full credit to the explanation of the envoy,

he dismissed him with reiterated assurances of speedily presenting

himself before the Inca.



The descent of the sierra, though the Andes are less precipitous on their

eastern side than towards the west, was attended with difficulties almost

equal to those of the upward march; and the Spaniards felt no little

satisfaction, when, on the seventh day, they arrived in view of the valley

of Caxamalca, which, enamelled with all the beauties of cultivation, lay

unrolled like a rich and variegated carpet of verdure, in strong contrast

with the dark forms of the Andes, that rose up everywhere around it.

The valley is of an oval shape, extending about five leagues in length by

three in breadth.  It was inhabited by a population of a superior character

to any which the Spaniards had met on the other side of the mountains,

as was argued by the superior style of their attire, and the greater

cleanliness and comfort visible both in their persons and dwellings.7  As

far as the eye could reach, the level tract exhibited the show of a diligent

and thrifty husbandry.  A broad river rolled through the meadows,

supplying facilities for copious irrigation by means of the usual canals

and subterraneous aqueducts.  The land, intersected by verdant hedge-

rows, was checkered with patches of various cultivation; for the soil was

rich, and the climate, if less stimulating than that of the sultry regions of

the coast, was more favorable to the hardy products of the temperate

latitudes.  Below the adventurers, with its white houses glittering in the

sun, lay the little city of Caxamalca, like a sparkling gem on the dark

skirts of the sierra.  At the distance of about a league farther, across the

valley, might be seen columns of vapor rising up towards the heavens,

indicating the place of the famous hot baths, much frequented by the

Peruvian princes.  And here, too, was a spectacle less grateful to the eyes

of the Spaniards; for along the slope of the hills a white cloud of

pavilions was seen covering the ground, as thick as snow-flakes, for the

space, apparently, of several miles.  "It filled us all with amazement,"

exclaims one of the Conquerors, "to behold the Indians occupying so

proud a position!  So many tents, so well appointed, as were never seen

in the Indies till now!  The spectacle caused something like confusion

and even fear in the stoutest bosom.  But it was too late to turn back, or

to betray the least sign of weakness, since the natives in our own

company would, in such case, have been the first to rise upon us.  So,

with as bold a countenance as we could, after coolly surveying the

ground, we prepared for our entrance into Caxamalca."8



What were the feelings of the Peruvian monarch we are not informed,

when he gazed on the martial cavalcade of the Christians, as, with

banners streaming, and bright panoplies glistening in the rays of the

evening sun, it emerged from the dark depths of the sierra, and advanced

in hostile array over the fair domain, which, to this period, had never

been trodden by other foot than that of the red man.  It might be, as

several of the reports had stated, that the Inca had purposely decoyed the

adventurers into the heart of his populous empire, that he might envelope

them with his legions, and the more easily become master of their

property and persons.9  Or was it from a natural feeling of curiosity, and

relying on their professions of friendship, that he had thus allowed them,

without any attempt at resistance, to come into his presence?  At all

events, he could hardly have felt such confidence in himself, as not to

look with apprehension, mingled with awe, on the mysterious strangers,

who, coming from an unknown world, and possessed of such wonderful

gifts, had made their way across mountain and valley, in spite of every

obstacle which man and nature had opposed to them.



Pizarro, meanwhile, forming his little corps into three divisions, now

moved forward, at a more measured pace, and in order of battle, down

the slopes that led towards the Indian city.  As he drew near, no one

came out to welcome him; and he rode through the streets without

meeting with a living thing, or hearing a sound, except the echoes, sent

back from the deserted dwellings, of the tramp of the soldiery.



It was a place of considerable size, containing about ten thousand

inhabitants, somewhat more, probably, than the population assembled at

this day within the walls of the modern city of Caxamalca.10  The

houses, for the most part, were built of clay, hardened in the sun; the

roofs thatched, or of timber.  Some of the more ambitious dwellings were

of hewn stone; and there was a convent in the place, occupied by the

Virgins of the Sun, and a temple dedicated to the same tutelar deity,

which last was hidden in the deep embowering shades of a grove on the

skirts of the city.  On the quarter towards the Indian camp was a square--

if square it might be called, which was almost triangular in form---of an

immense size, surrounded by low buildings.  These consisted of

capacious halls, with wide doors or openings communicating with the

square.  They were probably intended as a sort of barracks for the Inca's

soldiers.11  At the end of the plaza, looking towards the country, was a

fortress of stones with a stairway leading from the city, and a private

entrance from the adjoining suburbs.  There was still another fortress on

the rising ground which commanded the town, built of hewn stone, and

encompassed by three circular walls,--or rather one and the same wall,

which wound up spirally around it.  It was a place of great strength, and

the workmanship showed a better knowledge of masonry, and gave a

higher impression of the architectural science of the people, than

anything the Spaniards had yet seen.12



It was late in the afternoon of the fifteenth of November, 1532, when the

Conquerors entered the city of Caxamalca.  The weather, which had been

fair during the day, now threatened a storm, and some rain mingled with

hail--for it was unusually cold--began to fall.13  Pizarro, however, was

so anxious to ascertain the dispositions of the Inca, that he determined to

send an embassy, at once, to his quarters.  He selected for this, Hernando

de Soto with fifteen horse, and, after his departure, conceiving that the

number was too small, in case of any unfriendly demonstrations by the

Indians, he ordered his brother Hernando to follow with twenty

additional troopers.  This captain and one other of his party have left us

an account of the excursion.14



Between the city and the imperial camp was a causeway, built in a

substantial manner across the meadow land that intervened.  Over this

the cavalry galloped at a rapid pace, and, before they had gone a league,

they came in front of the Peruvian encampment, where it spread along

the gentle slope of the mountains.  The lances of the warriors were fixed

in the ground before their tents, and the Indian soldiers were loitering

without, gazing with silent astonishment at the Christian cavalcade, as

with clangor of arms and shrill blast of trumpet it swept by, like some

fearful apparition, on the wings of the wind.



The party soon came to a broad but shallow stream, which, winding

through the meadow, formed a defence for the Inca's position.  Across it

was a wooden bridge; but the cavaliers, distrusting its strength, preferred

to dash through the waters, and without difficulty gained the opposite

bank.  At battalion of Indian warriors was drawn up under arms on the

farther side of the bridge, but they offered no molestation to the

Spaniards; and these latter had strict orders from Pizarro--scarcely

necessary in their present circumstances--to treat the natives with

courtesy.  One of the Indians pointed out the quarter occupied by the

Inca.15



It was an open court-yard, with a light building or pleasure-house in the

centre, having galleries running around it, and opening in the rear on a

garden.  The walls were covered with a shining plaster, both white and

colored, and in the area before the edifice was seen a spacious tank or

reservoir of stone, fed by aqueducts that supplied it with both warm and

cold water.16  A basin of hewn stone--it may be of a more recent

construction--still bears, on the spot, the name of the "Inca's bath." 17

The court was filled with Indian nobles, dressed in gayly ornamented

attire, in attendance on the monarch, and with women of the royal

household.  Amidst this assembly it was not difficult to distinguish the

person of Atahuallpa, though his dress was simpler than that of his

attendants.  But he wore on his head the crimson borla or fringe, which,

surrounding the forehead, hung down as low as the eyebrow.  This was

the well-known badge of Peruvian sovereignty, and had been assumed by

the monarch only since the defeat of his brother Huascar.  He was seated

on a low stool or cushion, somewhat after the Morisco or Turkish

fashion, and his nobles and principal officers stood around him, with

great ceremony, holding the stations suited to their rank.18



The Spaniards gazed with much interest on the prince, of whose cruelty

and cunning they had heard so much, and whose valor had secured to

him the possession of the empire.  But his countenance exhibited

neither the fierce passions nor the sagacity which had been ascribed to

him; and, though in his bearing he showed a gravity and a calm

consciousness of authority well becoming a king, he seemed to discharge

all expression from his features, and to discover only the apathy so

characteristic of the American races.  On the present occasion, this must

have been in part, at least, assumed.  For it is impossible that the Indian

prince should not have contemplated with curious interest a spectacle so

strange, and, in some respects, appalling, as that of these mysterious

strangers, for which no previous description could have prepared him.



Hernando Pizarro and Soto, with two or three only of their followers,

slowly rode up in front of the Inca; and the former, making a respectful

obeisance, but without dismounting, informed Atahuallpa that he came

as an ambassador from his brother, the commander of the white men, to

acquaint the monarch with their arrival in his city of Caxamalca.  They

were the subjects of a mighty prince across the waters, and had come, he

said, drawn thither by the report of his great victories, to offer their

services, and to impart to him the doctrines of the true faith which they

professed; and he brought an invitation from the general to Atahuallpa

that the latter would be pleased to visit the Spaniards in their present

quarters.



To all this the Inca answered not a word; nor did he make even a sign of

acknowledgment that he comprehended it; though it was translated for

him by Felipillo, one of the interpreters already noticed.  He remained

silent, with his eyes fastened on the ground; but one of his nobles,

standing by his side, answered, "It is well." 19  This was an embarrassing

situation for the Spaniards, who seemed to be as wide from ascertaining

the real disposition of the Peruvian monarch towards themselves, as

when the mountains were between them.



In a courteous and respectful manner, Hernando Pizarro again broke the

silence by requesting the Inca to speak to them himself, and to inform

them what was his pleasure.20  To this Atahuallpa condescended to

reply, while a faint smile passed over his features,--"Tell your captain

that I am keeping a fast, which will end tomorrow morning.  I will then

visit him, with my chieftains.  In the meantime, let him occupy the public

buildings on the square, and no other, till I come, when I will order what

shall be done." 21



Soto, one of the party present at this interview, as before noticed, was the

best mounted and perhaps the best rider in Pizarro's troop.  Observing

that Atahuallpa looked with some interest on the fiery steed that stood

before him, champing the bit and pawing the ground with the natural

impatience of a war-horse, the Spaniard gave him the rein, and, striking

his iron heel into his side, dashed furiously over the plain; then, wheeling

him round and round, displayed all the beautiful movements of his

charger, and his own excellent horsemanship.  Suddenly checking him in

full career, he brought the animal almost on his haunches, so near the

person of the Inca, that some of the foam that flecked his horse's sides

was thrown on the royal garments.  But Atahuallpa maintained the same

marble composure as before, though several of his soldiers, whom De

Soto passed in the course, were so much disconcerted by it, that they

drew back in manifest terror; an act of timidity for which they paid

dearly, if, as the Spaniards assert, Atahuallpa caused them to be put to

death that same evening for betraying such unworthy weakness to the

strangers.22



Refreshments were now offered by the royal attendants to the Spaniards,

which they declined, being unwilling to dismount.  They did not refuse,

however, to quaff the sparkling chicha from golden vases of

extraordinary size, presented to them by the dark-eyed beauties of the

harem.23  Taking then a respectful leave of the Inca, the cavaliers rode

back to Caxamalca, with many moody speculations on what they had

seen; on the state and opulence of the Indian monarch; on the strength of

his military array, their excellent appointments, and the apparent

discipline in their ranks,--all arguing a much higher degree of

civilization, and consequently of power, than anything they had

witnessed in the lower regions of the country.  As they contrasted all

this with their own diminutive force, too far advanced, as they now were,

for succour to reach them, they felt they had done rashly in throwing

themselves into the midst of so formidable an empire, and were filled

with gloomy forebodings of the result.24  Their comrades in the camp

soon caught the infectious spirit of despondency, which was not lessened

as night came on, and they beheld the watch-fires of the Peruvians

lighting up the sides of the mountains, and glittering in the darkness, "as

thick," says one who saw them, "as the stars of heaven." 25



Yet there was one bosom in that little host which was not touched with

the feeling either of fear or dejection.  That was Pizarro's, who secretly

rejoiced that he had now brought matters to the issue for which he had so

long panted.  He saw the necessity of kindling a similar feeling in his

followers, or all would be lost.  Without unfolding his plans, he went

round among his men, beseeching them not to show faint hearts at this

crisis, when they stood face to face with the foe whom they had been so

long seeking.  "They were to rely on themselves, and on that Providence

which had carried them safe through so many fearful trials.  It would not

now desert them; and if numbers, however great, were on the side of

their enemy, it mattered little when the arm of Heaven was on theirs." 26

The Spanish cavalier acted under the combined influence of chivalrous

adventure and religious zeal.  The latter was the most effective in the

hour of peril; and Pizarro, who understood well the characters he had to

deal with, by presenting the enterprise as a crusade, kindled the dying

embers of enthusiasm in the bosoms of his followers, and restored their

faltering courage.



He then summoned a council of his officers, to consider the plan of

operations, or rather to propose to them the extraordinary plan on which

he had himself decided.  This was to lay an ambuscade for the Inca, and

take him prisoner in the face of his whole army!  It was a project full of

peril,--bordering, as it might well seem, on desperation.  But the

circumstances of the Spaniards were desperate.  Whichever way they

turned, they were menaced by the most appalling dangers; and better was

it bravely to confront the danger, than weakly to shrink from it, when

there was no avenue for escape.



To fly was now too late.  Whither could they fly? At the first signal of

retreat, the whole army of the Inca would be upon them.  Their

movements would be anticipated by a foe far better acquainted with the

intricacies of the sierra than themselves; the passes would be occupied,

and they would be hemmed in on all sides; while the mere fact of this

retrograde movement would diminish the confidence and with it the

effective strength of his own men, while it doubled that of his enemy.




Yet to remain long inactive in his present position seemed almost equally

perilous.  Even supposing that Atahuallpa should entertain friendly

feelings towards the Christians, they could not confide in the continuance

of such feelings.  Familiarity with the white men would soon destroy the

idea of anything supernatural, or even superior, in their natures.  He

would feel contempt for their diminutive numbers.  Their horses, their

arms and showy appointments, would be an attractive bait in the eye of

the barbaric monarch, and when conscious that he had the power to crush

their possessors, he would not be slow in finding a pretext for it.  A

sufficient one had already occurred in the high-handed measures of the

Conquerors, on their march through his dominions.



But what reason had they to flatter themselves that the Inca cherished

such a disposition towards them? He was a crafty and unscrupulous

prince, and, if the accounts they had repeatedly received on their march

were true, had ever regarded the coming of the Spaniards with an evil

eye.  It was scarcely possible he should do otherwise.  His soft messages

had only been intended to decoy them across the mountains, where, with

the aid of his warriors, he might readily overpower them.  They were

entangled in the toils which the cunning monarch had spread for them.



Their only remedy, then, was to turn the Inca's arts against himself; to

take him, if possible, in his own snare.  There was no time to be lost; for

any day might bring back the victorious legions who had recently won

his battles at the south, and thus make the odds against the Spaniards far

greater than now.



Yet to encounter Atahuallpa in the open field would be attended with

great hazard; and even if victorious, there would be little probability that

the person of the Inca, of so much importance, would fall into the hands

of the victors.  The invitation he had so unsuspiciously accepted to visit

them in their quarters afforded the best means for securing this desirable

prize.  Nor was the enterprise so desperate, considering the great

advantages afforded by the character and weapons of the invaders, and

the unexpectedness of the assault.  The mere circumstance of acting on a

concerted plan would alone make a small number more than a match for

a much larger one.  But it was not necessary to admit the whole of the

Indian force into the city before the attack; and the person of the Inca

once secured, his followers, astounded by so strange an event, were they

few or many, would have no heart for further resistance;--and with the

Inca once in his power, Pizarro might dictate laws to the empire.



In this daring project of the Spanish chief, it was easy to see that he had

the brilliant exploit of Cortes in his mind, when he carried off the Aztec

monarch in his capital.  But that was not by violence,--at least not by

open violence,--and it received the sanction, compulsory though it were,

of the monarch himself.  It was also true that the results in that case did

not altogether justify a repetition of the experiment; since the people rose

in a body to sacrifice both the prince and his kidnappers.  Yet this was

owing, in part, at least, to the indiscretion of the latter.  The experiment

in the outset was perfectly successful; and, could Pizarro once become

master of the person of Atahuallpa, he trusted to his own discretion for

the rest.  It would, at least, extricate him from his present critical

position, by placing in his power an inestimable guaranty for his safety;

and if he could not make his own terms with the Inca at once, the arrival

of reinforcements from home would, in all probability, soon enable him

to do so.



Pizarro having concerted his plans for the following day, the council

broke up, and the chief occupied himself with providing for the security

of the camp during the night.  The approaches to the town were

defended; sentinels were posted at different points, especially on the

summit of the fortress, where they were to observe the position of the

enemy, and to report any movement that menaced the tranquillity of the

night.  After these precautions, the Spanish commander and his followers

withdrew to their appointed quarters,--but not to sleep.  At least, sleep

must have come late to those who were aware of the decisive plan for the

morrow; that morrow which was to be the crisis of their fate,--to crown

their ambitious schemes with full success, or consign them to

irretrievable ruin!







Book 3



Chapter 5



Desperate Plan Of Pizarro--Atahuallpa Visits The Spaniards--

Horrible Massacre--The Inca A Prisoner--Conduct Of The Conquerors--

Splendid Promises Of The Inca--Death Of Huascar



1532



The clouds of the evening had passed away, and the sun rose bright on

the following morning, the most memorable epoch in the annals of Peru.

It was Saturday, the sixteenth of November, 1532.  The loud cry of the

trumpet called the Spaniards to arms with the first streak of dawn; and

Pizarro, briefly acquainting them with the plan of the assault, made the

necessary dispositions.



The plaza, as mentioned in the preceding chapter, was defended on its

three sides by low ranges of buildings, consisting of spacious halls with

wide doors or vomitories opening into the square.  In these halls he

stationed his cavalry in two divisions, one under his brother Hernando,

the other under De Soto.  The infantry he placed in another of the

buildings, reserving twenty chosen men to act with himself as occasion

might require.  Pedro de Candia, with a few soldiers and the artillery,--

comprehending under this imposing name two small pieces of ordnance,

called falconers,---he established in the fortress.  All received orders to

wait at their posts till the arrival of the Inca.  After his entrance into the

great square, they were still to remain under cover, withdrawn from

observation, till the signal was given by the discharge of a gun, when

they were to cry their war-cries, to rush out in a body from their covert,

and, putting the Peruvians to the sword, bear off the person of the Inca.

The arrangement of the immense hails, opening on a level with the plaza,

seemed to be contrived on purpose for a coup de theatre.  Pizarro

particularly inculcated order and implicit obedience, that in the hurry of

the moment there should be no confusion.  Everything depended on their

acting with concert, coolness, and celerity.1



The chief next saw that their arms were in good order; and that the

breastplates of their horses were garnished with bells, to add by their

noise to the consternation of the Indians.  Refreshments were, also,

liberally provided, that the troops should be in condition for the conflict.

These arrangements being completed, mass was performed with great

solemnity by the ecclesiastics who attended the expedition; the God of

battles was invoked to spread his shield over the soldiers who were

fighting to extend the empire of the Cross; and all joined with enthusiasm

in the chant, "Exsurge, Domine," "Rise, O Lord! and judge thine own

cause."2  One might have supposed them a company of martyrs, about to

lay down their lives in defence of their faith, instead of a licentious band

of adventurers, meditating one of the most atrocious acts of perfidy on

the record of history!  Yet, whatever were the vices of the Castilian

cavalier, hypocrisy was not among the number.  He felt that he was

battling for the Cross, and under this conviction, exalted as it was at such

a moment as this into the predominant impulse, he was blind to the baser

motives which mingled with the enterprise.  With feelings thus kindled to

a flame of religious ardor, the soldiers of Pizarro looked forward with

renovated spirits to the coming conflict; and the chieftain saw with

satisfaction, that in the hour of trial his men would be true to their leader

and themselves.



It was late in the day before any movement was visible in the Peruvian

camp, where much preparation was making to approach the Christian

quarters with due state and ceremony.  A message was received from

Atahuallpa, informing the Spanish commander that he should come with

his warriors fully armed, in the same manner as the Spaniards had come

to his quarters the night preceding.  This was not an agreeable intimation

to Pizarro, though he had no reason, probably, to expect the contrary.

But to object might imply distrust, or, perhaps, disclose, in some

measure, his own designs.  He expressed his satisfaction, therefore, at the

intelligence, assuring the Inca, that, come as he would, he would be

received by him as a friend and brother.3



It was noon before the Indian procession was on its march, when it was

seen occupying the great causeway for a long extent.  In front came a

large body of attendants, whose office seemed to be to sweep away every

particle of rubbish from the road.  High above the crowd appeared the

Inca, borne on the shoulders of his principal nobles, while others of the

same rank marched by the sides of his litter, displaying such a dazzling

show of ornaments on their persons, that, in the language of one of the

Conquerors, "they blazed like the sun." 4  But the greater part of the

Inca's forces mustered along the fields that lined the road, and were

spread over the broad meadows as far as the eye could reach.5



When the royal procession had arrived within half a mile of the city, it

came to a halt; and Pizarro saw with surprise that Atahuallpa was

preparing to pitch his tents, as if to encamp there.  A messenger soon

after arrived, informing the Spaniards that the Inca would occupy his

present station the ensuing night, and enter the city on the following

morning.



This intelligence greatly disturbed Pizarro, who had shared in the general

impatience of his men at the tardy movements of the Peruvians.  The

troops had been under arms since daylight, the cavalry mounted, and the

infantry at their post, waiting in silence the coming of the Inca.  A

profound stillness reigned throughout the town, broken only at intervals by

the cry of the sentinel from the summit of the fortress, as he proclaimed

the movements of the Indian army.  Nothing, Pizarro well knew, was so

trying to the soldier as prolonged suspense, in a critical situation like the

present; and he feared lest his ardor might evaporate, and be succeeded

by that nervous feeling natural to the bravest soul at such a crisis, and

which, if not fear, is near akin to it.6  He returned an answer, therefore,

to Atahuallpa, deprecating his change of purpose; and adding that he had

provided everything for his entertainment, and expected him that night to

sup with him.7



This message turned the Inca from his purpose; and, striking his tents

again, he resumed his march, first advising the general that he should

leave the greater part of his warriors behind, and enter the place with

only a few of them, and without arms,8 as he preferred to pass the night

at Caxamalca.  At the same time he ordered accommodations to be

provided for himself, and his retinue in one of the large stone buildings,

called, from a serpent sculptured on the walls, "the House of the

Serpent."9 --No tidings could have been more grateful to the Spaniards.

It seemed as if the Indian monarch was eager to rush into the snare that

had beer spread for him! The fanatical cavalier could not fail to discern

in it the immediate finger of Providence.



It is difficult to account for this wavering conduct of Atahuallpa, so

different from the bold and decided character which history ascribes to

him.  There is no doubt that he made his visit to the white men in perfect

good faith; though Pizarro was probably right in conjecturing that this

amiable disposition stood on a very precarious footing.  There is as little

reason to suppose that he distrusted the sincerity of the strangers; or he

would not thus unnecessarily have proposed to visit them unarmed.  His

original purpose of coming with all his force was doubtless to display his

royal state, and perhaps, also, to show greater respect for the Spaniards;

but when he consented to accept their hospitality, and pass the night in

their quarters, he was willing to dispense with a great part of his armed

soldiery, and visit them in a manner that implied entire confidence in

their good faith.  He was too absolute in his own empire easily to

suspect; and he probably could not comprehend the audacity with which

a few men, like those now assembled in Caxamalca, meditated an assault

on a powerful monarch in the midst of his victorious army.  He did not

know the character of the Spaniard.



It was not long before sunset, when the van of the royal procession

entered the gates of the city.  First came some hundreds of the menials,

employed to clear the path from every obstacle, and singing songs of

triumph as they came, "which, in our ears," says one of the Conquerors,

"sounded like the songs of hell!" 10  Then followed other bodies of

different ranks, and dressed in different liveries.  Some wore a showy

stuff, checkered white and red, like the squares of a chess-board.11

Others were clad in pure white, bearing hammers or maces of silver or

copper; 12 and the guards, together with those in immediate attendance

on the prince, were distinguished by a rich azure livery, and a profusion

of gay ornaments, while the large pendants attached to the ears indicated

the Peruvian noble.



Elevated high above his vassals came the Inca Atahuallpa, borne on a

sedan or open litter, on which was a sort of throne made of massive gold

of inestimable value.13  The palanquin was lined with the richly colored

plumes of tropical birds, and studded with shining plates of gold and

silver.14  The monarch's attire was much richer than on the preceding

evening.  Round his neck was suspended a collar of emeralds of

uncommon size and brilliancy.15  His short hair was decorated with

golden ornaments, and the imperial borla encircled his temples.  The

bearing of the Inca was sedate and dignified; and from his lofty station

he looked down on the multitudes below with an air of composure, like

one accustomed to command.



As the leading files of the procession entered the great square, larger,

says an old chronicler, than any square in Spain, they opened to the right

and left for the royal retinue to pass.  Everything was conducted with

admirable order.  The monarch was permitted to traverse the plaza in

silence, and not a Spaniard was to be seen.  When some five or six

thousand of his people had entered the place, Atahuallpa halted, and,

turning round with an inquiring look, demanded, "Where are the

strangers?"



At this moment Fray Vicente de Valverde, a Dominican friar, Pizarro's

chaplain, and afterward Bishop of Cuzco, came forward with his

brevidry, or, as other accounts say, a Bible, in one hand, and a crucifix in

the other, and, approaching the Inca, told him, that he came by order of

his commander to expound to him the doctrines of the true faith, for

which purpose the Spaniards had come from a great distance to his

country.  The friar then explained, as clearly as he could, the mysterious

doctrine of the Trinity, and, ascending high in his account, began with

the creation of man, thence passed to his fall, to his subsequent

redemption by Jesus Christ, to the crucifixion, and the ascension, when

the Saviour left the Apostle Peter as his Vicegerent upon earth.  This

power had been transmitted to the successors of the Apostle, good and

wise men, who, under the title of Popes, held authority over all powers

and potentates on earth.  One of the last of these Popes had

commissioned the Spanish emperor, the most mighty monarch in the

world, to conquer and convert the natives in this western hemisphere;

and his general, Francisco Pizarro, had now come to execute this

important mission.  The friar concluded with beseeching the Peruvian


monarch to receive him kindly; to abjure the errors of his own faith, and

embrace that of the Christians now proffered to him, the only one by

which he could hope for salvation; and, furthermore, to acknowledge

himself a tributary of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, who, in that event,

would aid and protect him as his loyal vassal.16



Whether Atahuallpa possessed himself of every link in the curious chain

of argument by which the monk connected Pizarro with St. Peter, may be

doubted.  It is certain, however, that he must have had very incorrect

notions of the Trinity, if, as Garcilasso states, the interpreter Felipillo

explained it by saying, that "the Christians believed in three Gods and

one God, and that made four." 17  But there is no doubt he perfectly

comprehended that the drift of the discourse was to persuade him to

resign his sceptre and acknowledge the supremacy of another.



The eyes of the Indian monarch flashed fire, and his dark brow grew

darker as he replied,--"I will be no man's tributary.  I am greater than any

prince upon earth.  Your emperor may be a great prince; I do not doubt

it, when I see that he has sent his subjects so far across the waters; and I

am willing to hold him as a brother.  As for the Pope of whom you

speak, he must be crazy to talk of giving away countries which do not

belong to him.  For my faith," he continued, "I will not change it.  Your

own God, as you say, was put to death by the very men whom he created.

But mine," he concluded, pointing to his Deity,--then, alas! sinking in

glory behind the mountains,--"my God still lives in the heavens, and

looks down on his children." 18



He then demanded of Valverde by what authority he had said these

things.  The friar pointed to the book which he held, as his authority.

Atahuallpa, taking it, turned over the pages a moment, then, as the insuit

he had received probably flashed across his mind, he threw it down with

vehemence, and exclaimed,--"Tell your comrades that they shall give me

an account of their doings in my land.  I will not go from here, till they

have made me full satisfaction for all the wrongs they have committed."

19



The friar, greatly scandalized by the indignity offered to the sacred

volume, stayed only to pick it up, and, hastening to Pizarro, informed

him of what had been done, exclaiming, at the same time,--"Do you not

see, that, while we stand here wasting our breath in talking with this dog,

full of pride as he is, the fields are filling with Indians? Set on, at once; I

absolve you." 20  Pizarro saw that the hour had come.  He waved a white

scarf in the air, the appointed signal.  The fatal gun was fired from the

fortress.  Then, springing into the square, the Spanish captain and his

followers shouted the old war-cry of "St. Jago and at them." It was

answered by the battle-cry of every Spaniard in the city, as, rushing from

the avenues of the great halls in which they were concealed, they poured

into the plaza, horse and foot, each in his own dark column, and threw

themselves into the midst of the Indian crowd.  The latter, taken by

surprise, stunned by the report of artillery and muskets, the echoes of

which reverberated like thunder from the surrounding buildings, and

blinded by the smoke which rolled in sulphurous volumes along the

square, were seized with a panic.  They knew not whither to fly for

refuge from the coming ruin.  Nobles and commoners,--all were trampled

down under the fierce charge of the cavalry, who dealt their blows, right

and left, without sparing; while their swords, flashing through.  the thick

gloom, carried dismay into the hearts of the wretched natives, who now,

for the first time, saw the horse and his rider in all their terrors.  They

made no resistance,--as, indeed, they had no weapons with which to

make it.  Every avenue to escape was closed, for the entrance to the

square was choked up with the dead bodies of men who had perished in

vain efforts to fly; and, such was the agony of the survivors under the

terrible pressure of their assailants, that a large body of Indians, by their

convulsive struggles, burst through the wall of stone and dried clay

which formed part of the boundary of the plaza!  It fell, leaving an

opening of more than a hundred paces, through which multitudes now

found their way into the country, still hotly pursued by the cavalry, who,

leaping the fallen rubbish, hung on the rear of the fugitives, striking them

down in all directions.21



Meanwhile the fight, or rather massacre, continued hot around the Inca,

whose person was the great object of the assault.  His faithful nobles,

rallying about him, threw themselves in the way of the assailants, and

strove, by tearing them from their saddles, or, at least, by offering their

own bosoms as a mark for their vengeance, to shield their beloved

master.  It is said by some authorities, that they carried weapons

concealed under their clothes.  If so, it availed them little, as it is not

pretended that they used them.  But the most timid animal will defend

itself when at bay.  That they did not so in the present instance is proof

that they had no weapons to use.22  Yet they still continued to force back

the cavaliers, clinging to their horses with dying grasp, and, as one was

cut down, another taking the place of his fallen comrade with a loyalty

truly affecting.



The Indian monarch, stunned and bewildered, saw his faithful subjects

falling round him without fully comprehending his situation.  The litter

on which he rode heaved to and fro, as the mighty press swayed

backwards and forwards; and he gazed on the overwhelming ruin, like

some forlorn mariner, who, tossed about in his bark by the furious

elements, sees the lightning's flash and hears the thunder bursting around

him with the consciousness that he can do nothing to avert his fate.  At

length, weary with the work of destruction, the Spaniards, as the shades

of evening grew deeper, felt afraid that the royal prize might, after all,

elude them; and some of the cavaliers made a desperate attempt to end

the affray at once by taking Atahuallpa's life.  But Pizarro, who was

nearest his person, called out with stentorian voice, "Let no one, who

values his life, strike at the Inca"; 23 and, stretching out his arm to shield

him, received a wound on the hand from one of his own men,--the only

wound received by a Spaniard in the action.24



The struggle now became fiercer than ever round the royal litter.  It

reeled more and more, and at length, several of the nobles who supported

it having been slain, it was overturned, and the Indian prince would have

come with violence to the ground, had not his fall been broken by the

efforts of Pizarro and some other of the cavaliers, who caught him in

their arms.  The imperial borla was instantly snatched from his temples

by a soldier named Estete,25 and the unhappy monarch, strongly

secured, was removed to a neighboring building, where he was carefully

guarded.



All attempt at resistance now ceased.  The fate of the Inca soon spread

over town and country.  The charm which might have held the Peruvians

together was dissolved.  Every man thought only of his own safety.  Even

the soldiery encamped on the adjacent fields took the alarm, and,

learning the fatal tidings, were seen flying in every direction before their

pursuers, who in the heat of triumph showed no touch of mercy.  At

length night, more pitiful than man, threw her friendly mantle over the

fugitives, and the scattered troops of Pizarro rallied once more at the

sound of the trumpet in the bloody square of Caxamalca.



The number of slain is reported, as usual, with great discrepancy.

Pizarro's secretary says two thousand natives fell.26  A descendant of the

Incas--a safer authority than Garcilasso---swells the number to ten

thousand.27  Truth is generally found somewhere between the extremes.

The slaughter was incessant, for there was nothing to check it.  That

there should have been no resistance will not appear strange, when we

consider the fact, that the wretched victims were without arms, and that

their senses must have been completely overwhelmed by the strange and

appalling spectacle which burst on them so unexpectedly.  "What wonder

was it," said an ancient Inca to a Spaniard, who repeats it, "what wonder

that our countrymen lost their wits, seeing blood run like water, and the

Inca, whose person we all of us adore, seized and carried off by a

handful of men?" 28  Yet though the massacre was incessant, it was short

in duration.  The whole time consumed by it, the brief twilight of the

tropics, did not much exceed half an hour; a short period, indeed,---yet

long enough to decide the fate of Peru, and to subvert the dynasty of the

Incas.



That night Pizarro kept his engagement with the Inca, since he had

Atahuallpa to sup with him.  The banquet was served in one of the halls

facing the great square, which a few hours before had been the scene of

slaughter, and the pavement of which was still encumbered with the dead

bodies of the Inca's subjects.  The captive monarch was placed next his

conqueror.  He seemed like one who did not yet fully comprehend the

extent of his calamity.  If he did, he showed an amazing fortitude.  "It is

the fortune of war," he said; 29 and, if we may credit the Spaniards, he

expressed his admiration of the adroitness with which they had contrived

to entrap him in the midst of his own troops.30  He added, that he had

been made acquainted with the progress of the white men from the hour

of their landing; but that he had been led to undervalue their strength

from the insignificance of their numbers.  He had no doubt he should be

easily able to overpower them, on their arrival at Caxamalca, by his

superior strength; and, as he wished to see for himself what manner of

men they were, he had suffered them to cross the mountains, meaning to

select such as he chose for his own service, and, getting possession of

their wonderful arms and horses, put the rest to death.31



That such may have been Atahuallpa's purpose is not improbable.  It

explains his conduct in not occupying the mountain passes, which

afforded such strong points of defence against invasion.  But that a

prince so astute, as by the general testimony of the Conquerors he is

represented to have been, should have made so impolitic a disclosure of

his hidden motives is not so probable.  The intercourse with the Inca was

carried on chiefly by means of the interpreter Felipillo, or little Philip, as

he was called, from his assumed Christian name,---a malicious youth, as

it appears, who bore no good-will to Atahuallpa, and whose

interpretations were readily admitted by the Conquerors, eager to find

some pretext for their bloody reprisals.



Atahuallpa, as elsewhere noticed, was, at this time, about thirty years of

age.  He was well made, and more robust than usual with his

countrymen.  His head was large, and his countenance might have been

called handsome, but that his eyes, which were bloodshot, gave a fierce

expression to his features.  He was deliberate in speech, grave in manner,

and towards his own people stern even to severity; though with the

Spaniards he showed himself affable, sometimes even indulging in

sallies of mirth.32



Pizarro paid every attention to his royal captive, and endeavored to

lighten, if he could not dispel, the gloom which, in spite of his assumed

equanimity, hung over the monarch's brow.  He besought him not to be

cast down by his reverses, for his lot had only been that of every prince

who had resisted the white men.  They had come into the country to

proclaim the gospel, the religion of Jesus Christ; and it was no wonder

they had prevailed, when his shield was over them.  Heaven had

permitted that Atahuallpa's pride should be humbled, because of his

hostile intentions towards the Spaniards, and the insults he had offered to

the sacred volume.  But he bade the Inca take courage and confide in

him, for the Spaniards were a generous race, warring only against those

who made war on them, and showing grace to all who submitted! 33--

Atahuallpa may have thought the massacre of that day an indifferent

commentary on this vaunted lenity.



Before retiring for the night, Pizarro briefly addressed his troops on their

present situation.  When he had ascertained that not a man was wounded,

he bade them offer up thanksgivings to Providence for so great a miracle;

without its care, they could never have prevailed so easily over the host

of their enemies; and he trusted their lives had been reserved for still

greater things.  But if they would succeed, they had much to do for

themselves.  They were in the heart of a powerful kingdom,

encompassed by foes deeply attached to their own sovereign.  They must

be ever on their guard, therefore, and be prepared at any hour to be

roused from their slumbers by the call of the trumpet.34--Having then

posted his sentinels, placed a strong guard over the apartment of

Atahuallpa, and taken all the precautions of a careful commander,

Pizarro withdrew to repose; and, if he could really feel, that, in the

bloody scenes of the past day, he had been fighting only the good fight of

the Cross, he doubtless slept sounder than on the night preceding the

seizure of the Inca.



On the following morning, the first commands of the Spanish chief were

to have the city cleansed of its impurities; and the prisoners, of whom

there were many in the camp, were employed to remove the dead, and

give them decent burial.  His next care was to despatch a body of about

thirty horse to the quarters lately occupied by Atahuallpa at the baths, to

take possession of the spoil, and disperse the remnant of the Peruvian

forces which still hung about the place.



Before noon, the party which he had detached on this service returned

with a large troop of Indians, men and women, among the latter of whom

were many of the wives and attendants of the Inca.  The Spaniards had

met with no resistance; since the Peruvian warriors, though so superior in

number, excellent in appointments, and consisting mostly of ablebodied

young men,--for the greater part of the veteran forces were with the

Inca's generals at the south,--lost all heart from the moment of their

sovereign's captivity.  There was no leader to take his place; for they

recognized no authority but that of the Child of the Sun, and they seemed

to be held by a sort of invisible charm near the place of his confinement;

while they gazed with superstitious awe on the white men, who could

achieve so audacious an enterprise.35



The number of Indian prisoners was so great, that some of the

Conquerors were for putting them all to death, or, at least, cutting off

their hands, to disable them from acts of violence, and to strike terror

into their countrymen.36  The proposition, doubtless, came from the

lowest and most ferocious of the soldiery.  But that it should have been

made at all shows what materials entered into the composition of

Pizarro's company.  The chief rejected it at once, as no less impolitic

than inhuman, and dismissed the Indians to their several homes, with the

assurance that none should be harmed who did not offer resistance to the

white men.  A sufficient number, however, were retained to wait on the

Conquerors who were so well provided, in this respect, that the most

common soldier was attended by a retinue of menials that would have

better suited the establishment of a noble.37



The Spaniards had found immense droves of llamas under the care of

their shepherds in the neighborhood of the baths, destined for the

consumption of the Court.  Many of them were now suffered to roam

abroad among their native mountains; though Pizarro caused a

considerable number to be reserved for the use of the army.  And this

was no small quantity, if, as one of the Conquerors says, a hundred and

fifty of the Peruvian sheep were frequently slaughtered in a day.38

Indeed, the Spaniards were so improvident in their destruction of these

animals, that, in a few years, the superb flocks, nurtured with so much

care by the Peruvian government, had almost disappeared from the

land.39



The party sent to pillage the Inca's pleasure-house brought back a rich

booty in gold and silver, consisting chiefly of plate for the royal table,

which greatly astonished the Spaniards by their size and weight.  These,

as well as some large emeralds obtained there, together with the precious

spoils found on the bodies of the Indian nobles who had perished in the

massacre, were placed in safe custody, to be hereafter divided.  In the

city of Caxamalca, the troops also found magazines stored with goods,

both cotton and woollen, far superior to any they had seen, for fineness

of texture, and the skill with which the various colors were blended.

They were piled from the floors to the very roofs of the buildings, and in

such quantity, that, after every soldier had provided himself with what he

desired, it made no sensible diminution of the whole amount.40



Pizarro would now gladly have directed his march on the Peruvian

capital.  But the distance was great, and his force was small.  This must

have been still further crippled by the guard required for the Inca, and

the chief feared to involve himself deeper in a hostile empire so

populous and powerful, with a prize so precious in his keeping.  With

much anxiety, therefore, he looked for reinforcements from the colonies;

and he despatched a courier to San Miguel, to inform the Spaniards there

of his recent successes, and to ascertain if there had been any arrival

from Panama.  Meanwhile he employed his men in making Caxamalca a

more suitable residence for a Christian host, by erecting a church, or,

perhaps, appropriating some Indian edifice to this use, in which mass

was regularly performed by the Dominican fathers, with great solemnity.

The dilapidated walls of the city were also restored in a more substantial

manner than before, and every vestige was soon effaced of the hurricane

that had so recently swept over it.



It was not long before Atahuallpa discovered, amidst all the show of

religious zeal in his Conquerors, a lurking appetite more potent in most

of their bosoms than either religion or ambition.  This was the love of

gold.  He determined to avail himself of it to procure his own freedom.

The critical posture of his affairs made it important that this should not

be long delayed.  His brother, Huascar, ever since his defeat, had been

detained as a prisoner, subject to the victor's orders.  He was now at

Andamarca, at no great distance from Caxamalca; and Atahuallpa feared,

with good reason, that, when his own imprisonment was known, Huascar

would find it easy to corrupt his guards, make his escape, and put himself

at the head of the contested empire, without a rival to dispute it.



In the hope, therefore, to effect his purpose by appealing to the avarice

of his keepers, he one day told Pizarro, that, if he would set him free, he

would engage to cover the floor of the apartment on which they stood

with gold.  Those present listened with an incredulous smile; and, as the

Inca received no answer, he said, with some emphasis, that "he would

not merely cover the floor, but would fill the room with gold as high as

he could reach"; and, standing on tiptoe, he stretched out his hand

against the wall.  All stared with amazement; while they regarded it as

the insane boast of a man too eager to procure his liberty to weigh the

meaning of his words.  Yet Pizarro was sorely perplexed.  As he had

advanced into the country, much that he had seen, and all that he had

heard, had confirmed the dazzling reports first received of the riches of

Peru.  Atahuallpa himself had given him the most glowing picture of the

wealth of the capital, where the roofs of the temples were plated with

gold, while the walls were hung with tapestry and the floors inlaid with

tiles of the same precious metal.  There must be some foundation for all

this.  At all events, it was safe to accede to the Inca's proposition; since,

by so doing, he could collect, at once, all the gold at his disposal, and

thus prevent its being purloined or secreted by the natives.  He therefore

acquiesced in Atahuallpa's offer, and, drawing a red line along the wall at

the height which the Inca had indicated, he caused the terms of the

proposal to be duly recorded by the notary.  The apartment was about

seventeen feet broad, by twenty-two feet long, and the line round the

walls was nine feet from the floor.41  This space was to be filled with

gold; but it was understood that the gold was not to be melted down into

ingots, but to retain the original form of the articles into which it was

manufactured, that the Inca might have the benefit of the space which

they occupied.  He further agreed to fill an adjoining room of smaller

dimensions twice full with silver, in like manner; and he demanded two

months to accomplish all this.42



No sooner was this arrangement made, than the Inca despatched couriers

to Cuzco and the other principal places in the kingdom, with orders that

the gold ornaments and utensils should be removed from the royal

palaces, and from the temples and other public buildings, and transported

without loss of time to Caxamalca.  Meanwhile he continued to live in

the Spanish quarters, treated with the respect due to his rank, and

enjoying all the freedom that was compatible with the security of his

person.  Though not permitted to go abroad, his limbs were unshackled,

and he had the range of his own apartments under the jealous

surveillance of a guard, who knew too well the value of the royal captive

to be remiss.  He was allowed the society of his favorite wives, and

Pizarro took care that his domestic privacy should not be violated.  His

subjects had free access to their sovereign, and every day he received

visits from the Indian nobles, who came to bring presents, and offer

condolence to their unfortunate master.  On such occasions, the most

potent of these great vassals never ventured into his presence, without

first stripping off their sandals, and bearing a load on their backs in token

of reverence.  The Spaniards gazed with curious eyes on these acts of

homage, or rather of slavish submission, on the one side, and on the air

of perfect indifference with which they were received, as a matter of

course, on the other; and they conceived high ideas of the character of a

prince who, even in his present helpless condition, could inspire such

feelings of awe in his subjects.  The royal levee was so well attended,

and such devotion was shown by his vassals to the captive monarch, as

did not fail, in the end, to excite some feelings of distrust in his

keepers.43



Pizarro did not neglect the opportunity afforded him of communicating

the truths of revelation to his prisoner, and both he and his chaplain,

Father Valverde, labored in the same good work.  Atahuallpa listened

with composure and apparent attention.  But nothing seemed to move

him so much as the argument with which the military polemic closed his

discourse,--that it could not be the true God whom Atahuallpa

worshipped, since he had suffered him to fall into the hands of his

enemies.  The unhappy monarch assented to the force of this,

acknowledging that his Deity had indeed deserted him in his utmost

need.44



Yet his conduct towards his brother Huascar, at this time, too clearly

proves, that, whatever respect he may have shown for the teachers, the

doctrines of Christianity had made little impression on his heart.  No

sooner had Huascar been informed of the capture of his rival, and of the

large ransom he had offered for his deliverance, than, as the latter had

foreseen, he made every effort to regain his liberty, and sent, or

attempted to send, a message to the Spanish commander, that he would

pay a much larger ransom than that promised by Atahuallpa, who, never

having dwelt in Cuzco, was ignorant of the quantity of treasure there, and

where it was deposited.



Intelligence of all this was secretly communicated to Atahuallpa by the

persons who had his brother in charge; and his jealousy, thus roused, was

further heightened by Pizarro's declaration, that he intended to have

Hauscar brought to Caxamalca, where he would himself examine into the

controversy, and determine which of the two had best title to the sceptre

of the Incas.  Pizarro perceived, from the first, the advantages of a

competition which would enable him, by throwing his sword into the

scale he preferred, to give it a preponderance.  The party who held the

sceptre by his nomination would henceforth be a tool in his hands, with

which to work his pleasure more effectually than he could well do in his

own name.  It was the game, as every reader knows, played by Edward

the First in the affairs of Scotland, and by many a monarch, both before

and since,--and though their examples may not have been familiar to the

unlettered soldier, Pizarro was too quick in his perceptions to require, in

this matter, at least, the teachings of history.



Atahuallpa was much alarmed by the Spanish commander's

determination to have the suit between the rival candidates brought

before him; for he feared, that, independently of the merits of the case,

the decision would be likely to go in favor of Huascar, whose mild and

ductile temper would make him a convenient instrument in the hands of

his conquerors.  Without further hesitation, he determined to remove this

cause of jealousy for ever, by the death of his brother.



His orders were immediately executed, and the unhappy prince was

drowned, as was commonly reported, in the river of Andamarca,

declaring with his dying breath that the white men would avenge his

murder, and that his rival would not long survive him.45--Thus perished

the unfortunate Huascar, the legitimate heir of the throne of the Incas, in

the very morning of life, and the commencement of his reign; a reign,

however, which had been long enough to call forth the display of many

excellent and amiable qualities, though his nature was too gentle to cope

with the bold and fiercer temper of his brother.  Such is the portrait we

have of him from the Indian and Castilian chroniclers, though the former,

it should be added, were the kinsmen of Huascar, and the latter certainly

bore no good-will to Atahuallpa.46



That prince received the tidings of Huascar's death with every mark of

surprise and indignation.  He immediately sent for Pizarro, and

communicated the event to him with expressions of the deepest sorrow.

The Spanish commander refused, at first, to credit the unwelcome news,

and bluntly told the Inca, that his brother could not be dead, and that he

should be answerable for his life.47  To this Atahuallpa replied by

renewed assurances of the fact, adding that the deed had been

perpetrated, without his privity, by Huascar's keepers, fearful that he

might take advantage of the troubles of the country to make his escape.

Pizarro, on making further inquiries, found that the report of his death

was but too true.  That it should have been brought about by Atahuallpa's

officers, without his express command, would only show, that, by so

doing, they had probably anticipated their master's wishes.  The crime,

which assumes in our eyes a deeper dye from the relation of the parties,

had not the same estimation among the Incas, in whose multitudinous

families the bonds of brotherhood must have sat loosely,--much too

loosely to restrain the arm of the despot from sweeping away any

obstacle that lay in his path.







Book 3



Chapter 6



Gold Arrives For The Ransom--Visit To Pachacamac--

Demolition Of The Idol-- The Inca's Favorite General--

The Inca's Life In Confinement--Envoys' Conduct In Cuzco--

Arrival Of Almagro



1533



Several weeks had now passed since Atahuallpa's emissaries had been

despatched for the gold and silver that were to furnish his ransom to the

Spaniards.  But the distances were great, and the returns came in slowly.

They consisted, for the most part, of massive pieces of plate, some of

which weighed two or three arrobas,--a Spanish weight of twenty-five

pounds.  On some days, articles of the value of thirty or forty thousand

pesos de oro were brought in, and, occasionally, of the value of fifty or

even sixty thousand pesos.  The greedy eyes of the Conquerors gloated

on the shining heaps of treasure, which were transported on the shoulders

of the Indian porters, and, after being carefully registered, were placed in

safe deposit under a strong guard.  They now began to believe that the

magnificent promises of the Inca would be fulfilled.  But, as their avarice

was sharpened by the ravishing display of wealth, such as they had

hardly dared to imagine, they became more craving and impatient.  They

made no allowance for the distance and the difficulties of the way, and

loudly inveighed against the tardiness with which the royal commands

were executed.  They even suspected Atahuallpa of devising this scheme

only to gain a pretext for communicating with his subjects in distant

places, and of proceeding as dilatorily as possible, in order to secure

time for the execution of his plans.  Rumors of a rising among the

Peruvians were circulated, and the Spaniards were in apprehension of

some general and sudden assault on their quarters.  Their new

acquisitions gave them additional cause for solicitude; like a miser, they

trembled in the midst of their treasures.1



Pizarro reported to his captive the rumors that were in circulation among

the soldiers, naming, as one of the places pointed out for the rendezvous

of the Indians, the neighboring city of Guamachucho.  Atahuallpa

listened with undisguised astonishment, and indignantly repelled the

charge, as false from beginning to end.  "No one of my subjects," said

he, "would dare to appear in arms, or to raise his finger, without my

orders.  You have me," he continued, "in your power.  Is not my life at

your disposal?  And what better security can you have for my fidelity?"

He then represented to the Spanish commander that the distances of

many of the places were very great; that to Cuzco, the capital, although a

message might be sent by post, through a succession of couriers, in five

days from Caxamalca, it would require weeks for a porter to travel over

the same ground, with a heavy load on his back.  "But that you may be

satisfied I am proceeding in good faith," he added, "I desire you will

send some of your own people to Cuzco.  I will give them a safe-

conduct, and, when there, they can superintend the execution of the

commission, and see with their own eyes that no hostile movements are

intended."  It was a fair offer, and Pizarro, anxious to get more precise

and authentic information of the state of the country, gladly availed

himself of it.2



Before the departure of these emissaries, the general had despatched his

brother Hernando with about twenty horse and a small body of infantry

to the neighboring town of Guamachucho, in order to reconnoitre the

country, and ascertain if there was any truth in the report of an armed

force having assembled there.  Hernando found every thing quiet, and

met with a kind reception from the natives.  But before leaving the place,

he received further orders from his brother to continue his march to

Pachacamac, a town situated on the coast, at least a hundred leagues

distant from Caxamalca.  It was consecrated at the seat of the great

temple of the deity of that name, whom the Peruvians worshipped as the

Creator of the world.  It is said that they found there altars raised to this

god, on their first occupation of the country; and, such was the

veneration in which he was held by the natives, that the Incas, instead of

attempting to abolish his worship, deemed it more prudent to sanction it

conjointly with that of their own deity, the Sun.  Side by side, the two

temples rose on the heights that overlooked the city of Pachacamac, and

prospered in the offerings of their respective votaries.  "It was a cunning

arrangement," says an ancient writer, "by which the great enemy of man

secured to himself a double harvest of souls." 3



But the temple of Pachacamac continued to maintain its ascendency; and

the oracles, delivered from its dark and mysterious shrine, were held in

no less repute among the natives of Tavantinsuyu, (or "the four quarters

of the world," as Peru under the Incas was called,) than the oracles of

Delphi obtained among the Greeks.  Pilgrimages were made to the

hallowed spot from the most distant regions, and the city of Pachacamac

became among the Peruvians what Mecca was among the Mahometans,

or Cholula with the people of Anahuac.  The shrine of the deity, enriched

by the tributes of the pilgrims, gradually became one of the most opulent

in the land; and Atahuallpa, anxious to collect his ransom as speedily as

possible, urged Pizarro to send a detachment in that direction, to secure

the treasures before they could be secreted by the priests of the temple.



It was a journey of considerable difficulty.  Two thirds of the route lay

along the table-land of the Cordilleras, intersected occasionally by crests

of the mountain range, that imposed no slight impediment to their

progress.  Fortunately, much of the way, they had the benefit of the great

road to Cuzco, and "nothing in Christendom," exclaims Hernando

Pizarro, "equals the magnificence of this road across the sierra."4  In

some places, the rocky ridges were so precipitous, that steps were cut in

them for the travellers; and though the sides were protected by heavy

stone balustrades or parapets, it was with the greatest difficulty that the

horses were enabled to scale them.  The road was frequently crossed by

streams, over which bridges of wood and sometimes of stone were

thrown; though occasionally, along the declivities of the mountains, the

waters swept down in such furious torrents, that the only method of

passing them was by the swinging bridges of osier, of which, till now, the

Spaniards had had little experience.  They were secured on either bank to

heavy buttresses of stone.  But as they were originally designed for

nothing heavier than the foot-passenger and the llama, and, as they had

something exceedingly fragile in their appearance, the Spaniards

hesitated to venture on them with their horses.  Experience, however,

soon showed they were capable of bearing a much greater weight; and

though the traveller, made giddy by the vibration of the long avenue,

looked with a reeling brain into the torrent that was tumbling at the depth

of a hundred feet or more below him, the whole of the cavalry effected

their passage without an accident.  At these bridges, it may be remarked,

they found persons stationed whose business it was to collect toll for the

government from all travellers.5



The Spaniards were amazed by the number as well as magnitude of the

flocks of llamas which they saw browsing on the stunted herbage that

grows in the elevated regions of the Andes.  Sometimes they were

gathered in inclosures, but more usually were roaming at large under the

conduct of their Indian shepherds; and the Conquerors now learned, for

the first time, that these animals were tended with as much care, and their

migrations as nicely regulated, as those of the vast flocks of merinos in

their own country.6



The table-land and its declivities were thickly sprinkled with hamlets and

towns, some of them of considerable size; and the country in every

direction bore the marks of a thrifty husbandry.  Fields of Indian corn

were to be seen in all its different stages, from the green and tender ear

to the yellow ripeness of harvest time.  As they descended into the

valleys and deep ravines that divided the crests of the Cordilleras, they

were surrounded by the vegetation of a warmer climate, which delighted

the eye with the gay livery of a thousand bright colors, and intoxicated

the senses with its perfumes.  Everywhere the natural capacities of the

soil were stimulated by a minute system of irrigation, which drew the

fertilizing moisture from every stream and rivulet that rolled down the

declivities of the Andes; while the terraced sides of the mountains were

clothed with gardens and orchards that teemed with fruits of various

latitudes.  The Spaniards could not sufficiently admire the industry with

which the natives had availed themselves of the bounty of Nature, or had

supplied the deficiency where she had dealt with a more parsimonious

hand.



Whether from the commands of the Inca, or from the awe which their

achievements had spread throughout the land, the Conquerors were

received, in every place through which they passed, with hospitable

kindness.  Lodgings were provided for them, with ample refreshments

from the well-stored magazines, distributed at intervals along the route.

In many of the towns the inhabitants came out to welcome them with

singing and dancing; and, when they resumed their march, a number of

ablebodied porters were furnished to carry forward their baggage.7



At length, after some weeks of travel, severe even with all these

appliances, Hernando Pizarro arrived before the city of Pachacamac.  It

was a place of considerable population, and the edifices were, many of

them, substantially built.  The temple of the tutelar deity consisted of a

vast stone building, or rather pile of buildings, which, clustering around a

conical hill, had the air of a fortress rather than a religious establishment.

But, though the walls were of stone, the roof was composed of a light

thatch, as usual in countries where rain seldom or never falls, and where

defence, consequently, is wanted chiefly against the rays of the sun.



Presenting himself at the lower entrance of the temple, Hernando Pizarro

was refused admittance by the guardians of the portal.  But, exclaiming

that "he had come too far to be stayed by the arm of an Indian priest," he

forced his way into the passage, and, followed by his men, wound up the

gallery which led to an area on the summit of the mount, at one end of

which stood a sort of chapel.  This was the sanctuary of the dread deity.

The door was garnished with ornaments of crystal, and with turquoises

and bits of coral.8  Here again the Indians would have dissuaded Pizarro

from violating the consecrated precincts, when, at that moment, the

shock of an earthquake, that made the ancient walls tremble to their

foundation, so alarmed the natives, both those of Pizarro's own company

and the people of the place, that they fled in dismay, nothing doubting

that their incensed deity would bury the invaders under the ruins, or

consume them with his lightnings.  But no such terror found its way into

the breast of the Conquerors, who felt that here, at least, they were

fighting the good fight of the Faith.



Tearing open the door, Pizarro and his party entered.  But instead of a

hall blazing, as they had fondly imagined, with gold and precious stones,

offerings of the worshippers of Pachacamac, they found themselves in a

small and obscure apartment, or rather den, from the floor and sides of

which steamed up the most offensive odors,--like those of a

slaughterhouse.  It was the place of sacrifice.  A few pieces of gold and

some emeralds were discovered on the ground, and, as their eyes became

accommodated to the darkness, they discerned in the most retired corner

of the room the figure of the deity.  It was an uncouth monster, made of

wood, with the head resembling that of a man.  This was the god,

through whose lips Satan had breathed forth the far-famed oracles which

had deluded his Indian votaries! 9



Tearing the idol from its recess, the indignant Spaniards dragged it into

the open air, and there broke it into a hundred fragments.  The place was

then purified, and a large cross, made of stone and plaster, was erected

on the spot.  In a few years the walls of the temple were pulled down by

the Spanish settlers, who found there a convenient quarry for their own

edifices.  But the cross still remained spreading its broad arms over the

ruins.  It stood where it was planted in the very heart of the stronghold of

Heathendom; and, while all was in ruins around it, it proclaimed the

permanent triumphs of the Faith.



The simple natives, finding that Heaven had no bolts in store for the

Conquerors, and that their god had no power to prevent the profanation

of his shrine, came in gradually and tendered their homage to the

strangers, whom they now regarded with feelings of superstitious awe.

Pizarro profiled by this temper to wean them, if possible, from their

idolatry; and though no preacher himself, as he tells us, he delivered a

discourse as edifying, doubtless, as could be expected from the mouth of

a soldier;10 and, in conclusion, he taught them the sign of the cross, as

an inestimable talisman to secure them against the future machinations of

the Devil.11



But the Spanish commander was not so absorbed in his spiritual labors

as not to have an eye to those temporal concerns for which he came into

this quarter.  He now found, to his chagrin, that he had come somewhat

too late; and that the priests of Pachacamac, being advised of his

mission, had secured much the greater part of the gold, and decamped

with it before his arrival.  A quantity was afterwards discovered buried in

the grounds adjoining.12  Still the amount obtained was considerable,

falling little short of eighty thousand castellanos, a sum which once

would have been deemed a compensation for greater fatigues than they

had encountered.  But the Spaniards had become familiar with gold; and

their imaginations, kindled by the romantic adventures in which they had

of late been engaged, indulged in visions which all the gold of Peru

would scarcely have realized.



One prize, however, Hernando obtained by his expedition, which went

far to console him for the loss of his treasure.  While at Pachacamac, he

learned that the Indian commander Challcuchima lay with a large force

in the neighborhood of Xauxa, a town of some strength at a considerable

distance among the mountains.  This man, who was nearly related to

Atahuallpa, was his most experienced general, and together with

Quizquiz, now at Cuzco, had achieved those victories at the south which

placed the Inca on the throne.  From his birth, his talents, and his large

experience, he was accounted second to no subject in the kingdom.

Pizarro was aware of the importance of securing his person.  Finding that

the Indian noble declined to meet him on his return, he determined to

march at once on Xauxa and take the chief in his own quarters.  Such a

scheme, considering the enormous disparity of numbers, might seem

desperate even for Spaniards.  But success had given them such

confidence, that they hardly condescended to calculate chances.



The road across the mountains presented greater difficulties than those

on the former march.  To add to the troubles of the cavalry, the shoes of

their horses were used up, and their hoofs suffered severely on the rough

and stony ground.  There was no iron at hand, nothing but gold and

silver.  In the present emergency they turned even these to account; and

Pizarro caused the horses of the whole troop to be shod with silver The

work was done by the Indian smiths, and it answered so well, that in this

precious material they found a substitute for iron during the remainder of

the march.13



Xauxa was a large and populous place; though we shall hardly credit the

assertion of the Conquerors, that a hundred thousand persons assembled

habitually in the great square of the city.14  The Peruvian commander

was encamped, it was said, with an army of five-and-thirty thousand men

at only a few miles' distance from the town.  With some difficulty he was

persuaded to an interview with Pizarro.  The latter addressed him

courteously, and urged his return with him to the Castilian quarters in

Caxamalca, representing it as the command of the Inca.  Ever since the

capture of his master, Challcuchima had remained uncertain what course

to take.  The capture of the Inca in this sudden and mysterious manner by

a race of beings who seemed to have dropped from the clouds, and that

too in the very hour of his triumph, had entirely bewildered the Peruvian

chief.  He had concerted no plan for the rescue of Atahuallpa, nor,

indeed, did he know whether any such movement would be acceptable to

him.  He now acquiesced in his commands, and was willing, at all events,

to have a personal interview with his sovereign.  Pizarro gained his end

without being obliged to strike a single blow to effect it.  The barbarian,

when brought into contact with the white man, would seem to have been

rebuked by his superior genius, in the same manner as the wild animal of

the forest is said to quail before the steady glance of the hunter.



Challcuchima came attended by a numerous retinue.  He was borne in his

sedan on the shoulders of his vassals; and, as he accompanied the

Spaniards on their return through the country, received everywhere from

the inhabitants the homage paid only to the favorite of a monarch.  Yet

all this pomp vanished on his entering the presence of the Inca, whom he

approached with his feet bare, while a light burden, which he had taken

from one of the attendants, was laid on his back.  As he drew near, the

old warrior, raising his hands to heaven, exclaimed,--"Would that I had

been here!--this would not then have happened"; then, kneeling down, he

kissed the hands and feet of his royal master, and bathed them with his

tears.  Atahuallpa, on his part, betrayed not the least emotion, and

showed no other sign of satisfaction at the presence of his favorite

counsellor than by simply bidding him welcome.  The cold demeanor of

the monarch contrasted strangely with the loyal sensibility of the

subject.15



The rank of the Inca placed him at an immeasurable distance above the

proudest of his vassals; and the Spaniards had repeated occasion to

admire the ascendency which, even in his present fallen fortunes, he

maintained over his people, and the awe with which they approached

him.  Pedro Pizarro records an interview, at which he was present,

between Atahuallpa and one of his great nobles, who had obtained leave

to visit some remote part of the country on condition of returning by a

certain day.  He was detained somewhat beyond the appointed time, and,

on entering the presence with a small propitiatory gift for his sovereign,

his knees shook so violently, that it seemed, says the chronicler, as if he

would have fallen to the ground.  His master, however, received him

kindly, and dismissed him without a word of rebuke.16



Atahuallpa in his confinement continued to receive the same respectful

treatment from the Spaniards as hitherto.  They taught him to play with

dice, and the more intricate game of chess, in which the royal captive

became expert, and loved to beguile with it the tedious hours of his

imprisonment.  Towards his own people he maintained as far as possible

his wonted state and ceremonial.  He was attended by his wives and the

girls of his harem, who, as was customary, waited on him at table and

discharged the other menial offices about his person.  A body of Indian

nobles were stationed in the antechamber, but never entered the presence

unbidden; and when they did enter it, they submitted to the same

humiliating ceremonies imposed on the greatest of his subjects.  The

service of his table was gold and silver plate.  His dress, which he often

changed, was composed of the wool of the vicuna wrought into mantles,

so fine that it had the appearance of silk.  He sometimes exchanged these

for a robe made of the skins of bats, as soft and sleek as velvet.  Round

his head he wore the llautu, a woollen turban or shawl of the most,

delicate texture, wreathed in folds of various bright colors; and he still

continued to encircle his temples with the borla, the crimson threads of

which, mingled with gold, descended so as partly to conceal his eyes.

The image of royalty had charms for him, when its substance had

departed.  No garment or utensil that had once belonged to the Peruvian

sovereign could ever be used by another.  When he laid it aside, it was

carefully deposited in a chest, kept for the purpose, and afterwards

burned.  It would have been sacrilege to apply to vulgar uses that which

had been consecrated by the touch of the Inca.17



Not long after the arrival of the party from Pachacamac, in the latter part

of May, the three emissaries returned from Cuzco.  They had been very

successful in their mission.  Owing to the Inca's order, and the awe which

the white men now inspired throughout the country, the Spaniards had

everywhere met with a kind reception.  They had been carried on the

shoulders of the natives in the hamacas, or sedans, of the country; and, as

they had travelled all the way to the capital on the great imperial road,

along which relays of Indian carriers were established at stated intervals,

they performed this journey of more than six hundred miles, not only

without inconvenience, but with the most luxurious ease.  They passed

through many populous towns, and always found the simple natives

disposed to venerate them as beings of a superior nature.  In Cuzco they

were received with public festivities, were sumptuously lodged, and had

every want anticipated by the obsequious devotion of the inhabitants.



Their accounts of the capital confirmed all that Pizarro had before heard

of the wealth and population of the city.  Though they had remained

more than a week in this place, the emissaries had not seen the whole of

it.  The great temple of the Sun they found literally covered with plates

of gold.  They had entered the interior and beheld the royal mummies,

seated each in his gold-embossed chair, and in robes profusely covered

with ornaments.  The Spaniards had the grace to respect these, as they

had been previously enjoined by the Inca; but they required that the

plates which garnished the walls should be all removed.  The Peruvians

most reluctantly acquiesced in the commands of their sovereign to

desecrate the national temple, which every inhabitant of the city regarded

with peculiar pride and veneration.  With less reluctance they assisted the

Conquerors in stripping the ornaments from some of the other edifices,

where the gold, however, being mixed with a large proportion of alloy,

was of much less value.18



The number of plates they tore from the temple of the Sun was seven

hundred; and though of no great thickness, probably, they are compared

in size to the lid of a chest, ten or twelve inches wide.19  A cornice of

pure gold encircled the edifice, but so strongly set in the stone, that it

fortunately defied the efforts of the spoilers.  The Spaniards complained

of the want of alacrity shown by the Indians in the work of destruction,

and said that there were other parts of the city containing buildings rich

in gold and silver which they had not been allowed to see.  In truth, their

mission, which, at best, was a most ungrateful one, had been rendered

doubly annoying by the manner in which they had executed it.  The

emissaries were men of a very low stamp, and, puffed up by the honors

conceded to them by the natives, they looked on themselves as entitled to

these, and condemned the poor Indians as a race immeasurably beneath

the European.  They not only showed the most disgusting rapacity, but

treated the highest nobles with wanton insolence.  They even went so far,

it is said, as to violate the privacy of the convents, and to outrage the

religious sentiments of the Peruvians by their scandalous amours with the

Virgins of the Sun.  The people of Cuzco were so exasperated, that they

would have laid violent hands on them, but for their habitual reverence

for the Inca, in whose name the Spaniards had come there.  As it was, the

Indians collected as much gold as was necessary to satisfy their unworthy

visitors, and got rid of them as speedily as possible.20  It was a great

mistake in Pizarro to send such men.  There were persons, even in his

company, who, as other occasions showed, had some sense of self-

respect, if not respect for the natives.



The messengers brought with them, besides silver, full two hundred

cargas or loads of gold.21  This was an important accession to the

contributions of Atahuallpa; and, although the treasure was still

considerably below the mark prescribed, the monarch saw with

satisfaction the time drawing nearer for the completion of his ransom.



Not long before this, an event had occurred which changed the condition

of the Spaniards, and had an unfavorable influence on the fortunes of the

Inca.  This was the arrival of Almagro at Caxamalca, with a strong

reinforcement.  That chief had succeeded, after great efforts, in

equipping three vessels, and assembling a body of one hundred and fifty

men, with which he sailed from Panama, the latter part of the preceding

year.  On his voyage, he was joined by a small additional force from

Nicaragua, so that his whole strength amounted to one hundred and fifty

foot and fifty horse, well provided with the munitions of war.  His

vessels were steered by the old pilot Ruiz; but after making the Bay of

St. Matthew, he crept slowly along the coast, baffled as usual by winds

and currents, and experiencing all the hardships incident to that

protracted navigation.  From some cause or other, he was not so

fortunate as to obtain tidings of Pizarro; and so disheartened were his

followers, most of whom were raw adventurers, that, when arrived at

Puerto Viejo, they proposed to abandon the expedition, and return at

once to Panama.  Fortunately, one of the little squadron which Almagro

had sent forward to Tumbez brought intelligence of Pizarro and of the

colony he had planted at San Miguel.  Cheered by the tidings, the

cavalier resumed his voyage, and succeeded, at length, towards the close

of December, 1532, in bringing his whole party safe to the Spanish

settlement.



He there received the account of Pizarro's march across the mountains,

his seizure of the Inca, and, soon afterwards, of the enormous ransom

offered for his liberation.  Almagro and his companions listened with

undisguised amazement to this account of his associate, and of a change

in his fortunes so rapid and wonderful that it seemed little less than

magic.  At the same time, he received a caution from some of the

colonists not to trust himself in the power of Pizarro, who was known to

bear him no good-will.



Not long after Almagro's arrival at San Miguel, advices were sent of it to

Caxamalca, and a private note from his secretary Perez informed Pizarro

that his associate had come with no purpose of cooperating with him, but

with the intention to establish an independent government.  Both of the

Spanish captains seem to have been surrounded by mean and turbulent

spirits, who sought to embroil them with each other, trusting, doubtless,

to find their own account in the rupture.  For once, however, their

malicious machinations failed.



Pizarro was overjoyed at the arrival of so considerable a reinforcement,

which would enable him to push his fortunes as he had desired, and go

forward with the conquest of the country.  He laid little stress on the

secretary's communication, since, whatever might have been Almagro's

original purpose, Pizarro knew that the richness of the vein he had now

opened in the land would be certain to secure his cooperation in working

it.  He had the magnanimity, therefore,--for there is something

magnanimous in being able to stifle the suggestions of a petty rivalry in

obedience to sound policy,--to send at once to his ancient comrade, and

invite him, with many assurances of friendship, to Caxamalca.  Almagro,

who was of a frank and careless nature, received the communication in

the spirit in which it was made, and, after some necessary delay, directed

his march into the interior.  But before leaving San Miguel, having

become acquainted with the treacherous conduct of his secretary, he

recompensed his treason by hanging him on the spot.22



Almagro reached Caxamalca about the middle of February, 1533.  The

soldiers of Pizarro came out to welcome their countrymen, and the two

captains embraced each other with every mark of cordial satisfaction.

All past differences were buried in oblivion, and they seemed only

prepared to aid one another in following up the brilliant career now

opened to them in the conquest of an empire.



There was one person in Caxamalca on whom this arrival of the

Spaniards produced a very different impression from that made on their

own countrymen.  This was the Inca Atahuallpa.  He saw in the new-

comers only a new swarm of locusts to devour his unhappy country; and

he felt, that, with his enemies thus multiplying around him, the chances

were diminished of recovering his freedom, or of maintaining it, if

recovered.  A little circumstance, insignificant in itself, but magnified by

superstition into something formidable, occurred at this time to cast an

additional gloom over his situation.



A remarkable appearance, somewhat of the nature of a meteor, or it may

have been a comet, was seen in the heavens by some soldiers and pointed

out to Atahuallpa.  He gazed on it with fixed attention for some minutes,

and then exclaimed, with a dejected air, that "a similar sign had been

seen in the skies a short time before the death of his father Huayna

Capac." 23  From this day a sadness seemed to take possession of him,

as he looked with doubt and undefined dread to the future.  Thus it is,

that, in seasons of danger, the mind, like the senses, becomes morbidly

acute in its perceptions; and the least departure from the regular course

of nature, that would have passed unheeded in ordinary times, to the

superstitious eye seems pregnant with meaning, as in some way or other

connected with the destiny of the individual.







Book 3



Chapter 7



Immense Amount Of Treasure--Its Division Among The Troops--

Rumors Of A Rising--Trial Of The Inca--His Execution--Reflections



1533



The arrival of Almagro produced a considerable change in Pizarro's

prospects, since it enabled him to resume active operations, and push

forward his conquests in the interior.  The only obstacle in his way was

the Inca's ransom, and the Spaniards had patiently waited, till the return

of the emissaries from Cuzco swelled the treasure to a large amount,

though still below the stipulated limit.  But now their avarice got the

better of their forbearance, and they called loudly for the immediate

division of the gold.  To wait longer would only be to invite the assault

of their enemies, allured by a bait so attractive.  While the treasure

remained uncounted, no man knew its value, nor what was to be his own

portion.  It was better to distribute it at once, and let every one possess

and defend his own.  Several, moreover, were now disposed to return

home, and take their share of the gold with them, where they could place

it in safety.  But these were few, while much the larger part were only

anxious to leave their present quarters, and march at once to Cuzco.

More gold, they thought, awaited them in that capital, than they could get

here by prolonging their stay; while every hour was precious, to prevent

the inhabitants from secreting their treasures, of which design they had

already given indication.



Pizarro was especially moved by the last consideration; and he felt, that,

without the capital, he could not hope to become master of the empire.

Without further delay, the division of the treasure was agreed upon.



Yet, before making this, it was necessary to reduce the whole to ingots of

a uniform standard, for the spoil was composed of an infinite variety of

articles, in which the gold was of very different degrees of purity.  These

articles consisted of goblets, ewers, salvers, vases of every shape and

size, ornaments and utensils for the temples and the royal palaces, tiles

and plates for the decoration of the public edifices, curious imitations of

different plants and animals.  Among the plants, the most beautiful was

the Indian corn, in which the golden ear was sheathed in its broad leaves

of silver, from which hung a rich tassel of threads of the same precious

metal.  A fountain was also much admired, which sent up a sparkling jet

of gold, while birds and animals of the same material played in the

waters at its base.  The delicacy of the workmanship of some of these,

and the beauty and ingenuity of the design, attracted the admiration of

better judges than the rude Conquerors of Peru.1



Before breaking up these specimens of Indian art, it was determined to

send a quantity, which should be deducted from the royal fifth, to the

Emperor.  It would serve as a sample of the ingenuity of the natives, and

would show him the value of his conquests.  A number of the most

beautiful articles was selected, to the amount of a hundred thousand

ducats, and Hernando Pizarro was appointed to be the bearer of them to

Spain.  He was to obtain an audience of Charles, and, at the same time

that he laid the treasures before him, he was to give an account of the

proceedings of the Conquerors, and to seek a further augmentation of

their powers and dignities.



No man in the army was better qualified for this mission, by his address

and knowledge of affairs, than Hernando Pizarro; no one would be so

likely to urge his suit with effect at the haughty Castilian court.  But

other reasons influenced the selection of him at the present juncture.



His former jealousy of Almagro still rankled in his bosom, and he had

beheld that chief's arrival at the camp with feelings of disgust, which he

did not care to conceal.  He looked on him as coming to share the spoils

of victory, and defraud his brother of his legitimate honors.  Instead of

exchanging the cordial greeting proffered by Almagro at their first

interview, the arrogant cavalier held back in sullen silence.  His brother

Francis was greatly displeased at a conduct which threatened to renew

their ancient feud, and he induced Hernando to accompany him to

Almagro's quarters, and make some acknowledgment for his uncourteous

behavior.2  But, notwithstanding this show of reconciliation, the general

thought the present a favorable opportunity to remove his brother from

the scene of operations, where his factious spirit more than

counterbalanced his eminent services.3



The business of melting down the plate was intrusted to the Indian

goldsmiths, who were thus required to undo the work of their own hands,

They toiled day and night, but such was the quantity to be recast, that it

consumed a full month.  When the whole was reduced to bars of a

uniform standard, they were nicely weighed, under the superintendence

of the royal inspectors.  The total amount of the gold was found to be

one million, three hundred and twenty-six thousand, five hundred and

thirty nine pesos de oro, which, allowing for the greater value of money

in the sixteenth century, would be equivalent, probably, at the present

time, to near three millions and a half of pounds sterling, or somewhat

less than fifteen millions and a half of dollars.4  The quantity of silver

was estimated at fifty-one thousand six hundred and ten marks.  History

affords no parallel of such a booty--and that, too, in the most convertible

form, in ready money, as it were--having fallen to the lot of a little band

of military adventurers, like the Conquerors of Peru.  The great object of

the Spanish expeditions in the New World was gold.  It is remarkable

that.  their success should have been so complete.  Had they taken the

track of the English, the French, or the Dutch, on the shores of the

northern continent, how different would have been the result!  It is

equally worthy of remark, that the wealth thus suddenly acquired, by

diverting them from the slow but surer and more permanent sources of

national prosperity, has in the end glided from their grasp, and left them

among the poorest of the nations of Christendom.



A new difficulty now arose in respect to the division of the treasure.

Almagro's followers claimed to be admitted to a share of it; which, as

they equalled, and indeed, somewhat exceeded in number Pizarro's

company, would reduce the gains of these last very materially.  "We

were not here, it is true," said Almagro's soldiers to their comrades, "at

the seizure of the Inca, but we have taken our turn in mounting guard

over him since his capture, have helped you to defend your treasures, and

now give you the means of going forward and securing your conquests.

It is a common cause," they urged, "in which all are equally embarked,

and the gains should be shared equally between us."



But this way of viewing the matter was not at all palatable to Pizarro's

company, who alleged that Atahuallpa's contract had been made

exclusively with them; that they had seized the Inca, had secured the

ransom, had incurred, in short, all the risk of the enterprise, and were not

now disposed to share the fruits of it with every one who came after

them.  There was much force, it could not be denied, in this reasoning,

and it was finally settled between the leaders, that Almagro's followers

should resign their pretensions for a stipulated sum of no great amount,

and look to the career now opened to them for carving out their fortunes

for themselves.



This delicate affair being thus harmoniously adjusted, Pizarro prepared,

with all solemnity, for a division of the imperial spoil.  The troops were

called together in the great square, and the Spanish commander, "with

the fear of God before his eyes," says the record, "invoked the assistance

of Heaven to do the work before him conscientiously and justly."5  The

appeal may seem somewhat out of place at the distribution of spoil so

unrighteously acquired; yet, in truth, considering the magnitude of the

treasure, and the power assumed by Pizarro to distribute it according to

the respective deserts of the individuals, there were few acts of his life

involving a heavier responsibility.  On his present decision might be said

to hang the future fortunes of each one of his followers,--poverty or

independence during the remainder of his days.



The royal fifth was first deducted, including the remittance already sent

to Spain.  The share appropriated by Pizarro amounted to fifty-seven

thousand two hundred and twenty-two pesos of gold, and two thousand

three hundred and fifty marks of silver.  He had besides this the great

chair or throne of the Inca, of solid gold, and valued at twenty-five

thousand pesos de oro.  To his brother Hernando were paid thirty-one

thousand and eighty pesos of gold, and two thousand three hundred and

fifty marks of silver.  De Soto received seventeen thousand seven

hundred and forty pesos of gold, and seven hundred and twenty-four

marks of silver.  Most of the remaining cavalry, sixty in number,

received each eight thousand eight hundred and eighty pesos of gold, and

three hundred and sixty-two marks of silver, though some had more, and

a few considerably less.  The infantry mustered in all one hundred and

five men.  Almost one fifth of them were allowed, each, four thousand

four hundred and forty pesos of gold, and one hundred and eighty marks

of silver, half of the compensation of the troopers.  The remainder

received one fourth part less; though here again there were exceptions,

and some were obliged to content themselves with a much smaller share

of the spoil.6



The new church of San Francisco, the first Christian temple in Peru, was

endowed with two thousand two hundred and twenty pesos of gold.  The

amount assigned to Almagro's company was not excessive, if it was not

more than twenty thousand pesos; 7 and that reserved for the colonists of

San Miguel, which amounted only to fifteen thousand pesos, was

unaccountably small.8  There were among them certain soldiers, who at

an early period of the expedition, as the reader may remember,

abandoned the march, and returned to San Miguel.  These, certainly, had

little claim to be remembered in the division of booty.  But the greater

part of the colony consisted of invalids, men whose health had been

broken by their previous hardships, but who still, with a stout and willing

heart, did good service in their military post on the sea-coast.  On what

grounds they had forfeited their claims to a more ample remuneration, it

is not easy to explain.



Nothing is said, in the partition, of Almagro himself, who, by the terms

of the original contract, might claim an equal share of the spoil with his

associate.  As little notice is taken of Luque, the remaining partner.

Luque himself, was, indeed, no longer to be benefited by worldly

treasure.  He had died a short time before Almagro's departure from

Panama;9 too soon to learn the full success of the enterprise, which, but

for his exertions, must have failed; too soon to become acquainted with

the achievements and the crimes of Pizarro.  But the Licentiate Espinosa,

whom he represented, and who, it appears, had advanced the funds for

the expedition, was still living at St. Domingo, and Luque's pretensions

were explicitly transferred to him.  Yet it is unsafe to pronounce, at this

distance of time, on the authority of mere negative testimony; and it must

be admitted to form a strong presumption in favor of Pizarro's general

equity in the distribution, that no complaint of it has reached us from any

of the parties present, nor from contemporary chroniclers.10



The division of the ransom being completed by the Spaniards, there

seemed to be no further obstacle to their resuming active operations, and

commencing the march to Cuzco.  But what was to be done with

Atahuallpa? In the determination of this question, whatever was

expedient was just.11  To liberate him would be to set at large the very

man who might prove their most dangerous enemy; one whose birth and

royal station would rally round him the whole nation, place all the

machinery of government at his control, and all its resources,--one, in

short, whose bare word might concentrate all the energies of his people

against the Spaniards, and thus delay for a long period, if not wholly

defeat, the conquest of the country.  Yet to hold him in captivity was

attended with scarcely less difficulty; since to guard so important a prize

would require such a division of their force as must greatly cripple its

strength, and how could they expect, by any vigilance, to secure their

prisoner against rescue in the perilous passes of the mountains?



The Inca himself now loudly demanded his freedom.  The proposed

amount of the ransom had, indeed, not been fully paid.  It may be

doubted whether it ever would have been, considering the

embarrassments thrown in the way by the guardians of the temples, who

seemed disposed to secrete the treasures, rather than despoil these sacred

depositories to satisfy the cupidity of the strangers.  It was unlucky, too,

for the Indian monarch, that much of the gold, and that of the best

quality, consisted of flat plates or tiles, which, however valuable, lay in a

compact form that did little towards swelling the heap.  But an immense

amount had been already realized, and it would have been a still greater

one, the Inca might allege, but for the impatience of the Spaniards.  At

all events, it was a magnificent ransom, such as was never paid by prince

or potentate before.



These considerations Atahuallpa urged on several of the cavaliers, and

especially on Hernando de Soto, who was on terms of more familiarity

with him than Pizarro.  De Soto reported Atahuallpa's demands to his

leader; but the latter evaded a direct reply.  He did not disclose the dark

purposes over which his mind was brooding.12  Not long afterward he

caused the notary to prepare an instrument, in which he fully acquitted

the Inca of further obligation in respect to the ransom.  This he

commanded to be publicly proclaimed in the camp, while at the same

time he openly declared that the safety of the Spaniards required, that the

Inca should be detained in confinement until they were strengthened by

additional reinforcements.13



Meanwhile the old rumors of a meditated attack by the natives began to

be current among the soldiers.  They were repeated from one to another,

gaining something by every repetition.  An immense army, it was

reported, was mustering at Quito, the land of Atahuallpa's birth, and

thirty thousand Caribs were on their way to support it.14  The Caribs

were distributed by the early Spaniards rather indiscriminately over the

different parts of America, being invested with peculiar horrors as a race

of cannibals.



It was not easy to trace the origin of these rumors.  There was in the

camp a considerable number of Indians, who belonged to the party of

Huascar, and who were, of course, hostile to Atahuallpa.  But his worst

enemy was Felipillo, the interpreter from Tumbez, already mentioned in

these pages.  This youth had conceived a passion, or, as some say, had

been detected in an intrigue with, one of the royal concubines.15  The

circumstance had reached the ears of Atahuallpa, who felt himself deeply

outraged by it.  "That such an insult should have been offered by so base

a person was an indignity," he said, "more difficult to bear than his

imprisonment";16 and he told Pizarro, "that, by the Peruvian law, it

could be expiated, not by the criminal's own death alone, but by that of

his whole family and kindred." 17  But Felipillo was too important to the

Spaniards to be dealt with so summarily; nor did they probably attach

such consequence to an offence which, if report be true, they had

countenanced by their own example.18  Felipillo, however, soon learned

the state of the Inca's feelings towards himself, and from that moment he

regarded him with deadly hatred.  Unfortunately, his malignant temper

found ready means for its indulgence.



The rumors of a rising among the natives pointed to Atahuallpa as the

author of it.  Challcuchima was examined on the subject, but avowed his

entire ignorance of any such design, which he pronounced a malicious

slander.  Pizarro next laid the matter before the Inca himself, repeating to

him the stories in circulation, with the air of one who believed them

"What treason is this," said the general, "that you have meditated against

me,--me, who have ever treated you with honor, confiding in your words,

as in those of a brother?"  "You jest," replied the Inca, who, perhaps, did

not feel the weight of this confidence; "you are always jesting with me.

How could I or my people think of conspiring against men so valiant as

the Spaniards? Do not jest with me thus, I beseech you."19  "This,"

continues Pizarro's secretary, "he said in the most composed and natural

manner, smiling all the while to dissemble his falsehood, so that we were

all amazed to find such cunning in a barbarian." 20



But it was not with cunning, but with the consciousness of innocence, as

the event afterwards proved, that Atahuallpa thus spoke to Pizarro.  He

readily discerned, however, the causes, perhaps the consequences, of the

accusation.  He saw a dark gulf opening beneath his feet; and he was

surrounded by strangers, on none of whom he could lean for counsel or

protection.  The life of the captive monarch is usually short; and

Atahuallpa might have learned the truth of this, when he thought of

Huascar.  Bitterly did he now lament the absence of Hernando Pizarro,

for, strange as it may seem, the haughty spirit of this cavalier had been

touched by the condition of the royal prisoner, and he had treated him

with a deference which won for him the peculiar regard and confidence

of the Indian.  Yet the latter lost no time in endeavoring to efface the

general's suspicions, and to establish his own innocence.  "Am I not,"

said he to Pizarro, "a poor captive in your hands? How could I harbor the

designs you impute to me, when I should be the first victim of the

outbreak? And you little know my people, if you think that such a

movement would be made without my orders; when the very birds in my

dominions," said he, with somewhat of an hyperbole, "would scarcely

venture to fly contrary to my will." 21



But these protestations of innocence had little effect on the troops;

among whom the story of a general rising of the natives continued to

gain credit every hour.  A large force, it was said, was already gathered

at Guamachucho, not a hundred miles from the camp, and their assault

might be hourly expected.  The treasure which the Spaniards had

acquired afforded a tempting prize, and their own alarm was increased

by the apprehension of losing it.  The patroles were doubled.  The horses

were kept saddled and bridled.  The soldiers slept on their arms; Pizarro

went the rounds regularly to see that every sentinel was on his post.  The

little army, in short, was in a state of preparation for instant attack.



Men suffering from fear are not likely to be too scrupulous as to the

means of removing the cause of it.  Murmurs, mingled with gloomy

menaces, were now heard against the Inca, the author of these

machinations.  Many began to demand his life as necessary to the safety

of the army.  Among these, the most vehement were Almagro and his

followers.  They had not witnessed the seizure of Atahuallpa.  They had

no sympathy with him in his fallen state.  They regarded him only as an

incumbrance, and their desire now was to push their fortunes in the

country, since they had got so little of the gold of Caxamalca.  They were

supported by Riquelme, the treasurer, and by the rest of the royal

officers.  These men had been left at San Miguel by Pizarro, who did not

care to have such official spies on his movements.  But they had come to

the camp with Almagro, and they loudly demanded the Inca's death, as

indispensable to the tranquillity of the country, and the interests of the

Crown.22



To these dark suggestions Pizarro turned--or seemed to turn--an

unwilling ear, showing visible reluctance to proceed to extreme measures

with his prisoner.23  There were some few, and among others Hernando

de Soto, who supported him in these views, and who regarded such

measures as not at all justified by the evidence of Atahuallpa's guilt.  In

this state of things, the Spanish commander determined to send a small

detachment to Guamachucho, to reconnoitre the country and ascertain

what ground there was for the rumors of an insurrection.  De Soto was

placed at the head of the expedition, which, as the distance was not great,

would occupy but a few days.



After that cavalier's departure, the agitation among the soldiers, instead

of diminishing, increased to such a degree, that Pizarro, unable to resist

their importunities, consented to bring Atahuallpa to instant trial.  It was

but decent, and certainly safer, to have the forms of a trial.  A court was

organized, over which the two captains, Pizarro and Almagro were to

preside as judges.  An attorney-general was named to prosecute for the

Crown, and counsel was assigned to the prisoner.



The charges preferred against the Inca, drawn up in the form of

interrogatories, were twelve in number.  The most important were, that

he had usurped the crown and assassinated his brother Huascar; that he

had squandered the public revenues since the conquest of the country by

the Spaniards, and lavished them on his kindred and his minions; that he

was guilty of idolatry, and of adulterous practices, indulging openly in a

plurality of wives; finally, that he had attempted to excite an insurrection

against the Spaniards.24



These charges, most of which had reference to national usages, or to the

personal relations of the Inca, over which the Spanish conquerors had

clearly no jurisdiction, are so absurd, that they might well provoke a

smile, did they not excite a deeper feeling.  The last of the charges was

the only one of moment in such a trial; and the weakness of this may be

inferred from the care taken to bolster it up with the others.  The mere

specification of the articles must have been sufficient to show that the

doom of the Inca was already sealed.



A number of Indian witnesses were examined, and their testimony,

filtrated through the interpretation of Felipillo, received, it is said, when

necessary, a very different coloring from that of the original.  The

examination was soon ended, and "a warm discussion," as we are assured

by one of Pizarro's own secretaries, "took place in respect to the

probable good or evil that would result from the death of Atahuallpa." 25

It was a question of expediency.  He was found guilty,--whether of all the

crimes alleged we are not informed,--and he was sentenced to be burnt

alive in the great square of Caxamalca.  The sentence was to be carried

into execution that very night.  They were not even to wait for the return

of De Soto, when the information he would bring would go far to

establish the truth or the falsehood of the reports respecting the

insurrection of the natives.  It was desirable to obtain the countenance of

Father Valverde to these proceedings, and a copy of the judgment was

submitted to the friar for his signature, which he gave without hesitation,

declaring, that, "in his opinion, the Inca, at all events, deserved death."

26



Yet there were some few in that martial conclave who resisted these

high-handed measures.  They considered them as a poor requital of all

the favors bestowed on them by the Inca, who hitherto had received at

their hands nothing but wrong.  They objected to the evidence as wholly

insufficient; and they denied the authority of such a tribunal to sit in

judgment on a sovereign prince in the heart of his own dominions.  If he

were to be tried, he should be sent to Spain, and his cause brought before

the Emperor, who alone had power to determine it.



But the great majority--and they were ten to one--overruled these

objections, by declaring there was no doubt of Atahuallpa's guilt, and

they were willing to assume the responsibility of his punishment.  A full

account of the proceedings would be sent to Castile, and the Emperor

should be informed who were the loyal servants of the Crown, and who

were its enemies.  The dispute ran so high, that for a time it menaced an

open and violent rupture; till, at length, convinced that resistance was

fruitless, the weaker party, silenced, but not satisfied, contented

themselves with entering a written protest against these proceedings,

which would leave an indelible stain on the names of all concerned in

them.27



When the sentence was communicated to the Inca, he was greatly

overcome by it.  He had, indeed, for some time, looked to such an issue

as probable, and had been heard to intimate as much to those about him.

But the probability of such an event is very different from its certainty, --

and that, too, so sudden and speedy.  For a moment, the overwhelming

conviction of it unmanned him, and he exclaimed, with tears in his eyes,-

-"What have I done, or my children, that I should meet such a fate? And

from your hands, too," said he, addressing Pizarro; "you, who have met

with friendship and kindness from my people, with whom I have shared

my treasures, who have received nothing but benefits from my hands!" In

the most piteous tones, he then implored that his life might be spared,

promising any guaranty that might be required for the safety of every

Spaniard in the army,--promising double the ransom he had already paid,

if time were only given him to obtain it.28



An eyewitness assures us that Pizarro was visibly affected, as he turned

away from the Inca, to whose appeal he had no power to listen, in

opposition to the voice of the army, and to his own sense of what was

due to the security of the country.29  Atahuallpa, finding he had no

power to turn his Conqueror from his purpose, recovered his habitual

self-possession, and from that moment submitted himself to his fate with

the courage of an Indian warrior.



The doom of the Inca was proclaimed by sound of trumpet in the great

square of Caxamalca; and, two hours after sunset, the Spanish soldiery

assembled by torch-light in the plaza to witness the execution of the

sentence.  It was on the twenty-ninth of August, 1533- Atahuallpa was

led out chained hand and foot,--for he had been kept in irons ever since

the great excitement had prevailed in the army respecting an assault.

Father Vicente de Valverde was at his side, striving to administer

consolation, and, if possible, to persuade him at this last hour to abjure

his superstition and embrace the religion of his Conquerors.  He was

willing to save the soul of his victim from the terrible expiation in the

next world, to which he had so cheerfully consigned his mortal part in

this.



During Atahuallpa's confinement, the friar had repeatedly expounded to

him the Christian doctrines, and the Indian monarch discovered much

acuteness in apprehending the discourse of his teacher.  But it had not

carried conviction to his mind, and though he listened with patience, he

had shown no disposition to renounce the faith of his fathers.  The

Dominican made a last appeal to him in this solemn hour; and, when

Atahuallpa was bound to the stake, with the fagots that were to kindle his

funeral pile lying around him, Valverde, holding up the cross, besought

him to embrace it and be baptized, promising that, by so doing, the

painful death to which he had been sentenced should be commuted for

the milder form of the garrote,--a mode of punishment by strangulation,

used for criminals in Spain.30



The unhappy monarch asked if this were really so, and, on its being

confirmed by Pizarro, he consented to abjure his own religion, and

receive baptism.  The ceremony was performed by Father Valverde, and

the new convert received the name of Juan de Atahuallpa,--the name of

Juan being conferred in honor of John the Baptist, on whose day the

event took place.31



Atahuallpa expressed a desire that his remains might be transported to

Quito, the place of his birth, to be preserved with those of his maternal

ancestors.  Then turning to Pizarro, as a last request, he implored him to

take compassion on his young children, and receive them under his

protection.  Was there no other one in that dark company who stood

grimly around him, to whom he could look for the protection of his

offspring?  Perhaps he thought there was no other so competent to afford

it, and that the wishes so solemnly expressed in that hour might meet

with respect even from his Conqueror.  Then, recovering his stoical

bearing, which for a moment had been shaken, he submitted himself

calmly to his fate,-while the Spaniards, gathering around, muttered their

credos for the salvation of his soul!32  Thus by the death of a vile

malefactor perished the last of the Incas!



I have already spoken of the person and the qualities of Atahuallpa.  He

had a handsome countenance, though with an expression somewhat too

fierce to be pleasing.  His frame was muscular and well-proportioned; his

air commanding; and his deportment in the Spanish quarters had a

degree of refinement, the more interesting that it was touched with

melancholy.  He is accused of having been cruel in his wars, and bloody

in his revenge.33  It may be true, but the pencil of an enemy would be

likely to overcharge the shadows of the portrait.  He is allowed to have

been bold, high-minded, and liberal.34  All agree that he showed

singular penetration and quickness of perception.  His exploits as a

warrior had placed his valor beyond dispute.  The best homage to it is

the reluctance shown by the Spaniards to restore him to freedom.  They

dreaded him as an enemy, and they had done him too many wrongs to

think that he could be their friend.  Yet his conduct towards them from

the first had been most friendly; and they repaid it with imprisonment,

robbery, and death.



The body of the Inca remained on the place of execution through the

night.  The following morning it was removed to the church of San

Francisco, where his funeral obsequies were performed with great

solemnity.  Pizarro and the principal cavaliers went into mourning, and

the troops listened with devout attention to the service of the dead from

the lips of Father Valverde.35  The ceremony was interrupted by the

sound of loud cries and wailing, as of many voices at the doors of the

church.  These were suddenly thrown open, and a number of Indian

women, the wives and sisters of the deceased, rushing up the great aisle,

surrounded the corpse.  This was not the way, they cried, to celebrate the

funeral rites of an Inca; and they declared their intention to sacrifice

themselves on his tomb, and bear him company to the land of spirits.

The audience, outraged by this frantic behaviour, told the intruders that

Atahuallpa had died in the faith of a Christian, and that the God of the

Christians abhorred such sacrifices.  They then caused the women to be

excluded from the church, and several, retiring to their own quarters, laid

violent hands on themselves, in the vain hope of accompanying their

beloved lord to the bright mansions of the Sun.36



Atahuallpa's remains, notwithstanding his request, were laid in the

cemetery of San Francisco.37  But from thence, as is reported, after the

Spaniards left Caxamalca, they were secretly removed, and carried, as he

had desired, to Quito.  The colonists of a later time supposed that some

treasures might have been buried with the body.  But, on excavating the

ground, neither treasure nor remains were to be discovered.38



A day or two after these tragic events, Hernando de Soto returned from

his excursion.  Great was his astonishment and indignation at learning

what had been done in his absence.  He sought out Pizarro at once, and

found him, says the chronicler, "with a great felt hat, by way of

mourning, slouched over his eyes," and in his dress and demeanor

exhibiting all the show of sorrow.39  "You have acted rashly," said De

Soto to him bluntly; "Atahuallpa has been basely slandered.  There was

no enemy at Guamachucho; no rising among the natives.  I have met with

nothing on the road but demonstrations of good-will, and all is quiet.  If

it was necessary to bring the Inca to trial, he should have been taken to

Castile and judged by the Emperor.  I would have pledged myself to see

him safe on board the vessel." 40  Pizarro confessed that he had been

precipitate, and said that he had been deceived by Riquelme, Valverde,

and the others.  These charges soon reached the ears of the treasurer and

the Dominican, who, in their turn, exculpated themselves, and upbraided

Pizarro to his face, as the only one responsible for the deed.  The dispute

ran high; and the parties were heard by the by-slanders to give one

another the lie! 41  This vulgar squabble among the leaders, so soon after

the event, is the best commentary on the iniquity of their own

proceedings and the innocence of the Inca.



The treatment of Atahuallpa, from first to last, forms undoubtedly one of

the darkest chapters in Spanish colonial history.  There may have been

massacres perpetrated on a more extended scale, and executions

accompanied with a greater refinement of cruelty.  But the blood-stained

annals of the Conquest afford no such example of cold-hearted and

systematic persecution, not of an enemy, but of one whose whole

deportment had been that of a friend and a benefactor.



From the hour that Pizarro and his followers had entered within the

sphere of Atahuallpa's influence, the hand of friendship had been

extended to them by the natives.  Their first act, on crossing the

mountains, was to kidnap the monarch and massacre his people.  The

seizure of his person might be vindicated, by those who considered the

end as justifying the means, on the ground that it was indispensable to

secure the triumphs of the Cross.  But no such apology can be urged for

the massacre of the unarmed and helpless population,--as wanton as it

was wicked.



The long confinement of the Inca had been used by the Conquerors to

wring from him his treasures with the hard gripe of avarice.  During the

whole of this dismal period, he had conducted himself with singular

generosity and good faith.  He had opened a free passage to the

Spaniards through every part of his empire; and had furnished every

facility for the execution of their plans.  When these were accomplished,

and he remained an encumbrance on their hands, notwithstanding their

engagement, expressed or implied, to release him,--and Pizarro, as we

have seen, by a formal act, acquitted his captive of any further obligation

on the score of the ransom,--he was arraigned before a mock tribunal,

and, under pretences equally false and frivolous, was condemned to an

excruciating death.  From first to last, the policy of the Spanish

conquerors towards their unhappy victim is stamped with barbarity and

fraud.



It is not easy to acquit Pizarro of being in a great degree responsible for

this policy.  His partisans have labored to show, that it was forced on him

by the necessity of the case, and that in the death of the Inca, especially,

he yielded reluctantly to the importunities of others.42  But weak as is

this apology, the historian who has the means of comparing the various

testimony of the period will come to a different conclusion.  To him it

will appear, that Pizarro had probably long felt the removal of

Atahuallpa as essential to the success of his enterprise.  He foresaw the

odium that would be incurred by the death of his royal captive without

sufficient grounds; while he labored to establish these, he still shrunk

from the responsibility of the deed, and preferred to perpetrate it in

obedience to the suggestions of others, rather than his own.  Like many

an unprincipled politician, he wished to reap the benefit of a bad act, and

let others take the blame of it.



Almagro and his followers are reported by Pizarro's secretaries to have

first insisted on the Inca's death.  They were loudly supported by the

treasurer and the royal officers, who considered it as indispensable to the

interests of the Crown; and, finally, the rumors of a conspiracy raised the

same cry among the soldiers, and Pizarro, with all his tenderness for his

prisoner, could not refuse to bring him to trial.--The form of a trial was

necessary to give an appearance of fairness to the proceedings.  That if

was only form is evident from the indecent haste with which it was

conducted,--the examination of evidence, the sentence, and the

execution, being all on the same day.  The multiplication of the charges,

designed to place the guilt of the accused on the strongest ground, had,

from their very number, the opposite effect, proving only the

determination to convict him.  If Pizarro had felt the reluctance to his

conviction which he pretended, why did he send De Soto, Atahuallpa's

best friend, away, when the inquiry was to be instituted? Why was the

sentence so summarily executed, as not to afford opportunity, by that

cavalier's return, of disproving the truth of the principal charge,--the only

one, in fact, with which the Spaniards had any concern? The solemn

farce of mourning and deep sorrow affected by Pizarro, who by these

honors to the dead would intimate the sincere regard he had entertained

for the living, was too thin a veil to impose on the most credulous.



It is not intended by these reflections to exculpate the rest of the army,

and especially its officers, from their share in the infamy of the

transaction.  But Pizarro, as commander of the army, was mainly

responsible for its measures.  For he was not a man to allow his own

authority to be wrested from his grasp, or to yield timidly to the impulses

of others.  He did not even yield to his own.  His whole career shows

him, whether for good or for evil, to have acted with a cool and

calculating policy.



A story has been often repeated, which refers the motives of Pizarro's

conduct, in some degree at least, to personal resentment.  The Inca had

requested one of the Spanish soldiers to write the name of God on his

nail.  This the monarch showed to several of his guards successively,

and, as they read it, and each pronounced the same word, the sagacious

mind of the barbarian was delighted with what seemed to him little short

of a miracle,--to which the science of his own nation afforded no

analogy.  On showing the writing to Pizarro, that chief remained silent;

and the Inca, finding he could not read, conceived a contempt for the

commander who was even less informed than his soldiers.  This he did

not wholly conceal, and Pizarro aware of the cause of it, neither forgot

nor forgave it.43  The anecdote is reported not on the highest authority.

It may be true; but it is unnecessary to look for the motives of Pizarro's

conduct in personal pique, when so many proofs are to be discerned of a

dark and deliberate policy.



Yet the arts of the Spanish chieftain failed to reconcile his countrymen to

the atrocity of his proceedings.  It is singular to observe the difference

between the tone assumed by the first chroniclers of the transaction,

while it was yet fresh, and that of those who wrote when the lapse of a

few years had shown the tendency of public opinion.  The first boldly

avow the deed as demanded by expediency, if not necessity; while they

deal in no measured terms of reproach with the character of their

unfortunate victim.44  The latter, on the other hand, while they extenuate

the errors of the Inca, and do justice to his good faith, are unreserved in

their condemnation of the Conquerors, on whose conduct, they say,

Heaven set the seal of its own reprobation, by bringing them all to an

untimely and miserable end.45  The sentence of contemporaries has been

fully ratified by that of posterity;46 and the persecution of Atahuallpa is

regarded with justice as having left a stain, never to be effaced, on the

Spanish arms in the New World.







Book 3



Chapter 8



Disorders In Peru--March To Cuzco--Encounter With The Natives--

Challcuchima Burnt--Arrival In Cuzco--Description Of The City--

Treasure Found There



1533--1534



The Inca of Peru was its sovereign in a peculiar sense.  He received an

obedience from his vassals more implicit than that of any despot; for his

authority reached to the most secret conduct,--to the thoughts of the

individual.  He was reverenced as more than human.1  He was not

merely the head of the state, but the point to which all its institutions

converged, as to a common centre,--the keystone of the political fabric,

which must fall to pieces by its own weight when that was withdrawn.

So it fared on the death of Atahuallpa.2  His death not only left the

throne vacant, without any certain successor, but the manner of it

announced to the Peruvian people that a hand stronger than that of their

Incas had now seized the sceptre, and that the dynasty of the Children of

the Sun had passed away for ever.



The natural consequences of such a conviction followed.  The beautiful

order of the ancient institutions was broken up, as the authority which

controlled it was withdrawn.  The Indians broke out into greater excesses

from the uncommon restraint to which they had been before subjected.

Villages were burnt, temples and palaces were plundered, and the gold

they contained was scattered or secreted.  Gold and silver acquired an

importance in the eyes of the Peruvian, when he saw the importance

attached to them by his conquerors.  The precious metals, which before

served only for purposes of state or religious decoration, were now

hoarded up and buried in caves and forests.  The gold and silver

concealed by the natives were affirmed greatly to exceed in quantity that

which fell into the hands of the Spaniards.3  The remote provinces now

shook off their allegiance to the Incas.  Their great captains, at the head

of distant armies, set up for themselves.  Ruminavi, a commander on the

borders of Quito, sought to detach that kingdom from the Peruvian

empire, and to reassert its ancient independence.  The country, in short,

was in that state, in which old things are passing away, and the new order

of things has not yet been established.  It was in a state of revolution.



The authors of the revolution, Pizarro and his followers, remained

meanwhile at Caxamalca.  But the first step of the Spanish commander

was to name a successor to Atahuallpa.  It would be easier to govern

under the venerated authority to which the homage of the Indians had

been so long paid; and it was not difficult to find a successor.  The true

heir to the crown was a second son of Huayna Capac, named Manco, a

legitimate brother of the unfortunate Huascar.  But Pizarro had too little

knowledge of the dispositions of this prince; and he made no scruple to

prefer a brother of Atahuallpa, and to present him to the Indian nobles as

their future Inca.  We know nothing of the character of the young

Toparca, who probably resigned himself without reluctance to a destiny

which, however humiliating in some points of view, was more exalted

than he could have hoped to obtain in the regular course of events.  The

ceremonies attending a Peruvian coronation were observed, as well as

time would allow; the brows of the young Inca were encircled with the

imperial borla by the hands of his conqueror, and he received the

homage of his Indian vassals.  They were the less reluctant to pay it, as

most of those in the camp belonged to the faction of Quito.



All thoughts were now eagerly turned towards Cuzco, of which the most

glowing accounts were circulated among the soldiers, and whose temples

and royal palaces were represented as blazing with gold and silver.  With

imaginations thus excited, Pizarro and his entire company, amounting to

almost five hundred men, of whom nearly a third, probably, were

cavalry, took their departure early in September from Caxamalca,--a

place ever memorable as the theatre of some of the most strange and

sanguinary scenes recorded in history.  All set forward in high spirits,--

the soldiers of Pizarro from the expectation of doubling their present

riches, and Almagro's followers from the prospect of sharing equally in

the spoil with "the first conquerors." 4  The young Inca and the old chief

Challcuchima accompanied the march in their litters, attended by a

numerous retinue of vassals, and moving in as much state and ceremony

as if in the possession of real power.5



Their course lay along the great road of the Incas, which stretched across

the elevated regions of the Cordilleras, all the way to Cuzco.  It was of

nearly a uniform breadth, though constructed with different degrees of

care, according to the ground.6  Sometimes it crossed smooth and level

valleys, which offered of themselves little impediment to the traveller; at

other times, it followed the course of a mountain stream that wound

round the base of some beetling cliff, leaving small space for the

foothold; at others, again, where the sierra was so precipitous that it

seemed to preclude all further progress, the road, accommodated to the

natural sinuosities of the ground, wound round the heights which it

would have been impossible to scale directly.7



But although managed with great address, it was a formidable passage

for the cavalry.  The mountain was hewn into steps, but the rocky ledges

cut up the hoofs of the horses; and, though the troopers dismounted and

led them by the bridle, they suffered severely in their efforts to keep their

footing.8  The road was constructed for man and the light-fooled llama;

and the only heavy beast of burden at all suited to it was the sagacious

and sure-footed mule, with which the Spanish adventurers were not then

provided.  It was a singular chance that Spain was the land of the mule;

and thus the country was speedily supplied with the very animal which

seems to have been created for the difficult passes of the Cordilleras.



Another obstacle, often occurring, was the deep torrents that rushed

down in fury from the Andes.  They were traversed by the hanging

bridges of osier, whose frail materials were after a time broken up by the

heavy tread of the cavalry, and the holes made in them added materially

to the dangers of the passage.  On such occasions, the Spaniards

contrived to work their way across the rivers on rafts, swimming their

horses by the bridle.9



All along the route, they found post-houses for the accommodation of the

royal couriers, established at regular intervals; and magazines of grain

and other commodities, provided in the principal towns for the Indian

armies.  The Spaniards profited by the prudent forecast of the Peruvian

government.



Passing through several hamlets and towns of some note, the principal of

which were Guamachucho and Guanuco, Pizarro, after a tedious march,

came in sight of the rich valley of Xauxa.  The march, though tedious,

had been attended with little suffering, except in crossing the bristling

crests of the Cordilleras, which occasionally obstructed their path,--a

rough setting to the beautiful valleys, that lay scattered like gems along

this elevated region.  In the mountain passes they found some

inconvenience from the cold; since, to move more quickly, they had

disencumbered themselves of all superfluous baggage, and were even

unprovided with tents.10  The bleak winds of the mountains penetrated

the thick harness of the soldiers; but the poor Indians, more scantily

clothed and accustomed to a tropical climate, suffered most severely.

The Spaniard seemed to have a hardihood of body, as of soul, that

rendered him almost indifferent to climate.



On the march they had not been molested by enemies.  But more than

once they had seen vestiges of them in smoking hamlets and ruined

bridges.  Reports, from time to time, had reached Pizarro of warriors on

his track; and small bodies of Indians were occasionally seen like dusky

clouds on the verge of the horizon, which vanished as the Spaniards

approached.  On reaching Xauxa, however, these clouds gathered into

one dark mass of warriors, which formed on the opposite bank of the

river that flowed through the valley.



The Spaniards advanced to the stream, which, swollen by the melting of

the snows, was now of considerable width, though not deep.  The bridge

had been destroyed; but the Conquerors, without hesitation, dashing

boldly in, advanced, swimming and wading, as they best could, to the

opposite bank.  The Indians, disconcerted by this decided movement, as

they had relied on their watery defences, took to flight, after letting off

an impotent volley of missiles.  Fear gave wings to the fugitives; but the

horse and his rider were swifter, and the victorious pursuers took bloody

vengeance on their enemy for having dared even to meditate resistance.



Xauxa was a considerable town.  It was the place already noticed as

having been visited by Hernando Pizarro.  It was seated in the midst of a

verdant valley, fertilized by a thousand little rills, which the thrifty

Indian husbandman drew from the parent river that rolled sluggishly

through the meadows.  There were several capacious buildings of rough

stone in the town, and a temple of some note in the times of the Incas.

But the strong arm of Father Valverde and his countrymen soon tumbled

the heathen deities from their pride of place, and established, in their

stead, the sacred effigies of the Virgin and Child.



Here Pizarro proposed to halt for some days, and to found a Spanish

colony.  It was a favorable position, he thought, for holding the Indian

mountaineers in check, while, at the same time, it afforded an easy

communication with the sea-coast.  Meanwhile he determined to send

forward De Soto, with a detachment of sixty horse, to reconnoitre the

country in advance, and to restore the bridges where demolished by the

enemy.11



That active cavalier set forward at once, but found considerable

impediments to his progress.  The traces of an enemy became more

frequent as he advanced.  The villages were burnt, the bridges destroyed,

and heavy rocks and trees strewed in the path to impede the march of the

cavalry.  As he drew near to Bilcas, once an important place, though now

effaced from the map, he had a sharp encounter with the natives, in a

mountain defile, which cost him the lives of two or three troopers.  The

loss was light; but any loss was felt by the Spaniards, so little

accustomed as they had been of late, to resistance.



Still pressing forward, the Spanish captain crossed the river Abancay,

and the broad waters of the Apurimac; and, as he drew near the sierra of

Vilcaconga, he learned that a considerable body of Indians lay in wait for

him in the dangerous passes of the mountains.  The sierra was several

leagues from Cuzco; and the cavalier, desirous to reach the further side

of it before nightfall, incautiously pushed on his wearied horses.  When

he was fairly entangled in its rocky defiles, a multitude of armed

warriors, springing, as it seemed, from every cavern and thicket of the

sierra, filled the air with their war-cries, and rushed down, like one of

their own mountain torrents, on the invaders, as they were painfully

toiling up the steeps.  Men and horses were overturned in the fury of the

assault, and the foremost files, rolling back on those below, spread ruin

and consternation in their ranks.  De Soto in vain endeavored to restore

order, and, if possible, to charge the assailants.  The horses were blinded

and maddened by the missiles, while the desperate natives, clinging to

their legs, strove to prevent their ascent up the rocky pathway.  De Soto

saw, that, unless he gained a level ground which opened at some distance

before him, all must be lost.  Cheering on his men with the old battle-cry,

that always went to the heart of a Spaniard, he struck his spurs deep into

the sides of his wearied charger, and, gallantly supported by his troop,

broke through the dark array of warriors, and, shaking them off to the

right and left, at length succeeded in placing himself on the broad level.



Here both parties paused, as if by mutual consent, for a few moments.  A

little stream ran through the plain, at which the Spaniards watered their

horses;12 and the animals, having recovered wind, De Soto and his men

made a desperate charge on their assailants.  The undaunted Indians

sustained the shock with firmness; and the result of the combat was still

doubtful, when the shades of evening, falling thicker around them,

separated the combatants.



Both parties then withdrew from the field, taking up their respective

stations within bow-shot of each other, so that the voices of the warriors

on either side could be distinctly heard in the stillness of the night.  But

very different were the reflections of the two hosts.  The Indians,

exulting in their temporary triumph, looked with confidence to the

morrow to complete it.  The Spaniards, on the other hand, were

proportionably discouraged.  They were not prepared for this spirit of

resistance in an enemy hitherto so tame.  Several cavaliers had fallen;

one of them by a blow from a Peruvian battle-axe, which clove his head

to the chin, attesting the power of the weapon, and of the arm that used

it.13  Several horses, too, had been killed; and the loss of these was

almost as severely felt as that of their riders, considering the great cost

and difficulty of transporting them to these distant regions.  Few either of

the men or horses escaped without wounds, and the Indian allies suffered

still more severely.



It seemed probable, from the pertinacity and a certain order maintained

in the assault, that it was directed by some leader of military experience;

perhaps the Indian commander Quizquiz, who was said to be hanging

round the environs of Cuzco with a considerable force.



Notwithstanding the reasonable cause of apprehension for the morrow,

De Soto, like a stout-hearted cavalier, as he was, strove to keep up the

spirits of his followers.  If they had beaten off the enemy when their

horses were jaded, and their own strength nearly exhausted, how much

easier it would be to come off victorious when both were restored by a

night's rest; and he told them to "trust in the Almighty, who would never

desert his faithful followers in their extremity."  The event justified De

Soto's confidence in this seasonable succour.



From time to time, on his march, he had sent advices to Pizarro of the

menacing state of the country, till his commander, becoming seriously

alarmed, was apprehensive that the cavalier might be overpowered by the

superior numbers of the enemy.  He accordingly detached Almagro with

nearly all the remaining horse, to his support,--unencumbered by

infantry, that he might move the lighter.  That efficient leader advanced

by forced marches, stimulated by the tidings which met him on the road;

and was so fortunate as to reach the foot of the sierra of Vilcaconga the

very night of the engagement.



There hearing of the encounter, he pushed forward without halting,

though his horses were spent with travel.  The night was exceedingly

dark, and Almagro, afraid of stumbling on the enemy's bivouac, and

desirous to give De Soto information of his approach, commanded his

trumpets to sound, till the notes, winding through the defiles of the

mountains, broke the slumbers of his countrymen, sounding like blithest

music in their ears.  They quickly replied with their own bugles, and

soon had the satisfaction to embrace their deliverers.14



Great was the dismay of the Peruvian host, when the morning light

discovered the fresh reinforcement of the ranks of the Spaniards.  There

was no use in contending with an enemy who gathered strength from the

conflict, and who seemed to multiply his numbers at will.  Without

further attempt to renew the fight, they availed themselves of a thick fog,

which hung over the lower slopes of the hills, to effect their retreat, and

left the passes open to the invaders.  The two cavaliers then continued

their march until they extricated their forces from the sierra, when, taking

up a secure position, they proposed to await there the arrival of

Pizarro.15



The commander-in-chief, meanwhile, lay at Xauxa, where he was greatly

disturbed by the rumors which reached him of the state of the country.

His enterprise, thus far, had gone forward so smoothly, that he was no

better prepared than his lieutenant to meet with resistance from the

natives.  He did not seem to comprehend that the mildest nature might at

last be roused by oppression; and that the massacre of their Inca, whom

they regarded with such awful veneration, would be likely, if any thing

could do it, to wake them from their apathy.



The tidings which he now received of the retreat of the Peruvians were

most welcome; and he caused mass to be said, and thanksgivings to be

offered up to Heaven, "which had shown itself thus favorable to the

Christians throughout this mighty enterprise." The Spaniard was ever a

Crusader.  He was, in the sixteenth century, what Coeur de Lion and his

brave knights were in the twelfth, with this difference; the cavalier of that

day fought for the Cross and for glory, while gold and the Cross were the

watchwords of the Spaniard.  The spirit of chivalry had waned somewhat

before the spirit of trade; but the fire of religious enthusiasm still burned

as bright under the quilted mail of the American Conqueror, as it did of

yore under the iron panoply of the soldier of Palestine.



It seemed probable that some man of authority had organized, or at least

countenanced, this resistance of the natives, and suspicion fell on the

captive chief Challcuchima, who was accused of maintaining a secret

correspondence with his confederate, Quizquiz.  Pizarro waited on the

Indian noble, and, charging him with the conspiracy, reproached him, as

he had formerly done his royal master, with ingratitude towards the

Spaniards, who had dealt with him so liberally.  He concluded by the

assurance, that, if he did not cause the Peruvians to lay down their arms,

and tender their submission at once, he should be burnt alive, so soon as

they reached Almagro's quarters.16



The Indian chief listened to the terrible menace with the utmost

composure.  He denied having had any communication with his countrymen,

and said, that, in his present state of confinement, at least,

he could have no power to bring them to submission.  He then remained

doggedly silent, and Pizarro did not press the matter further.17  But he

placed a strong guard over his prisoner, and caused him to be put in

irons.  It was an ominous proceeding, and had been the precursor of the

death of Atahuallpa.



Before quitting Xauxa, a misfortune befell the Spaniards in the death of

their creature, the young Inca Toparca.  Suspicion, of course, fell on

Challcuchima, now selected as the scape-goat for all the offences of his

nation.18  It was a disappointment to Pizarro, who hoped to find a

convenient shelter for his future proceedings under this shadow of

royalty.19



The general considered it most prudent not to hazard the loss of his

treasures by taking them on the march, and he accordingly left them at

Xauxa, under a guard of forty soldiers, who remained there in garrison.

No event of importance occurred on the road, and Pizarro, having

effected a junction with Almagro, their united forces soon entered the

vale of Xaquixaguana, about five leagues from Cuzco.  This was one of

those bright spots, so often found embosomed amidst the Andes, the

more beautiful from contrast with the savage character of the scenery

around it.  A river flowed through the valley, affording the means of

irrigating the soil, and clothing it in perpetual verdure; and the rich and

flowering vegetation spread out like a cultivated garden.  The beauty of

the place and its delicious coolness commended it as a residence for the

Peruvian nobles, and the sides of the hills were dotted with their villas,

which afforded them a grateful retreat in the heats of summer.20  Yet

the centre of the valley was disfigured by a quagmire of some extent,

occasioned by the frequent overflowing of the waters; but the industry of

the Indian architects had constructed a solid causeway, faced with heavy

stone, and connected with the great road, which traversed the whole

breadth of the morass.21



In this valley Pizarro halted for several days, while he refreshed his

troops from the well-stored magazines of the Incas.  His first act was to

bring Challcuchima to trial; if trial that could be called, where sentence

may be said to have gone hand in hand with accusation.  We are not

informed of the nature of the evidence.  It was sufficient to satisfy the

Spanish captains of the chieftain's guilt.  Nor is it at all incredible that

Challcuchima should have secretly encouraged a movement among the

people, designed to secure his country's freedom and his own.  He was

condemned to be burnt alive on the spot.  "Some thought it a hard

measure," says Herrera; "but those who are governed by reasons of state

policy are apt to shut their eyes against every thing else." 22  Why this

cruel mode of execution was so often adopted by the Spanish

Conquerors is not obvious; unless it was that the Indian was an infidel,

and fire, from ancient date, seems to have been considered the fitting

doom of the infidel, as the type of that inextinguishable flame which

awaited him in the regions of the damned.



Father Valverde accompanied the Peruvian chieftain to the stake.  He

seems always to have been present at this dreary moment, anxious to

profit by it, if possible, to work the conversion of the victim.  He painted

in gloomy colors the dreadful doom of the unbeliever, to whom the

waters of baptism could alone secure the ineffable glories of paradise.23

It does not appear that he promised any commutation of punishment in

this world.  But his arguments fell on a stony heart, and the chief coldly

replied, he "did not understand the religion of the white men." 24  He

might be pardoned for not comprehending the beauty of a faith which, as

it would seem, had borne so bitter fruits to him.  In the midst of his

tortures, he showed the characteristic courage of the American Indian,

whose power of endurance triumphs over the power of persecution in his

enemies, and he died with his last breath invoking the name of

Pachacamac.  His own followers brought the fagots to feed the flames

that consumed him .25



Soon after this tragic event, Pizarro was surprised by a visit from a

Peruvian noble, who came in great state, attended by a numerous and

showy retinue.  It was the young prince Manco, brother of the

unfortunate Huascar, and the rightful successor to the crown.  Being

brought before the Spanish commander, he announced his pretensions to

the throne, and claimed the protection of the strangers.  It is said he had

meditated resisting them by arms, and had encouraged the assaults made

on them on their march; but, finding resistance ineffectual, he had taken

this politic course, greatly to the displeasure of his more resolute nobles.

However this may be, Pizarro listened to his application with singular

contentment, for he saw in this new scion of the true royal stock, a more

effectual instrument for his purposes than he could have found in the

family of Quito, with whom the Peruvians had but little sympathy.  He

received the young man, therefore, with great cordiality, and did not

hesitate to assure him that he had been sent into the country by his

master, the Castilian sovereign, in order to vindicate the claims of

Huascar to the crown, and to punish the usurpation of his rival.26



Taking with him the Indian prince, Pizarro now resumed his march.  It

was interrupted for a few hours by a party of the natives, who lay in wait

for him in the neighboring sierra.  A sharp skirmish ensued, in which the

Indians behaved with great spirit, and inflicted some little injury on the

Spaniards; but the latter, at length, shaking them off, made good their

passage through the defile, and the enemy did not care to follow them

into the open country.



It was late in the afternoon when the Conquerors came in sight of

Cuzco.27  The descending sun was streaming his broad rays full on the

imperial city, where many an altar was dedicated to his worship.  The

low ranges of buildings, showing in his beams like so many lines of

silvery light, filled up the bosom of the valley and the lower slopes of the

mountains, whose shadowy forms hung darkly over the fair city, as if to

shield it from the menaced profanation.  It was so late, that Pizarro

resolved to defer his entrance till the following morning.



That night vigilant guard was kept in the camp, and the soldiers slept on

their arms.  But it passed away without annoyance from the enemy, and

early on the following day, November 15, 1533, Pizarro prepared for his

entrance into the Peruvian capital.28



The little army was formed into three divisions, of which the centre, or

"battle," as it was called, was led by the general.  The suburbs were

thronged with a countless multitude of the natives, who had flocked from

the city and the surrounding country to witness the showy, and, to them,

startling pageant.  All looked with eager curiosity on the strangers, the

fame of whose terrible exploits had spread to the remotest parts of the

empire.  They gazed with astonishment on their dazzling arms and fair

complexions, which seemed to proclaim them the true Children of the

Sun; and they listened with feelings of mysterious dread, as the trumpet

sent forth its prolonged notes through the streets of the capital, and the

solid ground shook under the heavy tramp of the cavalry.



The Spanish commander rode directly up the great square.  It was

surrounded by low piles of buildings, among which were several palaces

of the Incas.  One of these, erected by Huayna Capac, was surmounted

by a tower, while the ground-floor was occupied by one or more

immense halls, like those described in Caxamalca, where the Peruvian

nobles held their fetes in stormy weather.  These buildings afforded

convenient barracks for the troops, though, during the first few weeks,

they remained under their tents in the open plaza, with their horses

picketed by their side, ready to repulse any insurrection of the

inhabitants.29



The capital of the Incas, though falling short of the El Dorado which had

engaged their credulous fancies, astonished the Spaniards by the beauty

of its edifices, the length and regularity of its streets, and the good order

and appearance of comfort, even luxury, visible in its numerous

population.  It far surpassed all they had yet seen in the New World.  The

population of the city is computed by one of the Conquerors at two

hundred thousand inhabitants, and that of the suburbs at as many

more.30  This account is not confirmed, as far as I have seen, by any

other writer.  But however it may be exaggerated, it is certain that Cuzco

was the metropolis of a great empire, the residence of the Court and the

chief nobility; frequented by the most skilful mechanics and artisans of

every description, who found a demand for their ingenuity in the royal

precincts; while the place was garrisoned by a numerous soldiery, and

was the resort, finally, of emigrants from the most distant provinces.  The

quarters whence this motley population came were indicated by their

peculiar dress, and especially their head-gear, so rarely found at all on

the American Indian, which, with its variegated colors, gave a

picturesque effect to the groups and masses in the streets.  The habitual

order and decorum maintained in this multifarious assembly showed the

excellent police of the capital, where the only sounds that disturbed the

repose of the Spaniards were the noises of feasting and dancing, which

the natives, with happy insensibility, constantly prolonged to a late hour

of the night.31



The edifices of the better sort--and they were very numerous--were of

stone, or faced with stone.32  Among the principal were the royal

residences; as each sovereign built a new palace for himself, covering,

though low, a large extent of ground.  The walls were sometimes stained

or painted with gaudy tints, and the gates, we are assured, were

sometimes of colored marble.33  "In the delicacy of the stone-work,"

says another of the Conquerors, "the natives far excelled the Spaniards,

though the roofs of their dwellings, instead of tiles, were only of thatch,

but put together with the nicest art." 34  The sunny climate of Cuzco did

not require a very substantial material for defence against the weather.



The most important building was the fortress, planted on a solid rock,

that rose boldly above the city.  It was built of hewn stone, so finely

wrought that it was impossible to detect the line of junction between the

blocks; and the approaches to it were defended by three semicircular

parapets, composed of such heavy masses of rock, that it bore

resemblance to the kind of work known to architects as the Cyclopean.

The fortress was raised to a height rare in Peruvian architecture; and

from the summit of the tower the eye of the-spectator ranged over a

magnificent prospect, in which the wild features of the mountain scenery,

rocks, woods, and waterfalls, were mingled with the rich verdure of the

valley, and the shining city filling up the foreground,--all blended in

sweet harmony under the deep azure of a tropical sky.



The streets were long and narrow.  They were arranged with perfect

regularity, crossing one another at right angles; and from the great square

diverged four principal streets connecting with the high roads of the

empire.  The square itself, and many parts of the city, were paved with a

fine pebble.35  Through the heart of the capital ran a river of pure water,

if it might not be rather termed a canal, the banks or sides of which, for

the distance of twenty leagues, were faced with stone.36  Across this

stream, bridges, constructed of similar broad flags, were thrown, at

intervals, so as to afford an easy communication between the different

quarters of the capital.37



The most sumptuous edifice in Cuzco, in the times of the Incas, was

undoubtedly the great temple dedicated to the Sun, which, studded with

gold plates, as already noticed, was surrounded by convents and

dormitories for the priests, with their gardens and broad parterres

sparkling with gold.  The exterior ornaments had been already removed

by the Conquerors,--all but the frieze of gold, which, imbedded in the

stones, still encircled the principal building.  It is probable that the tales

of wealth, so greedily circulated among the Spaniards, greatly exceeded

the truth.  If they did not, the natives must have been very successful in

concealing their treasures from the invaders.  Yet much still remained,

not only in the great House of the Sun, but in the inferior temples which

swarmed in the capital.



Pizarro, on entering Cuzco, had issued an order forbidding any soldier to

offer violence to the dwellings of the inhabitants.38  But the palaces

were numerous, and the troops lost no time in plundering them of their

contents, as well as in despoiling the religious edifices.  The interior

decorations supplied them with considerable booty.  They stripped off

the jewels and rich ornaments that garnished the royal mummies in the

temple of Coricancha.  Indignant at the concealment of their treasures,

they put the inhabitants, in some instances, to the torture, and endeavored

to extort from them a confession of their hiding-places.39  They invaded

the repose of the sepulchres, in which the Peruvians often deposited their

valuable effects, and compelled the grave to give up its dead.  No place

was left unexplored by the rapacious Conquerors, and they occasionally

stumbled on a mine of wealth that rewarded their labors.



In a cavern near the city they found a number of vases of pure gold,

richly embossed with the figures of serpents, locusts, and other animals.

Among the spoil were four golden llamas and ten or twelve statues of

women, some of gold, others of silver, "which merely to see," says one

of the Conquerors, with some naivete, "was truly a great satisfaction."

The gold was probably thin, for the figures were all as large as life; and

several of them, being reserved for the royal fifth, were not recast, but

sent in their original form to Spain.40  The magazines were stored with

curious commodities; richly tinted robes of cotton and feather-work, gold

sandals, and slippers of the same material, for the women, and dresses

composed entirely of beads of gold.41  The grain and other articles of

food, with which the magazines were filled, were held in contempt by the

Conquerors, intent only on gratifying their lust for gold.42  The time

came when the grain would have been of far more value.



Yet the amount of treasure in the capital did not equal the sanguine


expectations that had been formed by the Spaniards.  But the deficiency

was supplied by the plunder which they had collected at various places

on their march.  In one place, for example, they met with ten planks or

bars of solid silver, each piece being twenty feet in length, one foot in

breadth, and two or three inches thick.  They were intended to decorate

the dwelling of an Inca noble.43



The whole mass of treasure was brought into a common heap, as in

Caxamalca; and after some of the finer specimens had been deducted for

the Crown, the remainder was delivered to the Indian goldsmiths to be

melted down into ingots of a uniform standard.  The division of the spoil

was made on the same principle as before.  There were four hundred and

eighty soldiers, including the garrison of Xauxa, who were each to

receive a share, that of the cavalry being double that of the infantry.  The

amount of booty is stated variously by those present at the division of it.

According to some it considerably exceeded the ransom of Atahuallpa.

Others state it as less.  Pedro Pizarro says that each horseman got six

thousand pesos de oro, and each one of the infantry half that sum; 44

though the same discrimination was made by Pizarro as before, in

respect to the rank of the parties, and their relative services.  But Sancho,

the royal notary, and secretary of the commander, estimates the whole

amount as far less,--not exceeding five hundred and eighty thousand and

two hundred pesos de oro, and two hundred and fifteen thousand marks

of silver.45  In the absence of the official returns, it is impossible to

determine which is correct.  But Sancho's narrative is countersigned, it

may be remembered, by Pizarro and the royal treasurer Riquelme, and

doubtless therefore, shows the actual amount for which the Conquerors

accounted to the Crown.



Whichever statement we receive, the sum, combined with that obtained

at Caxamalca, might well have satisfied the cravings of the most

avaricious.  The sudden influx of so much wealth, and that, too, in so

transferable a form, among a party of reckless adventurers little

accustomed to the possession of money, had its natural effect.  it

supplied them with the means of gaming, so strong and common a

passion with the Spaniards, that it may be considered a national vice.

Fortunes were lost and won in a single day, sufficient to render the

proprietors independent for life; and many a desperate gamester, by an

unlucky throw of the dice or turn of the cards, saw himself stripped in a

few hours of the fruits of years of toil, and obliged to begin over again

the business of rapine.  Among these, one in the cavalry service is

mentioned, named Leguizano, who had received as his share of the booty

the image of the Sun, which, raised on a plate of burnished gold, spread

over the walls in a recess of the great temple, and which, for some reason

or other,--perhaps because of its superior fineness,--was not recast like

the other ornaments.  This rich prize the spendthrift lost in a single night;

whence it came to be a proverb in Spain, Juega el Sol antes que

amanezca, "Play away the Sun before sunrise." 46



The effect of such a surfeit of the precious metals was instantly felt on

prices.  The most ordinary articles were only to be had for exorbitant

sums.  A quire of paper sold for ten pesos de oro; a bottle of wine, for

sixty; a sword, for forty or fifty; a cloak, for a hundred,--sometimes

more; a pair of shoes cost thirty or forty pesos de oro, and a good horse

could not be had for less than twenty-five hundred.47  Some brought a

still higher price.  Every article rose in value, as gold and silver, the

representatives of all, declined.  Gold and silver, in short, seemed to be

the only things in Cuzco that were not wealth.  Yet there were some few

wise enough to return contented with their present gains to their native

country.  Here their riches brought them consideration and competence,

and while they excited the envy of their countrymen, stimulated them to

seek their own fortunes in the like path of adventure.







Book 3



Chapter 9



New Inca Crowned--Municipal Regulations--Terrible March Of Alvarado--

Interview With Pizarro--Foundation Of Lima--

Hernando Pizarro Reaches Spain--Sensation At Court--

Feuds Of Almagro And The Pizarros



1534--1535



The first care of the Spanish general, after the division of the booty, was

to place Manco on the throne, and to obtain for him the recognition of

his countrymen.  He, accordingly, presented the young prince to them as

their future sovereign, the legitimate son of Huayna Capac, and the true

heir of the Peruvian sceptre.  The annunciation was received with

enthusiasm by the people, attached to the memory of his illustrious

father, and pleased that they were still to have a monarch rule over them

of the ancient line of Cuzco.



Everything was done to maintain the illusion with the Indian population.

The ceremonies of a coronation were studiously observed.  The young

prince kept the prescribed fasts and vigils; and on the appointed day, the

nobles and the people, with the whole Spanish soldiery, assembled in the

great square of Cuzco to witness the concluding ceremony.  Mass was

publicly performed by Father Valverde, and the Inca Manco received the

fringed diadem of Peru, not from the hand of the high-priest of his

nation, but from his Conqueror, Pizarro.  The Indian lords then tendered

their obeisance in the customary form; after which the royal notary read

aloud the instrument asserting the supremacy of the Castilian Crown, and

requiring the homage of all present to its authority.  This address was

explained by an interpreter, and the ceremony of homage was performed

by each one of the parties waving the royal banner of Castile twice or

thrice with his hands.  Manco then pledged the Spanish commander in a

golden goblet of the sparkling chicha; and, the latter having cordially

embraced the new monarch, the trumpets announced the conclusion of

the ceremony.1  But it was not the note of triumph, but of humiliation;

for it proclaimed that the armed foot of the stranger was in the halls of

the Peruvian Incas; that the ceremony of coronation was a miserable

pageant; that their prince himself was but a puppet in the hands of his

Conquerors; and that the glory of the Children of the Sun had departed

forever!



Yet the people readily gave in to the illusion, and seemed willing to

accept this image of their ancient independence.  The accession of the

young monarch was greeted by all the usual fetes and rejoicings.  The

mummies of his royal ancestors, with such ornaments as were still left to

them, were paraded in the great square.  They were attended each by his

own numerous retinue, who performed all the menial offices, as if the

object of them were alive and could feel their import.  Each ghostly form

took its seat at the banquet-table--now, alas!  stripped of the magnificent

service with which it was wont to blaze at these high festivals--and the

guests drank deep to the illustrious dead.  Dancing succeeded the

carousal, and the festivities, prolonged to a late hour, were continued

night after night by the giddy population, as if their conquerors had not

been intrenched in the capital!2  --What a contrast to the Aztecs in the

conquest of Mexico!



Pizarro's next concern was to organize a municipal government for

Cuzco, like those in the cities of the parent country.  Two alcaldes were

appointed, and eight regidores, among which last functionaries were his

brothers Gonzalo and Juan.  The oaths of office were administered with

great solemnity, on the twenty-fourth of March, 1534, in presence both

of Spaniards and Peruvians, in the public square; as if the general were

willing by this ceremony to intimate to the latter, that, while they

retained the semblance of their ancient institutions, the real power was

henceforth vested in their conquerors.3  He invited Spaniards to settle in

the place by liberal grants of land and houses, for which means were

afforded by the numerous palaces and public buildings of the Incas; and

many a cavalier, who had been too poor in his own country to find a

place to rest in, now saw himself the proprietor of a spacious mansion

that might have entertained the retinue of a prince.4  From this time, says

an old chronicler, Pizarro, who had hitherto been distinguished by his

military title of "Captain-General," was addressed by that of "Governor."

5  Both had been bestowed on him by the royal grant.



Nor did the chief neglect the interests of religion.  Father Valverde,

whose nomination as Bishop of Cuzco not long afterwards received the

Papal sanction, prepared to enter on the duties of his office.  A place was

selected for the cathedral of his diocese, facing the plaza.  A spacious

monastery subsequently rose on the ruins of the gorgeous House of the

Sun; its walls were constructed of the ancient stones; the altar was raised

on the spot where shone the bright image of the Peruvian deity, and the

cloisters of the Indian temple were trodden by the friars of St. Dominic.6

To make the metamorphosis more complete, the House of the Virgins of

the Sun was replaced by a Roman Catholic nunnery.7  Christian churches

and monasteries gradually supplanted the ancient edifices, and such of

the latter as were suffered to remain, despoiled of their heathen insignia,

were placed under the protection of the Cross.



The Fathers of St. Dominic, the Brethren of the Order of Mercy, and

other missionaries, now busied themselves in the good work of

conversion.  We have seen that Pizarro was required by the Crown to

bring out a certain number of these holy men in his own vessels; and

every succeeding vessel brought an additional reinforcement of

ecclesiastics.  They were not all like the Bishop of Cuzco, with hearts so

seared by fanaticism as to be closed against sympathy with the

unfortunate natives.8  They were, many of them, men of singular

humility, who followed in the track of the conqueror to scatter the seeds

of spiritual truth, and, with disinterested zeal, devoted themselves to the

propagation of the Gospel.  Thus did their pious labors prove them the

true soldiers of the Cross, and showed that the object so ostentatiously

avowed of carrying its banner among the heathen nations was not an

empty vaunt.



The effort to Christianize the heathen is an honorable characteristic of

the Spanish conquests.  The Puritan, with equal religious zeal, did

comparatively little for the conversion of the Indian, content, as it would

seem, with having secured to himself the inestimable privilege of

worshipping God in his own way.  Other adventurers who have occupied

the New World have often had too little regard for religion themselves,

to be very solicitous about spreading it among the savages.  But the

Spanish missionary, from first to last, has shown a keen interest in the

spiritual welfare of the natives.  Under his auspices, churches on a

magnificent scale have been erected, schools for elementary instruction

founded, and every rational means taken to spread the knowledge of

religious truth, while he has carried his solitary mission into remote and

almost inaccessible regions, or gathered his Indian disciples into

communities, like the good Las Casas in Cumana, or the Jesuits in

California and Paraguay.  At all times, the courageous ecclesiastic has

been ready to lift his voice against the cruelty of the conqueror, and the

no less wasting cupidity of the colonist; and when his remonstrances, as

was too often the case, have proved unavailing, he has still followed to

bind up the broken-hearted, to teach the poor Indian resignation under

his lot, and light up his dark intellect with the revelation of a holier and

happier existence.--In reviewing the blood-stained records of Spanish

colonial history, it is but fair, and at the same time cheering, to reflect,

that the same nation which sent forth the hard-hearted conqueror from its

bosom sent forth the missionary to do the work of beneficence, and

spread the light of Christian civilization over the farthest regions of the

New World.



While the governor, as we are henceforth to style him, lay at Cuzco, he

received repeated accounts of a considerable force in the neighborhood,

under the command of Atahuallpa's officer, Quizquiz.  He accordingly

detached Almagro, with a small body of horse and a large Indian force

under the Inca Manco, to disperse the enemy, and, if possible, to capture

their leader.  Manco was the more ready to take part in the expedition, as

the enemy were soldiers of Quito, who, with their commander, bore no

good-will to himself.



Almagro, moving with his characteristic rapidity, was not long in coming

up with the Indian chieftain.  Several sharp encounters followed, as the

army of Quito fell back on Xauxa, near which a general engagement

decided the fate of the war by the total discomfiture of the natives.

Quizquiz fled to the elevated plains of Quito, where he still held out with

undaunted spirit against a Spanish force in that quarter, till at length his

own soldiers, wearied by these long and ineffectual hostilities, massacred

their commander in cold blood.9  Thus fell the last of the two great

officers of Atahuallpa, who, if their nation had been animated by a spirit

equal to their own, might long have successfully maintained their soil

against the invader.



Some time before this occurrence, the Spanish governor, while in Cuzco,

received tidings of an event much more alarming to him than any Indian

hostilities.  This was the arrival on the coast of a strong Spanish force,

under command of Don Pedro de Alvarado, the gallant officer who had

served under Cortes with such renown in the war of Mexico.  That

cavalier, after forming a brilliant alliance in Spain, to which he was

entitled by his birth and military rank, had returned to his government of

Guatemala, where his avarice had been roused by the magnificent reports

he daily received of Pizarro's conquests.  These conquests, he learned,

had been confined to Peru; while the northern kingdom of Quito, the

ancient residence of Atahuallpa, and, no doubt, the principal depository

of his treasures, yet remained untouched.  Affecting to consider this

country as falling without the governor's jurisdiction, he immediately

turned a large fleet, which he had intended for the Spice Islands, in the

direction of South America; and in March, 1534, he landed in the bay of

Caraques, with five hundred followers, of whom half were mounted, and

all admirably provided with arms and ammunition.  It was the best

equipped and the most formidable array that had yet appeared in the

southern seas.10



Although manifestly an invasion of the territory conceded to Pizarro by

the Crown, the reckless cavalier determined to march at once on Quito.

With the assistance of an Indian guide, he proposed to take the direct

route across the mountains, a passage of exceeding difficulty, even at the

most favorable season.



After crossing the Rio Dable, Alvarado's guide deserted him, so that he

was soon entangled in the intricate mazes of the sierra; and, as he rose

higher and higher into the regions of winter, he became surrounded with

ice and snow, for which his men, taken from the warm countries of

Guatemala, were but ill prepared.  As the cold grew more intense, many

of them were so benumbed, that it was with difficulty they could

proceed.  The infantry, compelled to make exertions, fared best.  Many

of the troopers were frozen stiff in their saddles.  The Indians, still more

sensible to the cold, perished by hundreds.  As the Spaniards huddled

round their wretched bivouacs, with such scanty fuel as they could glean,

and almost without food, they waited in gloomy silence the approach of

morning.  Yet the morning light, which gleamed coldly on the cheerless

waste, brought no joy to them.  It only revealed more clearly the extent

of their wretchedness.  Still struggling on through the winding Puertos

Nevados, or Snowy Passes, their track was dismally marked by

fragments of dress, broken harness, golden ornaments, and other

valuables plundered on their march,--by the dead bodies of men, or by

those less fortunate, who were left to die alone in the wilderness.  As for

the horses, their carcasses were not suffered long to cumber the ground,

as they were quickly seized and devoured half raw by the starving

soldiers, who, like the famished condors, now hovering in troops above

their heads, greedily banqueted on the most offensive offal to satisfy the

gnawings of hunger.



Alvarado, anxious to secure the booty which had fallen into his hands at

an earlier part of his march, encouraged every man to take what gold he

wanted from the common heap, reserving only the royal fifth.  But they

only answered, with a ghastly smile of derision, "that food was the only

gold for them." Yet in this extremity, which might seem to have

dissolved the very ties of nature, there are some affecting instances

recorded of self-devotion; of comrades who lost their lives in assisting

others, and of parents and husbands (for some of the cavaliers were

accompanied by their wives) who, instead of seeking their own safety,

chose to remain and perish in the snows with the objects of their love.



To add to their distress, the air was filled for several days with thick

clouds of earthy particles and cinders, which blinded the men, and made

respiration exceedingly difficult.11  This phenomenon, it seems

probable, was caused by an eruption of the distant Cotopaxi, which,

about twelve leagues southeast of Quito, rears up its colossal and

perfectly symmetrical cone far above the limits of eternal snow,--the

most beautiful and the most terrible of the American volcanoes.12  At

the time of Alvarado's expedition, it was in a state of eruption, the

earliest instance of the kind on record, though doubtless not the

earliest.13  Since that period, it has been in frequent commotion, sending

up its sheets of flame to the height of half a mile, spouting forth cataracts

of lava that have overwhelmed towns and villages in their career, and

shaking the earth with subterraneous thunders, that, at the distance of

more than a hundred leagues, sounded like the reports of artillery!14

Alvarado's followers, unacquainted with the cause of the phenomenon, as

they wandered over tracts buried in snow,--the sight of which was

strange to them,--in an atmosphere laden with ashes, became bewildered

by this confusion of the elements, which Nature seemed to have

contrived purposely for their destruction.  Some of these men were the

soldiers of Cortes, steeled by many a painful march, and many a sharp

encounter with the Aztecs.  But this war of the elements, they now

confessed, was mightier than all.



At length, Alvarado, after sufferings, which even the most hardy,

probably, could have endured but a few days longer, emerged from the

Snowy Pass, and came on the elevated table-land, which spreads out, at

the height of more than nine thousand feet above the ocean, in the

neighborhood of Riobamba.  But one fourth of his gallant army had been

left to feed the condor in the wilderness, besides the greater part, at least

two thousand, of his Indian auxiliaries.  A great number of his horses,

too, had perished; and the men and horses that escaped were all of them

more or less injured by the cold and the extremity of suffering.--Such

was the terrible passage of the Puertos Nevados, which I have only

briefly noticed as an episode to the Peruvian conquest, but the account of

which, in all its details, though it occupied but a few weeks in duration,

would give one a better idea of the difficulties encountered by the

Spanish cavaliers, than volumes of ordinary narrative.15



As Alvarado, after halting some time to restore his exhausted troops,

began his march across the broad plateau, he was astonished by seeing

the prints of horses' hoofs on the soil.  Spaniards, then, had been there

before him, and, after all his toil and suffering, others had forestalled him

in the enterprise against Quito!  It is necessary to say a few words in

explanation of this.



When Pizarro quilted Caxamalca, being sensible of the growing

importance of San Miguel, the only port of entry then in the country, he

despatched a person in whom he had great confidence to take charge of

it.  This person was Sebastian Benalcazar, a cavalier who afterwards

placed his name in the first rank of the South American conquerors, for

courage, capacity,--and cruelty.  But this cavalier had hardly reached his

government, when, like Alvarado, he received such accounts of the

riches of Quito, that he determined, with the force at his command,

though without orders, to undertake its reduction.



At the head of about a hundred and forty soldiers, horse and foot, and a

stout body of Indian auxiliaries, he marched up the broad range of the

Andes, to where it spreads out into the table-land of Quito, by a road

safer and more expeditious than that taken by Alvarado.  On the plains of

Riobamba, he encountered the Indian general Ruminavi.  Several

engagements followed, with doubtful success, when, in the end, science

prevailed where courage was well matched, and the victorious

Benalcazar planted the standard of Castile on the ancient towers of

Atahuallpa.  The city, in honor of his general, Francis Pizarro, he named

San Francisco del Quito.  But great was his mortification on finding that

either the stories of its riches had been fabricated, or that these riches

were secreted by the natives.  The city was all that he gained by his

victories,--the shell without the pearl of price which gave it its value.

While devouring his chagrin, as he best could, the Spanish captain

received tidings of the approach of his superior, Almagro.16



No sooner had the news of Alvarado's expedition reached Cuzco, than

Almagro left the place with a small force for San Miguel, proposing to

strengthen himself by a reinforcement from that quarter, and to march at

once against the invaders.  Greatly was he astonished, on his arrival in

that city, to learn the departure of its commander.  Doubting the loyalty

of his motives, Almagro, with the buoyancy of spirit which belongs to

youth, though in truth somewhat enfeebled by the infirmities of age, did

not hesitate to follow Benalcazar at once across the mountains.



With his wonted energy, the intrepid veteran, overcoming all the

difficulties of his march, in a few weeks placed himself and his little

company on the lofty plains which spread around the Indian city of

Riobamba; though in his progress he had more than one hot encounter

with the natives, whose courage and perseverance formed a contrast

sufficiently striking to the apathy of the Peruvians.  But the fire only

slumbered in the bosom of the Peruvian.  His hour had not yet come.



At Riobamba, Almagro was soon joined by the commander of San

Miguel, who disclaimed, perhaps sincerely, any disloyal intent in his

unauthorized expedition.  Thus reinforced, the Spanish captain coolly

awaited the coming of Alvarado.  The forces of the latter, though in a

less serviceable condition, were much superior in number and

appointments to those of his rival.  As they confronted each other on the

broad plains of Riobamba, it seemed probable that a fierce struggle must

immediately follow, and the natives of the country have the satisfaction

to see their wrongs avenged by the very hands that inflicted them.  But it

was Almagro's policy to avoid such an issue.



Negotiations were set on foot, in which each party stated his claims to

the country.  Meanwhile Alvarado's men mingled freely with their

countrymen in the opposite army, and heard there such magnificent

reports of the wealth and wonders of Cuzco, that many of them were

inclined to change their present service for that of Pizarro.  Their own

leader, too, satisfied that Quito held out no recompense worth the

sacrifices he had made, and was like to make, by insisting on his claim,

became now more sensible of the rashness of a course which must

doubtless incur the censure of his sovereign.  In this temper, it was not

difficult for them to effect an adjustment of difficulties; and it was

agreed, as the basis of it, that the governor should pay one hundred

thousand pesos de oro to Alvarado, in consideration of which the latter

was to resign to him his fleet, his forces, and all his stores and munitions.

His vessels, great and small, amounted to twelve in number, and the sum

he received, though large, did not cover his expenses.  This treaty being

settled, Alvarado proposed, before leaving the country, to have an

interview with Pizarro.17



The governor, meanwhile, had quitted the Peruvian capital for the

seacoast, from his desire to repel any invasion that might be attempted in

that direction by Alvarado, with whose real movements he was still

unacquainted.  He left Cuzco in charge of his brother Juan, a cavalier

whose manners were such as, he thought, would be likely to gain the

good-will of the native population.  Pizarro also left ninety of his troops,

as the garrison of the capital, and the nucleus of his future colony.  Then,

taking the Inca Manco with him, he proceeded as far as Xauxa.  At this

place he was entertained by the Indian prince with the exhibition of a

great national hunt,--such as has been already described in these pages,--

in which immense numbers of wild animals were slaughtered, and the

vicunas, and other races of Peruvian sheep, which roam over the

mountains, driven into inclosures and relieved of their delicate fleeces.18



The Spanish governor then proceeded to Pachacamac, where he received

the grateful intelligence of the accommodation with Alvarado; and not

long afterward he was visited by that cavalier himself, previously to his

embarkation.



The meeting was conducted with courtesy and a show, at least, of

goodwill, on both sides, as there was no longer real cause for jealousy

between the parties; and each, as may be imagined, looked on the other

with no little interest, as having achieved such distinction in the bold

path of adventure.  In the comparison, Alvarado had somewhat the

advantage; for Pizarro, though of commanding presence, had not the

brilliant exterior, the free and joyous manner, which, no less than his

fresh complexion and sunny locks, had won for the conqueror of

Guatemala, in his campaigns against the Aztecs, the sobriquet of

Tonatiuh, or "Child of the Sun."



Blithe were the revels that now rang through the ancient city of

Pachacamac; where, instead of songs, and of the sacrifices so often seen

there in honor of the Indian deity, the walls echoed to the noise of

tourneys and Moorish tilts of reeds, with which the martial adventurers

loved to recall the sports of their native land.  When these were

concluded, Alvarado reembarked for his government of Guatemala,

where his restless spirit soon involved him in other enterprises that cut

short his adventurous career.  His expedition to Peru was eminently

characteristic of the man.  It was founded in injustice, conducted with

rashness, and ended in disaster.19



The reduction of Peru might now be considered as, in a manner,

accomplished.  Some barbarous tribes in the interior, it is true, still held

out, and Alonso de Alvarado, a prudent and able officer, was employed

to bring them into subjection.  Benalcazar was still at Quito, of which he

was subsequently appointed governor by the Crown.  There he was

laying deeper the foundation of the Spanish power, while he advanced

the line of conquest still higher towards the north.  But Cuzco, the

ancient capital of the Indian monarchy, had submitted.  The armies of

Atahuallpa had been beaten and scattered.  The empire of the Incas was

dissolved; and the prince who now wore the Peruvian diadem was but

the shadow of a king, who held his commission from his conqueror.



The first act of the governor was to determine on the site of the future

capital of this vast colonial empire.  Cuzco, withdrawn among the

mountains, was altogether too far removed from the sea-coast for a

commercial people.  The little settlement of San Miguel lay too far to the

north.  It was desirable to select some more central position, which could

be easily found in one of the fruitful valleys that bordered the Pacific.

Such was that of Pachacamac, which Pizarro now occupied.  But, on

further examination, he preferred the neighboring valley of Rimac, which

lay to the north, and which took its name, signifying in the Qhichua

tongue "one who speaks," from a celebrated idol, whose shrine was

much frequented by the Indians for the oracles it delivered.  Through the

valley flowed a broad stream, which, like a great artery, was made, as

usual by the natives, to supply a thousand finer veins that meandered

through the beautiful meadows.



On this river Pizarro fixed the site of his new capital, at somewhat less

than two leagues' distance from its mouth, which expanded into a

commodious haven for the commerce that the prophetic eye of the

founder saw would one day--and no very distant one---float on its waters.

The central situation of the spot recommended it as a suitable residence

for the Peruvian viceroy, whence he might hold easy communication

with the different parts of the country, and keep vigilant watch over his

Indian vassals.  The climate was delightful, and, though only twelve

degrees south of the line, was so far tempered by the cool breezes that

generally blow from the Pacific, or from the opposite quarter down the

frozen sides of the Cordilleras, that the heat was less than in

corresponding latitudes on the continent.  It never rained on the coast;

but this dryness was corrected by a vaporous cloud, which, through the

summer months, hung like a curtain over the valley, sheltering it from the

rays of a tropical sun, and imperceptibly distilling a refreshing moisture,

that clothed the fields in the brightest verdure.



The name bestowed on the infant capital was Ciudad de los Reyes, or

City of the Kings, in honor of the day, being the sixth of January, 1535, -

-the festival of Epiphany,--when it was said to have been founded, or

more probably when its site was determined, as its actual foundation

seems to have been twelve days later.20  But the Castilian name ceased

to be used even within the first generation, and was supplanted by that of

Lima, into which the original Indian name of Rimac was corrupted by the

Spaniards.21



The city was laid out on a very regular plan.  The streets were to be

much wider than usual in Spanish towns, and perfectly straight, crossing

one another at right angles, and so far asunder as to afford ample space

for gardens to the dwellings, and for public squares.  It was arranged in a

triangular form, having the river for its base, the waters of which were to

be carried, by means of stone conduits, through all the principal streets,

affording facilities for irrigating the grounds around the houses.



No sooner had the governor decided on the site and on the plan of the

city, than he commenced operations with his characteristic energy.  The

Indians were collected from the distance of more than a hundred miles to

aid in the work.  The Spaniards applied themselves with vigor to the

task, under the eye of their chief.  The sword was exchanged for the tool

of the artisan.  The camp was converted into a hive of diligent laborers;

and the sounds of war were succeeded by the peaceful hum of a busy

population.  The plaza, which was extensive, was to be surrounded by

the cathedral, the palace of the viceroy, that of the municipality, and

other public buildings; and their foundations were laid on a scale, and

with a solidity, which defied the assaults of time, and, in some instances,

even the more formidable shock of earthquakes, that, at different periods,

have laid portions of the fair capital in ruins.22



While these events were going on, Almagro, the Marshal, as he is usually

termed by chroniclers of the time, had gone to Cuzco, whither he was

sent by Pizarro to take command of that capital.  He received also

instructions to undertake, either by himself or by his captains, the

conquest of the countries towards the south, forming part of Chili.

Almagro, since his arrival at Caxamalca, had seemed willing to smother

his ancient feelings of resentment towards his associate, or, at least, to

conceal the expression of them, and had consented to take command

under him in obedience to the royal mandate.  He had even, in his

despatches, the magnanimity to make honorable mention of Pizarro, as

one anxious to promote the interests of government.  Yet he did not so

far trust his companion, as to neglect the precaution of sending a

confidential agent to represent his own services, when Hernando Pizarro

undertook his mission to the mother-country.



That cavalier, after touching at St. Domingo, had arrived without

accident at Seville, in January, 1534.  Besides the royal fifth, he took

with him gold, to the value of half a million of pesos, together with a

large quantity of silver, the property of private adventurers, some of

whom, satisfied with their gains, had returned to Spain in the same vessel

with himself.  The custom-house was filled with solid ingots, and with

vases of different forms, imitations of animals, flowers, fountains, and

other objects, executed with more or less skill, and all of pure gold, to

the astonishment of the spectators, who flocked from the neighboring

country to gaze on these marvellous productions of Indian art.23  Most

of the manufactured articles were the property of the Crown; and

Hernando Pizarro, after a short stay at Seville, selected some of the most

gorgeous specimens, and crossed the country to Calatayud, where the

emperor was holding the cortes of Aragon.



Hernando was instantly admitted to the royal presence, and obtained a

gracious audience.  He was more conversant with courts than either of

his brothers, and his manners, when in situations that imposed a restraint

on the natural arrogance of his temper, were graceful and even attractive,

In a respectful tone, he now recited the stirring adventures of his brother

and his little troop of followers, the fatigues they had endured, the

difficulties they had overcome, their capture of the Peruvian Inca, and

his magnificent ransom.  He had not to tell of the massacre of the

unfortunate prince, for that tragic event, which had occurred since his

departure from the country, was still unknown to him.  The cavalier

expatiated on the productiveness of the soil, and on the civilization of the

people, evinced by their proficiency in various mechanic arts; in proof of

which he displayed the manufactures of wool and cotton, and the rich

ornaments of gold and silver.  The monarch's eyes sparkled with delight

as he gazed on these last.  He was too sagacious not to appreciate the

advantages of a conquest which secured to him a country so rich in

agricultural resources.  But the returns from these must necessarily be

gradual and long deferred; and he may be excused for listening with still

greater satisfaction to Pizarro's tales of its mineral stores; for his

ambitious projects had drained the imperial treasury, and he saw in the

golden tide thus unexpectedly poured in upon him the immediate means

of replenishing it.



Charles made no difficulty, therefore, in granting the petitions of the

fortunate adventurer.  All the previous grants to Francis Pizarro and his

associates were confirmed in the fullest manner; and the boundaries of

the governor's jurisdiction were extended seventy leagues further

towards the south.  Nor did Almagro's services, this time, go unrequited.

He was empowered to discover and occupy the country for the distance

of two hundred leagues, beginning at the southern limit of Pizarro's

territory.24  Charles, in proof, still further, of his satisfaction, was

graciously pleased to address a letter to the two commanders, in which

he complimented them on their prowess, and thanked them for their

services.  This act of justice to Almagro would have been highly

honorable to Hernando Pizarro, considering the unfriendly relations in

which they stood to each other, had it not been made necessary by the

presence of the marshal's own agents at court, who, as already noticed,

stood ready to supply any deficiency in the statements of the emissary.



In this display of the royal bounty, the envoy, as will readily be believed,

did not go without his reward.  He was lodged as an attendant of the

Court; was made a knight of Santiago, the most prized of the chivalric

orders in Spain; was empowered to equip an armament, and to take

command of it; and the royal officers at Seville were required to aid him

in his views and facilitate his embarkation for the Indies.25



The arrival of Hernando Pizarro in the country, and the reports spread by

him and his followers, created a sensation among the Spaniards such as

had not been felt since the first voyage of Columbus.  The discovery of

the New World had filled the minds of men with indefinite expectations

of wealth, of which almost every succeeding expedition had proved the

fallacy.  The conquest of Mexico, though calling forth general

admiration as a brilliant and wonderful exploit, had as yet failed to

produce those golden results which had been so fondly anticipated.  The

splendid promises held out by Francis Pizarro on his recent visit to the

country had not revived the confidence of his countrymen, made

incredulous by repeated disappointment.  All that they were assured of

was the difficulties of the enterprise; and their distrust of its results was

sufficiently shown by the small number of followers, and those only of

the most desperate stamp, who were willing to take their chance in the

adventure.



But now these promises were realized.  It was no longer the golden

reports that they were to trust; but the gold itself, which was displayed in

such profusion before them.  All eyes were now turned towards the West.

The broken spendthrift saw in it the quarter where he was to repair his

fortunes as speedily as he had ruined them.  The merchant, instead of

seeking the precious commodities of the East, looked in the opposite

direction, and counted on far higher gains, where the most common

articles of life commanded so exorbitant prices.  The cavalier, eager to

win both gold and glory at the point of his lance, thought to find a fair

field for his prowess on the mountain plains of the Andes.  Ferdinand

Pizarro found that his brother had judged rightly in allowing as many of

his company as chose to return home, confident that the display of their

wealth would draw ten to his banner for every one that quitted it.



In a short time that cavalier saw himself at the head of one of the most

numerous and well-appointed armaments, probably, that had left the

shores of Spain since the great fleet of Ovando, in the time of Ferdinand

and Isabella.  It was scarcely more fortunate that this.  Hardly had

Ferdinand put to sea, when a violent tempest fell on the squadron, and

compelled him to return to port and refit.  At length he crossed the

ocean, and reached the little harbor of Nombre de Dios in safety.  But no

preparations had been made for his coming, and, as he was detained here

some time before he could pass the mountains, his company suffered

greatly from scarcity of food.  In their extremity, the most unwholesome

articles were greedily devoured, and many a cavalier spent his little

savings to procure himself a miserable subsistence.  Disease, as usual,

trod closely in the track of famine, and numbers of the unfortunate

adventurers, sinking under the unaccustomed heats of the climate,

perished on the very threshold of discovery.



It was the tale often repeated in the history of Spanish enterprise.  A few,

more lucky than the rest, stumble on some unexpected prize, and

hundreds, attracted by their success, press forward in the same path.  But

the rich spoil which lay on the surface has been already swept away by

the first comers, and those who follow are to win their treasure by long-

protracted and painful exertion.--Broken in spirit and in fortune, many

returned in disgust to their native shores, while others remained where

they were, to die in despair.  They thought to dig for gold; but they dug

only their graves.



Yet it fared not thus with all Pizarro's company.  Many of them, crossing

the Isthmus with him to Panama, came in time to Peru, where, in the

desperate chances of its revolutionary struggles, some few arrived at

posts of profit and distinction.  Among those who first reached the

Peruvian shore was an emissary sent by Almagro's agents to inform him

of the important grant made to him by the Crown.  The tidings reached

him just as he was making his entry into Cuzco, where he was received

with all respect by Juan and Gonzalo Pizarro, who, in obedience to their

brother's commands, instantly resigned the government of the capital into

the marshal's hands.  But Almagro was greatly elated on finding himself

now placed by his sovereign in a command that made him independent

of the man who had so deeply wronged him; and he intimated that in the

exercise of his present authority he acknowledged no superior.  In this

lordly humor he was confirmed by several of his followers, who insisted

that Cuzco fell to the south of the territory ceded to Pizarro, and

consequently came within that now granted to the marshal.  Among

these followers were several of Alvarado's men, who, though of better

condition than the soldiers of Pizarro, were under much worse discipline,

and had acquired, indeed, a spirit of unbridled license under that

unscrupulous chief.26  They now evinced little concern for the native

population of Cuzco; and, not content with the public edifices, seized on

the dwellings of individuals, where it suited their conveniences,

appropriating their contents without ceremony,--showing as little respect,

in short, for person or property, as if the place had been taken by

storm.27



While these events were passing in the ancient Peruvian capital, the

governor was still at Lima, where he was greatly disturbed by the

accounts he received of the new honors conferred on his associate.  He

did not know that his own jurisdiction had been extended seventy

leagues further to the south, and he entertained the same suspicion with

Almagro, that the capital of the Incas did not rightly come within his

present limits.  He saw all the mischief likely to result from this opulent

city falling into the hands of his rival, who would thus have an almost in

definite means of gratifying his own cupidity, and that of his followers.

He felt, that, under the present circumstances, it was not safe to allow

Almagro to anticipate the possession of power, to which, as yet, he had

no legitimate right; for the despatches containing the warrant for it still

remained with Hernando Pizarro, at Panama, and all that had reached

Peru was a copy of a garbled extract.



Without loss of time, therefore, he sent instructions to Cuzco for his

brothers to resume the government, while he defended the measure to

Almagro on the ground, that, when he should hereafter receive his

credentials, it would be unbecoming to be found already in possession of

the post.  He concluded by urging him to go forward without delay in his

expedition to the south.



But neither the marshal nor his friends were pleased with the idea of so

soon relinquishing the authority which they now considered as his right.

The Pizarros, on the other hand, were pertinacious in reclaiming it.  The

dispute grew warmer and warmer.  Each party had its supporters; the city

was split into factions; and the municipality, the soldiers, and even the

Indian population, took sides in the struggle for power.  Matters were

proceeding to extremity, menacing the capital with violence and

bloodshed, when Pizarro himself appeared among them.28



On receiving tidings of the fatal consequences of his mandates, he had

posted in all haste to Cuzco, where he was greeted with undisguised joy

by the natives, as well as by the more temperate Spaniards, anxious to

avert the impending storm.  The governor's first interview was with

Almagro, whom he embraced with a seeming cordiality in his manner;

and, without any show of resentment, inquired into the cause of the

present disturbances.  To this the marshal replied, by throwing the blame

on Pizarro's brothers; but, although the governor reprimanded them with

some asperity for their violence, it was soon evident that his sympathies

were on their side, and the dangers of a feud between the two associates

seemed greater than ever.  Happily, it was postponed by the intervention

of some common friends, who showed more discretion than their leaders.

With their aid a reconciliation was at length effected, on the grounds

substantially of their ancient compact.



It was agreed that their friendship should be maintained inviolate; and,

by a stipulation that reflects no great credit on the parties, it was

provided that neither should malign nor disparage the other, especially in

their despatches to the emperor; and that neither should hold

communication with the government without the knowledge of his

confederate; lastly, that both the expenditures and the profits of future

discovery should be shared equally by the associates.  The wrath of

Heaven was invoked by the most solemn imprecations on the head of

whichever should violate this compact, and the Almighty was implored

to visit the offender with loss of property and of life in this world, and

with eternal perdition in that to come! 29  The parties further bound

themselves to the observance of this contract by a solemn oath taken on

the sacrament, as it was held in the hands of Father Bartolome de

Segovia, who concluded the ceremony by performing mass.  The whole

proceeding, and the articles of agreement, were carefully recorded by the

notary, in an instrument bearing date June 12, 1535, and attested by a

long list of witnesses.30



Thus did these two ancient comrades, after trampling on the ties of

friendship and honor, hope to knit themselves to each other by the holy

bands of religion.  That it should have been necessary to resort to so

extraordinary a measure might have furnished them with the best proof

of its inefficacy.



Not long after this accommodation of their differences, the marshal

raised his standard for Chili; and numbers, won by his popular manners,

and by his liberal largesses,--liberal to prodigality,--eagerly joined in the

enterprise, which they fondly trusted would lead even to greater riches

than they had found in Peru.  Two Indians, Paullo Topa, a brother of the

Inca Manco, and Villac Umu, the high-priest of the nation, were sent in

advance, with three Spaniards, to prepare the way for the little army.  A

detachment of a hundred and fifty men, under an officer named

Saavedra, next followed.  Almagro remained behind to collect further

recruits; but before his levies were completed, he began his march,

feeling himself insecure, with his diminished strength, in the

neighborhood of Pizarro!  31  The remainder of his forces, when

mustered, were to follow him.



Thus relieved of the presence of his rival, the governor returned without

further delay to the coast, to resume his labors in the settlement of the

country.  Besides the principal city of "The Kings," he established others

along the Pacific, destined to become hereafter the flourishing marts of

commerce.  The most important of these, in honor of his birthplace, he

named Truxillo, planting it on a site already indicated by Almagro.32

He made also numerous repartimientos both of lands and Indians among

his followers, in the usual manner of the Spanish Conquerors; 33--though

here the ignorance of the real resources of the country led to very

different results from what he had intended, as the territory smallest in

extent, not unfrequently, from the hidden treasures in its bosom, turned

out greatest in value.34



But nothing claimed so much of Pizarro's care as the rising metropolis of

Lima; and, so eagerly did he press forward the work, and so well was he

seconded by the multitude of laborers at his command, that he had the

satisfaction to see his young capital, with its stately edifices and its pomp

of gardens, rapidly advancing towards completion.  It is pleasing to

contemplate the softer features in the character of the rude soldier, as he

was thus occupied with healing up the ravages of war, and laying broad

the foundations of an empire more civilized than that which he had

overthrown.  This peaceful occupation formed a contrast to the life of

incessant turmoil in which he had been hitherto engaged.  It seemed, too,

better suited to his own advancing age, which naturally invited to repose.

And, if we may trust his chroniclers, there was no part of his career in

which he took greater satisfaction.  It is certain there is no part which has

been viewed with greater satisfaction by posterity; and, amidst the woe

and desolation which Pizarro and his followers brought on the devoted

land of the Incas, Lima, the beautiful City of the Kings, still survives as

the most glorious work of his creation, the fairest gem on the shores of

the Pacific.







Book 3



Chapter 10



Escape Of The Inca--Return Of Hernando Pizarro-

Rising Of The Peruvians--Siege And Burning Of Cuzco-

Distresses Of The Spaniards--Storming Of The Fortress-

Pizarro's Dismay--The Inca Raises The Siege



1535--1536



While the absence of his rival Almagro relieved Pizarro from all

immediate disquietude from that quarter, his authority was menaced in

another, where he had least expected it.  This was from the native

population of the country.  Hitherto the Peruvians had shown only a tame

and submissive temper, that inspired their conquerors with too much

contempt to leave room for apprehension.  They had passively

acquiesced in the usurpation of the invaders; had seen one monarch

butchered, another placed on the vacant throne, their temples despoiled

of their treasures, their capital and country appropriated and parcelled

out among the Spaniards; but, with the exception of an occasional

skirmish in the mountain passes, not a blow had been struck in defence

of their rights.  Yet this was the warlike nation which had spread its

conquests over so large a part of the continent!



In his career, Pizarro, though he scrupled at nothing to effect his object,

had not usually countenanced such superfluous acts of cruelty as had too

often stained the arms of his countrymen in other parts of the continent,

and which, in the course of a few years, had exterminated nearly a whole

population in Hispaniola.  He had struck one astounding blow, by the

seizure of Atahuallpa; and he seemed willing to rely on this to strike

terror into the natives.  He even affected some respect for the institutions

of the country, and had replaced the monarch he had murdered by

another of the legitimate line.  Yet this was but a pretext.  The kingdom

had experienced a revolution of the most decisive kind.  Its ancient

institutions were subverted.  Its heaven-descended aristocracy was

levelled almost to the condition of the peasant.  The people became the

serfs of the Conquerors.  Their dwellings in the capital---at least, after

the arrival of Alvarado's officers--were seized and appropriated.  The

temples were turned into stables; the royal residences into barracks for

the troops.  The sanctity of the religious houses was violated.  Thousands

of matrons and maidens, who, however erroneous their faith, lived in

chaste seclusion in the conventual establishments, were now turned

inroad, and became the prey of a licentious soldiery.1  A favorite wife of

the young Inca was debauched by the Castilian officers.  The Inca,

himself treated with contemptuous indifference, found that he was a poor

dependant, if not a tool, in the hands of his conquerors.2



Yet the Inca Manco was a man of a lofty spirit and a courageous heart;

such a one as might have challenged comparison with the bravest of his

ancestors in the prouder days of the empire.  Stung to the quick by the

humiliations to which he was exposed, he repeatedly urged Pizarro to

restore him to the real exercise of power, as well as to the show of it.

But Pizarro evaded a request so incompatible with his own ambitious

schemes, or, indeed, with the policy of Spain, and the young Inca and his

nobles were left to brood over their injuries in secret, and await patiently

the hour of vengeance.



The dissensions among the Spaniards themselves seemed to afford a

favorable opportunity for this.  The Peruvian chiefs held many

conferences together on the subject, and the high-priest Villac Umu

urged the necessity of a rising so soon as Almagro had withdrawn his

forces from the city.  It would then be comparatively easy, by assaulting

the invaders on their several posts, scattered as they were over the

country, to overpower them by superior numbers, and shake off their

detested yoke before the arrival of fresh reinforcements should rivet it

forever on the necks of his countrymen.  A plan for a general rising was

formed, and it was in conformity to it that the priest was selected by the

Inca to bear Almagro company on the march, that he might secure the

cooperation of the natives in the country, and then secretly return--as in

fact he did--to take a part in the insurrection.



To carry their plans into effect, it became necessary that the Inca Manco

should leave the city and present himself among his people.  He found no

difficulty in withdrawing from Cuzco, where his presence was scarcely

heeded by the Spaniards, as his nominal power was held in little

deference by the haughty and confident Conquerors.  But in the capital

there was a body of Indian allies more jealous of his movements.  These

were from the tribe of the Canares, a warlike race of the north, too

recently reduced by the Incas to have much sympathy with them or their

institutions.  There were about a thousand of this people in the place,

and, as they had conceived some suspicion of the Inca's purposes, they

kept an eye on his movements, and speedily reported his absence to Juan

Pizarro.



That cavalier, at the head of a small body of horse, instantly marched in

pursuit of the fugitive, whom he was so fortunate as to discover in a

thicket of reeds, in which he sought to conceal himself, at no great

distance from the city.  Manco was arrested, brought back a prisoner to

Cuzco, and placed under a strong guard in the fortress.  The conspiracy

seemed now at an end; and nothing was left to the unfortunate Peruvians

but to bewail their ruined hopes, and to give utterance to their

disappointment in doleful ballads, which rehearsed the captivity of their

Inca, and the downfall of his royal house.3



While these things were in progress, Hernando Pizarro returned to

Ciudad de los Reyes, bearing with him the royal commission for the

extension of his brother's powers, as well as of those conceded to

Almagro.  The envoy also brought the royal patent conferring on

Francisco Pizarro the title of marques de los Atavillos,--a province in

Peru.  Thus was the fortunate adventurer placed in the ranks of the proud

aristocracy of Castile, few of whose members could boast--if they had

the courage to boast --their elevation from so humble an origin, as still

fewer could justify it by a show of greater services to the Crown.



The new marquess resolved not to forward the commission, at present, to

the marshal, whom he designed to engage still deeper in the conquest of

Chili, that his attention might be diverted from Cuzco which, however,

his brother assured him, now fell, without doubt, within the newly

extended limits of his own territory.  To make more sure of this

important prize, he despatched Hernando to take the government of the

capital into his own hands, as the one of his brothers on whose talents

and practical experience he placed greatest reliance.



Hernando, notwithstanding his arrogant bearing towards his countrymen,

had ever manifested a more than ordinary sympathy with the Indians.  He

had been the friend of Atahuallpa; to such a degree, indeed, that it was

said, if he had been in the camp at the time, the fate of that unhappy

monarch would probably have been averted.  He now showed a similar

friendly disposition towards his successor, Manco.  He caused the

Peruvian prince to be liberated from confinement, and gradually

admitted him into some intimacy with himself.  The crafty Indian availed

himself of his freedom to mature his plans for the rising, but with so

much caution, that no suspicion of them crossed the mind of Hernando.

Secrecy and silence are characteristic of the American, almost as

invariably as the peculiar color of his skin.  Manco disclosed to his

conqueror the existence of several heaps of treasure, and the places

where they had been secreted; and, when he had thus won his

confidence, he stimulated his cupidity still further by an account of a

statue of pure gold of his father Huayna Capac, which the wily Peruvian

requested leave to bring from a secret cave in which it was deposited,

among the neighboring Andes.  Hernando, blinded by his avarice,

consented to the Inca's departure.



He sent with him two Spanish soldiers, less as a guard than to aid him in

the object of his expedition.  A week elapsed, and yet he did not return,

nor were there any tidings to be gathered of him.  Hernando now saw his

error, especially as his own suspicions were confirmed by the

unfavorable reports of his Indian allies.  Without further delay, he

despatched his brother Juan, at the head of sixty horse, in quest of the

Peruvian prince, with orders to bring him back once more a prisoner to

his capital.



That cavalier, with his well-armed troops, soon traversed the environs of

Cuzco without discovering any vestige of the fugitive.  The country was

remarkably silent and deserted, until, as he approached the mountain

range that hems in the valley of Yucay, about six leagues from the city,

he was met by the two Spaniards who had accompanied Manco.  They

informed Pizarro that it was only at the point of the sword he could

recover the Inca, for the country was all in arms, and the Peruvian chief

at its head was preparing to march on the capital.  Yet he had offered no

violence to their persons, but had allowed them to return in safety.



The Spanish captain found this story fully confirmed when he arrived at

the river Yucay, on the opposite bank of which were drawn up the Indian

battalions to the number of many thousand men, who, with their young

monarch at their head, prepared to dispute his passage.  It seemed that

they could not feel their position sufficiently strong, without placing a

river, as usual, between them and their enemy.  The Spaniards were not

checked by this obstacle.  The stream, though deep, was narrow; and

plunging in, they swam their horses boldly across, amidst a tempest of

stones and arrows that rattled thick as hail on their harness, finding

occasionally some crevice or vulnerable point,--although the wounds

thus received only goaded them to more desperate efforts.  The

barbarians fell back as the cavaliers made good their landing; but,

without allowing the latter time to form, they returned with a spirit which

they had hitherto seldom displayed, and enveloped them on all sides with

their greatly superior numbers.  The fight now raged fiercely.  Many of

the Indians were armed with lances headed with copper tempered almost

to the hardness of steel, and with huge maces and battle-axes of the same

metal.  Their defensive armour, also, was in many respects excellent,

consisting of stout doublets of quilted cotton.  shields covered with skins,

and casques richly ornamented with gold and jewels, or sometimes made

like those of the Mexicans, in the fantastic shape of the heads of wild

animals, garnished with rows of teeth that grinned horribly above the

visage of the warrior.4   The whole army wore an aspect of martial

ferocity, under the control of much higher military discipline than the

Spaniards had before seen in the country.



The little band of cavaliers, shaken by the fury of the Indian assault, were

thrown at first into some disorder, but at length, cheering on one another

with the old war-cry of "St. Jago," they formed in solid column, and

charged boldly into the thick of the enemy.  The latter, incapable of

withstanding the shock, gave way, or were trampled down under the feet

of the horses, or pierced by the lances of the riders.  Yet their flight was

conducted with some order; and they turned at intervals, to let off a

volley of arrows, or to deal furious blows with their pole-axes and

warclubs.  They fought as if conscious that they were under the eye of

their Inca.



It was evening before they had entirely quitted the level ground, and

withdrawn into the fastnesses of the lofty range of hills which belt round

the beautiful valley of Yucay.  Juan Pizarro and his little troop encamped

on the level at the base of the mountains.  He had gained a victory, as

usual, over immense odds; but he had never seen a field so well disputed,

and his victory had cost him the lives of several men and horses, while

many more had been wounded, and were nearly disabled by the fatigues

of the day.  But he trusted the severe lesson he had inflicted on the

enemy, whose slaughter was great, would crush the spirit of resistance.

He was deceived.



The following morning, great was his dismay to see the passes of the

mountains filled up with dark lines of warriors, stretching as far as the

eye could penetrate into the depths of the sierra, while dense masses of

the enemy were gathered like thunder-clouds along the slopes and

sumrafts, as if ready to pour down in fury on the assailants.  The ground,

altogether unfavorable to the manoeuvres of cavalry, gave every

advantage to the Peruvians, who rolled down huge rocks from their

elevated position, and sent off incessant showers of missiles on the heads

of the Spaniards.  Juan Pizarro did not care to entangle himself further in

the perilous defile; and, though he repeatedly charged the enemy, and

drove them back with considerable loss, the second night found him with

men and horses wearied and wounded, and as little advanced in the

object of his expedition as on the preceding evening.  From this

embarrassing position, after a day or two more spent in unprofitable

hostilities, he was surprised by a summons from his brother to return

with all expedition to Cuzco, which was now besieged by the enemy!



Without delay, he began his retreat, recrossed the valley, the recent scene

of slaughter, swam the river Yucay, and, by a rapid countermarch,

closely followed by the victorious enemy, who celebrated their success

with songs or rather yells of triumph, he arrived before nightfall in sight

of the capital.



But very different was the sight which there met his eye from what he

had beheld on leaving it a few days before.  The extensive environs, as

far as the eye could reach, were occupied by a mighty host, which an

indefinite computation swelled to the number of two hundred thousand

warriors.5  The dusky lines of the Indian battalions stretched out to the

very verge of the mountains; while, all around, the eye saw only the

crests and waving banners of chieftains, mingled with rich panoplies of

feather-work, which reminded some few who had served under Cortes of

the military costume of the Aztecs.  Above all rose a forest of long lances

and battle-axes edged with copper, which, tossed to and fro in wild

confusion, glittered in the rays of the setting sun, like light playing on the

surface of a dark and troubled ocean.  It was the first time that the

Spaniards had beheld an Indian army in all its terrors; such an army as

the Incas led to battle, when the banner of the Sun was borne triumphant

over the land.



Yet the bold hearts of the cavaliers, if for a moment dismayed by the

sight, soon gathered courage as they closed up their files, and prepared to

open a way for themselves through the beleaguering host.  But the enemy

seemed to shun the encounter; and, falling back at their approach, left a

free entrance into the capital.  The Peruvians were, probably, not willing

to draw as many victims as they could into the toils, conscious that, the

greater the number, the sooner they would become sensible to the

approaches of famine.6



Hernando Pizarro greeted his brother with no little satisfaction; for he

brought an important addition to his force, which now, when all were

united, did not exceed two hundred, horse and foot,7 besides a thousand

Indian auxiliaries; an insignificant number, in comparison with the

countless multitudes that were swarming at the gates.  That night was

passed by the Spaniards with feelings of the deepest anxiety, as they

looked forward with natural apprehension to the morrow.  It was early in

February, 1536, when the siege of Cuzco commenced; a siege

memorable as calling out the most heroic displays of Indian and

European valor, and bringing the two races in deadlier conflict with each

other than had yet occurred in the conquest of Peru.



The numbers of the enemy seemed no less formidable during the night

than by the light of day; far and wide their watch-fires were to be seen

gleaming over valley and hill-top, as thickly scattered, says an

eyewitness, as "the stars of heaven in a cloudless summer night." 8

Before these fires had become pale in the light of the morning, the

Spaniards were roused by the hideous clamor of conch, trumpet, and

atabal, mingled with the fierce war-cries of the barbarians, as they let off

volleys of missiles of every description, most of which fell harmless

within the city.  But others did more serious execution.  These were

burning arrows, and redhot stones wrapped in cotton that had been

steeped in some bituminous substance, which, scattered long trains of

light through the air, fell on the roofs of the buildings, and speedily set

them on fire.9  These roofs, even of the better sort of edifices, were

uniformly of thatch, and were ignited as easily as tinder.  In a moment

the flames burst forth from the most opposite quarters of the city.  They

quickly communicated to the wood-work in the interior of the buildings,

and broad sheets of flame mingled with smoke rose up towards the

heavens, throwing a fearful glare over every object.  The rarefied

atmosphere heightened the previous impetuosity of the wind, which,

fanning the rising flames, they rapidly spread from dwelling to dwelling,

till the whole fiery mass, swayed to and fro by the tempest, surged and

roared with the fury of a volcano.  The heat became intense, and clouds

of smoke, gathering like a dark pall over the city, produced a sense of

suffocation and almost blindness in those quarters where it was driven by

the winds.10



The Spaniards were encamped in the great square, partly under awnings,

and partly in the hall of the Inca Viracocha, on the ground since covered

by the cathedral.  Three times in the course of that dreadful day, the roof

of the building was on fire; but, although no efforts were made to

extinguish it, the flames went out without doing much injury.  This

miracle was ascribed to the Blessed Virgin, who was distinctly seen by

several of the Christian combatants, hovering over the spot on which was

to be raised the temple dedicated to her worship.11



Fortunately, the open space around Hernando's little company separated

them from the immediate scene of conflagration.  It afforded a means of

preservation similar to that employed by the American hunter, who

endeavors to surround himself with a belt of wasted land, when

overtaken by a conflagration in the prairies.  All day the fire continued to

rage, and at night the effect was even more appalling; for by the lurid

flames the unfortunate Spaniards could read the consternation depicted

in each others' ghastly countenances, while in the suburbs, along the

slopes of the surrounding hills, might be seen the throng of besiegers,

gazing with fiendish exultation on the work of destruction.  High above

the town to the north, rose the gray fortress, which now showed ruddy in

the glare, looking grimly down on the ruins of the fair city which it was

no longer able to protect; and in the distance were to be discerned the

shadowy forms of the Andes, soaring up in solitary grandeur into the

regions of eternal silence, far beyond the wild tumult that raged so

fearfully at their base.



Such was the extent of the city, that it was several days before the fury of

the fire was spent.  Tower and temple, hut, palace, and hall, went down

before it.  Fortunately, among the buildings that escaped were the

magnificent House of the Sun and the neighboring Convent of the

Virgins.  Their insulated position afforded the means, of which the

Indians from motives of piety were willing to avail themselves, for their

preservation.12  Full one half of the capital, so long the chosen seat of

Western civilization, the pride of the Incas, and the bright abode of their

tutelar deity, was laid in ashes by the hands of his own children.  It was

some consolation for them to reflect, that it burned over the heads of its

conquerors,-their trophy and their tomb!



During the long period of the conflagration, the Spaniards made no

attempt to extinguish the flames.  Such an attempt would have availed

nothing.  Yet they did not tamely submit to the assaults of the enemy,

and they sallied forth from time to time to repel them.  But the fallen

timbers and scattered rubbish of the houses presented serious

impediments to the movements of horse; and, when these were partially

cleared away by the efforts of the infantry and the Indian allies, the

Peruvians planted stakes and threw barricades across the path, which

proved equally embarrassing.13  To remove them was a work of time

and no little danger, as the pioneers were exposed to the whole brunt of

the enemy's archery, and the aim of the Peruvian was sure.  When at

length the obstacles were cleared away, and a free course was opened to

the cavalry, they rushed with irresistible impetuosity on their foes, who,

falling back in confusion, were cut to pieces by the riders, or pierced

through with their lances.  The slaughter on these occasions was great;

but the Indians, nothing disheartened, usually returned with renewed

courage to the attack, and, while fresh reinforcements met the Spaniards

in front, others, lying in ambush among the ruins, threw the troops into

disorder by assailing them on the flanks.  The Peruvians were expert

both with bow and sling; and these encounters, notwithstanding the

superiority of their arms, cost the Spaniards more lives than in their

crippled condition they could afford to spare,--a loss poorly compensated

by that of tenfold the number of the enemy.  One weapon, peculiar to

South American warfare, was used with some effect by the Peruvians.

This was the lasso, a long rope with a noose at the end, which they

adroitly threw over the rider, or entangled with it the legs of his horse, so

as to bring them both to the ground.  More than one Spaniard fell into the

hands of the enemy by this expedient.14



Thus harassed, sleeping on their arms, with their horses picketed by their

side, ready for action at any and every hour, the Spaniards had no rest by

night or by day.  To add to their troubles, the fortress which overlooked

the city, and completely commanded the great square in which they were

quartered, had been so feebly garrisoned in their false sense of security,

that, on the approach of the Peruvians, it had been abandoned without a

blow in its defence.  It was now occupied by a strong body of the enemy,

who, from his elevated position, sent down showers of missiles, from

time to time, which added greatly to the annoyance of the besieged.

Bitterly did their captain now repent the improvident security which had

led him to neglect a post so important.



Their distresses were still further aggravated by the rumors, which

continually reached their ears, of the state of the country.  The rising, it

was said, was general throughout the land; the Spaniards living on their

insulated plantations had all been massacred; Lima and Truxillo and the

principal cities were besieged, and must soon fall into the enemy's hands;

the Peruvians were in possession of the passes, and all communications

were cut off, so that no relief was to be expected from their countrymen

on the coast.  Such were the dismal stories, (which, however

exaggerated, had too much foundation in fact,) that now found their way

into the city from the camp of the besiegers.  And to give greater credit

to the rumors, eight or ten human heads were rolled into the plaza, in

whose blood-stained visages the Spaniards recognized with horror the

lineaments of their companions, who they knew had been dwelling in

solitude on their estates! 15



Overcome by these horrors, many were for abandoning the place at once,

as no longer tenable, and for opening a passage for themselves to the

coast with their own good swords.  There was a daring in the enterprise

which had a charm for the adventurous spirit of the Castilian.  Better,

they said, to perish in a manly struggle for life, than to die thus

ignominiously, pent up like foxes in their holes, to be suffocated by the

hunter!



But the Pizarros, De Rojas, and some other of the principal cavaliers,

refused to acquiesce in a measure which, they said, must cover them with

dishonor.16  Cuzco had been the great prize for which they had

contended; it was the ancient seat of empire, and, though now in ashes,

would again rise from its ruins as glorious as before.  All eyes would be

turned on them, as its defenders, and their failure, by giving confidence

to the enemy, might decide the fate of their countrymen throughout the

land.  They were placed in that post as the post of honor, and better

would it be to die there than to desert it.



There seemed, indeed, no alternative; for every avenue to escape was cut

off by an enemy who had perfect knowledge of the country, and

possession of all its passes.  But this state of things could not last long.

The Indian could not, in the long run, contend with the white man.  The

spirit of insurrection would die out of itself.  Their great army would

melt away, unaccustomed as the natives were to the privations incident to

a protracted campaign.  Reinforcements would be daily coming in from

the colonies; and, if the Castilians would be but true to themselves for a

season, they would be relieved by their own countrymen, who would

never suffer them to die like outcasts among the mountains.



The cheering words and courageous bearing of the cavaliers went to the

hearts of their followers; for the soul of the Spaniard readily responded

to the call of honor, if not of humanity.  All now agreed to stand by their

leader to the last.  But, if they would remain longer in their present

position, it was absolutely necessary to dislodge the enemy from the

fortress; and, before venturing on this dangerous service, Hernando

Pizarro resolved to strike such a blow as should intimidate the besiegers

from further attempt to molest his present quarters.



He communicated his plan of attack to his officers; and, forming his little

troop into three divisions, he placed them under command of his brother

Gonzalo, of Gabriel de Rojas, an officer in whom he reposed great

confidence, and Hernan Ponce de Leon.  The Indian pioneers were sent

forward to clear away the rubbish, and the several divisions moved

simultaneously up the principal avenues towards the camp of the

besiegers.  Such stragglers as they met in their way were easily cut to

pieces, and the three bodies, bursting impetuously on the disordered lines

of the Peruvians, took them completely by surprise.  For some moments

there was little resistance, and the slaughter was terrible.  But the Indians

gradually rallied, and, coming into something like order, returned to the

fight with the courage of men who had long been familiar with danger.

They fought hand to hand with their copper-headed war-clubs and pole-

axes, while a storm of darts, stones, and arrows rained on the well-

defended bodies of the Christians.



The barbarians showed more discipline than was to have been expected;

for which, it is said, they were indebted to some Spanish prisoners, from

several of whom, the Inca, having generously spared their lives, took

occasional lessons in the art of war.  The Peruvians had, also, learned to

manage with some degree of skill the weapons of their conquerors; and

they were seen armed with bucklers, helmets, and swords of European

workmanship, and even, in a few instances, mounted on the horses which

they had taken from the white men.17  The young Inca, in particular,

accoutred in the European fashion, rode a war-horse which he managed

with considerable address, and, with a long lance in his hand led on his

followers to the attack.--This readiness to adopt the superior arms and

tactics of the Conquerors intimates a higher civilization than that which

belonged to the Aztec, who, in his long collision with the Spaniards, was

never so far divested of his terrors for the horse as to venture to mount

him.



But a few days or weeks of training were not enough to give familiarity

with weapons, still less with tactics, so unlike those to which the

Peruvians had been hitherto accustomed.  The fight, on the present

occasion, though hotly contested, was not of long duration.  After a

gallant struggle in which the natives threw themselves fearlessly on the

horse men, endeavoring to tear them from their saddles, they were

obliged to give way before the repeated shock of their chargers.  Many

were trampled under foot, others cut down by the Spanish broadswords,

while the arquebusiers, supporting the cavalry, kept up a running fire that

did terrible execution on the flanks and rear of the fugitives.  At length,

sated with slaughter, and trusting that the chastisement he had inflicted

on the enemy would secure him from further annoyance for the present,

the Castilian general drew back his forces to their quarters in the

capital.18



His next step was the recovery of the citadel.  It was an enterprise of

danger.  The fortress, which overlooked the northern section of the city,

stood high on a rocky eminence, so steep as to be inaccessible on this

quarter, where it was defended only by a single wall.  Towards the open

country, it was more easy of approach; but there it was protected by two

semicircular walls, each about twelve hundred feet in length, and of great

thickness.  They were built of massive stones, or rather rocks, put

together without cement, so as to form a kind of rustic-work.  The level

of the ground between these lines of defence was raised up so as to

enable the garrison to discharge its arrows at the assailants, while their

own persons were protected by the parapet.  Within the interior wall was

the fortress, consisting of three strong towers, one of great height, which,

with a smaller one, was now held by the enemy, under the command of

an Inca noble, a warrior of well-tried valor, prepared to defend it to the

last extremity.



The perilous enterprise was intrusted by Hernando Pizarro to his brother

Juan, a cavalier in whose bosom burned the adventurous spirit of a

knight-errant of romance.  As the fortress was to be approached through

the mountain passes, it became necessary to divert the enemy's attention

to another quarter.  A little while before sunset Juan Pizarro left the city

with a picked corps of horsemen, and took a direction opposite to that of

the fortress, that the besieging army might suppose the object was a

foraging expedition.  But secretly countermarching in the night, he

fortunately found the passes unprotected, and arrived before the outer

wall of the fortress, without giving the alarm to the garrison.19



The entrance was through a narrow opening in the centre of the rampart;

but this was now closed up with heavy stones, that seemed to form one

solid work with the rest of the masonry.  It was an affair of time to

dislodge these huge masses, in such a manner as not to rouse the

garrison.  The Indian nations, who rarely attacked in the night, were not

sufficiently acquainted with the art of war even to provide against

surprise by posting sentinels.  When the task was accomplished, Juan

Pizarro and his gallant troop rode through the gateway, and advanced

towards the second parapet.



But their movements had not been conducted so secretly as to escape

notice, and they now found the interior court swarming with warriors,

who- as the Spaniards drew near, let off clouds of missiles that

compelled them to come to a halt.  Juan Pizarro, aware that no time was

to be lost, ordered one half of his corps to dismount, and, putting himself

at their head, prepared to make a breach as before in the fortifications.

He had been wounded some days previously in the jaw, so that, finding

his helmet caused him pain, he rashly dispensed with it, and trusted for

protection to his buckler.20  Leading on his men, he encouraged them in

the work of demolition, in the face of such a storm of stones, javelins,

and arrows, as might have made the stoutest heart shrink from

encountering it.  The good mail of the Spaniards did not always protect

them; but others took the place of such as fell, until a-breach was made,

and the cavalry, pouring in, rode down all who opposed them.



The parapet was now abandoned, and the enemy, hurrying with

disorderly flight across the inclosure, took refuge on a kind of platform

or terrace, commanded by the principal tower.  Here rallying, they shot

off fresh volleys of missiles against the Spaniards, while the garrison in

the fortress hurled down fragments of rock and timber on their heads.

Juan Pizarro, still among the foremost, sprang forward on the terrace,

cheering on his men by his voice and example; but at this moment he

was struck by a large stone on the head, not then protected by his

buckler, and was stretched on the ground.  The dauntless chief still

continued to animate his followers by his voice, till the terrace was

carried, and its miserable defenders were put to the sword.  His

sufferings were then too much for him, and he was removed to the town

below, where, notwithstanding every exertion to save him, he survived

the injury but a fortnight, and died in great agony.21--To say that he was

a Pizarro is enough to attest his claim to valor.  But it is his praise, that

his valor was tempered by courtesy.  His own nature appeared mild by

contrast with the haughty temper of his brothers, and his manners made

him a favorite of the army.  He had served in the conquest of Peru from

the first, and no name on the roll of its conquerors is less tarnished by the

reproach of cruelty, or stands higher in all the attributes of a true and

valiant knight.22



Though deeply sensible to his brother's disaster, Hernando Pizarro saw

that no time was to be lost in profiting by the advantages already gained.

Committing the charge of the town to Gonzalo, he put himself at the

head of the assailants, and laid vigorous siege to the fortresses.



One surrendered after a short resistance.  The other and more formidable

of the two still held out under the brave Inca noble who commanded it.

He was a man of an athletic frame, and might be seen striding along the

battlements, armed with a Spanish buckler and cuirass, and in his hand

wielding a formidable mace, garnished with points or knobs of copper.

With this terrible weapon he struck down all who attempted to force a

passage into the fortress.  Some of his own followers who proposed a

surrender he is said to have slain with his own hand.  Hernando prepared

to carry the place by escalade.  Ladders were planted against the walls,

but no sooner did a Spaniard gain the topmost round, than he was hurled

to the ground by the strong arm of the Indian warrior.  His activity was

equal to his strength; and he seemed to be at every point the moment that

his presence was needed.



The Spanish commander was filled with admiration at this display of

valor; for he could admire valor even in an enemy.  He gave orders that

the chief should not be injured, but be taken alive, if possible.23  This

was not easy.  At length, numerous ladders having been planted against

the tower, the Spaniards scaled it on several quarters at the same time,

and, leaping into the place, overpowered the few combatants who still

made a show of resistance.  But the Inca chieftain was not to be taken;

and, finding further resistance ineffectual, he sprang to the edge of the

battlements, and, casting away his war-club, wrapped his mantle around

him and threw himself headlong from the summit.24  He died like an

ancient Roman.  He had struck his last stroke for the freedom of his

country, and he scorned to survive her dishonor.--The Castilian

commander left a small force in garrison to secure his conquest, and

returned in triumph to his quarters.



Week after week rolled away, and no relief came to the beleaguered

Spaniards.  They had long since begun to feel the approaches of famine.

Fortunately, they were provided with water from the streams which

flowed through the city.  But, though they had well husbanded their

resources, their provisions were exhausted, and they had for some time

depended on such scanty supplies of grain as they could gather from the

ruined magazines and dwellings, mostly consumed by the fire, or from

the produce of some successful foray.25  This latter resource was

attended with no little difficulty; for every expedition led to a fierce

encounter with the enemy, which usually cost the lives of several

Spaniards, and inflicted a much heavier injury on the Indian allies.  Yet it

was at least one good result of such loss, that it left fewer to provide for.

But the whole number of the besieged was so small, that any loss greatly

increased the difficulties of defence by the remainder.



As months passed away without bringing any tidings of their

countrymen, their minds were haunted with still gloomier apprehensions

as to their fate.  They well knew that the governor would make every

effort to rescue them from their desperate condition.  That he had not

succeeded in this made it probable, that his own situation was no better

than theirs, or, perhaps, he and his followers had already fallen victims to

the fury of the insurgents.  It was a dismal thought, that they alone were

left in the land, far from all human succour, to perish miserably by the

hands of the barbarians among the mountains.



Yet the actual state of things, though gloomy in the extreme, was not

quite so desperate as their imaginations had painted it.  The insurrection,

it is true, had been general throughout the country, at least that portion of

it occupied by the Spaniards.  It had been so well concerted, that it broke

out almost simultaneously, and the Conquerors, who were living in

careless security on their estates, had been massacred to the number of

several hundreds.  An Indian force had sat down before Xauxa, and a

considerable army had occupied the valley of Rimac and laid siege to

Lima.  But the country around that capital was of an open, level

character, very favorable to the action of cavalry.  Pizarro no sooner saw

himself menaced by the hostile array, than he sent such a force against

the Peruvians as speedily put them to flight; and, following up his

advantage, he inflicted on them such a severe chastisement, that,

although they still continued to hover in the distance and cut off his

communications with the interior, they did not care to trust themselves

on the other side of the Rimac.



The accounts that the Spanish commander now received of the state of

the country filled him with the most serious alarm.  He was particularly

solicitous for the fate of the garrison at Cuzco, and he made repeated

efforts to relieve that capital.  Four several detachments, amounting to

more than four hundred men in all, half of them cavalry, were sent by

him at different times, under some of his bravest officers.  But none of

them reached their place of destination.  The wily natives permitted them

to march into the interior of the country, until they were fairly entangled

in the passes of the Cordilleras.  They then enveloped them with greatly

superior numbers, and, occupying the heights, showered down their fatal

missiles on the heads of the Spaniards, or crushed them under the weight

of fragments of rock which they rolled on them from the mountains.  In

some instances, the whole detachment was cut off to a man.  In others, a

few stragglers only survived to return and tell the bloody tale to their

countrymen at Lima.26



Pizarro was now filled with consternation.  He had the most dismal

forebodings of the fate of the Spaniards dispersed throughout the

country, and even doubted the possibility of maintaining his own

foothold in it without assistance from abroad.  He despatched a vessel to

the neighboring colony at Truxillo, urging them to abandon the place,

with all their effects, and to repair to him at Lima.  The measure was,

fortunately, not adopted.  Many of his men were for availing themselves

of the vessels which rode at anchor in the port to make their escape from

the country at once, and take refuge in Panama.  Pizarro would not

hearken to so dastardly a counsel, which involved the desertion of the

brave men in the interior who still looked to him for protection.  He cut

off the hopes of these timid spirits by despatching all the vessels then in

port on a very different mission.  He sent letters by them to the governors

of Panama, Nicaragua, Guatemala, and Mexico, representing the gloomy

state of his affairs, and invoking their aid.  His epistle to Alvarado, then

established at Guatemala, is preserved.  He conjures him by every

sentiment of honor and patriotism to come to his assistance, and this

before it was too late.  Without assistance, the Spaniards could no longer

maintain their footing in Peru, and that great empire would be lost to the

Castilian Crown.  He finally engages to share with him such conquests as

they may make with their united arms.27--Such concessions, to the very

man whose absence from the country, but a few months before, Pizarro

would have been willing to secure at almost any price, are sufficient

evidence of the extremity of his distress.  The succours thus earnestly

solicited arrived in time, not to quell the Indian insurrection, but to aid

him in a struggle quite as formidable with his own countrymen.



It was now August.  More than five months had elapsed since the

commencement of the siege of Cuzco, yet the Peruvian legions still lay

encamped around the city.  The siege had been protracted much beyond

what was usual in Indian warfare, and showed the resolution of the

natives to exterminate the white men.  But the Peruvians themselves had

for some time been straitened by the want of provisions.  It was no easy

matter to feed so numerous a host; and the obvious resource of the

magazines of grain, so providently prepared by the Incas, did them but

little service, since their contents had been most prodigally used, and

even dissipated, by the Spaniards, on their first occupation of the

country.28  The season for planting had now arrived, and the Inca well

knew, that, if his followers were to neglect it, they would be visited by a

scourge even more formidable than their invaders.  Disbanding the

greater part of his forces, therefore, he ordered them to withdraw to their

homes, and, after the labors of the field were over, to return and resume

the blockade of the capital.  The Inca reserved a considerable force to

attend on his own person, with which he retired to Tambo, a strongly

fortified place south of the valley of Yucay, the favorite residence of his

ancestors.  He also posted a large body as a corps of observation in the

environs of Cuzco, to watch the movements of the enemy, and to

intercept supplies.



The Spaniards beheld with joy the mighty host, which had so long

encompassed the city, now melting away.  They were not slow in

profiling by the circumstance, and Hernando Pizarro took advantage of

the temporary absence to send out foraging parties to scour the country,

and bring back supplies to his famishing soldiers.  In this he was so

successful that on one occasion no less than two thousand head of cattle-

-the Peruvian sheep--were swept away from the Indian plantations and

brought safely to Cuzco.29 This placed the army above all apprehensions

on the score of want for the present.



Yet these forays were made at the point of the lance, and many a

desperate contest ensued, in which the best blood of the Spanish chivalry

was shed.  The contests, indeed, were not confined to large bodies of

troops, but skirmishes took place between smaller parties, which

sometimes took the form of personal combats.  Nor were the parties so

unequally matched as might have been supposed in these single

rencontres; and the Peruvian warrior, with his sling, his bow, and his

lasso, proved no contemptible antagonist for the mailed horseman, whom

he sometimes even ventured to encounter, hand to hand, with his

formidable battle-axe.  The ground around Cuzco became a battle-field,

like the vega of Granada, in which Christian and Pagan displayed the

characteristics of their peculiar warfare; and many a deed of heroism was

performed, which wanted only the song of the minstrel to shed around it

a glory like that which rested on the last days of the Moslem of Spain.30



But Hernando Pizarro was not content to act wholly on the defensive;

and he meditated a bold stroke, by which at once to put an end to the

war.  This was the capture of the Inca Manco, whom he hoped to surprise

in his quarters at Tambo.



For this service he selected about eighty of his best-mounted cavalry,

with a small body of foot; and, making a large detour through the less

frequented mountain defiles, he arrived before Tambo without alarm to

the enemy.  He found the place more strongly fortified than he had

imagined.  The palace, or rather fortress, of the Incas stood on a lofty

eminence, the steep sides of which, on the quarter where the Spaniards

approached, were cut into terraces, defended by strong walls of stone and

sunburnt brick.31  The place was impregnable on this side.  On the

opposite, it looked towards the Yucay, and the ground descended by a

gradual declivity towards the plain through which rolled its deep but

narrow current.32  This was the quarter on which to make the assault.



Crossing the stream without much difficulty, the Spanish commander

advanced up the smooth glacis with as little noise as possible.  The

morning light had hardly broken on the mountains; and Pizarro, as he

drew near the outer defences, which, as in the fortress of Cuzco,

consisted of a stone parapet of great strength drawn round the inclosure,

moved quickly forward, confident that the garrison were still buried in

sleep.  But thousands of eyes were upon him; and as the Spaniards came

within bowshot, a multitude of dark forms suddenly rose above the

rampart, while the Inca, with his lance in hand, was seen on horseback in

the inclosure, directing the operations of his troops.33  At the same

moment the air was darkened with innumerable missiles, stones, javelins,

and arrows, which fell like a hurricane on the troops, and the mountains

rang to the wild war-whoop of the enemy.  The Spaniards, taken by

surprise, and many of them sorely wounded, were staggered; and, though

they quickly rallied, and made two attempts to renew the assault, they

were at length obliged to fall back, unable to endure the violence of the

storm.  To add to their confusion, the lower level in their rear was

flooded by the waters, which the natives, by opening the sluices, had

diverted from the bed of the river, so that their position was no longer

tenable.34  A council of war was then held, and it was decided to

abandon the attack as desperate, and to retreat in as good order as

possible.



The day had been consumed in these ineffectual operations; and

Hernando, under cover of the friendly darkness, sent forward his infantry

and baggage, taking command of the centre himself, and trusting the rear

to his brother Gonzalo.  The river was happily recrossed without

accident, although the enemy, now confident in their strength, rushed out

of their defences, and followed up the retreating Spaniards, whom they

annoyed with repeated discharges of arrows.  More than once they

pressed so closely on the fugitives, that Gonzalo and his chivalry were

compelled to turn and make one of those desperate charges that

effectually punished their audacity, and stayed the tide of pursuit.  Yet

the victorious foe still hung on the rear of the discomfited cavaliers, till

they had emerged from the mountain passes, and come within sight of

the blackened walls of the capital.  It was the last triumph of the Inca.35





Among the manuscripts for which I am indebted to the liberality of that

illustrious Spanish scholar, the lamented Navarrete, the most remarkable,

in connection with this history, is the work of Pedro Pizarro; Relaciones

del Descubrimiento y Conquista de los Reynos del Peru.  But a single

copy of this important document appears to have been preserved, the

existence of which was but little known till it came into the hands of

Senior de Navarrete; though it did not escape the indefatigable

researches of Herrera, as is evident from the mention of several

incidents, some of them having personal relation to Pedro Pizarro

himself, which the historian of the Indies could have derived through no

other channel.  The manuscript has lately been given to the public as part

of the inestimable collection of historical documents now in process of

publication at Madrid, under auspices which, we may trust, will insure its

success.  As the printed work did not reach me till my present labors

were far advanced, I have preferred to rely on the manuscript copy for

the brief remainder of my narrative, as I had been compelled to do for

the previous portion of it.



Nothing, that I am aware of, is known respecting the author, but what is

to be gleaned from incidental notices of himself in his own history.  He

was born at Toledo in Estremadura, the fruitful province of adventurers

to the New World, whence the family of Francis Pizarro, to which Pedro

was allied, also emigrated.  When that chief came over to undertake the

conquest of Peru, after receiving his commission from the emperor in

1529, Pedro Pizarro, then only fifteen years of age, accompanied him in

quality of page.  For three years he remained attached to the house hold

of his commander, and afterwards continued to follow his banner as a

soldier of fortune.  He was present at most of the memorable events of

the Conquest, and seems to have possessed in a great degree the

confidence of his leader, who employed him on some difficult missions,

in which he displayed coolness and gallantry.  It is true, we must take the

author's own word for all this.  But he tells his exploits with an air of

honesty, and without any extraordinary effort to set them off in undue

relief.  He speaks of himself in the third person, and, as his manuscript

was not intended solely for posterity, he would hardly have ventured

on great misrepresentation, where fraud could so easily have been

exposed.



After the Conquest, our author still remained attached to the fortunes of

his commander, and stood by him through all the troubles which ensued;

and on the assassination of that chief, he withdrew to Arequipa, to enjoy

in quiet the repartimiento of lands and Indians, which had been bestowed

on him as the recompense of his services.  He was there on the breaking

out of the great rebellion under Gonzalo Pizarro.  But he was true to his

allegiance, and chose rather, as he tells us, to be false to his name and his

lineage than to his loyalty.  Gonzalo, in retaliation, seized his estates, and

would have proceeded to still further extremities against him, when

Pedro Pizarro had fallen into his hands at Lima, but for the interposition

of his lieutenant, the famous Francisco de Carbajal, to whom the

chronicler had once the good fortune to render an important service.

This, Carbajal requited by sparing his life on two occasions,--but on the

second coolly remarked, "No man has a right to a brace of lives; and if

you fall into my hands a third time, God only can grant you another."

Happily, Pizarro did not find occasion to put this menace to the test.

After the pacification of the country, he again retired to Arequipa; but,

from the querulous tone of his remarks, it would seem he was not fully

reinstated in the possessions he had sacrificed by his loyal devotion to

government.  The last we hear of him is in 1571, the date which he

assigns as that of the completion of his history.



Pedro Pizarro's narrative covers the whole ground of the Conquest, from

the date of the first expedition that sallied out from Panama, to the

troubles that ensued on the departure of President Gasca.  The first part

of the work was gathered from the testimony of others, and, of course,

cannot claim the distinction of rising to the highest class of evidence.

But all that follows the return of Francis Pizarro from Castile, all, in

short, which constitutes the conquest of the country, may be said to be

reported on his own observation, as an eyewitness and an actor.  This

gives to his narrative a value to which it could have no pretensions on the

score of its literary execution.  Pizarro was a soldier, with as little

education, probably, as usually falls to those who have been trained from

youth in this rough school,--the most unpropitious in the world to both

mental and moral progress.  He had the good sense, moreover, not to

aspire to an excellence which he could not reach.  There is no ambition

of fine writing in his chronicle; there are none of those affectations of

ornament which only make more glaring the beggarly condition of him

who assumes them.  His object was simply to tell the story of the

Conquest, as he had seen it.  He was to deal with facts, not with words,

which he wisely left to those who came into the field after the laborers

had quilted it, to garner up what they could at second hand.



Pizarro's situation may be thought to have necessarily exposed him to

party influences, and thus given an undue bias to his narrative.  It is not

difficult, indeed, to determine under whose banner he had enlisted.  He

writes like a partisan, and yet like an honest one, who is no further

warped from a correct judgment of passing affairs than must necessarily

come from preconceived opinions.  There is no management to work a

conviction in his reader on this side or the other, still less any obvious

perversion of fact.  He evidently believes what he says, and this is the

great point to be desired.  We can make allowance for the natural

influences of his position.  Were he more impartial than this, the critic of

the present day, by making allowance for a greater amount of prejudice

and partiality, might only be led into error.



Pizarro is not only independent, but occasionally caustic in his

condemnation of those under whom he acted.  This is particularly the

case where their measures bear too unfavorably on his own interests, or

those of the army.  As to the unfortunate natives, he no more regards

their sufferings than the Jews of old did those of the Philistines, whom

they considered as delivered up to their swords, and whose lands they

regarded as their lawful heritage.  There is no mercy shown by the hard

Conqueror in his treatment of the infidel.



Pizarro was the representative of the age in which he lived.  Yet it is too

much to cast such obloquy on the age.  He represented more truly the

spirit of the fierce warriors who overturned the dynasty of the Incas.  He

was not merely a crusader, fighting to extend the empire of the Cross

over the darkened heathen.  Gold was his great object; the estimate by

which he judged of the value of the Conquest; the recompense that he

asked for a life of toil and danger.  It was with these golden visions, far

more than with visions of glory, above all, of celestial glory, that the

Peruvian adventurer fed his gross and worldly imagination.  Pizarro did

not rise above his caste.  Neither did he rise above it in a mental view,

any more than in a moral.  His history displays no great penetration, or

vigor and comprehension of thought.  It is the work of a soldier, telling

simply his tale of blood.  Its value is, that it is told by him who acted it.

And this, to the modern compiler, renders it of higher worth than far

abler productions at second hand.  It is the rude ore, which, submitted to

the regular process of purification and refinement, may receive the

current stamp that fits it for general circulation.



Another authority, to whom I have occasionally referred, and whose

writings still slumber in manuscript, is the Licentiate Fernando

Montesinos.  He is, in every respect, the opposite of the military

chronicler who has just come under our notice.  He flourished about a

century after the Conquest.  Of course, the value of his writings as an

authority for historical facts must depend on his superior opportunities

for consulting original documents.  For this his advantages were great.

He was twice sent in an official capacity to Peru, which required him to

visit the different parts of the country.  These two missions occupied

fifteen years; so that, while his position gave him access to the colonial

archives and literary repositories, he was enabled to verify his

researches, to some extent, by actual observation of the country.



The result was his two historical works, Memorias Antiguas Historiales

del Peru, and his Annales, sometimes cited in these pages.  The former is

taken up with the early history of the country,--very early, it must be

admitted, since it goes back to the deluge.  The first part of this treatise is

chiefly occupied with an argument to show the identity of Peru with the

golden Ophir of Solomon's time!  This hypothesis, by no means original

with the author, may give no unfair notion of the character of his mind.

In the progress of his work he follows down the line of Inca princes,

whose exploits, and names even, by no means coincide with Garcilasso's

catalogue; a circumstance, however, far from establishing their

inaccuracy.  But one will have little doubt of the writer's title to this

reproach, that reads the absurd legends told in the grave tone of reliance

by Montesinos, who shared largely in the credulity and the love of the

marvellous which belong to an earlier and less enlightened age.



These same traits are visible in his Annals, which are devoted

exclusively to the Conquest.  Here, indeed, the author, after his cloudy

flight, has descended on firm ground, where gross violations of truth, or,

at least, of probability, are not to be expected.  But any one who has

occasion to compare his narrative with that of contemporary writers will

find frequent cause to distrust it.  Yet Montesinos has one merit.  In his

extensive researches, he became acquainted with original instruments,

which he has occasionally transferred to his own pages, and which it

would be now difficult to meet elsewhere.



His writings have been commended by some of his learned countrymen,

as showing diligent research and information.  My own experience

would not assign them a high rank as historical vouchers.  They seem to

me entitled to little praise, either for the accuracy of their statements, or

the sagacity of their reflections.  The spirit of cold indifference which

they manifest to the sufferings of the natives is an odious feature, for

which there is less apology in a writer of the seventeenth century than in

one of the primitive Conquerors, whose passions had been inflamed by

longprotracted hostility.  M. Ternaux-Compans has translated the

Memorias Antiguas with his usual elegance and precision, for his

collection of original documents relating to the New World.  He speaks

in the Preface of doing the same kind office to the Annales, at a future

time.  I am not aware that he has done this; and I cannot but think that

the excellent translator may find a better subject for his labors in some of

the rich collection of the Munoz manuscripts in his possession.

