





History of the Conquest of Peru



by William Hickling Prescott



Book 4



Civil Wars Of The Conquerors



Chapter 1



Almagro's March To Chili--Suffering Of The Troops-

He Returns And Seizes Cuzco--Action Of Abancay-

Gaspar De Espinosa--Almagro Leaves Cuzco-

Negotiations With Pizarro



1535--1537



While the events recorded in the preceding chapter were passing, the

Marshal Almagro was engaged in his memorable expedition to Chili.  He

had set out, as we have seen, with only part of his forces, leaving his

lieutenant to follow him with the remainder.  During the first part of the

way, he profited by the great military road of the Incas, which stretched

across the table-land far towards the south.  But as he drew near to Chili,

the Spanish commander became entangled in the defiles of the

mountains, where no vestige of a road was to be discerned.  Here his

progress was impeded by all the obstacles which belong to the wild

scenery of the Cordilleras; deep and ragged ravines, round whose sides a

slender sheep-path wound up to a dizzy height over the precipices below;

rivers rushing in fury down the slopes of the mountains, and throwing

themselves in stupendous cataracts into the yawning abyss; dark forests

of pine that seemed to have no end, and then again long reaches of

desolate tableland, without so much as a bush or shrub to shelter the

shivering traveller from the blast that swept down from the frozen

summits of the sierra.



The cold was so intense, that many lost the nails of their fingers, their

fingers themselves, and sometimes their limbs.  Others were blinded by

the dazzling waste of snow, reflecting the rays of a sun made intolerably

brilliant in the thin atmosphere of these elevated regions.  Hunger came,

as usual, in the train of woes; for in these dismal solitudes no vegetation

that would suffice for the food of man was visible, and no living thing,

except only the great bird of the Andes, hovering over their heads in

expectation of his banquet.  This was too frequently afforded by the

number of wretched Indians, who, unable, from the scantiness of their

clothing, to encounter the severity of the climate, perished by the way.

Such was the pressure of hunger, that the miserable survivors fed on the

dead bodies of their countrymen, and the Spaniards forced a similar

sustenance from the carcasses of their horses, literally frozen to death in

the mountain passes.1--Such were the terrible penalties which Nature

imposed on those who rashly intruded on these her solitary and most

savage haunts.



Yet their own sufferings do not seem to have touched the hearts of the

Spaniards with any feeling of compassion for the weaker natives.  Their

path was everywhere marked by burnt and desolated hamlets, the

inhabitants of which were compelled to do them service as beasts of

burden.  They were chained together in gangs of ten or twelve, and no

infirmity or feebleness of body excused the unfortunate captive from his

full share of the common toil, till he sometimes dropped dead, in his very

chains, from mere exhaustion! 2  Alvarado's company are accused of

having been more cruel than Pizarro's; and many of Almagro's men, it

may be remembered, were recruited from that source.  The commander

looked with displeasure, it is said, on these enormities, and did what he

could to repress them.  Yet he did not set a good example in his own

conduct, if it be true that he caused no less than thirty Indian chiefs to be

burnt alive, for the massacre of three of his followers! 3  The heart

sickens at the recital of such atrocities perpetrated on an unoffending

people, or, at least, guilty of no other crime than that of defending their

own soil too well.



There is something in the possession of superior strength most

dangerous, in a moral view, to its possessor.  Brought in contact with

semicivilized man, the European, with his endowments and effective

force so immeasurably superior, holds him as little higher than the brute,

and as born equally for his service.  He feels that he has a natural right,

as it were, to his obedience, and that this obedience is to be measured,

not by the powers of the barbarian, but by the will of his conqueror.

Resistance becomes a crime to he washed out only in the blood of the

victim.  The tale of such atrocities is not confined to the Spaniard.

Wherever the civilized man and the savage have come in contact, in the

East or in the West, the story has been too often written in blood.



From the wild chaos of mountain scenery the Spaniards emerged on the

green vale of Coquimbo, about the thirtieth degree of south latitude.

Here they halted to refresh themselves in its abundant plains, after their

unexampled sufferings and fatigues.  Meanwhile Almagro despatched an

officer with a strong party in advance, to ascertain the character of the

country towards the south.  Not long after, he was cheered by the arrival

of the remainder of his forces under his lieutenant Rodrigo de Orgonez.

This was a remarkable person, and intimately connected with the

subsequent fortunes of Almagro.



He was a native of Oropesa, had been trained in the Italian wars, and

held the rank of ensign in the army of the Constable of Bourbon at the

famous sack of Rome.  It was a good school in which to learn his iron

trade, and to steel the heart against any too ready sensibility to human

suffering.  Orgonez was an excellent soldier; true to his commander,

prompt, fearless, and unflinching in the execution of his orders.  His

services attracted the notice of the Crown, and, shortly after this period,

he was raised to the rank of Marshal of New Toledo.  Yet it may be

doubted whether his character did not qualify him for an executive and

subordinate station rather than for one of higher responsibility.



Almagro received also the royal warrant, conferring on him his new

powers and territorial jurisdiction.  The instrument had been detained by

the Pizarros to the very last moment.  His troops, long since disgusted

with their toilsome and unprofitable march, were now clamorous to

return.  Cuzco, they said, undoubtedly fell within the limits of his

government, and it was better to take possession of its comfortable

quarters than to wander like outcasts in this dreary wilderness.  They

reminded their commander that thus only could he provide for the

interests of his son Diego.  This was an illegitimate son of Almagro, on

whom his father doated with extravagant fondness, justified more than

usual by the promising character of the youth.



After an absence of about two months, the officer sent on the exploring

expedition returned, bringing unpromising accounts of the southern

regions of Chili.  The only land of promise for the Castilian was one that

teemed with gold.4  He had penetrated to the distance of a hundred

leagues, to the limits, probably, of the conquests of the Incas on the river

Maule.5  The Spaniards had fortunately stopped short of the land of

Arauco, where the blood of their countrymen was soon after to be poured

out like water, and which still maintains a proud independence amidst

the general humiliation of the Indian races around it.



Almagro now yielded, with little reluctance, to the renewed importunities

of the soldiers, and turned his face towards the North.  It is unnecessary

to follow his march in detail.  Disheartened by the difficulty of the

mountain passage, he took the road along the coast, which led him across

the great desert of Atacama.  In crossing this dreary waste, which

stretches for nearly a hundred leagues to the northern borders of Chili,

with hardly a green spot in its expanse to relieve the fainting traveller,

Almagro and his men experienced as great sufferings, though not of the

same kind, as those which they had encountered in the passes of the

Cordilleras.  Indeed, the captain would not easily be found at this day,

who would venture to lead his army across this dreary region.  But the

Spaniard of the sixteenth century had a strength of limb and a buoyancy

of spirit which raised him to a contempt of obstacles, almost justifying

the boast of the historian, that "he contended indifferently, at the same

time, with man, with the elements, and with famine!" 6



After traversing the terrible desert, Almagro reached the ancient town of

Arequipa, about sixty leagues from Cuzco.  Here he learned with

astonishment the insurrection of the Peruvians, and further, that the

young Inca Manco still lay with a formidable force at no great distance

from the capital.  He had once been on friendly terms with the Peruvian

prince, and he now resolved, before proceeding farther, to send an

embassy to his camp, and arrange an interview with him in the

neighborhood of Cuzco.



Almagro's emissaries were well received by the Inca, who alleged his

grounds of complaint against the Pizarros, and named the vale of Yucay

as the place where he would confer with the marshal.  The Spanish

commander accordingly resumed his march, and, taking one half of his

force, whose whole number fell somewhat short of five hundred men, he

repaired in person to the place of rendezvous; while the remainder of his

army established their quarters at Urcos, about six leagues from the

capital.7



The Spaniards in Cuzco, startled by the appearance of this fresh body of

troops in their neighborhood, doubted, when they learned the quarter

whence they came, whether it betided them good or evil.  Hernando

Pizarro marched out of the city with a small force, and, drawing near to

Urcos, heard with no little uneasiness of Almagro's purpose to insist on

his pretensions to Cuzco.  Though much inferior in strength to his rival,

he determined to resist him.



Meanwhile, the Peruvians, who had witnessed the conference between

the soldiers of the opposite camps, suspected some secret understanding

between the parties, which would compromise the safety of the Inca.

They communicated their distrust to Manco, and the latter, adopting the

same sentiments, or perhaps, from the first, meditating a surprise of the

Spaniards, suddenly fell upon the latter in the valley of Yucay with a

body of fifteen thousand men.  But the veterans of Chili were too

familiar with Indian tactics to be taken by surprise.  And though a sharp

engagement ensued, which lasted more than an hour, in which Orgonez

had a horse killed under him, the natives were finally driven back with

great slaughter, and the Inca was so far crippled by the blow, that he was

not likely for the present to give further molestation.8



Almagro, now joining the division left at Urcos, saw no further

impediment to his operations on Cuzco.  He sent, at once, an embassy to

the municipality of the place, requiring the recognition of him as its

lawful governor, and presenting at the same time a copy of his

credentials from the Crown.  But the question of jurisdiction was not one

easy to be settled, depending, as it did, on a knowledge of the true

parallels of latitude, not very likely to be possessed by the rude followers

of Pizarro.  The royal grant had placed under his jurisdiction all the

country extending two hundred and seventy leagues south of the river at

Santiago, situated one degree and twenty minutes north of the equator.

Two hundred and seventy leagues on the meridian, by our measurement,

would fall more than a degree short of Cuzco, and, indeed, would barely

include the city of Lima itself.  But the Spanish leagues, of only

seventeen and a half to a degree,9 would remove the southern boundary

to nearly half a degree beyond the capital of the Incas, which would thus

fall within the jurisdiction of Pizarro.10  Yet the division-line ran so

close to the disputed ground, that the true result might reasonably be

doubted, where no careful scientific observations had been made to

obtain it; and each party was prompt to assert, as they always are in such

cases, that its own claim was clear and unquestionable.11



Thus summoned by Almagro, the authorities of Cuzco, unwilling to give

umbrage to either of the contending chiefs, decided that they must wait

until they could take counsel--which they promised to do at once--with

certain pilots better instructed than themselves in the position of the

Santiago.  Meanwhile, a truce was arranged between the parties, each

solemnly engaging to abstain from hostile measures, and to remain quiet

in their present quarters.



The weather now set in cold and rainy.  Almagro's soldiers, greatly

discontented with their position, flooded as it was by the waters, were

quick to discover that Hernando Pizarro was busily employed in

strengthening himself in the city, contrary to agreement.  They also

learned with dismay, that a large body of men, sent by the governor from

Lima, under command of Alonso de Alvarado, was on the march to

relieve Cuzco.  They exclaimed that they were betrayed, and that the

truce had been only an artifice to secure their inactivity until the arrival

of the expected succours.  In this state of excitement, it was not very

difficult to persuade their commander--too ready to surrender his own

judgment to the rash advisers around him--to violate the treaty, and take

possession of the capital.12



Under cover of a dark and stormy night (April 8th, 1537), he entered the

place without opposition, made himself master of the principal church,

established strong parties of cavalry at the head of the great avenues to

prevent surprise, and detached Orgonez with a body of infantry to force

the dwelling of Hernando Pizarro.  "That captain was lodged with his

brother Gonzalo in one of the large halls built by the Incas for public

diversions, with immense doors of entrance that opened on the plaza.  It

was garrisoned by about twenty soldiers, who, as the gates were burst

open, stood stoutly to the defence of their leader.  A smart struggle

ensued, in which some lives were lost, till at length Orgonez, provoked

by the obstinate resistance, set fire to the combustible roof of the

building.  It was speedily in flames, and the burning rafters falling on the

heads of the inmates, they forced their reluctant leader to an

unconditional surrender.  Scarcely had the Spaniards left the building,

when the whole roof fell in with a tremendous crash.13



Almagro was now master of Cuzco.  He ordered the Pizarros, with

fifteen or twenty of the principal cavaliers, to be secured and placed in

confinement.  Except so far as required for securing his authority, he

does not seem to have been guilty of acts of violence to the

inhabitants,14 and he installed one of Pizarro's most able officers,

Gabriel de Rojas, in the government of the city.  The municipality,

whose eyes were now open to the validity of Almagro's pretensions,

made no further scruple to recognize his title to Cuzco.



The marshal's first step was to send a message to Alonso de Alvarado's

camp, advising that officer of his occupation of the city, and requiring

his obedience to him as its legitimate master.  Alvarado was lying, with a

body of five hundred men, horse and foot, at Xauxa, about thirteen

leagues from the capital.  He had been detached several months

previously for the relief of Cuzco; but had, most unaccountably, and, as

it proved, most unfortunately for the Peruvian capital, remained at Xauxa

with the alleged motive of protecting that settlement and the surrounding

country against the insurgents.15  He now showed himself loyal to his

commander; and, when Almagro's ambassadors reached his camp, he put

them in irons, and sent advice of what had been done to the governor at

Lima.



Almagro, offended by the detention of his emissaries, prepared at once to

march against Alonso de Alvarado, and take more effectual means to

bring him to submission.  His lieutenant, Orgonez, strongly urged him

before his departure to strike off the heads of the Pizarros, alleging,

"that, while they lived, his commander's life would never be safe"; and

concluding with the Spanish proverb, "Dead men never bite." 16  But the

marshal, though he detested Hernando in his heart, shrunk from so

violent a measure; and, independently of other considerations, he had

still an attachment for his old associate, Francis Pizarro, and was

unwilling to sever the ties between them for ever.  Contenting himself,

therefore, with placing his prisoners trader strong guard in one of the

stone buildings belonging to the House of the Sun, he put himself at the

head of his forces, and left the capital in quest of Alvarado.



That officer had now taken up a position on the farther side of the Rio de

Abancay, where he lay, with the strength of his little army, in front of a

bridge, by which its rapid waters are traversed, while a strong

detachment occupied a spot commanding a ford lower down the river.

But in this detachment was a cavalier of much consideration in the army,

Pedro de Lerma, who, from some pique against his commander, had

entered into treasonable correspondence with the opposite party.  By his

advice, Almagro, on reaching the border of the river, established himself

against the bridge in face of Alvarado, as if prepared to force a passage,

thus concentrating his adversary's attention on that point.  But, when

darkness had set in, he detached a large body under Orgonez to pass the

ford, and operate in concert with Lerma.  Orgonez executed this

commission with his usual promptness.  The ford was crossed, though

the current ran so swiftly, that several of his men were swept away by it,

and perished in the waters.  Their leader received a severe wound

himself in the mouth, as he was gaining the opposite bank, but, nothing

daunted, he cheered on his men, and fell with fury on the enemy.  He was

speedily joined by Lerma, and such of the soldiers as he had gained over,

and, unable to distinguish friend from foe, the enemy's confusion was

complete.



Meanwhile, Alvarado, roused by the noise of the attack on this quarter,

hastened to the support of his officer, when Almagro, seizing the

occasion, pushed across the bridge, dispersed the small body left to

defend it, and, falling on Alvarado's rear, that general saw himself

hemmed in on all sides.  The struggle did not last long; and the

unfortunate chief, uncertain on whom he could rely, surrendered with all

his force,--those only excepted who had already-deserted to the enemy.

Such was the battle of Abancay, as it was called, from the river on whose

banks it was fought, on the twelfth of July, 1537.- Never was a victory

more complete, or achieved with less cost of life; and Almagro marched

back, with an array of prisoners scarcely inferior to his own army in

number, in triumph to Cuzco.17



While the events related in the preceding pages were passing, Francisco

Pizarro had remained at Lima, anxiously awaiting the arrival of the

reinforcements which he had requested, to enable him to march to the

relief of the beleaguered capital of the Incas.  His appeal had not been

unanswered.  Among the rest was a corps of two hundred and fifty men,

led by the Licentiate Gaspar de Espinosa, one of the three original

associates, it may be remembered, who engaged in the conquest of Peru.

He had now left his own residence at Panama, and came in person, for

the first time, it would seem, to revive the drooping fortunes of his

confederates.  Pizarro received also a vessel laden with provisions,

military stores, and other necessary supplies, besides a rich wardrobe for

himself, from Cortes, the Conqueror of Mexico, who generously

stretched forth his hand to aid his kinsman in the hour of need.18



With a force amounting to four hundred and fifty men, half of them

cavalry, the governor quitted Lima, and began his march on the Inca

capital.  He had not advanced far, when he received tidings of the return

of Almagro, the seizure of Cuzco, and the imprisonment of his brothers;

and, before he had time to recover from this astounding intelligence, he

learned the total defeat and capture of Alvarado.  Filled with

consternation at these rapid successes of his rival, he now returned in all

haste to Lima, which he put in the best posture of defence, to secure it

against the hostile movements, not unlikely, as he thought, to be directed

against that capital itself.  Meanwhile, far from indulging in impotent

sallies of resentment, or in complaints of his ancient comrade, he only

lamented that Almagro should have resorted to these violent measures

for the settlement of their dispute, and this less-if we may take his word

for it--from personal considerations than from the prejudice it might do

to the interests of the Crown.19



But, while busily occupied with warlike preparations, he did not omit to

try the effect of negotiation.  He sent an embassy to Cuzco, consisting of

several persons in whose discretion he placed the greatest confidence,

with Espinosa at their head, as the party most interested in an amicable

arrangement.



The licentiate, on his arrival, did not find Almagro in as favorable a

mood for an accommodation as he could have wished.  Elated by his

recent successes, he now aspired not only to the possession of Cuzco, but

of Lima itself, as falling within the limits of his jurisdiction.  It was in

vain that Espinosa urged the propriety, by every argument which

prudence could suggest, of moderating his demands.  His claims upon

Cuzco, at least, were not to be shaken, and he declared himself ready to

peril his life in maintaining them.  The licentiate coolly replied by

quoting the pithy Castilian proverb, El vencido vencido, y el vencidor

perdido; "The vanquished vanquished, and the victor undone."



What influence the temperate arguments of the licentiate might

eventually have had on the heated imagination of the soldier is doubtful;

but unfortunately for the negotiation, it was abruptly terminated by the

death of Espinosa himself, which took place most unexpectedly, though,

strange to say, in those times, without the imputation of poison.20  He

was a great loss to the parties in the existing fermentation of their minds;

for he had the weight of character which belongs to wise and moderate

counsels, and a deeper interest than any other man in recommending

them.



The name of Espinosa is memorable in history from his early connection

with the expedition to Peru, which, but for the seasonable, though secret,

application of his funds, could not then have been compassed.  He had

long been a resident in the Spanish colonies of Tierra Firme and Panama,

where he had served in various capacities, sometimes as a legal

functionary presiding in the courts of justice,21 and not unfrequently as

an efficient leader in the early expeditions of conquest and discovery.  In

these manifold vocations he acquired high reputation for probity,

intelligence, and courage, and his death at the present crisis was

undoubtedly the most unfortunate event that could befall the country.



All attempt at negotiation was now abandoned; and Almagro announced

his purpose to descend to the sea-coast, where he could plant a colony

and establish a port for himself.  This would secure him the means, so

essential, of communication with the mother-country, and here he would

resume negotiations for the settlement of his dispute with Pizarro.

Before quitting Cuzco, he sent Orgonez with a strong force against the

Inca, not caring to leave the capital exposed in his absence to further

annoyance from that quarter.



But the Inca, discouraged by his late discomfiture, and unable, perhaps,

to rally in sufficient strength for resistance, abandoned his stronghold at

Tambo, and retreated across the mountains.  He was hotly pursued by

Orgonez over hill and valley, till, deserted by his followers, and with

only one of his wives to bear him company, the royal fugitive took

shelter in the remote fastnesses of the Andes.22



Before leaving the capital, Orgonez again urged his commander to strike

off the heads of the Pizarros, and then march at once upon Lima.  By this

decisive step he would bring the war to an issue, and forever secure

himself from the insidious machinations of his enemies.  But, in the mean

time, a new friend had risen up to the captive brothers.  This was Diego

de Alvarado, brother of that Pedro, who, as mentioned in a preceding

chapter, had conducted the unfortunate expedition to Quito.  After his

brother's departure, Diego had attached himself to the fortunes of

Almagro, had accompanied him to Chili, and, as he was a cavalier of

birth, and possessed of some truly noble qualities, he had gained

deserved ascendency over his commander.  Alvarado had frequently

visited Hernando Pizarro in his confinement, where, to beguile the

tediousness of captivity, he amused himself with gaming,--the passion of

the Spaniard.  They played deep, and Alvarado lost the enormous sum of

eighty thousand gold castellanos.  He was prompt in paying the debt, but

Hernando Pizarro peremptorily declined to receive the money.  By this

politic generosity, he secured an important advocate in the council of

Almagro.  It stood him now in good stead.  Alvarado represented to the

marshal, that such a measure as that urged by Orgonez would not only

outrage the feelings of his followers, but would ruin his fortunes by the

indignation it must excite at court.  When Almagro acquiesced in these

views, as in truth most grateful to his own nature, Orgonez, chagrined at

his determination, declared that the day would come when he would

repent this mistaken lenity.  "A Pizarro," he said, "was never known to

forget an injury; and that which they had already received from Almagro

was too deep for them to forgive."  Prophetic words!



On leaving Cuzco, the marshal gave orders that Gonzalo Pizarro and the

other prisoners should be detained in strict custody.  Hernando he took

with him, closely guarded, on his march.  Descending rapidly towards

the coast, he reached the pleasant vale of Chincha in the latter part of

August.  Here he occupied himself with laying the foundations of a town

bearing his own name, which might serve as a counterpart to the City of

the Kings,--thus bidding defiance, as it were, to his rival on his own

borders.  While occupied in this manner, he received the unwelcome

tidings, that Gonzalo Pizarro, Alonso de Alvarado, and the other

prisoners, having tampered with their guards, had effected their escape

from Cuzco, and he soon after heard of their safe arrival in the camp of

Pizarro.



Chafed by this intelligence, the marshal was not soothed by the

insinuations of Orgonez, that it was owing to his ill-advised lenity; that it

might have gone hard with Hernando, but that Almagro's attention was

diverted by the negotiation which Francisco Pizarro now proposed to

resume.



After some correspondence between the parties, it was agreed to submit

the arbitration of the dispute to a single individual, Fray Francisco de

Bovadilla, a Brother of the Order of Mercy.  Though living in Lima, and,

as might be supposed, under the influence of Pizarro, he had a reputation

for integrity that disposed Almagro to confide the settlement of the

question exclusively to him.  In this implicit confidence in the friar's

impartiality, Orgonez, of a less sanguine temper than his chief, did not

participate.23



An interview was arranged between the rival chiefs.  It took place at

Mala, November 13th, 1537; but very different was the deportment of

the two commanders towards each other from that which they had

exhibited at their former meetings.  Almagro, indeed, doffing his bonnet,

advanced in his usual open manner to salute his ancient comrade; but

Pizarro, hardly condescending to return the salute, haughtily demanded

why the marshal had seized upon his city of Cuzco, and imprisoned his

brothers.  This led to a recrimination on the part of his associate.  The

discussion assumed the tone of an angry altercation, till Almagro, taking

a hint--or what he conceived to be such--from an attendant, that some

treachery was intended, abruptly quitted the apartment, mounted his

horse, and galloped back to his quarters at Chincha.24  The conference

closed, as might have been anticipated from the heated temper of their

minds when they began it, by widening the breach it was intended to

heal.  The friar, now left wholly to himself, after some deliberation, gave

his award.  He decided that a vessel, with a skilful pilot on board, should

be sent to determine the exact latitude of the river of Santiago, the

northern boundary of Pizarro's territory, by which all the measurements

were to be regulated.  In the mean time, Cuzco was to be delivered up by

Almagro, and Hernando Pizarro to be set at liberty, on condition of his

leaving the country in six weeks for Spain.  Both parties were to retire

within their undisputed territories, and to abandon all further

hostilities.25



This award, as may be supposed, highly satisfactory to Pizarro, was

received by Almagro's men with indignation and scorn.  They had been

sold, they cried, by their general, broken, as he was, by age and

infirmities.  Their enemies were to occupy Cuzco and its pleasant places,

while they were to be turned over to the barren wilderness of Charcas.

Little did they dream that under this poor exterior were hidden the rich

treasures of Potosi.  They denounced the umpire as a hireling of the

governor, and murmurs were heard among the troops, stimulated by

Orgonez, demanding the head of Hernando.  Never was that cavalier in

greater danger.  But his good genius in the form of Alvarado again

interposed to protect him.  His life in captivity was a succession of

reprieves.26



Yet his brother, the governor, was not disposed to abandon him to his

fate.  On the contrary, he was now prepared to make every concession to

secure his freedom.  Confessions, that politic chief well knew, cost little

to those who are not concerned to abide by them.  After some

preliminary negotiation, another award, more equitable, or, at all events,

more to the satisfaction of the discontented party, was given.  The

principal articles of it were, that, until the arrival of some definitive

instructions on the point from Castile, the city of Cuzco, with its

territory, should remain in the hands of Almagro; and that Hernando

Pizarro should be set at liberty, on the condition, above stipulated, of

leaving the country in six weeks.--When the terms of this agreement

were communicated to Orgonez, that officer intimated his opinion of

them, by passing his finger across his throat, and exclaiming, "What has

my fidelity to my commander cost me!" 27



Almagro, in order to do greater honor to his prisoner, visited him in

person, and announced to him that he was from that moment free.  He

expressed a hope, at the same time, that "all past differences would be

buried in oblivion, and that henceforth they should live only in the

recollection of their ancient friendship." Hernando replied, with apparent

cordiality, that "he desired nothing better for himself." He then swore in

the most solemn manner, and pledged his knightly honor,--the latter,

perhaps, a pledge of quite as much weight in his own mind as the

former,--that he would faithfully comply with the terms stipulated in the

treaty.  He was next conducted by the marshal to his quarters, where he

partook of a collation in company with the principal officers; several of

whom, together with Diego Almagro, the general's son, afterward

escorted the cavalier to his brother's camp, which had been transferred to

the neighboring town of Mala.  Here the party received a most cordial

greeting from the governor, who entertained them with a courtly

hospitality, and lavished many attentions, in particular, on the son of his

ancient associate.  In short, such, on their return, was the account of their

reception, that it left no doubt in the mind of Almagro that all was at

length amicably settled.28--He did not know Pizarro.







Book 4



Chapter 2



First Civil War--Almagro Retreats To Cuzco--Battle Of Las Salinas--

Cruelty Of The Conquerors--Trial And Execution Of Almagro-

His Character



1537--1538



Scarcely had Almagro's officers left the governor's quarters, when the

latter, calling his little army together, briefly recapitulated the many

wrongs which had been done him by his rival, the seizure of his capital,

the imprisonment of his brothers, the assault and defeat of his troops; and

he concluded with the declaration,--heartily echoed back by his military

audience,--that the time had now come for revenge.  All the while that

the negotiations were pending, Pizarro had been busily occupied with

military preparations.  He had mustered a force considerably larger than

that of his rival, drawn from various quarters, but most of them familiar

with service.  He now declared, that, as he was too old to take charge of

the campaign himself, he should devolve that duty on his brothers; and

he released Hernando from all his engagements to Almagro, as a

measure justified by necessity.  That cavalier, with graceful pertinacity,

intimated his design to abide by the pledges he had given, but, at length,

yielded a reluctant assent to the commands of his brother, as to a

measure imperatively demanded by his duty to the Crown.1



The governor's next step was to advise Almagro that the treaty was at an

end.  At the same time, he warned him to relinquish his pretensions to

Cuzco, and withdraw into his own territory, or the responsibility of the

consequences would lie on his own head.



Reposing in his false security, Almagro was now fully awakened to the

consciousness of the error he had committed; and the warning voice of

his lieutenant may have risen to his recollection.  The first part of the

prediction was fulfilled.  And what should prevent the latter from being

so?  To add to his distress, he was laboring at this time under a grievous

malady, the result of early excesses, which shattered his constitution, and

made him incapable alike of mental and bodily exertion.2



In this forlorn condition, he confided the management of his affairs to

Orgonez, on whose loyalty and courage he knew he might implicitly rely.

The first step was to secure the passes of the Guaitara, a chain of hills

that hemmed in the valley of Zangalla, where Almagro was at present

established.  But, by some miscalculation, the passes were not secured in

season; and the active enemy, threading the dangerous defiles, effected a

passage across the sierra, where a much inferior force to his own might

have taken him at advantage.  The fortunes of Almagro were on the

wane.



His thoughts were now turned towards Cuzco, and he was anxious to get

possession of this capital before the arrival of the enemy.  Too feeble to

sit on horseback, he was obliged to be carried in a litter; and, when he

reached the ancient town of Bilcas, not far from Guamanga, his

indisposition was so severe that he was compelled to halt and remain

there three weeks before resuming his march.



The governor and his brothers, in the mean time, after traversing the pass

of Guaitara, descended into the valley of Ica, where Pizarro remained a

considerable while, to get his troops in order and complete his

preparations for the campaign.  Then, taking leave of the army, he

returned to Lima, committing the prosecution of the war, as he had

before announced, to his younger and more active brothers.  Hernando,

soon after quitting Ica, kept along the coast as far as Nasca, proposing to

penetrate the country by a circuitous route in order to elude the enemy,

who might have greatly embarrassed him in some of the passes of the

Cordilleras.  But unhappily for him, this plan of operations, which would

have given him such manifest advantage, was not adopted by Almagro;

and his adversary, without any other impediment than that arising from

the natural difficulties of the march, arrived, in the latter part of April,

1538, in the neighborhood of Cuzco.



But Almagro was already in possession of that capital, which he had

reached ten days before.  A council of war was held by him respecting

the course to be pursued.  Some were for making good the defence of the

city.  Almagro would have tried what could be done by negotiation.  But

Orgonez bluntly replied,--"It is too late; you have liberated Hernando

Pizarro, and nothing remains but to fight him."  The opinion of Orgonez

finally prevailed, to march out and give the enemy battle on the plains.

The marshal, still disabled by illness from taking the command, devolved

it on his trusty lieutenant, who, mustering his forces, left the city, and

took up a position at Las Salinas, less than a league distant from Cuzco.

The place received its name from certain pits or vats in the ground, used

for the preparation of salt, that was obtained from a natural spring in the

neighborhood.  It was an injudicious choice of ground, since its broken

character was most unfavorable to the free action of cavalry, in which the

strength of Almagro's force consisted.  But, although repeatedly urged by

the officers to advance into the open country, Orgonez persisted in his

position, as the most favorable for defence, since the front was protected

by a marsh, and by a little stream that flowed over the plain.  His forces

amounted in all to about five hundred, more than half of them horse.  His

infantry was deficient in firearms, the place of which was supplied by the

long pike.  He had also six small cannon, or falconets, as they were

called, which, with his cavalry, formed into two equal divisions, he

disposed on the flanks of his infantry.  Thus prepared, he calmly awaited

the approach of the enemy.



It was not long before the bright arms and banners of the Spaniards

under Hernando Pizarro were seen emerging from the mountain passes,

The troops came forward in good order, and like men whose steady step

showed that they had been spared in the march, and were now fresh for

action.  They advanced slowly across the plain, and halted on the

opposite border of the little stream which covered the front of Orgonez.

Here Hernando, as the sun had set, took up his quarters for the night,

proposing to defer the engagement till daylight.3



The rumors of the approaching battle had spread far and wide over the

country; and the mountains and rocky heights around were thronged with

multitudes of natives, eager to feast their eyes on a spectacle, where,

whichever side were victorious, the defeat would fall on their enemies.4

The Castilian women and children, too, with still deeper anxiety, had

thronged out from Cuzco to witness the deadly strife in which brethren

and kindred were to contend for mastery.5  The whole number of the

combatants was insignificant; though not as compared with those usually

engaged in these American wars.  It is not, however, the number of the

players, but the magnitude of the stake, that gives importance and

interest to the game; and in this bloody game, they were to play for the

possession of an empire.



The night passed away in silence, unbroken by the vast assembly which

covered the surrounding hill-tops.  Nor did the soldiers of the hostile

camps, although keeping watch within hearing of one another, and with

the same blood flowing in their veins, attempt any communication.  So

deadly was the hate in their bosoms! 6



The sun rose bright, as usual in this beautiful climate, on Saturday, the

twenty-sixth day of April, 1538.7  But long before his beams were on the

plain, the trumpet of Hernando Pizarro had called his men to arms.  His

forces amounted in all to about seven hundred.  They were drawn from

various quarters, the veterans of Pizarro, the followers of Alonso de

Alvarado,--many of whom, since their defeat, had found their way back

to Lima,--and the late reinforcement from the isles, most of them

seasoned by many a toilsome march in the Indian campaigns, and many a

hard-fought field.  His mounted troops were inferior to those of

Almagro; but this was more than compensated by the strength of his

infantry, comprehending a well-trained corps of arquebusiers, sent from

St. Domingo, whose weapons were of the improved construction

recently introduced from Flanders.  They were of a large calibre, and

threw double-headed shot, consisting of bullets linked together by an

iron chain.  It was doubtless a clumsy weapon compared with modern

firearms, but, in hands accustomed to wield it, proved a destructive

instrument.8



Hernando Pizarro drew up his men in the same order of battle as that

presented by the enemy,--throwing his infantry into the centre, and

disposing his horse on the flanks; one corps of which he placed under

command of Alonso de Alvarado, and took charge of the other himself.

The infantry was headed by his brother Gonzalo, supported by Pedro de

Valdivia, the future hero of Arauco, whose disastrous story forms the

burden of romance as well as of chronicle.9



Mass was said, as if the Spaniards were about to fight what they deemed

the good fight of the faith, instead of imbruing their hands in the blood of

their countrymen.  Hernando Pizarro then made a brief address to his

soldiers.  He touched on the personal injuries he and his family had

received from Almagro; reminded his brother's veterans that Cuzco had

been wrested from their possession; called up the glow of shame on the

brows of Alvarado's men as he talked of the rout of Abancay, and,

pointing out the Inca metropolis that sparkled in the morning sunshine,

he told them that there was the prize of the victor.  They answered his

appeal with acclamations; and the signal being given, Gonzalo Pizarro,

heading his battalion of infantry, led it straight across the river.  The

water was neither broad nor deep, and the soldiers found no difficulty in

gaining a landing, as the enemy's horse was prevented by the marshy

ground from approaching the borders.  But, as they worked their way

across the morass, the heavy guns of Orgonez played with effect on the

leading files, and threw them into disorder.  Gonzalo and Valdivia threw

themselves into the midst of their followers, menacing some,

encouraging others, and at length led them gallantly forward to the firm

ground.  Here the arquebusiers, detaching themselves from the rest of the

infantry, gained a small eminence, whence, in their turn, they opened a

galling fire on Orgonez, scattering his array of spearmen, and sorely

annoying the cavalry on the flanks.



Meanwhile, Hernando, forming his two squadrons of horse into one

column, crossed under cover of this well-sustained fire, and, reaching the

firm ground, rode at once against the enemy.  Orgonez, whose infantry

was already much crippled, advancing his horse, formed the two

squadrons into one body, like his antagonist, and spurred at full gallop

against the assailants.  The shock was terrible; and it was hailed by the

swarms of Indian spectators on the surrounding heights with a fiendish

yell of triumph, that rose far above the din of battle, till it was lost in

distant echoes among the mountains.10



The struggle was desperate.  For it was not that of the white man against

the defenceless Indian, but of Spaniard against Spaniard; both parties

cheering on their comrades with their battlecries of "El Rey y Almagro,"

or "El Rey y Pizarro,"--while they fought with a hate, to which national

antipathy was as nothing; a hate strong in proportion to the strength of

the ties that had been rent asunder.



In this bloody field well did Orgonez do his duty, fighting like one to

whom battle was the natural element.  Singling out a cavalier, whom,

from the color of the sobre-vest on his armour, he erroneously supposed

to be Hernando Pizarro, he charged him in full career, and overthrew

him with his lance.  Another he ran through in like manner, and a third

he struck down with his sword as he was prematurely shouting

"Victory!"  But while thus doing the deeds of a paladin of romance, he

was hit by a chain-shot from an arquebuse, which, penetrating the bars of

his visor, grazed his forehead, and deprived him for a moment of reason.

Before he had fully recovered, his horse was killed under him, and

though the fallen cavalier succeeded in extricating himself from the

stirrups, he was surrounded, and soon overpowered by numbers.  Still

refusing to deliver up his sword, he asked "if there was no knight to

whom he could surrender."  One Fuentes, a menial of Pizarro, presenting

himself as such, Orgonez gave his sword into his hands,--and the dastard,

drawing his dagger, stabbed his defenceless prisoner to the heart!  His

head, then struck off, was stuck on a pike, and displayed, a bloody

trophy, in the great square of Cuzco, as the head of a traitor.11  Thus

perished as loyal a cavalier, as decided in council, and as bold in action,

as ever crossed to the shores of America.



The fight had now lasted more than an hour, and the fortune of the day

was turning against the followers of Almagro.  Orgonez being down,

their confusion increased.  The infantry, unable to endure the fire of the

arquebusiers, scattered and took refuge behind the stone-walls, that here

and there straggled across the country.  Pedro de Lerma, vainly striving

to rally the cavalry, spurred his horse against Hernando Pizarro, with

whom he had a personal feud.  Pizarro did not shrink from the encounter.

The lances of both the knights took effect.  That of Hernando penetrated

the thigh of his opponent, while Lerma's weapon, glancing by his

adversary's saddle-bow, struck him with such force above the groin, that

it pierced the joints of his mail, slightly wounding the cavalier, and

forcing his horse back on his haunches.  But the press of the fight soon

parted the combatants, and, in the turmoil that ensued, Lerma was

unhorsed, and left on the field covered with wounds.12



There was no longer order, and scarcely resistance, among the followers

of Almagro.  They fled, making the best of their way to Cuzco, and

happy was the man who obtained quarter when he asked it.  Almagro

himself, too feeble to sit so long on his horse, reclined on a litter, and

from a neighboring eminence surveyed the battle, watching its

fluctuations with all the interest of one who felt that honor, fortune, life

itself, hung on the issue.  With agony not to be described, he had seen

his faithful followers, after their hard struggle, borne down by their

opponents, till, convinced that all was lost, he succeeded in mounting a

mule, and rode off for a temporary refuge to the fortress of Cuzco.

Thither he was speedily followed, taken, and brought in triumph to the

capital, where, ill as he was, he was thrown into irons, and confined in

the same apartment of the stone building in which he had imprisoned the

Pizarros.



The action lasted not quite two hours.  The number of killed, variously

stated, was probably not less than a hundred and fifty,--one of the

combatants calls it two hundred,13--a great number, considering the

shortness of the time, and the small amount of forces engaged.  No

account is given of the wounded.  Wounds were the portion of the

cavalier.  Pedro de Lerma is said to have received seventeen, and yet was

taken alive from the field!  The loss fell chiefly on the followers of

Almagro.  But the slaughter was not confined to the heat of the action.

Such was the deadly animosity of the parties, that several were murdered

in cold blood, like Orgonez, after they had surrendered.  Pedro de Lerma

himself, while lying on his sick couch in the quarters of a friend in

Cuzco, was visited by a soldier, named Samaniego, whom he had once

struck for an act of disobedience.  This person entered the solitary

chamber of the wounded man took his place by his bed-side, and then,

upbraiding him for the insult, told him that he had come to wash it away

in his blood!  Lerma in vain assured him, that, when restored to health,

he would give him the satisfaction he desired.  The miscreant, exclaimed

"Now is the hour!" plunged his sword into his bosom.  He lived several

years to vaunt this atrocious exploit, which he proclaimed as a reparation

to his honor.  It is some satisfaction to know that the insolence of this

vaunt cost him his life.14 --Such anecdotes, revolting as they are,

illustrate not merely the spirit of the times, but that peculiarly ferocious

spirit which is engendered by civil wars,--the most unforgiving in their

character of any, but wars of religion.



In the hurry of the flight of one party, and the pursuit by the other, all

pouring towards Cuzco, the field of battle had been deserted.  But it soon

swarmed with plunderers, as the Indians, descending like vultures from

the mountains, took possession of the bloody ground, and, despoiling the

dead, even to the minutest article of dress, left their corpses naked on the

plain.15  It has been thought strange that the natives should not have

availed themselves of their superior numbers to fall on the victors after

they had been exhausted by the battle.  But the scattered bodies of the

Peruvians were without a leader; they were broken in spirits, moreover,

by recent reverses, and the Castilians, although weakened for the

moment by the struggle, were in far greater strength in Cuzco than they

had ever been before.



Indeed, the number of troops now assembled within its walls, amounting

to full thirteen hundred, composed, as they were, of the most discordant

materials, gave great uneasiness to Hernando Pizarro.  For there were

enemies glaring on each other and on him with deadly though smothered

rancor, and friends, if not so dangerous, not the less troublesome from

their craving and unreasonable demands.  He had given the capital up to

pillage, and his followers found good booty in the quarters of Almagro's

officers.  But this did not suffice the more ambitious cavaliers; and they

clamorously urged their services, and demanded to be placed in charge

of some expedition, nothing doubting that it must prove a golden one.

All were in quest of an El Dorado.  Hernando Pizarro acquiesced as far

as possible in these desires, most willing to relieve himself of such

importunate creditors.  The expeditions, it is true, usually ended in

disaster; but the country was explored by them.  It was the lottery of

adventure; the prizes were few, but they were splendid; and in the

excitement of the game, few Spaniards paused to calculate the chances of

success.



Among those who left the capital was Diego, the son of Almagro.

Hernando was mindful to send him, with a careful escort, to his brother

the governor, desirous to remove him at this crisis from the

neighborhood of his father.  Meanwhile the marshal himself was pining

away in prison under the combined influence of bodily illness and

distress of mind.  Before the battle of Salinas, it had been told to

Hernando Pizarro that Almagro was like to die.  "Heaven forbid," he

exclaimed, "that this should come to pass before he falls into my

hands!"16  Yet the gods seemed now disposed to grant but half of this

pious prayer, since his captive seemed about to escape him just as he had

come into his power.  To console the unfortunate chief, Hernando paid

him a visit in his prison, and cheered him with the assurance that he only

waited for the governor's arrival to set him at liberty; adding, "that, if

Pizarro did not come soon to the capital, he himself would assume the

responsibility of releasing him, and would furnish him with a conveyance

to his brother's quarters."  At the same time, with considerate attention to

his comfort, he inquired of the marshal "what mode of conveyance

would be best suited to his state of health."  After this he continued to

send him delicacies from his own table to revive his faded appetite.

Almagro, cheered by these kind attentions, and by the speedy prospect of

freedom, gradually mended in health and spirits.17



He little dreamed that all this while a process was industriously preparing

against him.  It had been instituted immediately on his capture, and every

one, however humble, who had any cause of complaint against the

unfortunate prisoner, was invited to present it.  The summons was readily

answered; and many an enemy now appeared in the hour of his fallen

fortunes, like the base reptiles crawling into light amidst the ruins of

some noble edifice; and more than one, who had received benefits from

his hands, were willing to court the favor of his enemy by turning on

their benefactor.  From these loathsome sources a mass of accusations

was collected which spread over two thousand folio pages!  Yet Almagro

was the idol of his soldiers! 18



Having completed the process, (July 8th, 1538,) it was not difficult to

obtain a verdict against the prisoner.  The principal charges on which he

was pronounced guilty were those of levying war against the Crown, and

thereby occasioning the death of many of his Majesty's subjects; of

entering into conspiracy with the Inca; and finally, of dispossessing the

royal governor of the city of Cuzco.  On these charges he was

condemned to suffer death as a traitor, by being publicly beheaded in

the great square of the city.  Who were the judges, or what was the

tribunal that condemned him, we are not informed.  Indeed, the whole

trial was a mockery; if that can be called a trial, where the accused

himself is not even aware of the accusation.



The sentence was communicated by a friar deputed for the purpose to

Almagro.  The unhappy man, who all the while had been unconsciously

slumbering on the brink of a precipice, could not at first comprehend the

nature of his situation.  Recovering from the first shock, "It was

impossible," he said, "that such wrong could be done him,--he would not

believe it."  He then besought Hernando Pizarro to grant him an

interview.  That cavalier, not unwilling, it would seem, to witness the

agony of his captive, consented: and Almagro was so humbled by his

misfortunes, that he condescended to beg for his life with the most

piteous supplications.  He reminded Hernando of his ancient relations

with his brother, and the good offices he had rendered him and his family

in the earlier part of their career.  He touched on his acknowledged

services to his country, and besought his enemy "to spare his gray hairs,

and not to deprive him of the short remnant of an existence from which

he had now nothing more to fear."--To this the other coldly replied, that

"he was surprised to see Almagro demean himself in a manner so

unbecoming a brave cavalier; that his fate was no worse than had

befallen many a soldier before him; and that, since God had given him

the grace to be a Christian, he should employ his remaining moments in

making up his account with Heaven!"19



But Almagro was not to be silenced.  He urged the service he had

rendered Hernando himself.  "This was a hard requital," he said, "for

having spared his life so recently under similar circumstances, and that,

too, when he had been urged again and again by those around him to

take it away."  And he concluded by menacing his enemy with the

vengeance of the emperor, who would never suffer this outrage on one

who had rendered such signal services to the Crown to go unrequited.  It

was all in vain; and Hernando abruptly closed the conference by

repeating, that "his doom was inevitable, and he must prepare to meet

it."20



Almagro, finding that no impression was to be made on his ironhearted

conqueror, now seriously addressed himself to the settlement of his

affairs.  By the terms of the royal grant he was empowered to name his

successor.  He accordingly devolved his office on his son, appointing

Diego de Alvarado, on whose integrity he had great reliance,

administrator of the province during his minority.  All his property and

possessions in Peru, of whatever kind, he devised to his master the

emperor, assuring him that a large balance was still due to him in his

unsettled accounts with Pizarro.  By this politic bequest, he hoped to

secure the monarch's protection for his son, as well as a strict scrutiny

into the affairs of his enemy.



The knowledge of Almagro's sentence produced a deep sensation in the

community of Cuzco.  All were amazed at the presumption with which

one, armed with a little brief authority, ventured to sit in judgment on a

person of Almagro's station.  There were few who did not call to mind

some generous or good-natured act of the unfortunate veteran.  Even

those who had furnished materials for the accusation, now startled by the

tragic result to which it was to lead, were heard to denounce Hernando's

conduct as that of a tyrant.  Some of the principal cavaliers, and among

them Diego de Alvarado, to whose intercession, as we have seen,

Hernando Pizarro, when a captive, had owed his own life, waited on that

commander, and endeavored to dissuade him from so highhanded and

atrocious a proceeding.  It was in vain.  But it had the effect of changing

the mode of execution, which, instead of the public square, was now to

take place in prison.21



On the day appointed, a strong corps of arquebusiers was drawn up in

the plaza.  The guards were doubled over the houses where dwelt the

principal partisans of Almagro.  The executioner, attended by a priest,

stealthily entered his prison; and the unhappy man, after confessing and

receiving the sacrament, submitted without resistance to the garrote.

Thus obscurely, in the gloomy silence of a dungeon, perished the hero of

a hundred battles!  His corpse was removed to the great square of the

city, where, in obedience to the sentence, the head was severed from the

body.  A herald proclaimed aloud the nature of the crimes for which he

had suffered; and his remains, rolled in their bloody shroud, were borne

to the house of his friend Hernan Ponce de Leon, and the next day laid

with all due solemnity in the church of Our Lady of Mercy.  The Pizarros

appeared among the principal mourners.  It was remarked, that their

brother had paid similar honors to the memory of Atahuallpa.22



Almagro, at the time of his death, was probably not far from seventy

years of age.  But this is somewhat uncertain; for Almagro was a

foundling, and his early history is lost in obscurity.23  He had many

excellent qualities by nature; and his defects, which were not few, may

reasonably be palliated by the circumstances of his situation.  For what

extenuation is not authorized by the position of a foundling,--without

parents, or early friends, or teacher to direct him,--his little bark set adrift

on the ocean of life, to take its chance among the rude billows and

breakers, without one friendly hand stretched forth to steer or to save it!

The name of "foundling" comprehends an apology for much, very much,

that is wrong in after life.24



He was a man of strong passions, and not too well used to control

them.25  But he was neither vindictive nor habitually cruel.  I have

mentioned one atrocious outrage which he committed on the natives.

But insensibility to the rights of the Indian he shared with many a better

instructed Spaniard.  Yet the Indians, after his conviction, bore testimony

to his general humanity, by declaring that they had no such friend among

the white men.26  Indeed, far from being vindictive, he was placable and

easily yielded to others.  The facility with which he yielded, the result of

good-natured credulity, made him too often the dupe of the crafty; and it

showed, certainly, a want of that self-reliance which belongs to great

strength of character.  Yet his facility of temper, and the generosity of his

nature, made him popular with his followers.  No commander was ever

more beloved by his soldiers.  His generosity was often carried to

prodigality.  When he entered on the campaign of Chili, he lent a

hundred thousand gold ducats to the poorer cavaliers to equip themselves

and afterwards gave them up the debt.27  He was profuse to ostentation.

But his extravagance did him no harm among the roving spirits of the

camp, with whom prodigality is apt to gain more favor than a strict and

well-regulated economy.



He was a good soldier, careful and judicious in his plans, patient and

intrepid in their execution.  His body was covered with the scars of his

battles, till the natural plainness of his person was converted almost into

deformity.  He must not be judged by his closing campaign, when,

depressed by disease, he yielded to the superior genius of his rival; but

by his numerous expeditions by land and by water for the conquest of

Peru and the remote Chili.  Yet it may be doubted whether he possessed

those uncommon qualities, either as a warrior or as a man, that, in

ordinary circumstances, would have raised him to distinction.  He was

one of the three, or, to speak more strictly, of the two associates, who

had the good fortune and the glory to make one of the most splendid

discoveries in the Western World.  He shares largely in the credit of this

with Pizarro; for, when he did not accompany that leader in his perilous

expeditions, he contributed no less to their success by his exertions in the

colonies.



Yet his connection with that chief can hardly be considered a fortunate

circumstance in his career.  A partnership between individuals for

discovery and conquest is not likely to be very scrupulously observed,

especially by men more accustomed to govern others than to govern

themselves.  If causes for discord do not arise before, they will be sure to

spring up on division of the spoil.  But this association was particularly

ill-assorted.  For the free, sanguine, and confiding temper of Almagro

was no match for the cool and crafty policy of Pizarro; and he was

invariably circumvented by his companion, whenever their respective

interests came in collision.



Still the final ruin of Almagro may be fairly imputed to himself.  He

made two capital blunders.  The first was his appeal to arms by the

seizure of Cuzco.  The determination of a boundary-line was not to be

settled by arms.  It was a subject for arbitration; and, if arbitrators could

not be trusted, it should have been referred to the decision of the Crown.

But, having once appealed to arms, he should not then have resorted to

negotiation,--above all, to negotiation with Pizarro.  This was his second

and greatest error.  He had seen enough of Pizarro to know that he was

not to be trusted.  Almagro did trust him, and he paid for it with his life.







Book 4



Chapter 3



Pizarro Revisits Cuzco--Hernando Returns To Castile-

His Long Imprisonment--Commissioner Sent To Peru-

Hostilities With The Inca--Pizarro's Active Administration-

Gonzalo Pizarro



1539--1540



On the departure of his brother in pursuit of Almagro, the Marquess

Francisco Pizarro, as we have seen, returned to Lima.  There he

anxiously awaited the result of the campaign; and on receiving the

welcome tidings of the victory of Las Salinas, he instantly made

preparations for his march to Cuzco.  At Xauxa, however, he was long

detained by the distracted state of the country, and still longer, as it

would seem, by a reluctance to enter the Peruvian capital while the trial

of Almagro was pending.



He was met at Xauxa by the marshal's son Diego, who had been sent to

the coast by Hernando Pizarro.  The young man was filled with the most

gloomy apprehensions respecting his father's fate, and he besought the

governor not to allow his brother to do him any violence.  Pizarro, who

received Diego with much apparent kindness, bade him take heart, as no

harm should come to his father;1 adding, that he trusted their ancient

friendship would soon be renewed.  The youth, comforted by these

assurances, took his way to Lima, where, by Pizarro's orders, he was

received into his house, and treated as a son.



The same assurances respecting the marshal's safety were given by the

governor to Bishop Valverde, and some of the principal cavaliers who

interested themselves in behalf of the prisoner.2  Still Pizarro delayed his

march to the capital; and when he resumed it, he had advanced no farther

than the Rio de Abancay when he received tidings of the death of his

rival.  He appeared greatly shocked by the intelligence, his whole frame

was agitated, and he remained for some time with his eyes bent on the

ground showing signs of strong emotion.3



Such is the account given by his friends.  A more probable version of the

matter represents him to have been perfectly aware of the state of things

at Cuzco.  When the trial was concluded, it is said he received a message

from Hernando, inquiring what was to be done with the prisoner.  He

answered in a few words :--"Deal with him so that he shall give us no

more trouble."4  It is also stated that Hernando, afterwards, when

laboring under the obloquy caused by Almagro's death, shielded himself

under instructions affirmed to have been received from the governor.5  It

is quite certain, that, during his long residence at Xauxa, the latter was in

constant communication with Cuzco; and that had he, as Valverde

repeatedly urged him,6 quickened his march to that capital, he might

easily have prevented the consummation of the tragedy.  As commander-

in-chief, Almagro's fate was in his hands; and, whatever his own

partisans may affirm of his innocence, the impartial judgment of history

must hold him equally accountable with Hernando for the death of his

associate.



Neither did his subsequent conduct show any remorse for these

proceedings.  He entered Cuzco, says one who was present there to

witness it, amidst the flourish of clarions and trumpets, at the head of his

martial cavalcade, and dressed in the rich suit presented him by Cortes,

with the proud bearing and joyous mien of a conqueror.7  When Diego

de Alvarado applied to him for the government of the southern

provinces, in the name of the young Almagro, whom his father, as we

have seen, had consigned to his protection, Pizarro answered, that "the

marshal, by his rebellion, had forfeited all claims to the government."

And, when he was still further urged by the cavalier, he bluntly broke off

the conversation by declaring that "his own territory covered all on this

side of Flanders"!8--intimating, no doubt, by this magnificent vaunt, that

he would endure no rival on this side of the water.



In the same spirit, he had recently sent to supersede Benalcazar, the

conqueror of Quito, who, he Was informed, aspired to an independent

government.  Pizarro's emissary had orders to send the offending captain

to Lima; but Benalcazar, after pushing his victorious career far into the

north, had returned to Castile to solicit his guerdon from the emperor.



To the complaints of the injured natives, who invoked his protection, he

showed himself strangely insensible, while the followers of Almagro he

treated with undisguised contempt.  The estates of the leaders were

confiscated, and transferred without ceremony to his own partisans.

Hernando had made attempts to conciliate some of the opposite faction

by acts of liberality, but they had refused to accept anything from the

man whose hands were stained with the blood of their commander.9  The

governor held to them no such encouragement; and many were reduced

to such abject poverty, that, too proud to expose their wretchedness to

the eyes of their conquerors, they withdrew from the city, and sought a

retreat among the neighboring mountains.10



For his own brothers he provided by such ample repartimientos, as

excited the murmurs of his adherents.  He appointed Gonzalo to the

command of a strong force destined to act against the natives of Charcas,

a hardy people occupying the territory assigned by the Crown to

Almagro.  Gonzalo met with a sturdy resistance, but, after some severe

fighting, succeeded in reducing the province to obedience.  He was

recompensed, together with Hernando, who aided him in the conquest,

by a large grant in the neighborhood of Porco, the productive mines of

which had been partially wrought under the Incas.  The territory, thus

situated, embraced part of those silver hills of Potosi which have since

supplied Europe with such stores of the precious metals.  Hernando

comprehended the capabilities of the ground, and he began working the

mines on a more extensive scale than that hitherto adopted, though it

does not appear that any attempt was then made to penetrate the rich

crust of Potosi.11  A few years more were to elapse before the Spaniards

were to bring to light the silver quarries that lay hidden in the bosom of

its mountains.12



It was now the great business of Hernando to collect a sufficient quantity

of treasure to take with him to Castile.  Nearly a year had elapsed since

Almagro's death; and it was full time that he should return and present

himself at court, where Diego de Alvarado and other friends of the

marshal, who had long since left Peru, were industriously maintaining

the claims of the younger Almagro, as well as demanding redress for the

wrongs done to his father.  But Hernando looked confidently to his gold

to dispel the accusations against him.



Before his departure, he counselled his brother to beware of the "men of

Chili," as Almagro's followers were called; desperate men, who would

stick at nothing, he said, for revenge.  He besought the governor not to

allow them to consort together in any number within fifty miles of his

person; if he did, it would be fatal to him.  And he concluded by

recommending a strong body-guard; "for I," he added, "shall not be here

to watch over you."  But the governor laughed at the idle fears, as he

termed them, of his brother, bidding the latter take no thought of him, "as

every hair in the heads of Almagro's followers was a guaranty for his

safety.''13  He did not know the character of his enemies so well as

Hernando.



The latter soon after embarked at Lima in the summer of 1539.  He did

not take the route of Panama, for he had heard that it was the intention of

the authorities there to detain him.  He made a circuitous passage,

therefore, by way of Mexico, landed in the Bay of Tecoantepec, and was

making his way across the narrow strip that divides the great oceans,

when he was arrested and taken to the capital.  But the Viceroy Mendoza

did not consider that he had a right to detain him, and he was suffered to

embark at Vera Cruz, and to proceed on his voyage.  Still he did not

deem it safe to trust himself in Spain without further advices.  He

accordingly put in at one of the Azores, where he remained until he

could communicate with home.  He had some powerful friends at court,

and by them he was encouraged to present himself before the emperor.

He took their advice, and shortly after, reached the Spanish coast in

safety.14



The Court was at Valladolid; but Hernando, who made his entrance into

that city, with great pomp and a display of his Indian riches, met with a

reception colder than he had anticipated.15  For this he was mainly

indebted to Diego de Alvarado, who was then residing there, and who, as

a cavalier of honorable standing, and of high connections, had

considerable influence.  He had formerly, as we have seen, by his timely

interposition, more than once saved the life of Hernando; and he had

consented to receive a pecuniary obligation from him to a large amount.

But all were now forgotten in the recollection of the wrong done to his

commander; and, true to the trust reposed in him by that chief in his

dying hour, he had come to Spain to vindicate the claims of the young

Almagro.



But although coldly received at first, Hernando's presence, and his own

version of the dispute with Almagro, aided by the golden arguments

which he dealt with no stinted hand, checked the current of indignation,

and the opinion of his judges seemed for a time suspended.  Alvarado, a

cavalier more accustomed to the prompt and decisive action of a camp

than to the tortuous intrigues of a court, chafed at the delay, and

challenged Hernando to settle their quarrel by single combat.  But his

prudent adversary had no desire to leave the issue to such an ordeal;

and the affair was speedily terminated by the death of Alvarado himself,

which happened five days after the challenge.  An event so opportune

naturally suggested the suspicion of poison.16



But his accusations had not wholly fallen to the ground; and Hernando

Pizarro had carried measures with too high a hand, and too grossly

outraged public sentiment, to be permitted to escape.  He received no

formal sentence, but he was imprisoned in the strong fortress of Medina

del Campo, where he was allowed to remain for twenty years when in

1560, after a generation had nearly passed away, and time had, in some

measure, thrown its softening veil over the past, he was suffered to

regain his liberty.17  But he came forth an aged man, bent down with

infirmities and broken in spirit,--an object of pity, rather than

indignation.  Rarely has retributive justice been meted out in fuller

measure to offenders so high in authority,--most rarely in Castile.18



Yet Hernando bore this long imprisonment with an equanimity which,

had it been rounded on principle, might command our respect.  He saw

brothers and kindred, all on whom he leaned for support, cut off one

after another; his fortune, in part, confiscated, while he was involved in

expensive litigation for the remainder;19 his fame blighted, his career

closed in an untimely hour, himself an exile in the heart of his own

country;--yet he bore it all with the constancy of a courageous spirit.

Though very old when released, he still survived several years, and

continued to the extraordinary age of a hundred.20  He lived long

enough to see friends, rivals, and foes all called away to their account

before him.



Hernando Pizarro was in many respects a remarkable character.  He was

the eldest of the brothers, to whom he was related only by the father's

side, for he was born in wedlock, of honorable parentage on both sides

of his house.  In his early years, he received a good education,--good for

the time.  He was taken by his father, while quite young, to Italy, and

there learned the art of war under the Great Captain.  Little is known of

his history after his return to Spain; but, when his brother had struck out

for himself his brilliant career of discovery in Peru, Hernando consented

to take part in his adventures.



He was much deferred to by Francisco, not only as his elder brother, but

from his superior education and his knowledge of affairs.  He was ready

in his perceptions, fruitful in resources, and possessed of great vigor in

action.  Though courageous, he was cautious; and his counsels, when not

warped by passion, were wise and wary.  But he had other qualities,

which more than counterbalanced the good resulting from excellent parts

and attainments.  His ambition and avarice were insatiable.  He was

supercilious even to his equals; and he had a vindictive temper, which

nothing could appease.  Thus, instead of aiding his brother in the

Conquest, he was the evil genius that blighted his path.  He conceived

from the first an unwarrantable contempt for Almagro, whom he

regarded as his brother's rival, instead of what he then was, the faithful

partner of his fortunes.  He treated him with personal indignity, and, by

his intrigues at court, had the means of doing him sensible injury.  He

fell into Almagro's hands, and had nearly paid for these wrongs with his

life.  This was not to be forgiven by Hernando, and he coolly waited for

the hour of revenge.  Yet the execution of Almagro was a most impolitic

act; for an evil passion can rarely be gratified with impunity.  Hernando

thought to buy off justice with the gold of Peru.  He had studied human

nature on its weak and wicked side, and he expected to profit by it.

Fortunately, he was deceived.  He had, indeed, his revenge; but the hour

of his revenge was that of his ruin.



The disorderly state of Peru was such as to demand the immediate

interposition of government.  In the general license that prevailed there,

the rights of the Indian and of the Spaniard were equally trampled under

foot.  Yet the subject was one of great difficulty; for Pizarro's authority

was now firmly established over the country, which itself was too remote

from Castile to be readily controlled at home.  Pizarro, moreover, was a

man not easy to be approached, confident in his own strength, jealous of

interference, and possessed of a fiery temper, which would kindle into a

flame at the least distrust of the government.  It would not answer to send

out a commission to suspend him from the exercise of his authority until

his conduct could be investigated, as was done with Cortes, and other

great colonial officers, on whose rooted loyalty the Crown could

confidently rely.  Pizarro's loyalty sat, it was feared, too lightly on him to

be a powerful restraint on his movements; and there were not wanting

those among his reckless followers, who, in case of extremity, would be

prompt to urge him to throw off his allegiance altogether, and set up an

independent government for himself.



Some one was to be sent out, therefore, who should possess, in some

sort, a controlling, or, at least, concurrent power with the dangerous

chief, while ostensibly he should act only in subordination to him.  The

person selected for this delicate mission, was the Licentiate Vaca de

Castro, a member of the Royal Audience of Valladolid.  He was a

learned judge, a man of integrity and wisdom, and, though not bred to

arms, had so much address, and such knowledge of character, as would

enable him readily to turn the resources of others to his own account.



His commission was guarded in a way which showed the embarrassment

of the government.  He was to appear before Pizarro in the capacity of a

royal judge; to consult with him on the redress of grievances, especially

with reference to the unfortunate natives; to concert measures for the

prevention of future evils; and above all, to possess himself faithfully of

the condition of the country in all its details, and to transmit intelligence

of it to the Court of Castile.  But, in case of Pizarro's death, he was to

produce his warrant as royal governor, and as such to claim the

obedience of the authorities throughout the land.--Events showed the

wisdom of providing for this latter contingency.21



The licentiate, thus commissioned, quilted his quiet residence at

Valladolid, embarked at Seville, in the autumn of 1540, and, after a

tedious voyage across the Atlantic, he traversed the Isthmus, and,

encountering a succession of tempests on the Pacific, that had nearly sent

his frail bark to the bottom, put in with her, a mere wreck, at the

northerly port of Buenaventura.22  The affairs of the country were in a

state to require his presence.



The civil war which had lately distracted the land had left it in so

unsettled a state, that the agitation continued long after the immediate

cause had ceased.  This was especially the case among the natives.  In

the violent transfer of repartimientos, the poor Indian hardly knew to

whom he was to look as his master.  The fierce struggles between the

rival chieftains left him equally in doubt whom he was to regard as the

rulers of the land.  As to the authority of a common sovereign, across the

waters, paramount over all, he held that in still greater distrust; for what

was the authority which could not command the obedience even of its

own vassals?23  The Inca Manco was not slow in taking advantage of

this state of feeling.  He left his obscure fastnesses in the depths of the

Andes, and established himself with a strong body of followers in the

mountain country lying between Cuzco and the coast.  From this retreat,

he made descents on the neighboring plantations, destroying the houses,

sweeping off the cattle, and massacring the people.  He fell on travellers,

as they were journeying singly or in caravans from the coast, and put

them to death--it is told by his enemies--with cruel tortures.  Single

detachments were sent against him, from time to time, but without effect.

Some he eluded, others he defeated; and, on one occasion, cut off a party

of thirty troopers, to a man.24



At length, Pizarro found it necessary to send a considerable force under

his brother Gonzalo against the Inca.  The hardy Indian encountered his

enemy several times in the rough passes of the Cordilleras.  He was

usually beaten, and sometimes with heavy loss, which he repaired with

astonishing facility; for he always contrived to make his escape, and so

true were his followers, that, in defiance of pursuit and ambuscade, he

found a safe shelter in the secret haunts of the sierra.



Thus baffled, Pizarro determined to try the effect of pacific overtures.

He sent to the Inca, both in his own name, and in that of the Bishop of

Cuzco, whom the Peruvian prince held in reverence, to invite him to

enter into negotiation.25  Manco acquiesced, and indicated, as he had

formerly done with Almagro, the valley of Yucay, as the scene of it.  The

governor repaired thither, at the appointed time, well guarded, and, to

propitiate the barbarian monarch, sent him a rich present by the hands of

an African slave.  The slave was met on the route by a party of the Inca's

men, who, whether with or without their master's orders, cruelly

murdered him, and bore off the spoil to their quarters.  Pizarro resented

this outrage by another yet more atrocious.



Among the Indian prisoners was one of the Inca's wives, a young and

beautiful woman, to whom he was said to be fondly attached.  The

governor ordered her to be stripped naked, bound to a tree, and, in

presence of the camp, to be scourged with rods, and then shot to death

with arrows.  The wretched victim bore the execution of the sentence

with surprising fortitude.  She did not beg for mercy, where none was to

be found.  Not a complaint, scarcely a groan, escaped her under the

infliction of these terrible torments.  The iron Conquerors were amazed

at this power of endurance in a delicate woman, and they expressed their

admiration, while they condemned the cruelty of their commander,--in

their hearts.26  Yet constancy under the most excruciating tortures that

human cruelty can inflict is almost the universal characteristic of the

American Indian.



Pizarro now prepared, as the most effectual means of checking these

disorders among the natives, to establish settlements in the heart of the

disaffected country.  These settlements, which received the dignified

name of cities, might be regarded in the light of military colonies.  The

houses were usually built of stone, to which were added the various

public offices, and sometimes a fortress.  A municipal corporation was

organized.  Settlers were invited by the distribution of large tracts of land

in the neighborhood, with a stipulated number of Indian vassals to each.

The soldiers then gathered there, sometimes accompanied by their wives

and families; for the women of Castile seem to have disdained the

impediments of sex, in the ardor of conjugal attachment, or, it may be, of

romantic adventure.  A populous settlement rapidly grew up in the

wilderness, affording protection to the surrounding territory, and

furnishing a commercial depot for the country, and an armed force ready

at all times to maintain public order.



Such a settlement was that now made at Guamanga, midway between

Cuzco and Lima, which effectually answered its purpose by guarding the

communications with the coast.27  Another town was founded in the

mining district of Charcas, under the appropriate name of the Villa de la

Plato, the "City of Silver." And Pizarro, as he journeyed by a circuitous

route along the shores of the southern sea towards Lima, planted there

the city of Arequipa, since arisen to such commercial celebrity.



Once more in his favorite capital of Lima, the governor found abundant

occupation in attending to its municipal concerns, and in providing for

the expansive growth of its population.  Nor was he unmindful of the

other rising settlements on the Pacific.  He encouraged commerce with

the remoter colonies north of Peru, and took measures for facilitating

internal intercourse.  He stimulated industry in all its branches, paying

great attention to husbandry, and importing seeds of the different

European grains, which he had the satisfaction, in a short time, to see

thriving luxuriantly in a country where the variety of soil and climate

afforded a home for almost every product.28  Above all, he promoted the

working of the mines, which already began to make such returns, that the

most common articles of life rose to exorbitant prices, while the precious

metals themselves seemed the only things of little value.  But they soon

changed hands, and found their way to the mother-country, where they

rose to their true level as they mingled with the general currency of

Europe.  The Spaniards found that they had at length reached the land of

which they had been so long in search,--the land of gold and silver.

Emigrants came in greater numbers to the country, and, spreading over

its surface, formed in the increasing population the most effectual barrier

against the rightful owners of the soil.29



Pizarro, strengthened by the arrival of fresh adventurers, now turned his

attention to the remoter quarters of the country.  Pedro de Valdivia was

sent on his memorable expedition to Chili; and to his own brother

Gonzalo the governor assigned the territory of Quito, with instructions to

explore the unknown country towards the east, where, as report said,

grew the cinnamon.  As this chief, who had hitherto acted but a

subordinate part in the Conquest, is henceforth to take the most

conspicuous, it may be well to give some account of him.



Little is known of his early life, for he sprang from the same obscure

origin with Francisco, and seems to have been as little indebted as his

eider brother to the fostering care of his parents.  He entered early on the

career of a soldier; a career to which every man in that iron age, whether

cavalier or vagabond, seems, if left to himself, to have most readily

inclined.  Here he soon distinguished himself by his skill in martial

exercises, was an excellent horseman, and, when he came to the New

World, was esteemed the best lance in Peru.30



In talent and in expansion of views, he was inferior to his brothers.

Neither did he discover the same cool and crafty policy; but he was

equally courageous, and in the execution of his measures quite as

unscrupulous.  He lied a handsome person, with open, engaging features,

a free, soldier-like address, and a confiding temper, which endeared him

to his followers.  His spirit was high and adventurous, and, what was

equally important, he could inspire others with the same spirit, and thus

do much to insure the success of his enterprises.  He was an excellent

captain in guerilla warfare, an admirable leader in doubtful and difficult

expeditions; but he had not the enlarged capacity for a great military

chief, still less for a civil ruler.  It was his misfortune to be called to fill

both situations.







Book 4



Chapter 4



Gonzalo Pizarro's Expedition--Passage Across The Mountains--

Discovers The Napo--Incredible Sufferings-

Orellana Sails Down The Amazon--Despair Of The Spaniards-

The Survivors Return To Quito



1540--1542



Gonzalo Pizarro received the news of his appointment to the government

of Quito with undisguised pleasure; not so much for the possession that it

gave him of this ancient Indian province, as for the field that it opened

for discovery towards the east,--the fabled land of Oriental spices, which

had long captivated the imagination of the Conquerors.  He repaired to

his government without delay, and found no difficulty in awakening a

kindred enthusiasm to his own in the bosoms of his followers.  In a short

time, he mustered three hundred and fifty Spaniards, and four thousand

Indians.  One hundred and fifty of his company were mounted, and all

were equipped in the most thorough manner for the undertaking.  He

provided, moreover, against famine by a large stock of provisions, and

an immense drove of swine which followed in the rear.1



It was the beginning of 1540, when he set out on this celebrated

expedition.  The first part of the journey was attended with

comparatively little difficulty, while the Spaniards were yet in the land of

the Incas; for the distractions of Peru had not been felt in this distant

province, where the simple people still lived as under the primitive sway

of the Children of the Sun.  But the scene changed as they entered the

territory of Quixos, where the character of the inhabitants, as well as of

the climate, seemed to be of another description.  The country was

traversed by lofty ranges of the Andes, and the adventurers were soon

entangled in their deep and intricate passes.  As they rose into the more

elevated regions, the icy winds that swept down the sides of the

Cordilleras benumbed their limbs, and many of the natives found a

wintry grave in the wilderness.  While crossing this formidable barrier,

they experienced one of those tremendous earthquakes which, in these

volcanic regions, so often shake the mountains to their base.  In one

place, the earth was rent asunder by the terrible throes of Nature, while

streams of sulphurous vapor issued from the cavity, and a village with

some hundreds of houses was precipitated into the frightful abyss! 2



On descending the eastern slopes, the climate changed; and, as they came

on the lower level, the fierce cold was succeeded by a suffocating heat,

while tempests of thunder and lightning, rushing from out the gorges of

the sierra, poured on their heads with scarcely any intermission day or

night, as if the offended deities of the place were willing to take

vengeance on the invaders of their mountain solitudes.  For more than six

weeks the deluge continued unabated, and the forlorn wanderers, wet,

and weary with incessant toil, were scarcely able to drag their limbs

along the soil broken up and saturated with the moisture.  After some

months of toilsome travel, in which they had to cross many a morass and

mountain stream, they at length reached Canelas, the Land of

Cinnamon.3  They saw the trees bearing the precious bark, spreading out

into broad forests; yet, however valuable an article for commerce it

might have proved in accessible situations, in these remote regions it was

of little worth to them.  But, from the wandering tribes of savages whom

they occasionally met in their path, they learned that at ten days' distance

was a rich and fruitful land abounding with gold, and inhabited by

populous nations.  Gonzalo Pizarro had already reached the limits

originally proposed for the expedition.  But this intelligence renewed his

hopes, and he resolved to push the adventure farther.  It would have been

well for him and his followers, had they been content to return on their

footsteps.



Continuing their march, the country now spread out into broad savannas

terminated by forests, which, as they drew near, seemed to stretch on

every side to the very verge of the horizon.  Here they beheld trees of

that stupendous growth seen only in the equinoctial regions.  Some were

so large, that sixteen men could hardly encompass them with extended

arms! 4  The wood was thickly matted with creepers and parasitical

vines, which hung in gaudy-colored festoons from tree to tree, clothing

them in a drapery beautiful to the eye, but forming an impenetrable

network.  At every step of their way, they were obliged to hew open a

passage with their axes, while their garments, rotting from the effects of

the drenching rains to which they had been exposed, caught in every

bush and bramble, and hung about them in shreds.5  Their provisions,

spoiled by the weather, had long since failed, and the live stock which

they had taken with them had either been consumed or made their escape

in the woods and mountain passes.  They had set out with nearly a

thousand dogs, many of them of the ferocious breed used in hunting

down the unfortunate natives.  These they now gladly killed, but their

miserable carcasses furnished a lean banquet for the famishing travellers;

and, when these were gone, they had only such herbs and dangerous

roots as they could gather in the forest.6



At length the way-worn company came on a broad expanse of water

formed by the Napo, one of the great tributaries of the Amazon, and

which, though only a third or fourth rate river in America, would pass for

one of the first magnitude in the Old World.  The sight gladdened their

hearts, as, by winding along its banks, they hoped to find a safer and

more practicable route.  After traversing its borders for a considerable

distance, closely beset with thickets which it taxed their strength to the

utmost to overcome, Gonzalo and his party came within hearing of a

rushing noise that sounded like subterranean thunder.  The river, lashed

into fury, tumbled along over rapids with frightful velocity, and

conducted them to the brink of a magnificent cataract, which, to their

wondering fancies, rushed down in one vast volume of foam to the depth

of twelve hundred feet! 7  The appalling sounds which they had heard for

the distance of six leagues were rendered yet more oppressive to the

spirits by the gloomy stillness of the surrounding forests.  The rude

warriors were filled with sentiments of awe.  Not a bark dimpled the

waters.  No living thing was to be seen but the wild tenants of the

wilderness, the unwieldy boa, and the loathsome alligator basking on the

borders of the stream.  The trees towering in wide-spread magnificence

towards the heavens, the river rolling on in its rocky bed as it had rolled

for ages, the solitude and silence of the scene, broken only by the hoarse

fall of waters, or the faint rustling of the woods,--all seemed to spread

out around them in the same wild and primitive state as when they came

from the hands of the Creator.



For some distance above and below the falls, the bed of the river

contracted so that its width did not exceed twenty feet.  Sorely pressed

by hunger, the adventurers determined, at all hazards, to cross to the

opposite side, in hopes of finding a country that might afford them

sustenance.  A frail bridge was constructed by throwing the huge trunks

of trees across the chasm, where the cliffs, as if split asunder by some

convulsion of nature, descended sheer down a perpendicular depth of

several hundred feet.  Over this airy causeway the men and horses

succeeded in effecting their passage with the loss of a single Spaniard,

who, made giddy by heedlessly looking down, lost his footing and fell

into the boiling surges below.



Yet they gained little by the exchange.  The country wore the same

unpromising aspect, and the river-banks were studded with gigantic

trees, or fringed with impenetrable thickets.  The tribes of Indians, whom

they occasionally met in the pathless wilderness, were fierce and

unfriendly, and they were engaged in perpetual skirmishes with them.

From these they learned that a fruitful country was to be found down the

river at the distance of only a few days' journey, and the Spaniards held

on their weary way, still hoping and still deceived, as the promised land

flitted before them, like the rainbow, receding as they advanced.



At length, spent with toil and suffering, Gonzalo resolved to construct a

bark large enough to transport the weaker part of his company and his

baggage.  The forests furnished him with timber; the shoes of the horses

which had died on the road or been slaughtered for food, were converted

into nails; gum distilled from the trees took the place of pitch; and the

tattered garments of the soldiers supplied a substitute for oakum.  It was

a work of difficulty; but Gonzalo cheered his men in the task, and set an

example by taking part in their labors.  At the end of two months a

brigantine was completed, rudely put together, but strong and of

sufficient burden to carry half the company,--the first European vessel

that ever floated on these inland waters.



Gonzalo gave the command to Francisco de Orellana, a cavalier from

Truxillo, on whose courage and devotion to himself he thought he could

rely.  The troops now moved forward, still following the descending

course of the river, while the brigantine kept alongside; and when a bold

promontory or more impracticable country intervened, it furnished

timely aid by the transportation of the feebler soldiers.  In this way they

journeyed, for many a wearisome week, through the dreary wilderness on

the borders of the Napo.  Every scrap of provisions had been long since

consumed.  The last of their horses had been devoured.  To appease the

gnawings of hunger, they were fain to eat the leather of their saddles and

belts.  The woods supplied them with scanty sustenance, and they

greedily fed upon toads, serpents, and such other reptiles as they

occasionally found.8



They were now told of a rich district, inhabited by a populous nation,

where the Napo emptied into a still greater river that flowed towards the

east.  It was, as usual, at the distance of several days' journey; and

Gonzalo Pizarro resolved to halt where he was and send Orellana down

in his brigantine to the confluence of the waters to procure a stock of

provisions, with which he might return and put them in condition to

resume their march.  That cavalier, accordingly, taking with him fifty of

the adventurers, pushed off into the middle of the river, where the stream

ran swiftly, and his bark, taken by the current, shot forward with the

speed of an arrow, and was soon out of sight.



Days and weeks passed away, yet the vessel did not return; and no speck

was to be seen on the waters, as the Spaniards strained their eyes to the

farthest point, where the line of light faded away in the dark shadows of

the foliage on the borders.  Detachments were sent out, and, though

absent several days, came back without intelligence of their comrades.

Unable longer to endure this suspense, or, indeed, to maintain

themselves in their present quarters, Gonzalo and his famishing followers

now determined to proceed towards the junction of the rivers.  Two

months elapsed before they accomplished this terrible journey those of

them who did not perish on the way,--although the distance probably' did

not exceed two hundred leagues; and they at length reached the spot so

long desired, where the Napo pours its tide into the Amazon, that mighty

stream, which, fed by its thousand tributaries, rolls on towards the ocean,

for many hundred miles, through the heart of the great continent,--the

most majestic of American rivers.



But the Spaniards gathered no tidings of Orellana, while the country,

though more populous than the region they had left, was as little inviting

in its aspect, and was tenanted by a race yet more ferocious.  They now

abandoned the hope of recovering their comrades, who they supposed

must have miserably perished by famine or by the hands of the natives.

But their doubts were at length dispelled by the appearance of a white

man wandering half-naked in the woods, in whose famine stricken

countenance they recognized the features of one of their countrymen.  It

was Sanchez de Vargas, a cavalier of good descent, and much esteemed

in the army.  He had a dismal tale to tell.



Orellana, borne swiftly down the current of the Napo, had reached the

point of its confluence with the Amazon in less than three days;

accomplishing in this brief space of time what had cost Pizarro and his

company two months.  He had found the country altogether different

from what had been represented; and, so far from supplies for his

countrymen, he could barely obtain sustenance for himself.  Nor was it

possible for him to return as he had come, and make head against the

current of the river; while the attempt to journey by land was an alternative

scarcely less formidable.  In this dilemma, an idea flashed across his

mind.  It was to launch his bark at once on the bosom of the Amazon,

and descend its waters to its mouth.  He would then visit the rich and

populous nations that, as report said, lined its borders, sail out on the

great ocean, cross to the neighboring isles, and return to Spain to claim

the glory and the guerdon of discovery.  The suggestion was eagerly

taken up by his reckless companions, welcoming any course that would

rescue them from the wretchedness of their present existence, and fired

with the prospect of new and stirring adventure,--for the love of

adventure was the last feeling to become extinct in the bosom of the

Castilian cavalier.  They heeded little their unfortunate comrades, whom

they were to abandon in the wilderness! 9



This is not the place to record the circumstances of Orellana's

extraordinary expedition.  He succeeded in his enterprise.  But it is

marvellous that he should have escaped shippwreck in the perilous and

unknown navigation of that river.  Many times his vessel was nearly

dashed to pieces on its rocks and in its furious rapids;10 and he was in

still greater peril from the warlike tribes on its borders, who fell on his

little troop whenever he attempted to land, and followed in his wake for

miles in their canoes.  He at length emerged from the great river; and,

once upon the sea, Orellana made for the isle of Cubagua; thence passing

over to Spain, he repaired to court, and told the circumstances of his

voyage,--of the nations of Amazons whom he had found on the banks of

the river, the El Dorado which report assured him existed in the

neighborhood, and other marvels,--the exaggeration rather than the

coinage of a credulous fancy.  His audience listened with willing ears to

the tales of the traveller; and in an age of wonders, when the mysteries of

the East and West were hourly coming to light, they might be excused

for not discerning the true line between romance and reality.11



He found no difficulty in obtaining a commission to conquer and

colonize the realms he had discovered.  He soon saw himself at the head

of five hundred followers, prepared to share the perils and the profits of

his expedition.  But neither he, nor his country, was destined to realize

these profits.  He died on his outward passage, and the lands washed by

the Amazon fell within the territories of Portugal.  The unfortunate

navigator did not even enjoy the undivided honor of giving his name to

the waters he had discovered.  He enjoyed only the barren glory of the

discovery, surely not balanced by the iniquitous circumstances which

attended it.12



One of Orellana's party maintained a stout opposition to his proceedings,

as repugnant both to humanity and honor.  This was Sanchez de Vargas;

and the cruel commander was revenged on him by abandoning him to his

fate in the desolate region where he was now found by his

countrymen.13



The Spaniards listened with horror to the recital of Vargas, and their

blood almost froze in their veins as they saw themselves thus deserted in

the heart of this remote wilderness, and deprived of their only means of

escape from it.  They made an effort to prosecute their journey along the

banks, but, after some toilsome days, strength and spirits failed, and they

gave up in despair!



Then it was that the qualities of Gonzalo Pizarro, as a fit leader in the

hour of despondency and danger, shone out conspicuous.  To advance

farther was hopeless.  To stay where they were, without food or raiment,

without defence from the fierce animals of the forest and the fiercer

natives, was impossible.  One only course remained; it was to return to

Quito.  But this brought with it the recollection of the past, of sufferings

which they could too well estimate,---hardly to be endured even in

imagination.  They were now at least four hundred leagues from Quito,

and more than a year had elapsed since they had set out on their painful

pilgrimage.  How could they encounter these perils again! 14



Yet there was no alternative.  Gonzalo endeavored to reassure his

followers by dwelling on the invincible constancy they had hitherto

displayed; adjuring them to show themselves still worthy of the name of

Castilians.  He reminded them of the glory they would for ever acquire

by their heroic achievement, when they should reach their own country.

He would lead them back, he said, by another route, and it could not be

but that they should meet somewhere with those abundant regions of

which they had so often heard.  It was something, at least, that every step

would take them nearer home; and as, at all events, it was clearly the

only course now left, they should prepare to meet it like men.  The spirit

would sustain the body; and difficulties encountered in the right spirit

were half vanquished already!



The soldiers listened eagerly to his words of promise and

encouragement.  The confidence of their leader gave life to the

desponding.  They felt the force of his reasoning, and, as they lent a

willing ear to his assurances, the pride of the old Castilian honor revived

in their bosoms, and every one caught somewhat of the generous

enthusiasm of their commander.  He was, in truth, entitled to their

devotion.  From the first hour of the expedition, he had freely borne his

part in its privations.  Far from claiming the advantage of his position, he

had taken his lot with the poorest soldier; ministering to the wants of the

sick, cheering up the spirits of the desponding, sharing his stinted

allowance with his famished followers, bearing his full part in the toil

and burden of the march, ever showing himself their faithful comrade, no

less than their captain.  He found the benefit of this conduct in a trying

hour like the present.



I will spare the reader the recapitulation of the sufferings endured by the

Spaniards on their retrograde march to Quito.  They took a more

northerly route than that by which they had approached the Amazon;

and, if it was attended with fewer difficulties, they experienced yet

greater distresses from their greater inability to overcome them.  Their

only nourishment was such scanty fare as they could pick up in the

forest, or happily meet with in some forsaken Indian settlement, or wring

by violence from the natives.  Some sickened and sank down by the way,

for there was none to help them.  Intense misery had made them selfish;

and many a poor wretch was abandoned to his fate, to die alone in the

wilderness, or, more probably, to be devoured, while living, by the wild

animals which roamed over it.



At length, in June, 1542, after somewhat more than a year consumed in

their homeward march, the way-worn company came on the elevated

plains in the neighborhood of Quito.  But how different their aspect from

that which they had exhibited on issuing from the gates of the same

capital, two years and a half before, with high romantic hope and in all

the pride of military array!  Their horses gone, their arms broken and

rusted, the skins of wild animals instead of clothes hanging loosely about

their limbs, their long and matted locks streaming wildly down their

shoulders, their faces burned and blackened by the tropical sun, their

bodies wasted by famine and sorely disfigured by scars,--it seemed as if

the charnel-house had given up its dead, as, with uncertain step, they

glided slowly onwards like a troop of dismal spectres!  More than half of

the four thousand Indians who had accompanied the expedition had

perished, and of the Spaniards only eighty, and many of these

irretrievably broken in constitution, returned to Quito.15



The few Christian inhabitants of the place, with their wives and children,

came out to welcome their countrymen.  They ministered to them all the

relief and refreshment in their power; and, as they listened to the sad

recital of their sufferings, they mingled their tears with those of the

wanderers.  The whole company then entered the capital, where their

first act--to their credit be it mentioned--was to go in a body to the

church, and offer up thanksgivings to the Almighty for their miraculous

preservation through their long and perilous pilgrimage.16  Such was the

end of the expedition to the Amazon; an expedition which, for its

dangers and hardships, the length of their duration, and the constancy

with which they were endured, stands, perhaps, unmatched in the annals

of American discovery.







Book 4



Chapter 5



The Almagro Faction--Their Desperate Condition-

Conspiracy Against Francisco Pizarro--Assassination Of Pizarro-

Acts Of The Conspirators--Pizarro's Character



1541



When Gonzalo Pizarro reached Quito, he received tidings of an event

which showed that his expedition to the Amazon had been even more

fatal to his interests than he had imagined.  A revolution had taken place

during his absence, which had changed the whole condition of things in

Peru.



In a preceding chapter we have seen, that, when Hernando Pizarro

returned to Spain, his brother the marquess repaired to Lima, where he

continued to occupy himself with building up his infant capital, and

watching over the general interests of the country.  While thus employed,

he gave little heed to a danger that hourly beset his path, and this, too, in

despite of repeated warnings from more circumspect friends.



After the execution of Almagro, his followers, to the number of several

hundred, remained scattered through the country; but, however scattered,

still united by a common sentiment of indignation against the Pizarros,

the murderers, as they regarded them, of their leader.  The governor was

less the object of these feelings than his brother Hernando, as having

been less instrumental in the perpetration of the deed.  Under these

circumstances, it was clearly Pizarro's policy to do one of two things; to

treat the opposite faction either as friends, or as open enemies.  He might

conciliate the most factious by acts of kindness, efface the remembrance

of past injury, if he could, by present benefits; in short, prove to them

that his quarrel had been with their leader, not with themselves, and that

it was plainly for their interest to come again under his banner.  This

would have been the most politic, as well as the most magnanimous

course; and, by augmenting the number of his adherents, would have

greatly strengthened his power in the land.  But, unhappily, he had not

the magnanimity to pursue it.  It was not in the nature of a Pizarro to

forgive an injury, or the man whom he had injured.  As he would not,

therefore, try to conciliate Almagro's adherents, it was clearly the

governor's policy to regard them as enemies, not the less so for being in

disguise,--and to take such measures as should disqualify them for doing

mischief.  He should have followed the counsel of his more prudent

brother Hernando, and distributed them in different quarters, taking care

that no great number should assemble at any one point, or, above all, in

the neighborhood of his own residence.



But the governor despised the broken followers of Almagro too heartily

to stoop to precautionary measures.  He suffered the son of his rival to

remain in Lima, where his quarters soon became the resort of the

disaffected cavaliers.  The young man was well known to most of

Almagro's soldiers, having been trained along with them in the camp

under his father's eye, and, now that his parent was removed, they

naturally transferred their allegiance to the son who survived him.



That the young Almagro, however, might be less able to maintain this

retinue of unprofitable followers, he was deprived by Pizarro of a great

part of his Indians and lands, while he was excluded from the

government of New Toledo, which had been settled on him by his

father's testament.1  Stripped of all means of support, without office or

employment of any kind, the men of Chili, for so Almagro's adherents

continued to be called, were reduced to the utmost distress.  So poor

were they, as is the story of the time, that twelve cavaliers, who lodged in

the same house, could muster only one cloak among them all; and, with

the usual feeling of pride that belongs to the poor hidalgo, unwilling to

expose their poverty, they wore this cloak by turns, those who had no

right to it remaining at home.2  Whether true or not, the anecdote well

illustrates the extremity to which Almagro's faction was reduced.  And

this distress was rendered yet more galling by the effrontery of their

enemies, who, enriched by their forfeitures, displayed before their eyes

all the insolent bravery of equipage and apparel that could annoy their

feelings.



Men thus goaded by insult and injury were too dangerous to be lightly

regarded.  But, although Pizarro received various intimations intended to

put him on his guard, he gave no heed to them.  "Poor devils!" he would

exclaim, speaking with contemptuous pity of the men of Chili; "they

have had bad luck enough.  We will not trouble them further."3  And so

little did he consider them, that he went freely about, as usual, riding

without attendants to all parts of the town and to its immediate

environs.4



News now reached the colony of the appointment of a judge by the

Crown to take cognizance of the affairs of Peru.  Pizarro, although

alarmed by the intelligence, sent orders to have him well entertained on

his landing, and suitable accommodations prepared for him on the route.

The spirits of Almagro's followers were greatly raised by the tidings.

They confidently looked to this high functionary for the redress of their

wrongs; and two of their body, clad in suits of mourning, were chosen to

go to the north, where the judge was expected to land, and to lay their

grievances before him.



But months elapsed, and no tidings came of his arrival, till, at length, a

vessel, coming into port, announced that most of the squadron had

foundered in the heavy storms on the coast, and that the commissioner

had probably perished with them.  This was disheartening intelligence to

the men of Chili, whose "miseries," to use the words of their young

leader, "had become too grievous to be borne."5  Symptoms of

disaffection had already begun openly to manifest themselves.  The

haughty cavaliers did not always doff their bonnets, on meeting the

governor in the street; and on one occasion, three ropes were found

suspended from the public gallows, with labels attached to them, bearing

the names of Pizarro, Velasquez the judge, and Picado the governor's

secretary.6  This last functionary was peculiarly odious to Almagro and

his followers.  As his master knew neither how to read nor write, all his

communications passed through Picado's hands; and, as the latter was of

a hard and arrogant nature, greatly elated by the consequence which his

position gave him, he exercised a mischievous influence on the

governor's measures.  Almagro's poverty-stricken followers were the

objects of his open ridicule, and he revenged the insult now offered him

by riding before their young leader's residence, displaying a tawdry

magnificence in his dress, sparkling with gold and silver, and with the

inscription, "For the Men of Chili," set in his bonnet.  It was a foolish

taunt; but the poor cavaliers who were the object of it, made morbidly

sensitive by their sufferings, had not the philosophy to despise it.7



At length, disheartened by the long protracted coming of Vaca de Castro,

and still more by the recent reports of his loss, Almagro's faction,

despairing of redress from a legitimate authority, determined to take it

into their own hands.  They came to the desperate resolution of

assassinating Pizarro.  The day named for this was Sunday, the twenty-

sixth of June, 1541- The conspirators, eighteen or twenty in number,

were to assemble in Almagro's house, which stood in the great square

next to the cathedral, and, when the governor was returning from mass,

they were to issue forth and fall on him in the street.  A white flag,

unfurled at the same time from an upper window in the house, was to be

the signal for the rest of their comrades to move to the support of those

immediately engaged in the execution of the deed.8



These arrangements could hardly have been concealed from Almagro,

since his own quarters were to be the place of rendezvous.  Yet there is

no good evidence of his having taken part in the conspiracy.9  He was,

indeed, too young to make it probable that he took a leading part in it.

He is represented by contemporary writers to have given promise of

many good qualities, though, unhappily, he was not placed in a situation

favorable for their development.  He was the son of an Indian woman of

Panama; but from early years had followed the troubled fortunes of his

father, to whom he bore much resemblance in his free and generous

nature, as well as in the violence of his passions.  His youth and

inexperience disqualified him from taking the lead in the perplexing

circumstances in which he was placed, and made him little more than a

puppet in the hands of others.10



The most conspicuous of his advisers was Juan de Herrada, or Rada, as

his name is more usually spelt,--a cavalier of respectable family, but

who, having early enlisted as a common soldier, had gradually risen to

the highest posts in the army by his military talents.  At this time he was

well advanced in years; but the fires of youth were not quenched in his

bosom, and he burned with desire to avenge the wrongs done to his

ancient commander.  The attachment which he had ever felt for the elder

Almagro he seems to have transferred in full measure to his son; and it

was apparently with reference to him, even more than to himself, that he

devised this audacious plot, and prepared to take the lead in the

execution of it.



There was one, however, in the band of conspirators who felt some

compunctions of conscience at the part he was acting, and who relieved

his bosom by revealing the whole plot to his confessor.  The latter lost no

time in reporting it to Picado, by whom in turn it was communicated to

Pizarro.  But, strange to say, it made little more impression on the

governor's mind than the vague warnings he had so frequently received.

"It is a device of the priest," said he; "he wants a mitre." 11  Yet he

repeated the story to the judge Velasquez, who, instead of ordering the

conspirators to be seized, and the proper steps taken for learning the

truth of the accusation, seemed to be possessed with the same infatuation

as Pizarro; and he bade the governor be under no apprehension, "for no

harm should come to him, while the rod of justice," not a metaphorical

badge of authority in Castile, "was in his hands." 12  Still, to obviate

every possibility of danger, it was deemed prudent for Pizarro to abstain

from going to mass on Sunday, and to remain at home on pretence of

illness.



On the day appointed, Rada and his companions met in Almagro's house,

and waited with anxiety for the hour when the governor should issue

from the church.  But great was their consternation, when they learned

that he was not there, but was detained at home, as currently reported, by

illness.  Little doubting that their design was discovered, they felt their

own ruin to be the inevitable consequence, and that, too, without

enjoying the melancholy consolation of having struck the blow for which

they had incurred it.  Greatly perplexed, some were for disbanding, in the

hope that Pizarro might, after all, be ignorant of their design.  But most

were for carrying it into execution at once, by assaulting him in his own

house.  The question was summarily decided by one of the party, who

felt that in this latter course lay their only chance of safety.  Throwing

open the doors, he rushed out, calling on his comrades "to follow him, or

he would proclaim the purpose for which they had met."  There was no

longer hesitation, and the cavaliers issued forth, with Rada at their head,

shouting, as they went, "Long live the king!  Death to the tyrant!" 13



It was the hour of dinner, which, in this primitive age of the Spanish

colonies, was at noon.  Yet numbers, roused by the cries of the

assailants, came out into the square to inquire the cause.  "They are

going to kill the marquess," some said very coolly; others replied, "It is

Picado."  No one stirred in their defence.  The power of Pizarro was not

seated in the hearts of his people.



As the conspirators traversed the plaza, one of the party made a circuit to

avoid a little pool of water that lay in their path.  "What!" exclaimed

Rada, "afraid of wetting your feet, when you are to wade up to your

knees in blood!"  And he ordered the man to give up the enterprise and

go home to his quarters.  The anecdote is characteristic.14



The governor's palace stood on the opposite side of the square.  It was

approached by two courtyards.  The entrance to the outer one was

protected by a massive gate, capable of being made good against a

hundred men or more.  But it was left open, and the assailants, hurrying

through to the inner court, still shouting their fearful battle-cry, were met

by two domestics loitering in the yard.  One of these they struck down.

The other, flying in all haste towards the house, called out, "Help, help!

the men of Chili are all coming to murder the marquess!"



Pizarro at this time was at dinner, or, more probably, had just dined.  He

was surrounded by a party of friends, who had dropped in, it seems, after

mass, to inquire after the state of his health, some of whom had remained

to partake of his repast.  Among these was Don Martinez do Alcantara,

Pizarro's half-brother by the mother's side, the judge Velasquez, the

bishop elect of Quito, and several of the principal cavaliers in the place,

to the number of fifteen or twenty.  Some of them, alarmed by the uproar

in the court-yard, left the saloon, and, running down to the first landing

on the stairway, inquired into the cause of the disturbance.  No sooner

were they informed of it by the cries of the servant, than they retreated

with precipitation into the house; and, as they had no mind to abide the

storm unarmed, or at best imperfectly armed, as most of them were, they

made their way to a corridor that overlooked the gardens, into which

they easily let themselves down without injury.  Velasquez, the judge,

the better to have the use of his hands in the descent, held his rod of

office in his mouth, thus taking care, says a caustic old chronicler, not to

falsify his assurance, that "no harm should come to Pizarro while the rod

of justice was in his hands"! 15



Meanwhile, the marquess, learning the nature of the tumult, called out to

Francisco de Chaves, an officer high in his confidence, and who was in

the outer apartment opening on the staircase, to secure the door, while he

and his brother Alcantara buckled on their armour.  Had this order,

coolly given, been as coolly obeyed, it would have saved them all, since

the entrance could easily have been maintained against a much larger

force, till the report of the cavaliers who had fled had brought support to

Pizarro.  But unfortunately, Chaves, disobeying his commander, half

opened the door, and attempted to enter into a parley with the

conspirators.  The latter had now reached the head of the stairs, and cut

short the debate by running Chaves through the body, and tumbling his

corpse down into the area below.  For a moment they were kept at bay by

the attendants of the slaughtered cavalier, but these, too, were quickly

despatched; and Rada and his companions, entering the apartment,

hurried across it, shouting out, "Where is the marquess? Death to the

tyrant!"



Martinez de Alcantara, who in the adjoining room was assisting his

brother to buckle on his mail, no sooner saw that the entrance to the

antechamber had been gained, than he sprang to the doorway of the

apartment, and, assisted by two young men, pages of Pizarro, and by one

or two cavaliers in attendance, endeavored to resist the approach of the

assailants.  A desperate struggle now ensued.  Blows were given on both

sides, some of which proved fatal, and two of the conspirators were

slain, while Alcantara and his brave companions were repeatedly

wounded.



At length, Pizarro, unable, in the hurry of the moment, to adjust the

fastenings of his cuirass, threw it away, and, enveloping one arm in his

cloak, with the other seized his sword, and sprang to his brother's

assistance.  It was too late; for Alcantara was already staggering under

the loss of blood, and soon fell to the ground.  Pizarro threw himself on

his invaders, like a lion roused in his lair, and dealt his blows with as

much rapidity and force, as if age had no power to stiffen his limbs.

"What ho!" he cried, "traitors! have you come to kill me in my own

house?"  The conspirators drew back for a moment, as two of their body

fell under Pizarro's sword; but they quickly rallied, and, from their

superior numbers, fought at great advantage by relieving one another in

the assault.  Still the passage was narrow, and the struggle lasted for

some minutes, till both of Pizarro's pages were stretched by his side,

when Rada, impatient of the delay, called out, "Why are we so long

about it? Down with the tyrant!" and taking one of his companions,

Narvaez, in his arms, he thrust him against the marquess.  Pizarro,

instantly grappling with his opponent, ran him through with his sword.

But at that moment he received a wound in the throat, and reeling, he

sank on the floor, while the swords of Rada and several of the

conspirators were plunged into his body.  "Jesu!" exclaimed the dying

man, and, tracing a cross with his finger on the bloody floor, he bent

down his head to kiss it, when a stroke, more friendly than the rest, put

an end to his existence.16



The conspirators, having accomplished their bloody deed, rushed into

the street, and, brandishing their dripping weapons, shouted out, "The

tyrant is dead!  The laws are restored!  Long live our master the emperor,

and his governor, Almagro!"  The men of Chili, roused by the cheering

cry, now flocked in from every side to join the banner of Rada, who soon

found himself at the head of nearly three hundred followers, all armed

and prepared to support his authority.  A guard was placed over the

houses of the principal partisans of the late governor, and their persons

were taken into custody.  Pizarro's house, and that of his secretary

Picado, were delivered up to pillage and a large booty in gold and silver

was found in the former.  Picado himself took refuge in the dwelling of

Riquelme, the treasurer; but his hiding-place was detected, --betrayed,

according to some accounts, by the looks, though not the words, of the

treasurer himself,--and he was dragged forth and committed to a secure

prison.17  The whole city was thrown into consternation, as armed

bodies hurried to and fro on their several errands, and all who were not

in the faction of Almagro trembled test they should be involved in the

proscription of their enemies.  So great was the disorder, that the

Brothers of Mercy, turning out in a body, paraded the streets in solemn

procession, with the host elevated in the air, in hopes by the presence of

the sacred symbol to calm the passions of the multitude.



But no other violence was offered by Rada and his followers than to

apprehend a few suspected persons, and to seize upon horses and arms

wherever they were to be found.  The municipality was then summoned

to recognize the authority of Almagro; the refractory were ejected

without ceremony from their offices, and others of the Chili faction were

substituted.  The claims of the new aspirant were fully recognized; and

young Almagro, parading the streets on horseback, and escorted by a

well-armed body of cavaliers, was proclaimed by sound of trumpet

governor and captain-general of Peru.



Meanwhile, the mangled bodies of Pizarro and his faithful adherents

were left weltering in their blood.  Some were for dragging forth the

governor's corpse to the market-place, and fixing his head upon a gibbet.

But Almagro was secretly prevailed on to grant the entreaties of Pizarro's

friends, and allow his interment.  This was stealthily and hastily

performed, in the fear of momentary interruption.  A faithful attendant

and his wife, with a few black domestics, wrapped the body in a cotton

cloth and removed it to the cathedral.  A grave was hastily dug in an

obscure corner, the services were hurried through, and, in secrecy, and in

darkness dispelled only by the feeble glimmering of a few tapers

furnished by these humble menials, the remains of Pizarro, rolled in their

bloody shroud, were consigned to their kindred dust.  Such was the

miserable end of the Conqueror of Peru,--of the man who but a few

hours before had lorded it over the land with as absolute a sway as was

possessed by its hereditary Incas.  Cut off in the broad light of day, in the

heart of his own capital, in the very midst of those who had been his

companions in arms and shared with him his triumphs and his spoils, he

perished like a wretched outcast.  "There was none, even," in the

expressive language of the chronicler, "to say, God forgive him!" 18



A few years later, when tranquillity was restored to the country, Pizarro's

remains were placed in a sumptuous coffin and deposited under a

monument in a conspicuous part of the cathedral.  And in 1607, when

time had thrown its friendly mantle over the past, and the memory of his

errors and his crimes was merged in the consideration of the great

services he had rendered to the Crown by the extension of her colonial

empire, his bones were removed to the new cathedral, and allowed to

repose side by side with those of Mendoza, the wise and good viceroy of

Peru.19



Pizarro was, probably, not far from sixty-five years of age at the time of

his death; though this, it must be added, is but loose conjecture, since

there exists no authentic record of the date of his birth.20  He was never

married; but by an Indian princess of the Inca blood, daughter of

Atahuallpa and granddaughter of the great Huayna Capac, he had two

children, a son and a daughter.  Both survived him; but the son did not

live to manhood.  Their mother, after Pizarro's death, wedded a Spanish

cavalier, named Ampuero, and removed with him to Spain.  Her

daughter Francisca accompanied her, and was there subsequently

married to her uncle Hernando Pizarro, then a prisoner in the Mota del

Medina.  Neither the title nor estates of the Marquess Francisco

descended to his illegitimate offspring.  But in the third generation, in the

reign of Philip the Fourth, the title was revived in favor of Don Juan

Hernando Pizarro, who, out of gratitude for the services of his ancestor,

was created Marquess of the Conquest, Marques de la Conquista, with a

liberal pension from government.  His descendants, bearing the same

title of nobility, are still to be found, it is said, at Truxillo, in the ancient

province of Estremadura, the original birthplace of the Pizarros.21



Pizarro's person has been already described.  He was tall in stature, well-

proportioned, and with a countenance not unpleasing.  Bred in camps,

with nothing of the polish of a court, he had a soldier-like bearing, and

the air of one accustomed to command.  But though not polished, there

was no embarrassment or rusticity in his address, which, where it served

his purpose, could be plausible and even insinuating.  The proof of it is

the favorable impression made by him, on presenting himself, after his

second expedition--stranger as he was to all its forms and usages--at the

punctilious court of Castile.



Unlike many of his countrymen, he had no passion for ostentatious dress,

which he regarded as an incumbrance.  The costume which he most

affected on public occasions was a black cloak, with a white hat, and

shoes of the same color; the last, it is said, being in imitation of the Great

Captain, whose character he had early learned to admire in Italy, but to

which his own, certainly, bore very faint resemblance.22



He was temperate in eating, drank sparingly, and usually rose an hour

before dawn.  He was punctual in attendance to business, and shrunk

from no toil.  He had, indeed, great powers of patient endurance.  Like

most of his nation, he was fond of play, and cared little for the quality of

those with whom he played; though, when his antagonist could not afford

to lose, he would allow himself, it is said, to be the loser; a mode of

conferring an obligation much commended by a Castilian writer, for its

delicacy.23



Though avaricious, it was in order to spend and not to hoard.  His ample

treasures, more ample than those, probably, that ever before fell to the

lot of an adventurer,24 were mostly dissipated in his enterprises, his

architectural works, and schemes of public improvement, which, in a

country where gold and silver might be said to have lost their value from

their abundance, absorbed an incredible amount of money.  While he

regarded the whole country, in a manner, as his own, and distributed it

freely among his captains, it is certain that the princely grant of a

territory with twenty thousand vassals, made to him by the Crown, was

never carried into effect; nor did his heirs ever reap the benefit of it.25



To a man possessed of the active energies of Pizarro, sloth was the

greatest evil.  The excitement of play was in a manner necessary to a

spirit accustomed to the habitual stimulants of war and adventure.  His

uneducated mind had no relish for more refined, intellectual recreation.

The deserted foundling had neither been taught to read nor write.  This

has been disputed by some, but it is attested by unexceptionable

authorities.26  Montesinos says, indeed, that Pizarro, on his first voyage,

tried to learn to read; but the impatience of his temper prevented it, and

he contented himself with learning to sign his name.27  But Montesinos

was not a contemporary historian.  Pedro Pizarro, his companion in

arms, expressly tells us he could neither read nor write;28 and Zarate,

another contemporary, well acquainted with the Conquerors, confirms

this statement, and adds, that Pizarro could not so much as sign his

name.29  This was done by his secretary--Picado, in his latter years-

while the governor merely made the customary rubrica or flourish at the

sides of his name.  This is the case with the instruments I have examined,

in which his signature, written probably by his secretary, or his title of

Marques, in later life substituted for his name, is garnished with a

flourish at the ends, executed in as bungling a manner as if done by the

hand of a ploughman.  Yet we must not estimate this deficiency as we

should in this period of general illumination,--general, at least, in our

own fortunate country.  Reading and writing, so universal now, in the

beginning of the sixteenth century might be regarded in the light of

accomplishments; and all who have occasion to consult the autograph

memorials of that time will find the execution of them, even by persons

of the highest rank, too often such as would do little credit to a

schoolboy of the present day.



Though bold in action and not easily turned from his purpose, Pizarro

was slow in arriving at a decision.  This gave him an appearance of

irresolution foreign to his character.30  Perhaps the consciousness of this

led him to adopt the custom of saying "No," at first, to applicants for

favor; and afterwards, at leisure, to revise his judgment, and grant what

seemed to him expedient.  He took the opposite course from his comrade

Almagro, who, it was observed, generally said "Yes," but too often failed

to keep his promise.  This was characteristic of the careless and easy

nature of the latter, governed by impulse rather than principle.31



It is hardly necessary to speak of the courage of a man pledged to such a

career as that of Pizarro.  Courage, indeed, was a cheap quality among

the Spanish adventurers, for danger was their element.  But he possessed

something higher than mere animal courage, in that constancy of purpose

which was rooted too deeply in his nature to be shaken by the wildest

storms of fortune.  It was this inflexible constancy which formed the key

to his character, and constituted the secret of his success.  A remarkable

evidence of it was given in his first expedition, among the mangroves

and dreary marshes of Choco.  He saw his followers pining around him

under the blighting malaria, wasting before an invisible enemy, and

unable to strike a stroke in their own defence.  Yet his spirit did not

yield, nor did he falter in his enterprise.



There is something oppressive to the imagination in this war against

nature.  In the struggle of man against man, the spirits are raised by a

contest conducted on equal terms; but in a war with the elements, we

feel, that, however bravely we may contend, we can have no power to

control.  Nor are we cheered on by the prospect of glory in such a

contest; for, in the capricious estimate of human glory, the silent

endurance of privations, however painful, is little, in comparison with the

ostentatious trophies of victory.  The laurel of the hero---alas for

humanity that it should be so!--grows best on the battle-field.



This inflexible spirit of Pizarro was shown still more strongly, when, in

the little island of Gallo, he drew the line on the sand, which was to

separate him and his handful of followers from their country and from

civilized man.  He trusted that his own constancy would give strength to

the feeble, and rally brave hearts around him for the prosecution of his

enterprise.  He looked with confidence to the future, and he did not


miscalculate.  This was heroic, and wanted only a nobler motive for its

object to constitute the true moral sublime.



Yet the same feature in his character was displayed in a manner scarcely

less remarkable, when, landing on the coast, and ascertaining the real

strength and civilization of the Incas, he persisted in marching into the

interior at the head of a force of less than two hundred men.  In this he

undoubtedly proposed to himself the example of Cortes, so contagious to

the adventurous spirits of that day, and especially to Pizarro, engaged, as

he was, in a similar enterprise.  Yet the hazard assumed by Pizarro was

far greater than that of the Conqueror of Mexico, whose force was nearly

three times as large, while the terrors of the Inca name--however justified

by the result--were as widely spread as those of the Aztecs.



It was doubtless in imitation of the same captivating model, that Pizarro

planned the seizure of Atahuallpa.  But the situations of the two Spanish

captains were as dissimilar as the manner in which their acts of violence

were conducted.  The wanton massacre of the Peruvians resembled that

perpetrated by Alvarado in Mexico, and might have been attended with

consequences as disastrous, if the Peruvian character had been as fierce

as that of the Aztecs.32  But the blow which roused the latter to madness

broke the tamer spirits of the Peruvians.  It was a bold stroke, which left

so much to chance, that it scarcely merits the name of policy.



When Pizarro landed in the country, he found it distracted by a contest

for the crown.  It would seem to have been for his interest to play off one

party against the other, throwing his own weight into the scale that suited

him.  Instead of this, he resorted to an act of audacious violence which

crushed them both at a blow.  His subsequent career afforded no scope

for the profound policy displayed by Cortes, when he gathered

conflicting nations under his banner, and directed them against a

common foe.  Still less did he have the opportunity of displaying the

tactics and admirable strategy of his rival.  Cortes conducted his military

operations on the scientific principles of a great captain at the head of a

powerful host.  Pizarro appears only as an adventurer, a fortunate knight-

errant.  By one bold stroke, he broke the spell which had so long held the

land under the dominion of the Incas.  The spell was broken, and the airy

fabric of their empire, built on the superstition of ages, vanished at a

touch.  This was good fortune, rather than the result of policy.



Pizarro was eminently perfidious, Yet nothing is more opposed to sound

policy.  One act of perfidy fully established becomes the ruin of its

author.  The man who relinquishes confidence in his good faith gives up

the best basis for future operations.  Who will knowingly build on a

quicksand?  By his perfidious treatment of Almagro, Pizarro alienated the

minds of the Spaniards.  By his perfidious treatment of Atahuallpa, and

subsequently of the Inca Manco, he disgusted the Peruvians.  The name

of Pizarro became a by-word for perfidy.  Almagro took his revenge in a

civil war; Manco in an insurrection which nearly cost Pizarro his

dominion.  The civil war terminated in a conspiracy which cost him his

life.  Such were the fruits of his policy.  Pizarro may be regarded as a

cunning man; but not, as he has been often eulogized by his countrymen,

as a politic one.



When Pizarro obtained possession of Cuzco, he found a country well

advanced in the arts of civilization; institutions under which the people

lived in tranquillity and personal safety; the mountains and the uplands

whitened with flocks; the valleys teeming with the fruits of a scientific

husbandry; the granaries and warehouses filled to overflowing; the whole

land rejoicing in its abundance; and the character of the nation, softened

under the influence of the mildest and most innocent form of

superstition, well prepared for the reception of a higher and a Christian

civilization.  But, far from introducing this, Pizarro delivered up the

conquered races to his brutal soldiery; the sacred cloisters were

abandoned to their lust; the towns and villages were given up to pillage;

the wretched natives were parcelled out like slaves, to toil for their

conquerors in the mines; the flocks were scattered, and wantonly

destroyed, the granaries were dissipated; the beautiful contrivances for

the more perfect culture of the soil were suffered to fall into decay; the

paradise was converted into a desert.  Instead of profiting by the ancient

forms of civilization, Pizarro preferred to efface every vestige of them

from the land, and on their ruin to erect the institutions of his own

country.  Yet these institutions did little for the poor Indian, held in iron

bondage.  It was little to him that the shores of the Pacific were studded

with rising communities and cities, the marts of a flourishing commerce.

He had no share in the goodly heritage.  He was an alien in the land of

his fathers.



The religion of the Peruvian, which directed him to the worship of that

glorious luminary which is the best representative of the might and

beneficence of the Creator, is perhaps the purest form of superstition that

has existed among men.  Yet it was much, that, under the new order of

things, and through the benevolent zeal of the missionaries, some

glimmerings of a nobler faith were permitted to dawn on his darkened

soul.  Pizarro, himself, cannot be charged with manifesting any

overweening solicitude for the propagation of the Faith.  He was no

bigot, like Cortes.  Bigotry is the perversion of the religious principle;

but the principle itself was wanting in Pizarro.  The conversion of the

heathen was a predominant motive with Cortes in his expedition.  It was

not a vain boast.  He would have sacrificed his life for it at any time; and

more than once, by his indiscreet seal, he actually did place his life and

the success of his enterprise in jeopardy.  It was his great purpose to

purify the land from the brutish abominations of the Aztecs, by

substituting the religion of Jesus.  This gave to his expedition the

character of a crusade.  It furnished the best apology for the Conquest,

and does more than all other considerations towards enlisting our

sympathies on the side of the conquerors.



But Pizarro's ruling motives, so far as they can be scanned by human

judgment, were avarice and ambition.  The good missionaries, indeed,

followed in his train to scatter the seeds of spiritual truth, and the

Spanish government, as usual, directed its beneficent legislation to the

conversion of the natives.  But the moving power with Pizarro and his

followers was the lust of gold.  This was the real stimulus to their toil,

the price of perfidy, the true guerdon of their victories.  This gave a base

and mercenary character to their enterprise; and when we contrast the

ferocious cupidity of the conquerors with the mild and inoffensive

manners of the conquered, our sympathies, the sympathies even of the

Spaniard, are necessarily thrown into the scale of the Indian.33



But as no picture is without its lights, we must not, in justice to Pizarro,

dwell exclusively on the darker features of his portrait.  There was no

one of her sons to whom Spain was under larger obligations for extent of

empire; for his hand won for her the richest of the Indian jewels that

once sparkled in her imperial diadem.  When we contemplate the perils

he braved, the sufferings he patiently endured, the incredible obstacles

he overcame, the magnificent results he effected with his single arm, as it

were, unaided by the government,--though neither a good, nor a great

man in the highest sense of that term, it is impossible not to regard him

as a very extraordinary one.



Nor can we fairly omit to notice, in extenuation of his errors, the

circumstances of his early life; for, like Almagro, he was the son of sin

and sorrow, early cast upon the world to seek his fortunes as he might.

In his young and tender age he was to take the impression of those into

whose society he was thrown.  And when was it the lot of the needy

outcast to fall into that of the wise and the virtuous?  His lot was cast

among the licentious inmates of a camp, the school of rapine, whose only

law was the sword, and who looked on the wretched Indian and his

heritage as their rightful spoil.



Who does not shudder at the thought of what his own fate might have

been, trained in such a school?  The amount of crime does not necessarily

show the criminality of the agent.  History, indeed, is concerned with the

former, that it may be recorded as a warning to mankind; but it is He

alone who knoweth the heart, the strength of the temptations and the

means of resisting it, that can determine the measure of the guilt.







Book 4



Chapter 6



Movements Of The Conspirators--Advance Of Vaca De Castro--

Proceedings Of Almagro--Progress Of The Governor-

The Forces Approach Each Other--Bloody Plains Of Chupas-

Conduct Of Vaca De Castro



1541--1543



The first step of the conspirators, after securing possession of the capital,

was to send to the different cities, proclaiming the revolution which had

taken place, and demanding the recognition of the young Almagro as

governor of Peru.  Where the summons was accompanied by a military

force, as at Truxillo and Arequipa, it was obeyed without much cavil.

But in other cities a colder assent was given, and in some the requisition

was treated with contempt.  In Cuzco, the place of most importance next

to Lima, a considerable number of the Almagro faction secured the

ascendency of their party; and such of the magistracy as resisted were

ejected from their offices to make room for others of a more

accommodating temper.  But the loyal inhabitants of the city, dissatisfied

with this proceeding, privately sent to one of Pizarro's captains, named

Alvarez de Holguin, who lay with a considerable force in the

neighborhood; and that officer, entering the place, soon dispossessed the

new dignitaries of their honors, and restored the ancient capital to its

allegiance.



The conspirators experienced a still more determined opposition from

Alonso de Alvarado, one of the principal captains of Pizarro,-defeated,

as the reader will remember, by the elder Almagro at the bridge of

Abancay,--and now lying in the north with a corps of about two hundred

men, as good troops as any in the land.  That officer, on receiving tidings

of his general's assassination, instantly wrote to the Licentiate Vaca de

Castro, advising him of the state of affairs in Peru, and urging him to

quicken his march towards the south.1



This functionary had been sent out by the Spanish Crown, as noticed in a

preceding chapter, to cooperate with Pizarro in restoring tranquillity to

the country, with authority to assume the government himself, in case of

that commander's death.  After a long and tempestuous voyage, he had

landed, in the spring of 1541, at the port of Buena Ventura, and,

disgusted with the dangers of the sea, preferred to continue his

wearisome journey by land.  But so enfeebled was he by the hardships he

had undergone, that it was full three months before he reached Popayan

where he received the astounding tidings of the death of Pizarro.  This

was the contingency which had been provided for, with such judicious

forecast, in his instructions.  Yet he was sorely perplexed by the

difficulties of his situation.  He was a stranger in the land, with a very

imperfect knowledge of the country, without an armed force to support

him, without even the military science which might be supposed

necessary to avail himself of it.  He knew nothing of the degree of

Almagro's influence, or of the extent to which the insurrection had

spread,--nothing, in short, of the dispositions of the people among whom

he was cast.



In such an emergency, a feebler spirit might have listened to the counsels

of those who advised to return to Panama, and stay there until he had

mustered a sufficient force to enable him to take the field against the

insurgents with advantage.  But the courageous heart of Vaca de Castro

shrunk from a step which would proclaim his incompetency to the task

assigned him.  He had confidence in his own resources, and in the virtue

of the commission under which he acted.  He relied, too, on the habitual

loyalty of the Spaniards; and, after mature deliberation, he determined to

go forward, and trust to events for accomplishing the objects of his

mission.



He was confirmed in this purpose by the advices he now received from

Alvarado; and without longer delay, he continued his march towards

Quito.  Here he was well received by Gonzalo Pizarro's lieutenant, who

had charge of the place during his commander's absence on his

expedition to the Amazon.  The licentiate was also joined by Benalcazar,

the conqueror of Quito, who brought a small reinforcement, and offered

personally to assist him in the prosecution of his enterprise.  He now

displayed the royal commission, empowering him, on Pizarro's death, to

assume the government.  That contingency had arrived, and Vaca de

Castro declared his purpose to exercise the authority conferred on him.

At the same time, he sent emissaries to the principal cities, requiring

their obedience to him as the lawful representative of the Crown, --taking

care to employ discreet persons on the mission, whose character would

have weight with the citizens.  He then continued his march slowly

towards the south.2



He was willing by his deliberate movements to give time for his

summons to take effect, and for the fermentation caused by the late

extraordinary events to subside.  He reckoned confidently on the loyalty

which made the Spaniard unwilling, unless in cases of the last extremity,

to come into collision with the royal authority; and, however much this

popular sentiment might be disturbed by temporary gusts of passion, he

trusted to the habitual current of their feelings for giving the people a

right direction.  In this he did not miscalculate; for so deeprooted was the

principle of loyalty in the ancient Spaniard, that ages of oppression and

misrule could alone have induced him to shake off his allegiance.  Sad it

is, but not strange, that the length of time passed under a bad government

has not qualified him for devising a good one.



While these events were passing in the north, Almagro's faction at Lima

was daily receiving new accessions of strength.  For, in addition to those

who, from the first, had been avowedly of his father's party, there were

many others who, from some cause or other, had conceived a disgust for

Pizarro, and who now willingly enlisted under the banner of the chief

that had overthrown him.



The first step of the young general, or rather of Rada, who directed his

movements, was to secure the necessary supplies for the troops, most of

whom, having long been in indigent circumstances, were wholly

unprepared for service.  Funds to a considerable amount were raised, by

seizing on the moneys of the Crown in the hands of the treasurer.

Pizarro's secretary, Picado, was also drawn from his prison, and

interrogated as to the place where his master's treasures were deposited.

But, although put to the torture, he would not---or, as is probable, could

not --give information on the subject; and the conspirators, who had a

long arrear of injuries to settle with him, closed their proceedings by

publicly beheading him in the great square of Lima.3



Valverde, Bishop of Cuzco, as he himself assures us, vainly interposed in

his behalf.  It is singular, that, the last time this fanatical prelate appears

on the stage, it should be in the benevolent character of a supplicant for

mercy.4  Soon afterwards, he was permitted, with the judge, Velasquez,

and some other adherents of Pizarro, to embark from the port of Lima.

We have a letter from him, dated at Tumbez, in November, 1541; almost

immediately after which he fell into the hands of the Indians, and with

his companions was massacred at Puna.  A violent death not

unfrequently closed the stormy career of the American adventurer.

Valverde was a Dominican friar, and, like Father Olmedo in the suite of

Cortes, had been by his commander's side throughout the whole of his

expedition.  But he did not always, like the good Olmedo, use his

influence to stay the uplifted hand of the warrior.  At least, this was not

the mild aspect in which he presented himself at the terrible massacre of

Caxamalca.  Yet some contemporary accounts represent him, after he

had been installed in his episcopal office, as unwearied in his labors to

convert the natives, and to ameliorate their condition; and his own

correspondence with the government, after that period, shows great

solicitude for these praiseworthy objects.  Trained in the severest school

of monastic discipline, which too often closes the heart against the

common charities of life, he could not, like the benevolent Las Casas,

rise so far above its fanatical tenets as to regard the heathen as his

brother, while in the state of infidelity; and, in the true spirit of that

school, he doubtless conceived that the sanctity of the end justified the

means, however revolting in themselves.  Yet the same man, who thus

freely shed the blood of the poor native to secure the triumph of his faith,

would doubtless have as freely poured out his own in its defence.  The

character was no uncommon one in the sixteenth century.5



Almagro's followers, having supplied themselves with funds, made as

little scruple to appropriate to their own use such horses and arms, of

every description, as they could find in the city.  And this they did with

the less reluctance, as the inhabitants for the most part testified no good-

will to their cause.  While thus employed, Almagro received intelligence

that Holguin had left Cuzco with a force of near three hundred men, with

which he was preparing to effect a junction with Alvarado in the north.

It was important to Almagro's success that he should defeat this junction.

If to procrastinate was the policy of Vaca de Castro, it was clearly that of

Almagro to quicken operations, and to bring matters to as speedy an

issue as possible; to march at once against Holguin, whom he might

expect easily to overcome with his superior numbers; then to follow up

the stroke by the still easier defeat of Alvarado, when the new governor

would be, in a manner, at his mercy.  It would be easy to beat these

several bodies in detail, which, once united, would present formidable

odds.  Almagro and his party had already arrayed themselves against the

government by a proceeding too atrocious, and which struck too directly

at the royal authority, for its perpetrators to flatter themselves with the

hopes of pardon.  Their only chance was boldly to follow up the blow,

and, by success, to place them, selves in so formidable an attitude as to

excite the apprehensions of government.  The dread of its too potent

vassal might extort terms that would never be conceded to his prayers.



But Almagro and his followers shrunk from this open collision with the

Crown.  They had taken up rebellion because it lay in their path, not

because they had wished it.  They had meant only to avenge their

personal wrongs on Pizarro, and not to defy the royal authority.  When,

therefore, some of the more resolute, who followed things fearlessly to

their consequences, proposed to march at once against Vaca de Castro,

and, by striking at the head, settle the contest by a blow, it was almost

universally rejected; and it was not till after long debate that it was

finally determined to move against Holguin, and cut off his

communication with Alonso de Alvarado.



Scarcely had Almagro commenced his march on Xauxa, where he

proposed to give battle to his enemy, than he met with a severe

misfortune in the death of Juan de Rada.  He was a man somewhat

advanced in years; and the late exciting scenes, in which he had taken the

principal part, had been too much for a frame greatly shattered by a life

of extraordinary hardship.  He was thrown into a fever, of which he soon

after died.  By his death, Almagro sustained an inestimable loss; for,

besides his devoted attachment to his young leader, he was, by his large

experience, and his cautious though courageous character, better

qualified than any other cavalier in the army to conduct him safely

through the stormy sea on which he had led him to embark.



Among the cavaliers of highest consideration after Rada's death, the two

most aspiring were Christoval de Sotelo, and Garcia de Alvarado; both

possessed of considerable military talent, but the latter marked by a bold,

presumptuous manner, which might remind one of his illustrious

namesake, who achieved much higher renown under the banner of

Cortes.  Unhappily, a jealousy grew up between these two officers; that

jealousy, so common among the Spaniards, that it may seem a national

characteristic; an impatience of equality, founded on a false principle of

honor, which has ever been the fruitful source of faction among them,

whether under a monarchy or a republic.



This was peculiarly unfortunate for Almagro, whose inexperience led

him to lean for support on others, and who, in the present distracted state

of his council, knew scarcely where to turn for it.  In the delay

occasioned by these dissensions, his little army did not reach the valley

of Xauxa till after the enemy had passed it.  Almagro followed close,

leaving behind his baggage and artillery that he might move the lighter.

But the golden opportunity was lost.  The rivers, swollen by autumnal

rains, impeded his pursuit; and, though his light troops came up with a

few stragglers of the rear-guard, Holguin succeeded in conducting his

forces through the dangerous passes of the mountains, and in effecting a

junction with Alonso de Alvarado, near the northern seaport of Huaura.



Disappointed in his object, Almagro prepared to march on Cuzco,-the

capital, as he regarded it, of his own jurisdiction,--to get possession of

that city, and there make preparations to meet his adversary in the field.

Sotelo was sent forward with a small corps in advance.  He experienced

no opposition from the now defenceless citizens; the government of the

place was again restored to the hands of the men of Chili, and their

young leader soon appeared at the head of his battalions, and established

his winter-quarters in the Inca capital.



Here, the jealousy of the rival captains broke out into an open feud.  It

was ended by the death of Sotelo, treacherously assassinated in his own

apartment by Garcia de Alvarado.  Almagro, greatly outraged by this

atrocity, was the more indignant, as he felt himself too weak to punish

the offender.  He smothered his resentment for the present, affecting to

treat the dangerous officer with more distinguished favor.  But Alvarado

was not the dupe of this specious behaviour.  He felt that he had forfeited

the confidence of his commander.  In revenge, he laid a plot to betray

him; and Almagro, driven to the necessity of self-defence, imitated the

example of his officer, by entering his house with a party of armed men,

who, laying violent hands on the insurgent, slew him on the spot.6



This irregular proceeding was followed by the best consequences.  The

seditious schemes of Alvarado perished with him.  The seeds of

insubordination were eradicated, and from that moment Almagro

experienced only implicit obedience and the most loyal support from his

followers.  From that hour, too, his own character seemed to be changed;

he relied far less on others than on himself, and developed resources not

to have been anticipated in one of his years; for he had hardly reached

the age of twenty-two.7  From this time he displayed an energy and

forecast, which proved him, in despite of his youth, not unequal to the

trying emergencies of the situation in which it was his unhappy lot to be

placed.



He instantly set about providing for the wants of his men, and strained

every nerve to get them in good fighting order for the approaching

campaign.  He replenished his treasury with a large amount of silver

which he drew from the mines of La Plata.  Saltpetre, obtained in

abundance in the neighborhood of Cuzco, furnished the material for

gunpowder.  He caused cannon, some of large dimensions, to be cast

under the superintendence of Pedro de Candia, the Greek, who, it may be

remembered, had first come into the country with Pizarro, and who, with

a number of his countrymen,--Levantines, as they were called,-was well

acquainted with this manufacture.  Under their care, fire-arms were

made, together with cuirasses and helmets, in which silver was mingled

with copper,8 and of so excellent a quality, that they might vie, says an

old soldier of the time, with those from the workshops of Milan.9

Almagro received a seasonable supply, moreover, from a source scarcely

to have been expected.  This was from Manco, the wandering Inca, who

detesting the memory of Pizarro, transferred to the young Almagro the

same friendly feelings which he had formerly borne to his father;

heightened, it may be, by the consideration that Indian blood flowed in

the veins of the young commander.  From this quarter Almagro obtained

a liberal supply of swords, spears, shields, and arms and armour of every

description, chiefly taken by the Inca at the memorable siege of Cuzco.

He also received the gratifying assurance, that the latter would support

him with a detachment of native troops when he opened the campaign.



Before making a final appeal to arms, however, Almagro resolved to try

the effect of negotiation with the new governor.  In the spring, or early in

the summer, of 1542, he sent an embassy to the latter, then at Lima, in

which he deprecated the necessity of taking arms against an officer of the

Crown.  His only desire, he said, was to vindicate his own rights; to

secure the possession of New Toledo, the province bequeathed to him by

his father, and from which he had been most unjustly excluded by

Pizarro.  He did not dispute the governor's authority over New Castile, as

the country was designated which had been assigned to the marquess;

and he concluded by proposing that each party should remain within his

respective territory until the determination of the Court of Castile could

be made known to them.  To this application, couched in respectful

terms, Almagro received no answer.



Frustrated in his hopes of a peaceful accommodation, the young captain

now saw that nothing was left but the arbitrament of arms.  Assembling

his troops, preparatory to his departure from the capital, he made them a

brief address.  He protested that the step which he and his brave

companions were about to take was not an act of rebellion against the

Crown.  It was forced on them by the conduct of the governor himself.

The commission of that officer gave him no authority over the territory

of New Toledo, settled on Almagro's father, and by his father bequeathed

to him.  If Vaca de Castro, by exceeding the limits of his authority, drove

him to hostilities, the blood spill in the quarrel would lie on the head of

that commander, not on his.  "In the assassination of Pizarro," he

continued, "we took that justice into our own hands which elsewhere was

denied us.  It is the same now, in our contest with the royal governor.

We are as true-hearted and loyal subjects of the Crown as he is." And he

concluded by invoking his soldiers to stand by him heart and hand in the

approaching contest, in which they were all equally interested with

himself.



The appeal was not made to an insensible audience.  There were few

among them who did not feel that their fortunes were indissolubly

connected with those of their commander; and while they had little to

expect from the austere character of the governor, they were warmly

attached to the person of their young chief, who, with all the popular

qualities of his father, excited additional sympathy from the

circumstances of his age and his forlorn condition.  Laying their hands

on the cross, placed on an altar raised for the purpose, the officers and

soldiers severally swore to brave every peril with Almagro, and remain

true to him to the last.



In point of numbers, his forces had not greatly strengthened since his

departure from Lima.  He mustered but little more than five hundred in

all; but among them were his father's veterans, well seasoned by many an

Indian campaign.  He had about two hundred horse, many of them clad

in complete mail, a circumstance not too common in these wars, where a

stuffed doublet of cotton was often the only panoply of the warrior.  His

infantry, formed of pikemen and arquebusiers, was excellently armed.

But his strength lay in his heavy ordnance, consisting of sixteen pieces,

eight large and eight smaller guns, or falconets, as they were called,

forming, says one who saw it, a beautiful park of artillery, that would

have made a brave show on the citadel of Burgos.10  The little army, in

short, though not imposing from its numbers, was under as good

discipline, and as well appointed, as any that ever fought on the fields of

Peru; much better than any which Almagro's own father or Pizarro ever

led into the field and won their conquests with.  Putting himself at the

head of his gallant company, the chieftain sallied forth from the walls of

Cuzco about midsummer, in 1542, and directed his march towards the

coast in expectation of meeting the enemy.11



While the events detailed in the preceding pages were passing, Vaca de

Castro, whom we left at Quito in the preceding year, was advancing

slowly towards the south.  His first act, after leaving that city, showed his

resolution to enter into no compromise with the assassins of Pizarro.

Benalcazar, the distinguished officer whom I have mentioned as having

early given in his adherence to him, had protected one of the principal

conspirators, his personal friend, who had come into his power, and had

facilitated his escape.  The governor, indignant at the proceeding, would

listen to no explanation, but ordered the offending officer to return to his

own district of Popayan.  It was a bold step, in the precarious state of his

own fortunes.



As the governor pursued his march, he was well received by the people

on the way; and when he entered the cities of San Miguel and of

Truxillo, he was welcomed with loyal enthusiasm by the inhabitants, who

readily acknowledged his authority, though they showed little alacrity to

take their chance with him in the coming struggle.



After lingering a long time in each of these places, he resumed his march

and reached the camp of Alonso de Alvarado at Huaura, early in 1542.

Holguin had established his quarters at some little distance from his

rival; for a jealousy had sprung up, as usual, between these two captains,

who both aspired to the supreme command of Captain General of the

army.  The office of governor, conferred on Vaca de Castro, might seem

to include that of commander-in-chief of the forces.  But De Castro was

a scholar, bred to the law;.  and, whatever authority he might arrogate to

himself in civil matters, the two captains imagined that the military

department he would resign into the hands of others.  They little knew

the character of the man.



Though possessed of no more military science than belonged to every

cavalier in that martial age, the governor knew that to avow his

ignorance, and to resign the management of affairs into the hands of

others, would greatly impair his authority, if not bring him into contempt

with the turbulent spirits among whom he was now thrown.  He had both

sagacity and spirit, and trusted to be able to supply his own deficiencies

by the experience of others.  His position placed the services of the

ablest men m the country at his disposal, and with the aid of their

counsels he felt quite competent to decide on his plan of operations, and

to enforce the execution of it.  He knew, moreover, that the only way to

allay the jealousy of the two parties in the present crisis was to assume

himself the office which was the cause of their dissension.



Still he approached his ambitious officers with great caution; and the

representations, which he made through some judicious persons who had

the most intimate access to them, were so successful, that both were in a

short time prevailed on to relinquish their pretensions in his favor.

Holguin, the more unreasonable of the two, then waited on him in his

rival's quarters, where the governor had the further satisfaction to

reconcile him to Alonso de Alvarado.  It required some address, as their

jealousy of each other had proceeded to such lengths that a challenge had

passed between them.



Harmony being thus restored, the licentiate passed over to Holguin's

camp, where he was greeted with salvoes of artillery, and loud

acclamations of "Viva el Rey" from the loyal soldiery.  Ascending a

platform covered with velvet, he made an animated harangue to the

troops; his commission was read aloud by the secretary; and the little

army tendered their obedience to him as the representative of the Crown.



Vaca de Castro's next step was to send off the greater part of his force, in

the direction of Xauxa, while, at the head of a small corps, he directed

his march towards Lima.  Here he was received with lively

demonstrations of joy by the citizens, who were generally attached to the

cause of Pizarro, the founder and constant patron of their capital.

Indeed, the citizens had lost no time after Almagro's departure in

expelling his creatures from the municipality, and reasserting their

allegiance.  With these favorable dispositions towards himself, the

governor found no difficulty in obtaining a considerable loan of money

from the wealthier inhabitants, But he was less successful, at first, in his

application for horses and arms, since the harvest had been too faithfully

gleaned, already, by the men of Chili.  As, however, he prolonged his

stay some time in the capital, he obtained important supplies, before he

left it, both of arms and ammunition, while he added to his force by a

considerable body of recruits.12



As he was thus employed, he received tidings that the enemy had left

Cuzco, and was on his march towards the coast.  Quitting Los Reyes,

therefore, with his trusty followers, Vaca de Castro marched at once to

Xauxa, the appointed place of rendezvous.  Here he mustered his forces,

and found that they amounted to about seven hundred men.  The cavalry,

in which lay his strength, was superior in numbers to that of his

antagonist, but neither so well mounted or armed.  It included many

cavaliers of birth, and well-tried soldiers, besides a number who, having

great interests at stake, as possessed of large estates in the country, had

left them at the call of government, to enlist under its banners.13  His

infantry, besides pikes, was indifferently well supplied with firearms; but

he had nothing to show in the way of artillery except three or four ill-

mounted falconets.  Yet, notwithstanding these deficiencies, the royal

army, if so insignificant a force can deserve that name, was so far

superior in numbers to that of his rival, that the one might be thought, on

the whole, to be no unequal match for the other.14



The reader, familiar with the large masses employed in European

warfare, may smile at the paltry forces of the Spaniards.  But in the New

World, where a countless host of natives went for little, five hundred

well-trained Europeans were regarded as a formidable body.  No army,

up to the period before us, had ever risen to a thousand.  Yet it is not

numbers, as I have already been led to remark, that give importance to a

conflict; but the consequences that depend on it,--the magnitude of the

stake, and the skill and courage of the players.  The more limited the

means, even, the greater may be the science shown in the use of them;

until, forgetting the poverty of the materials, we fix our attention on the

conduct of the actors, and the greatness of the results.



While at Xauxa, Vaca de Castro received an embassy from Gonzalo

Pizarro, returned from his expedition from the "Land of Cinnamon," in

which that chief made an offer of his services in the approaching contest.

The governor's answer showed that he was not wholly averse to an

accommodation with Almagro, provided it could be effected without

compromising the royal authority.  He was willing, perhaps, to avoid the

final trial by battle, when he considered, that, from the equality of the

contending forces, the issue must be extremely doubtful.  He knew that

the presence of Pizarro in the camp, the detested enemy of the

Almagrians, would excite distrust in their bosoms that would probably

baffle every effort at accommodation.  Nor is it likely that the governor

cared to have so restless a spirit introduced into his own councils.  He

accordingly sent to Gonzalo, thanking him for the promptness of his

support, but courteously declined it, while he advised him to remain in

his province, and repose after the fatigues of his wearisome expedition.

At the same time, he assured him that he would not fail to call for his

services when occasion required it.--The haughty cavalier was greatly

disgusted by the repulse.15



The governor now received such an account of Almagro's movements.

as led him to suppose that he was preparing to occupy Gaumanga, a

fortified place of considerable strength, about thirty leagues from

Xauxa.16  Anxious to secure this post, he broke up his encampment, and

by forced marches, conducted in so irregular a manner as must have

placed him in great danger if his enemy had been near to profit by it, he

succeeded in anticipating Almagro, and threw himself into the place

while his antagonist was at Bilcas, some ten leagues distant.



At Guamanga, Vaca de Castro received another embassy from Almagro,

of similar import with the former.  The young chief again deprecated the

existence of hostilities between brethren of the same family, and

proposed an accommodation of the quarrel on the same basis as before.

To these proposals the governor now condescended to reply.  It might be

thought, from his answer, that he felt some compassion for the youth and

inexperience of Almagro, and that he was willing to distinguish between

him and the principal conspirators, provided he could detach him from

their interests.  But it is more probable that he intended only to amuse his

enemy by a show of negotiation, while he gained time for tampering with

the fidelity of his troops.



He insisted that Almagro should deliver up to him all those immediately

implicated in the death of Pizarro, and should then disband his forces.

On these conditions the government would pass over his treasonable

practices, and he should be reinstated in the royal favor.  Together with

this mission, Vaca de Castro, it is reported, sent a Spaniard, disguised as

an Indian, who was instructed to communicate with certain officers in

Almagro's camp, and prevail on them, if possible, to abandon his cause

and return to their allegiance.  Unfortunately, the disguise of the

emissary was detected.  He was seized, put to the torture, and, having

confessed the whole of the transaction, was hanged as a spy.



Almagro laid the proceeding before his captains.  The terms proffered by

the governor were such as no man with a particle of honor in his nature

could entertain for a moment; and Almagro's indignation, as well as that

of his companions, was heightened by the duplicity of their enemy, who

could practise such insidious arts, while ostensibly engaged in a fair and

open negotiation.  Fearful, perhaps, lest the tempting offers of their

antagonist might yet prevail over the constancy of some of the weaker

spirits among them, they demanded that all negotiation should be broken

off, and that they should be led at once against the enemy.17



The governor, meanwhile, finding the broken country around Guamanga

unfavorable for his cavalry, on which he mainly relied, drew off his

forces to the neighboring lowlands, known as the Plains of Chupas.  It

was the tempestuous season of the year, and for several days the storm

raged wildly among the hills, and, sweeping along their sides into the

valley, poured down rain, sleet, and snow on the miserable bivouacs of

the soldiers, till they were drenched to the skin and nearly stiffened by

the cold.18  At length, on the sixteenth of September, 1542, the scouts

brought in tidings that Almagro's troops were advancing, with the

intention, apparently, of occupying the highlands around Chupas.  The

war of the elements had at last subsided, and was succeeded by one of

those brilliant days which are found only in the tropics.  The royal camp

was early in motion, as Vaca de Castro, desirous to secure the heights

that commanded the valley, detached a body of arquebusiers on that

service, supported by a corps of cavalry, which he soon followed with

the rest of the forces.  On reaching the eminence, news was brought that

the enemy had come to a halt, and established himself in a strong

position at less than a league's distance.



It was now late in the afternoon, and the sun was not more than two

hours above the horizon.  The governor hesitated to begin the action

when they must so soon be overtaken by night.  But Alonso de Alvarado

assured him that "now was the time; for the spirits of his men were hot

for fight, and it was better to take the benefit of it than to damp their

ardor by delay." The governor acquiesced, exclaiming at the same time, -

-"O for the might of Joshua, to stay the sun in his course!" 19  He then

drew up his little army in order of battle, and made his dispositions for

the attack.



In the centre he placed his infantry, consisting of arquebusiers and

pikemen, constituting the battle, as it was called.  On the flanks, he

established his cavalry, placing the right wing, together with the royal

standard, under charge of Alonso de Alvarado, and the left under

Holguin, supported by a gallant body of cavaliers.  His artillery, too

insignificant to be of much account, was also in the centre.  He proposed

himself to lead the van, and to break the first lance with the enemy; but

from this chivalrous display he was dissuaded by his officers, who

reminded him that too much depended on his life to have it thus

wantonly exposed.  The governor contented himself, therefore, with

heading a body of reserve, consisting of forty horse, to act on any quarter

as occasion might require.  This corps, comprising the flower of his

chivalry, was chiefly drawn from Alvarado's troop, greatly to the

discontent of that captain.  The governor himself rode a coal-black

charger, and wore a rich surcoat of brocade over his mail, through which

the habit and emblems of the knightly order of St. James, conferred on

him just before his departure from Castile, were conspicuous.20  It was a

point of honor with the chivalry of the period to court danger by

displaying their rank in the splendor of their military attire and the

caparisons of their horses.



Before commencing the assault, Vaca de Castro addressed a few remarks

to his soldiers, in order to remove any hesitation that some might yet

feel, who recollected the displeasure shown by the emperor to the victors

as well as the vanquished after the battle of Salinas.  He told them that

their enemies were rebels.  They were in arms against him.  the

representative of the Crown, and it was his duty to quell this rebellion

and punish the authors of it.  He then caused the law to be read aloud,

proclaiming the doom of traitors.  By this law, Almagro and his

followers had forfeited their lives and property, and the governor

promised to distribute the latter among such of his men as showed the

best claim to it by their conduct in the battle.  This last politic promise

vanquished the scruples of the most fastidious; and, having completed

his dispositions in the most judicious and soldier-like manner, Vaca de

Castro gave the order to advance.21



As the forces turned a spur of the hills, which had hitherto screened them

from their enemies, they came in sight of the latter, formed along the

crest of a gentle eminence, with their snow-white banners, the

distinguishing color of the Almagrians, floating above their heads, and

their bright arms flinging back the broad rays of the evening sun.

Almagro's disposition of his troops was not unlike that of his adversary.

In the centre was his excellent artillery, covered by his arquebusiers and

spearmen; while his cavalry rode on the flanks.  The troops on the left he

proposed to lead in person.  He had chosen his position with judgment,

as the character of the ground gave full play to his guns, which opened

an effective fire on the assailants as they drew near.  Shaken by the storm

of shot, Vaca de Castro saw the difficulty of advancing in open view of

the hostile battery.  He took the counsel, therefore, of Francisco de

Carbajal, who undertook to lead the forces by a circuitous, but safer,

route.  This is the first occasion on which the name of this veteran

appears in these American wars, where it was afterwards to acquire a

melancholy notoriety.  He had come to the country after the campaigns

of forty years in Europe, where he had studied the art of war under the

Great Captain, Gonsalvo de Cordova.  Though now far advanced in age,

he possessed all the courage and indomitable energy of youth, and well

exemplified the lessons he had studied under his great commander.



Taking advantage of a winding route that sloped round the declivity of

the hills, he conducted the troops in such a manner, that, until they

approached quite near the enemy, they were protected by the intervening

ground.  While thus advancing, they were assailed on the left flank by

the Indian battalions under Paullo, the Inca Manco's brother; but a corps

of musketeers, directing a scattering fire among them, soon rid the

Spaniards of this annoyance.  When, at length, the royal troops, rising

above the hill, again came into view of Almagro's lines, the artillery

opened on them with fatal effect.  It was but for a moment, however, as,

from some unaccountable cause, the guns were pointed as such an angle,

that, although presenting an obvious mark, by far the greater part of the

shot passed over their heads.  Whether this was the result of treachery, or

merely of awkwardness, is uncertain.  The artillery was under charge of

the engineer, Pedro de Candia.  This man, who, it" may be remembered,

was one of the thirteen that so gallantly stood by Pizarro in the island of

Gallo, had fought side by side with his leader through the whole of the

Conquest.  He had lately, however, conceived some disgust with him,

and had taken part with the faction of Almagro.  The death of his old

commander, he may perhaps have thought, had settled all their

differences, and he was now willing to return to his former allegiance.

At least, it is said, that, at this very time, he was in correspondence with

Vaca de Castro.  Almagro himself seems to have had no doubt of his

treachery.  For, after remonstrating in vain with him on his present

conduct, he ran him through the body, and the unfortunate cavalier fell

lifeless on the field.  Then, throwing himself on one of the guns,

Almagro gave it a new direction, and that so successfully, that, when it

was discharged, it struck down several of the cavalry.22



The firing now took better effect, and by one volley a whole file of the

royal infantry was swept off, and though others quickly stepped in to fill

up the ranks, the men, impatient of their sufferings, loudly called on the

troopers, who had halted for a moment, to quicken their advance.23

This delay had been caused by Carbajal's desire to bring his own guns to

bear on the opposite columns.  But the design was quickly abandoned;

the clumsy ordnance was left on the field, and orders were given to the

cavalry to charge; the trumpets sounded, and, crying their war-cries, the

bold cavaliers struck their spurs into their steeds, and rode at full speed

against the enemy.



Well had it been for Almagro, if he had remained firm on the post which

gave him such advantage.  But from a false point of honor, he thought it

derogatory to a brave knight passively to await the assault, and, ordering

his own men to charge, the hostile squadrons, rapidly advancing against

each other, met midway on the plain.  The shock was terrible.  Horse and

rider reeled under the force of it.  The spears flew into shivers;24 and the

cavaliers, drawing their swords, or wielding their maces and battle-axes,-

-though some of the royal troopers were armed only with a common

axe,--dealt their blows with all the fury of civil hate.  It was a fearful

struggle, not merely of man against man, but, to use the words of an

eyewitness, of brother against brother, and friend against friend.25  No

quarter was asked; for the wrench that had been strong enough to tear

asunder the dearest ties of kindred left no hold for humanity.  The

excellent arms of the Almagrians counterbalanced the odds of numbers;

but the royal partisans gained some advantage by striking at the horses

instead of the mailed bodies of their antagonists.



The infantry, meanwhile, on both sides, kept up a sharp cross-fire from

their arquebuses, which did execution on the ranks of the cavaliers, as

well as on one another.  But Almagro's battery of heavy guns, now well

directed, mowed down the advancing columns of foot.  The latter,

staggering, began to fall back from the terrible fire, when Francisco de

Carbajal, throwing himself before them, cried out, "Shame on you, my

men!  Do you give way now?  I am twice as good a mark for the enemy

as any of you!" He was a very large man; and, throwing off his steel

helmet and cuirass, that he might have no advantage over his followers,

he remained lightly attired in his cotton doublet, when, swinging his

partisan over his head, he sprang boldly forward through blinding

volumes of smoke and a tempest of musket-balls, and, supported by the

bravest of his troops, overpowered the gunners, and made himself master

of their pieces.



The shades of night had now, for some time been coming thicker and

thicker over the field.  But still the deadly struggle went on in the

darkness, as the red and white badges intimated the respective parties,

and their war-cries rose above the din,--"Vaca de Castro y el Rey,"--

"Almagro y el Rey,"--while both invoked the aid of their military apostle

St. James.  Holguin, who commanded the royalists on the left, pierced

through by two musket-balls, had been slain early in the action.  He had

made himself conspicuous by a rich sobre-vest of white velvet over his

armour.  Still a gallant band of cavaliers maintained the fight so valiantly

on that quarter, that the Almagrians found it difficult to keep their

ground.26



It fared differently on the right, where Alonso de Alvarado commanded.

He was there encountered by Almagro in person, who fought worthy of

his name.  By repeated charges on his opponent, he endeavored to bear

down his squadrons, so much worse mounted and worse armed than his

own.  Alvarado resisted with undiminished courage; but his numbers had

been thinned, as we have seen, before the battle, to supply the governor's

reserve, and, fairly overpowered by the superior strength of his

adversary, who had already won two of the royal banners, he was slowly

giving ground.  "Take, but kill not!" shouted the generous young chief,

who felt himself sure of victory.27



But at this crisis, Vaca de Castro, who, with his reserve, had occupied a

rising ground that commanded the field of action, was fully aware that

the time had now come for him to take part in the struggle.  He had long

strained his eyes through the gloom to watch the movements of the

combatants, and received constant tidings how the fight was going.  He

no longer hesitated, but, calling on his men to follow, led off boldly into

the thickest of the melee to the support of his stout-hearted officer.  The

arrival of a new corps on the field, all fresh for action, gave another turn

to the tide.28  Alvarado's men took heart and rallied.  Almagro's, though

driven back by the fury of the assault, quickly returned against their

assailants.  Thirteen of Vaca de Castro's cavaliers fell dead from their

saddles.  But it was the last effort of the Almagrians.  Their strength,

though not their spirit, failed them.  They gave way in all directions, and,

mingling together in the darkness, horse, foot, and artillery, they

trampled one another down, as they made the best of their way from the

press of their pursuers.  Almagro used every effort to stay them.  He

performed miracles of valor, says one who witnessed them; but he was

borne along by the tide, and, though he seemed to court death, by the

freedom with which he exposed his person to danger, yet he escaped

without a wound.



Others there were of his company, and among them a young cavalier

named Geronimo de Alvarado, who obstinately refused to quit the field;

and shouting out,--"We slew Pizarro!  we killed the tyrant!" they threw

themselves on the lances of their conquerors, preferring death on the

battle-field to the ignominious doom of the gibbet.29



It was nine o'clock when the battle ceased, though the firing was heard at

intervals over the field at a much later hour, as some straggling party of

fugitives were overtaken by their pursuers.  Yet many succeeded in

escaping in the obscurity of night, while some, it is said, contrived to

elude pursuit in a more singular way; tearing off the badges from the

corpses of their enemies, they assumed them for themselves, and,

mingling in the ranks as followers of Vaca de Castro, joined in the

pursuit.



That commander, at length, fearing some untoward accident, and that the

fugitives, should they rally again under cover of the darkness, might

inflict some loss on their pursuers, caused his trumpets to sound, and

recalled his scattered forces under their banners.  All night they remained

under arms on the field, which, so lately the scene of noisy strife, was

now hushed in silence, broken only by the groans of the wounded and the

dying.  The natives, who had hung, during the fight, like a dark cloud,

round the skirts of the mountains, contemplating with gloomy

satisfaction the destruction of their enemies, now availed themselves of

the obscurity to descend, like a pack of famished wolves, upon the

plains, where they stripped the bodies of the slain, and even of the living,

but disabled wretches, who had in vain dragged themselves into the

bushes for concealment.  The following morning, Vaca de Castro gave

orders that the wounded--those who had not perished in the cold damps

of the night--should be committed to the care of the surgeons, while the

priests were occupied with administering confession and absolution to

the dying.  Four large graves or pits were dug, in which the bodies of the

slain--the conquerors and the conquered--were heaped indiscriminately

together.  But the remains of Alvarez de Holguin and several other

cavaliers of distinction were transported to Guamanga, where they were

buried with the solemnities suited to their rank; and the tattered banners

won from their vanquished countrymen waved over their monuments, the

melancholy trophies of their victory.



The number of killed is variously reported,--from three hundred to five

hundred on both sides.30  The mortality was greatest among the

conquerors, who suffered more from the cannon of the enemy before the

action, than the latter suffered in the rout that followed it.  The number of

wounded was still greater; and full half of the survivors of Almagro's

party were made prisoners.  Many, indeed, escaped from the field to the

neighboring town of Guamanga, where they took refuge in the churches

and monasteries.  But their asylum was not respected, and they were

dragged forth and thrown into prison.  Their brave young commander

fled with a few followers only to Cuzco, where he was instantly arrested

by the magistrates whom he had himself placed over the city.31



At Guamanga, Vaca de Castro appointed a commission, with the

Licentiate de la Gama at its head, for the trial of the prisoners; and

justice was not satisfied, till forty had been condemned to death, and

thirty others--some of them with the loss of one or more of their

members-sent into banishment.32  Such severe reprisals have been too

common with the Spaniards in their civil feuds.  Strange that they should

so blindly plunge into these, with this dreadful doom for the vanquished!



From the scene of this bloody tragedy, the governor proceeded to Cuzco,

which he entered at the head of his victorious battalions, with all the

pomp and military display of a conqueror.  He maintained a

corresponding state in his way of living, at the expense of a sneer from

some, who sarcastically contrasted this ostentatious profusion with the

economical reforms he subsequently introduced into the finances.33  But

Vaca de Castro was sensible of the effect of this outward show on the

people generally, and disdained no means of giving authority to his

office.  His first act was to determine the fate of his prisoner, Almagro.

A council of war was held.  Some were for sparing the unfortunate chief,

in consideration of his youth, and the strong cause of provocation he had

received.  But the majority were of opinion that such mercy could not be

extended to the leader of the rebels, and that his death was indispensable

to the permanent tranquillity of the country.

When led to execution in the great square of Cuzco,--the same spot

where his father had suffered but a few years before,---Almagro

exhibited the most perfect composure, though, as the herald proclaimed

aloud the doom of the traitor, he indignantly denied that he was one.  He

made no appeal for mercy to his judges, but simply requested that his

bones might be laid by the side of his father's.  He objected to having his

eyes bandaged, as was customary on such occasions, and, after

confession, he devoutly embraced the cross, and submitted his neck to

the stroke of the executioner.  His remains, agreeably to his request, were

transported to the monastery of La Merced, where they were deposited

side by side with those of his unfortunate parent.34



There have been few names, indeed, in the page of history, more

unfortunate than that of Almagro.  Yet the fate of the son excites a

deeper sympathy than that of the father; and this, not merely on account

of his youth, and the peculiar circumstances of his situation.  He

possessed many of the good qualities of the elder Almagro, with a frank

and manly nature, in which the bearing of the soldier was somewhat

softened by the refinement of a better education than is to be found in the

license of a camp.  His career, though short, gave promise of

considerable talent, which required only a fair field for its development.

But he was the child of misfortune, and his morning of life was overcast

by clouds and tempests.  If his character, naturally benignant, sometimes

showed the fiery sparkles of the vindictive Indian temper, some apology

may be found, not merely in his blood, but in the circumstances of his

situation.  He was more sinned against than sinning; and, if conspiracy

could ever find a justification, it must be in a case like his, where, borne

down by injuries heaped on his parent and himself, he could obtain no

redress from the only quarter whence he had a right to look for it.  With

him, the name of Almagro became extinct, and the faction of Chili, so

long the terror of the land, passed away for ever.



While these events were occurring in Cuzco, the governor learned that

Gonzalo Pizarro had arrived at Lima, where he showed himself greatly

discontented with the state of things in Peru.  He loudly complained that

the government of the country, after his brother's death, had not been

placed in his hands; and, as reported by some, he was now meditating

schemes for getting possession of it.  Vaca de Castro well knew that

there would be no lack of evil counsellors to urge Gonzalo to this

desperate step; and, anxious to extinguish the spark of insurrection

before it had been fanned by these turbulent spirits into a flame, he

detached a strong body to Lima to secure that capital.  At the same time

he commanded the presence of Gonzalo Pizarro in Cuzco.



That chief did not think it prudent to disregard the summons; and shortly

after entered the Inca capital, at the head of a well-armed body of

cavaliers.  He was at once admitted into the governor's presence, when

the latter dismissed his guard, remarking that he had nothing to fear from

a brave and loyal knight like Pizarro.  He then questioned him as to his

late adventures in Canelas, and showed great sympathy for his

extraordinary sufferings.  He took care not to alarm his jealousy by any

allusion to his ambitious schemes, and concluded by recommending him,

now that the tranquillity of the country was reestablished, to retire and

seek the repose he so much needed, on his valuable estates at Charcas.

Gonzalo Pizarro, finding no ground opened for a quarrel with the coot

and politic governor, and probably feeling that he was, at least not now,

in sufficient strength to warrant it, thought it prudent to take the advice,

and withdrew to La Plata, where he busied himself in working those rich

mines of silver that soon put him in condition for more momentous

enterprise than any he had yet attempted.35



Thus rid of his formidable competitor, Vaca de Castro occupied himself

with measures for the settlement of the country.  He began with his army,

a part of which he had disbanded.  But many cavaliers still remained,

pressing their demands for a suitable recompense for their services.

These they were not disposed to undervalue, and the governor was happy

to rid himself of their importunities by employing them on distant

expeditions, among which was the exploration of the country watered by

the great Rio de la Plata.  The boiling spirits of the highmettled cavaliers,

without some such vent, would soon have thrown the whole country

again into a state of fermentation.



His next concern was to provide laws for the better government of the

colony.  He gave especial care to the state of the Indian population; and

established schools for teaching them Christianity.  By various

provisions, be endeavored to secure them from the exactions of their

conquerors, and he encouraged the poor natives to transfer their own

residence to the communities of the white men.  He commanded the

caciques to provide supplies for the tambos, or houses for the

accommodation of travellers, which lay in their neighborhood, by which

regulation he took away from the Spaniards a plausible apology for

rapine, and greatly promoted facility of intercourse.  He was watchful

over the finances, much dilapidated in the late troubles, and in several

instances retrenched what he deemed excessive repartimientos among the

Conquerors.  This last act exposed him to much odium from the objects

of it.  But his measures were so just and impartial, that he was supported

by public opinion.36



Indeed, Vaca de Castro's conduct, from the hour of his arrival in the

country, had been such as to command respect, and prove him competent

to the difficult post for which he had been selected.  Without funds,

without troops, he had found the country, on his landing, in a state of

anarchy; yet, by courage and address, he had gradually acquired

sufficient strength to quell the insurrection.  Though no soldier, he had

shown undaunted spirit and presence of mind in the hour of action, and

made his military preparations with a forecast and discretion that excited

the admiration of the most experienced veteran.



If he may be thought to have abused the advantages of victory by cruelty

towards the conquered, it must be allowed that he was not influenced by

any motives of a personal nature.  He was a lawyer, bred in high notions

of royal prerogative.  Rebellion he looked upon as an unpardonable

crime; and, if his austere nature was unrelenting in the exaction of

justice, he lived in an iron age, when justice was rarely tempered by

mercy.



In his subsequent regulations for the settlement of the country, he

showed equal impartiality and wisdom.  The colonists were deeply

sensible of the benefits of his administration, and afforded the best

commentary on his services by petitioning the Court of Castile to

continue him in the government of Peru.37 Unfortunately, such was not

the policy of the Crown.







Book 4



Chapter 7



Abuses By The Conquerors--Code For The Colonies-

Great Excitement In Peru--Blasco Nunez The Viceroy-

His Severe Policy--Opposed By Gonzalo Pizarro



1543--1544



Before continuing the narrative of events in Peru, we must turn to the

mother-country, where important changes were in progress in respect to

the administration of the colonies.



Since his accession to the Crown, Charles the Fifth had been chiefly

engrossed by the politics of Europe, where a theatre was opened more

stimulating to his ambition than could be found in a struggle with the

barbarian princes of the New World.  In this quarter, therefore, an

empire almost unheeded, as it were, had been suffered to grow up, until

it had expanded into dimensions greater than those of his European

dominions and destined soon to become far more opulent.  A scheme of

government had, it is true, been devised, and laws enacted from time to

time for the regulation of the colonies.  But these laws were often

accommodated less to the interests of the colonies themselves, than to

those of the parent country; and, when contrived in a better spirit, they

were but imperfectly executed; for the voice of authority, however loudly

proclaimed at home, too often died away in feeble echoes before it had

crossed the waters.



This state of things, and, indeed, the manner in which the Spanish

territories in the New World had been originally acquired, were most

unfortunate both for the conquered races and their masters.  Had the

provinces gained by the Spaniards been the fruit of peaceful acquisition,

--of barter and negotiation,--or had their conquest been achieved under

the immediate direction of government, the interests of the natives would

have been more carefully protected.  From the superior civilization of the

Indians in the Spanish American colonies, they still continued after the

Conquest to remain on the ground, and to mingle in the same

communities, with the white men; in this forming an obvious contrast to

the condition of our own aborigines, who, shrinking from the contact of

civilization, have withdrawn, as the latter has advanced, deeper and

deeper into the heart of the wilderness.  But the South American Indian

was qualified by his previous institutions for a more refined legislation

than could be adapted to the wild hunters of the forest; and, had the

sovereign been there in person to superintend his conquests, he could

never have suffered so large a portion of his vassals to be wantonly

sacrificed to the cupidity and cruelty of the handful of adventurers who

subdued them.



But, as it was, the affair of reducing the country was committed to the

hands of irresponsible individuals, soldiers of fortune, desperate

adventurers, who entered on conquest as a game, which they were to play

in the most unscrupulous manner, with little care but to win it.  Receiving

small encouragement from the government, they were indebted to their

own valor for success; and the right of conquest, they conceived,

extinguished every existing right in the unfortunate natives.  The lands,

the persons, of the conquered races were parcelled out and appropriated

by the victors as the legitimate spoils of victory; and outrages were

perpetrated every day, at the contemplation of which humanity shudders.



These outrages, though nowhere perpetrated on so terrific a scale as in

the islands, where, in a few years, they had nearly annihilated the native

population, were yet of sufficient magnitude in Peru to call down the

vengeance of Heaven on the heads of their authors; and the Indian might

feel that this vengeance was not long delayed, when he beheld his

oppressors, wrangling over their miserable spoil, and turning their

swords against each other.  Peru, as already mentioned, was subdued by

adventurers, for the most part, of a lower and more ferocious stamp than

those who followed the banner of Cortes.  The character of the followers

partook, in some measure, of that of the leaders in their respective

enterprises.  It was a sad fatality for the Incas; for the reckless soldiers of

Pizarro were better suited to contend with the fierce Aztec than with the

more refined and effeminate Peruvian.  Intoxicated by the unaccustomed

possession of power, and without the least notion of the responsibilities

which attached to their situation as masters of the land, they too often

abandoned themselves to the indulgence of every whim which cruelty or

caprice could dictate.  Not unfrequently, says an unsuspicious witness, I

have seen the Spaniards, long after the Conquest, amuse themselves by

hunting down the natives with bloodhounds for mere sport, or in order to

train their dogs to the game! 1  The most unbounded scope was given to

licentiousness.  The young maiden was torn without remorse from the

arms of her family to gratify the passion of her brutal conqueror.2  The

sacred houses of the Virgins of the Sun were broken open and violated,

and the cavalier swelled his harem with a troop of Indian girls making it

seem that the Crescent would have been a much more fitting symbol for

his banner than the immaculate Cross.3



But the dominant passion of the Spaniard was the lust of gold.  For this

he shrunk from no toil himself, and was merciless in his exactions of

labor from his Indian slave.  Unfortunately, Peru abounded in mines

which too well repaid this labor; and human life was the item of least

account in the estimate of the Conquerors.  Under his Incas, the Peruvian

was never suffered to be idle; but the task imposed on him was always

proportioned to his strength.  He had his seasons of rest and refreshment,

and was well protected against the inclemency of the weather.  Every

care was shown for his personal safety.  But the Spaniards, while they

taxed the strength of the native to the utmost, deprived him of the means

of repairing it, when exhausted.  They suffered the provident

arrangements of the Incas to fall into decay.  The granaries were

emptied; the flocks were wasted in riotous living.  They were slaughtered

to gratify a mere epicurean whim, and many a llama was destroyed solely

for the sake of the brains----a dainty morsel, much coveted by the

Spaniards.4  So reckless was the spirit of destruction after the Conquest,

says Ondegardo.  the wise governor of Cuzco, that in four years more of

these animals perished than in four hundred, in the times of the Incas.5

The flocks, once so numerous over the broad table-lands, were now

thinned to a scanty number, that sought shelter in the fastnesses of the

Andes.  The poor Indian, without food, without the warm fleece which

furnished him a defence against the cold, now wandered half-starved and

naked over the plateau.  Even those who had aided the Spaniards in the

conquest fared no better; and many an Inca noble roamed a mendicant

over the lands where he once held rule, and if driven, perchance, by his

necessities, to purloin something from the superfluity of his conquerors,

he expiated it by a miserable death.6



It is true, there were good men, missionaries, faithful to their calling,

who wrought hard in the spiritual conversion of the native, and who,

touched by his misfortunes, would gladly have interposed their arm to

shield him from his oppressors.7  But too often the ecclesiastic became

infected by the general spirit of licentiousness; and the religious

fraternities, who led a life of easy indulgence on the lands cultivated by

their Indian slaves, were apt to think less of the salvation of their souls

than of profiting by the labor of their bodies.8



Yet still there were not wanting good and wise men in the colonies, who,

from time to time, raised the voice of remonstrance against these abuses,

and who carried their complaints to the foot of the throne.  To the credit

of the government, it must also be confessed, that it was solicitous to

obtain such information as it could, both from its own officers, and from

commissioners deputed expressly for the purpose, whose voluminous

communications throw a flood of light on the internal condition of the

country, and furnish the best materials for the historian.9  But it was

found much easier to get this information than to profit by it.



In 1541, Charles the Fifth, who had been much occupied by the affairs of

Germany, revisited his ancestral dominions, where his attention was

imperatively called to the state of the colonies.  Several memorials in

relation to it were laid before him; but no one pressed the matter so

strongly on the royal conscience as Las Casas, afterwards Bishop of

Chiapa.  This good ecclesiastic, whose long life had been devoted to

those benevolent labors which gained him the honorable title of

Protector of the Indians, had just completed his celebrated treatise on the

Destruction of the Indies, the most remarkable record, probably, to be

found, of human wickedness, but which, unfortunately, loses much of its

effect from the credulity of the writer, and his obvious tendency to

exaggerate.



In 1542, Las Casas placed his manuscript in the hands of his royal aster.

That same year, a council was called at Valladolid, composed chiefly of

jurists and theologians, to devise a system of laws for the regulation of

the American colonies.



Las Casas appeared before this body, and made an elaborate argument,

of which a part only has been given to the public.  He there assumes, as a

fundamental proposition, that the Indians were by the law of nature free;

that, as vassals of the Crown, they had a right to its protection, and

should be declared free from that time, without exception and for ever.10

He sustains this proposition by a great variety of arguments,

comprehending the substance of most that has been since urged in the

same cause by the friends of humanity.  He touches on the ground of

expediency, showing, that, without the interference of government, the

Indian race must be gradually exterminated by the systematic oppression

of the Spaniards.  In conclusion, he maintains, that, if the Indians, as it

was pretended, would not labor unless compelled, the white man would

still find it for his interest to cultivate the soil; and that if he should not

be able to do so, that circumstance would give him no right over the

Indian, since God does not allow evil that good may come of it.11--This

lofty morality, it will be remembered, was from the lips of a Dominican,

in the sixteenth century, one of the order that rounded the Inquisition,

and in the very country where the fiery tribunal was then in most active

operation!12



The arguments of Las Casas encountered all the opposition naturally to

be expected from indifference, selfishness, and bigotry.  They were also

resisted by some persons of just and benevolent views in his audience,

who, while they admitted the general correctness of his reasoning, and

felt deep sympathy for the wrongs of the natives, yet doubted whether his

scheme of reform was not fraught with greater evils than those it was

intended to correct.  For Las Casas was the uncompromising friend of

freedom.  He intrenched himself strongly on the ground of natural right;

and, like some of the reformers of our own day, disdained to calculate

the consequences of carrying out the principle to its full and unqualified

extent.  His earnest eloquence, instinct with the generous love of

humanity, and fortified by a host of facts, which it was not easy to assail,

prevailed over his auditors.  The result of their deliberations was a code

of ordinances, which, however, far from being limited to the wants of the

natives, had particular reference to the European population, and the

distractions of the country.  It was of general application to all the

American colonies.  It will be necessary here only to point out some of

the provisions having immediate reference to Peru.



The Indians were declared true and loyal vassals of the Crown, and their

freedom as such was fully recognized.  Yet, to maintain inviolate the

guaranty of the government to the Conquerors, it was decided, that those

lawfully possessed of slaves might still retain them; but, at the death of

the present proprietors, they were to revert to the Crown.



It was provided, however, that slaves, in any event, should be forfeited

by all those who had shown themselves unworthy to hold them by

neglect or ill-usage; by all public functionaries, or such as had held

offices under the government; by ecclesiastics and religious

corporations; and lastly,--a sweeping clause,--by all who had taken a

criminal part in the feuds of Almagro and Pizarro.



It was further ordered, that the Indians should be moderately taxed; that

they should not be compelled to labor where they did not choose, and

that where, from particular circumstances, this was made necessary, they

should receive a fair compensation.  It was also decreed, that, as the

repartimientos of land were often excessive, they should in such cases be

reduced; and that, where proprietors had been guilty of a notorious abuse

of their slaves, their estates should be forfeited altogether.



As Peru had always shown a spirit of insubordination, which required a

more vigorous interposition of authority than was necessary in the other

colonies, it was resolved to send a viceroy to that country, who should

display a state, and be armed with powers, that might make him a more

fitting representative of the sovereign.  He was to be accompanied by a

Royal Audience, consisting of four judges, with extensive powers of

jurisdiction, both criminal and civil, who, besides a court of justice,

should constitute a sort of council to advise with and aid the viceroy.

The Audience of Panama was to be dissolved, and the new tribunal,

with the vice-king's court, was to be established at Los Reyes, or Lima,

as it now began to be called,---henceforth the metropolis of the Spanish

empire on the Pacific.13



Such were some of the principal features of this remarkable code, which,

touching on the most delicate relations of society, broke up the very

foundations of property, and, by a stroke of the pen, as it were, converted

a nation of slaves into freemen.  It would have required, we may

suppose, but little forecast to divine, that in the remote regions of

America, and especially in Peru, where the colonists had been hitherto

accustomed to unbounded license, a reform, so salutary in essential

points, could be enforced thus summarily only at the price of a

revolution.  Yet the ordinances received the sanction of the emperor that

same year, and in November, 1543, were published at Madrid.14



No sooner was their import known than it was conveyed by numerous

letters to the colonists, from their friends in Spain.  The tidings flew like

wildfire over the land, from Mexico to Chili.  Men were astounded at the

prospect of the ruin that awaited them.  In Peru, particularly, there was

scarcely one that could hope to escape the operation of the law.  Few

there were who had not taken part, at some time or other, in the civil

feuds of Almagro and Pizarro; and still fewer of those that remained that

would not be entangled in some one or other of the insidious clauses that

seemed spread out, like a web, to ensnare them.



The whole country was thrown into commotion.  Men assembled

tumultuously in the squares and public places, and, as the regulations

were made known they were received with universal groans and hisses.

"Is this the fruit," they cried, "of all our toil?  Is it for this that we have

poured out our blood like water?  Now that we are broken down by

hardships and sufferings, to be left at the end of our campaigns as poor

as at the beginning!  Is this the way government rewards our services in

winning for it an empire?  The government has done little to aid us in

making the conquest, and for what we have we may thank our own good

swords; and with these same swords," they continued, warming into

menace, "we know how to defend it."  Then, stripping up his sleeve, the

war-worn veteran bared his arm, or, exposing his naked bosom, pointed

to his scars, as the best title to his estates.15



The governor, Vaca de Castro, watched the storm thus gathering from all

quarters, with the deepest concern.  He was himself in the very heart of

disaffection; for Cuzco, tenanted by a mixed and lawless population was

so far removed into the depths of the mountains, that it had much less

intercourse with the parent country, and was consequently much less

under her influence, than the great towns on the coast.  The people now

invoked the governor to protect them against the tyranny of the Court;

but he endeavored to calm the agitation by representing, that by these

violent measures they would only defeat their own object.  He counselled

them to name deputies to lay their petition before the Crown, stating the

impracticability of the present scheme of reform, and praying for the

repeal of it; and he conjured them to wait patiently for the arrival of the

viceroy, who might be prevailed on to suspend the ordinances till further

advices could be received from Castile.



But it was not easy to still the tempest; and the people now eagerly

looked for some one whose interests and sympathies might lie with

theirs, and whose position in the community might afford them

protection.  The person to whom they naturally turned in this crisis was

Gonzalo Pizarro, the last in the land of that family who had led the

armies of the Conquest,--a cavalier whose gallantry and popular manners

had made him always a favorite with the people.  He was now beset with

applications to interpose in their behalf with the government, and shield

them from the oppressive ordinances.



But Gonzalo Pizarro was at Charcas, busily occupied in exploring the

rich veins of Potosi, whose silver fountains, just brought into light, were

soon to pour such streams of wealth over Europe.  Though gratified with

this appeal to his protection, the cautious cavalier was more intent on

providing for the means of enterprise than on plunging prematurely into

it; and, while he secretly encouraged the malecontents, he did not

commit himself by taking part in any revolutionary movement.  At the

same period, he received letters from Vaca de Castro,--whose vigilant

eye watched all the aspects of the time,---cautioning Gonzalo and his

friends not to be seduced, by any wild schemes of reform, from their

allegiance.  And, to check still further these disorderly movements, he

ordered his alcaldes to arrest every man guilty of seditious language, and

bring him at once to punishment.  By this firm yet temperate conduct the

minds of the populace were overawed, and there was a temporary lull in

the troubled waters, while all looked anxiously for the coming of the

viceroy.16



The person selected for this critical post was a knight of Avila, named

Blasco Nunez Vela.  He was a cavalier of ancient family, handsome in

person, though now somewhat advanced in years, and reputed brave and

devout.  He had filled some offices of responsibility to the satisfaction of

Charles the Fifth, by whom he was now appointed to this post in Peru.

The selection did no credit to the monarch's discernment.



It may seem strange that this important place should not have been

bestowed on Vaca de Castro, already on the spot, and who had shown

himself so well qualified to fill it.  But ever since that officer's mission to

Peru, there had been a series of assassinations, insurrections, and civil

wars, that menaced the wretched colony with ruin; and, though his wise

administration had now brought things into order, the communication

with the Indies was so tardy, that the results of his policy were not yet

fully disclosed.  As it was designed, moreover, to make important

innovations in the government, it was thought better to send some one

who would have no personal prejudices to encounter, from the part he

had already taken, and who, coming directly from the Court, and clothed

with extraordinary powers, might present himself with greater authority

than could one who had become familiar to the people in an inferior

capacity.  The monarch, however, wrote a letter with his own hand to,

Vaca de Castro in which he thanked that officer for his past services, and

directed him, after aiding the new viceroy with the fruits of his large

experience, to return to Castile, and take his seat in the Royal Council.

Letters of a similar complimentary kind were sent to the loyal colonists

who had stood by the governor in the late troubles of the country.

Freighted with these testimonials, and with the ill-starred ordinances,

Blasco Nunez embarked at San Lucar, on the 3d of November, 1543.  He

was attended by the four judges of the Audience, and by a numerous

retinue, that he might appear in the state befitting his distinguished

rank.17



About the middle of the following January, 1544, the viceroy, after a

favorable passage, landed at Nombre de Dios.  He found there a vessel

laden with silver from the Peruvian mines, ready to sail for Spain.  His

first act was to lay an embargo on it for the government, as containing

the proceeds of slave labor.  After this extraordinary measure, taken in

opposition to the advice of the Audience, he crossed the Isthmus to

Panama.  Here he gave sure token of his future policy, by causing more

than three hundred Indians, who had been brought by their owners from

Peru, to be liberated and sent back to their own country.  This

highhanded measure created the greatest sensation in the city, and was

strongly resisted by the judges of the Audience.  They besought him not

to begin thus precipitately to execute his commission, but to wait till his

arrival in the colony, when he should have taken time to acquaint himself

somewhat with the country, and with the temper of the people.  But

Blasco Nunez coldly replied, that "he had come, not to tamper with the

laws, nor to discuss their merits, but to execute them,--and execute them

he would, to the letter, whatever might be the consequence."18  This

answer, and the peremptory tone in which it was delivered, promptly

adjourned the debate; for the judges saw that debate was useless with one

who seemed to consider all remonstrance as an attempt to turn him from

his duty, and whose ideas of duty precluded all discretionary exercise of

authority, even where the public good demanded it.



Leaving the Audience, as one of its body was ill, at Panama, the viceroy

proceeded on his way, and, coasting down the shores of the Pacific, on

the fourth of March he disembarked at Tumbez.  He was well received

by the loyal inhabitants; his authority was publicly proclaimed, and the

people were overawed by the display of a magnificence and state such as

had not till then been seen in Peru.  He took an early occasion to intimate

his future line of policy by liberating a number of Indian slaves on the

application of their caciques.  He then proceeded by land towards the

south, and showed his determination to conform in his own person to the

strict letter of the ordinances, by causing his baggage to be carried by

mules, where it was practicable; and where absolutely necessary to make

use of Indians, he paid them fairly for their services.19



The whole country was thrown into consternation by reports of the

proceedings of the viceroy, and of his conversations, most unguarded,

which were eagerly circulated, and, no doubt, often exaggerated.

Meetings were again called in the cities.  Discussions were held on the

expediency of resisting his further progress, and a deputation of citizens

from Cuzco, who were then in Lima, strongly urged the people to close

the gates of that capital against him.  But Vaca de Castro had also left

Cuzco for the latter city, on the earliest intimation of the viceroy's

approach, and, with some difficulty, he prevailed on the inhabitants not

to swerve from their loyalty, but to receive their new ruler with suitable

honors, and trust to his calmer judgment for postponing the execution of

the law till the case could be laid before the throne.



But the great body of the Spaniards, after what they had heard, had

slender confidence in the relief to be obtained from this quarter.  They

now turned with more eagerness than ever towards Gonzalo Pizarro; and

letters and addresses poured in upon him from all parts of the country,

inviting him to take on himself the office of their protector.  These

applications found a more favorable response than on the former

occasion.



There were, indeed, many motives at work to call Gonzalo into action.  It

was to his family, mainly, that Spain was indebted for this extension of

her colonial empire; and he had felt deeply aggrieved that the

government of the colony should be trusted to other hands than his.  He

had felt this on the arrival of Vaca de Castro, and much more so when

the appointment of a viceroy proved it to be the settled policy of the

Crown to exclude his family from the management of affairs.  His

brother Hernando still languished in prison, and he himself was now to

be sacrificed as the principal victim of the fatal ordinances.  For who had

taken so prominent a part in the civil war with the elder Almagro?  And

the viceroy was currently reported--it may have been scandal---to have

intimated that Pizarro would be dealt with accordingly.20  Yet there was

no one in the country who had so great a stake, who had so much to lose

by the revolution.  Abandoned thus by the government, he conceived that

it was now time to take care of himself.



Assembling together some eighteen or twenty cavaliers in whom he most

trusted, and taking a large amount of silver, drawn from the mines, he

accepted the invitation to repair to Cuzco.  As he approached this capital,

he was met by a numerous body of the citizens, who came out to

welcome him, making the air ring with their shouts, as they saluted him

with the title of Procurator-General of Peru.  The title was speedily

confirmed by the municipality of the city, who invited him to head a

deputation to Lima, in order to state their grievances to the viceroy, and

solicit the present suspension of the ordinances.



But the spark of ambition was kindled in the bosom of Pizarro.  He felt

strong in the affections of the people; and, from the more elevated

position in which he now stood, his desires took a loftier and more

unbounded range.  Yet, if he harbored a criminal ambition in his breast,

he skilfully veiled it from others--perhaps from himself.  The only object

he professed to have in view was the good of the people;21 a suspicious

phrase, usually meaning the good of the individual.  He now demanded

permission to raise and organize an armed force, with the further title of

Captain-General.  His views were entirely pacific; but it was not safe,

unless strongly protected, to urge them on a person of the viceroy's

impatient and arbitrary temper.  It was further contended by Pizarro's

friends, that such a force was demanded, to rid the country of their old

enemy, the Inca Manco, who hovered in the neighboring mountains with

a body of warriors, ready, at the first opportunity, to descend on the

Spaniards.  The municipality of Cuzco hesitated, as well it might, to

confer powers so far beyond its legitimate authority.  But Pizarro avowed

his purpose, in case of refusal, to decline the office of Procurator; and

the efforts of his partisans, backed by those of the people, at length

silenced the scruples of the magistrates, who bestowed on the ambitious

chief the military command to which he aspired.  Pizarro accepted it with

the modest assurance, that he did so "purely from regard to the interests

of the king, of the Indies, and, above all, of Peru!" 22







Book 4



Chapter 8



The Viceroy Arrives At Lima--Gonzalo Pizarro Marches From Cuzco--

Death Of The Inca Manco--Rash Conduct Of The Viceroy--

Seized And Deposed By The Audience--

Gonzalo Proclaimed Governor Of Peru



1544



While the events recorded in the preceding pages were in progress,

Blasco Nunez had been journeying towards Lima.  But the alienation

which his conduct had already caused in the minds of the colonists was

shown in the cold reception which he occasionally experienced on the

route, and in the scanty accommodations provided for him and his

retinue.  In one place where he took up his quarters, he found an ominous

inscription over the door:--"He that takes my property must expect to pay

for it with his life." 1  Neither daunted, nor diverted from his purpose,

the inflexible viceroy held on his way towards the capital, where the

inhabitants, preceded by Vaca de Castro and the municipal authorities,

came out to receive him.  He entered in great state, under a canopy of

crimson cloth, embroidered with the arms of Spain, and supported by

stout poles or staves of solid silver, which were borne by the members of

the municipality.  A cavalier, holding a mace, the emblem of authority,

rode before him; and after the oaths of office were administered in the

council-chamber, the procession moved towards the cathedral, where Te

Deum was sung, and Blasco Nunez was installed in his new dignity of

viceroy of Peru.2



His first act was to proclaim his determination in respect to the

ordinances.  He had no warrant to suspend their execution.  He should

fulfil his commission; but he offered to join the colonists in a memorial

to the emperor, soliciting the repeal of a code which he now believed

would be for the interests neither of the country nor of the Crown.3

With this avowed view of the subject, it may seem strange that Blasco

Nunez should not have taken the responsibility of suspending the law

until his sovereign could be assured of the inevitable consequences of

enforcing it.  The pacha of a Turkish despot, who had allowed himself

this latitude for the interests of his master, might, indeed, have reckoned

on the bowstring.  But the example of Mendoza, the prudent viceroy of

Mexico who adopted this course in a similar crisis, and precisely at the

same period, showed its propriety under existing circumstances.  The

ordinances were suspended by him till the Crown could be warned of the

consequences of enforcing them,--and Mexico was saved from

revolution.4  But Blasco Nunez had not the wisdom of Mendoza.



The public apprehension was now far from being allayed.  Secret cabals

were formed in Lima, and communications held with the different towns.

No distrust, however, was raised in the breast of the viceroy, and, when

informed of the preparations of Gonzalo Pizarro, he took no other step

than to send a message to his camp, announcing the extraordinary

powers with which he was himself invested, and requiring that chief to

disband his forces.  He seemed to think that a mere word from him

would be sufficient to dissipate rebellion.  But it required more than a

breath to scatter the iron soldiery of Peru.



Gonzalo Pizarro, meanwhile, was busily occupied in mustering his army.

His first step was to order from Guamanga sixteen pieces of artillery,

sent there by Vaca de Castro, who, in the present state of excitement,

was unwilling to trust the volatile people of Cuzco with these implements

of destruction.  Gonzalo, who had no scruples as to Indian labor,

appropriated six thousand of the natives to the service of transporting

this train of ordnance across the mountains.5



By his exertions and those of his friends, the active chief soon mustered

a force of nearly four hundred men, which, if not very imposing in the

outset, he conceived would be swelled, in his descent to the coast, by

tributary levies from the towns and villages on the way.  All his own

funds were expended in equipping his men and providing for the march;

and, to supply deficiencies, he made no scruple---since, to use his words,

it was for the public interest--to appropriate the moneys in the royal

treasury.  With this seasonable aid, his troops, well mounted and

thoroughly equipped, were put in excellent fighting order; and, after

making them a brief harangue, in which he was careful to insist on the

pacific character of his enterprise, somewhat at variance with its military

preparations, Gonzalo Pizarro sallied forth from the gates of the capital.



Before leaving it, he received an important accession of strength in the

person of Francisco de Carbajal, the veteran who performed so

conspicuous a part in the battle of Chupas.  He was at Charcas when the

news of the ordinances reached Peru; and he instantly resolved to quit

the country and return to Spain, convinced that the New World would be

no longer the land for him,--no longer the golden Indies.  Turning his

effects into money, he prepared to embark them on board the first ship

that offered.  But no opportunity occurred, and he could have little

expectation now of escaping the vigilant eye of the viceroy.  Yet, though

solicited by Pizarro to take command under him in the present

expedition, the veteran declined, saying, he was eighty years old, and had

no wish but to return home, and spend his few remaining days in quiet.6

Well had it been for him, had he persisted in his refusal.  But he yielded

to the importunities of his friend; and the short space that yet remained to

him of life proved long enough to brand his memory with perpetual

infamy.



Soon after quitting Cuzco, Pizarro learned the death of the Inca Manco.

He was massacred by a party of Spaniards, of the faction of Almagro,

who, on the defeat of their young leader, had taken refuge in the Indian

camp.  They, in turn, were all slain by the Peruvians.  It is impossible to

determine on whom the blame of the quarrel should rest, since no one

present at the time has recorded it.7



The death of Manco Inca, as he was commonly called, is an event not to

be silently passed over in Peruvian history; for he was the last of his race

that may be said to have been animated by the heroic spirit of the ancient

Incas.  Though placed on the throne by Pizarro, far from remaining a

mere puppet in his hands, Manco soon showed that his lot was not to be

cast with that of his conquerors.  With the ancient institutions of his

country lying a wreck around him, he yet struggled bravely, like

Guatemozin, the last of the Aztecs, to uphold her tottering fortunes, or to

bury his oppressors under her ruins.  By the assault on his own capital of

Cuzco, in which so large a portion of it was demolished, he gave a check

to the arms of Pizarro, and, for a season, the fate of the Conquerors

trembled in the balance.  Though foiled, in the end, by the superior

science of his adversary, the young barbarian still showed the same

unconquerable spirit as before.  He withdrew into the fastnesses of his

native mountains, whence sallying forth as occasion offered, he fell on

the caravan of the traveller, or on some scattered party of the military;

and, in the event of a civil war, was sure to throw his own weight into the

weaker scale, thus prolonging the contest of his enemies, and feeding his

revenge by the sight of their calamities.  Moving lightly from spot to

spot, he eluded pursuit amidst the wilds of the Cordilleras; and, hovering

in the neighborhood of the towns, or lying in ambush on the great

thoroughfares of the country, the Inca Manco made his name a terror to

the Spaniards.  Often did they hold out to him terms of accommodation;

and every succeeding ruler, down to Blasco Nunez, bore instructions

from the Crown to employ every art to conciliate the formidable warrior.

But Manco did not trust the promises of the white man; and he chose

rather to maintain his savage independence in the mountains, with the

few brave spirits around him, than to live a slave in the land which had

once owned the sway of his ancestors.



The death of the Inca removed one of the great pretexts for Gonzalo

Pizarro's military preparations; but it had little influence on him, as may

be readily imagined.  He was much more sensible to the desertion of

some of his followers, which took place early on the march.  Several of

the cavaliers of Cuzco, startled by his unceremonious appropriation of

the public moneys, and by the belligerent aspect of affairs, now for the

first time seemed to realize that they were in the path of rebellion.  A

number of these, including some principal men of the city, secretly

withdrew from the army, and, hastening to Lima, offered their services to

the viceroy.  The troops were disheartened by this desertion, and even

Pizarro for a moment faltered in his purpose, and thought of retiring with

some fifty followers to Charcas, and there making his composition with

government.  But a little reflection, aided by the remonstrances of the

courageous Carbajal, who never turned his back on an enterprise which

he had once assumed, convinced him that he had gone too far to recede,-

-that his only safety was to advance.



He was reassured by more decided manifestations, which he soon after

received, of the public opinion.  An officer named Puelles, who

commanded at Guanuco, joined him, with a body of horse with which he

had been intrusted by the viceroy.  This defection was followed by that

of others, and Gonzalo, as he descended the sides of the table-land,

found his numbers gradually swelled to nearly double the amount with

which he had left the Indian capital.



As he traversed with a freer step the bloody field of Chupas, Carbajal

pointed out the various localities of the battle-ground, and Pizarro might

have found food for anxious reflection, as he meditated on the fortunes

of a rebel.  At Guamanga he was received with open arms by the

inhabitants, many of whom eagerly enlisted under his banner; for they

trembled for their property, as they heard from all quarters of the

inflexible temper of the viceroy.8



That functionary began now to be convinced that he was in a critical

position.  Before Puelles's treachery, above noticed, had been

consummated, the viceroy had received some vague intimation of his

purpose.  Though scarcely crediting it, he detached one of his company,

named Diaz, with a force to intercept him.  But, although that cavalier

undertook the mission with alacrity, he was soon after prevailed on to

follow the example of his comrade, and, with the greater part of the men

under his command, went over to the enemy.  In the civil feuds of this

unhappy land, parties changed sides so lightly, that treachery to a

commander had almost ceased to be a stain on the honor of a cavalier.

Yet all, on whichever side they cast their fortunes, loudly proclaimed

their loyalty to the Crown.



Thus betrayed by his own men, by those apparently most devoted to his

service, Blasco Nunez became suspicious of every one around him.

Unfortunately, his suspicions fell on some who were most deserving of

his confidence.  Among these was his predecessor, Vaca de Castro.  That

officer had conducted himself, in the delicate situation in which he had

been placed, with his usual discretion, and with perfect integrity and

honor.  He had frankly communicated with the viceroy, and well had it

been for Blasco Nunez, if he had known how to profit by it.  But he was

too much puffed up by the arrogance of office, and by the conceit of his

own superior wisdom, to defer much to the counsels of his experienced

predecessor.  The latter was now suspected by the viceroy of maintaining

a secret correspondence with his enemies at Cuzco,--a suspicion which

seems to have had no better foundation than the personal friendship

which Vaca de Castro was known to entertain for these individuals.  But,

with Blasco Nunez, to suspect was to be convinced; and he ordered De

Castro to be placed under arrest, and confined on board of a vessel lying

in the harbor.  This high-handed measure was followed by the arrest and

imprisonment of several other cavaliers, probably on grounds equally

frivolous.9



He now turned his attention towards the enemy.  Notwithstanding his

former failure, he still did not altogether despair of effecting something

by negotiation, and he sent another embassy, having the bishop of Lima

at its head, to Gonzalo Pizarro's camp, with promises of a general

amnesty, and some proposals of a more tempting character to the

commander.  But this step, while it proclaimed his own weakness, had no

better success than the preceding.10



The viceroy now vigorously prepared for war.  His first care was to put

the capital in a posture of defence, by strengthening its fortifications, and

throwing barricades across the streets.  He ordered a general enrolment

of the citizens, and called in levies from the neighboring towns,-a call

not very promptly answered.  A squadron of eight or ten vessels was got

ready in the port to act in concert with the land forces.  The bells were

taken from the churches, and used in the manufacture of muskets;11 and

funds were procured from the fifths which had accumulated in the royal

treasury.  The most extravagant bounty was offered to the soldiers, and

prices were paid for mules and horses, which showed that gold, or rather

silver, was the commodity of least value in Peru.12  By these efforts, the

active commander soon assembled a force considerably larger than that

of his adversary.  But how could he confide in it?



While these preparations were going forward, the judges of the Audience

arrived at Lima.  They had shown, throughout their progress, no great

respect either for the ordinances, or the will of the viceroy; for they had

taxed the poor natives as freely and unscrupulously as any of the

Conquerors.  We have seen the entire want of cordiality subsisting

between them and their principal in Panama.  It became more apparent,

on their landing at Lima.  They disapproved of his proceedings in every

particular; of his refusal to suspend the ordinances,--although, in fact, he

had found no opportunity, of late, to enforce them; of his preparations

for defence, declaring that he ought rather trust to the effect of

negotiation; and, finally, of his imprisonment of so many loyal cavaliers,

which they pronounced an arbitrary act, altogether beyond the bounds of

his authority; and they did not scruple to visit the prison in person, and

discharge the captives from their confinement.13



This bold proceeding, while it conciliated the good-will of the people,

severed, at once, all relations with the viceroy.  There was in the

Audience a lawyer, named Cepeda, a cunning, ambitious man, with

considerable knowledge in the way of his profession, and with still

greater talent for intrigue.  He did not disdain the low arts of a

demagogue to gain the favor of the populace, and trusted to find his own

account in fomenting a misunderstanding with Blasco Nunez.  The latter,

it must be confessed, did all in his power to aid his counsellor in this

laudable design.



A certain cavalier in the place, named Suarez de Carbajal, who had long

held an office under government, fell under the viceroy's displeasure, on

suspicion of conniving at the secession of some of his kinsmen, who had

lately taken part with the malecontents.  The viceroy summoned Carbajal

to attend him at his palace, late at night; and when conducted to his

presence, he bluntly charged him with treason.  The latter stoutly denied

the accusation, in tones as haughty as those of his accuser.  The

altercation grew warm, until, in the heat of passion, Blasco Nunez struck

him with his poniard.  In an instant, the attendants, taking this as a signal,

plunged their swords into the body of the unfortunate man, who fell

lifeless on the floor.14



Greatly alarmed for the consequences of his rash act,--for Carbajal was

much beloved in Lima,--Blasco Nunez ordered the corpse of the

murdered man to be removed by a private stairway from the house, and

carried to the cathedral, where, rolled in his bloody cloak, it was laid in a

grave hastily dug to receive it.  So tragic a proceeding, known to so

many witnesses, could not long be kept secret.  Vague rumors of the fact

explained the mysterious disappearance of Carbajal.  The grave was

opened, and the mangled remains of the slaughtered cavalier established

the guilt of the viceroy.15



From this hour Blasco Nunez was held in universal abhorrence; and his

crime, in this instance, assumed the deeper dye of ingratitude, since the

deceased was known to have had the greatest influence in reconciling the

citizens early to his government.  No one knew where the blow would

fall next, or how soon he might himself become the victim of the

ungovernable passions of the viceroy.  In this state of things, some

looked to the Audience, and yet more to Gonzalo Pizarro, to protect

them.



That chief was slowly advancing towards Lima, from which, indeed, he

was removed but a few days' march.  Greatly perplexed, Blasco Nunez

now felt the loneliness of his condition.  Standing aloof, as it were from

his own followers, thwarted by the Audience, betrayed by his soldiers, he

might well feel the consequences of his misconduct.  Yet there seemed

no other course for him, but either to march out and meet the enemy, or

to remain in Lima and defend it.  He had placed the town in a posture of

defence, which argued this last to have been his original purpose.  But he

felt he could no longer rely on his troops, and he decided on a third

course, most unexpected.



This was to abandon the capital, and withdraw to Truxillo, about eighty

leagues distant.  The women would embark on board the squadron, and,

with the effects of the citizens, be transported by water.  The troops, with

the rest of the inhabitants, would march by land, laying waste the country

as they proceeded.  Gonzalo Pizarro, when he arrived at Lima, would

find it without supplies for his army, and, thus straitened he would not

care to take a long march across a desert in search of his enemy.16



What the viceroy proposed to effect by this movement is not clear,

unless it were to gain time; and yet the more time he had gained, thus far,

the worse it had proved for him.  But he was destined to encounter a

decided opposition from the judges.  They contended that he had no

warrant for such an act, and that the Audience could not lawfully hold its

sessions out of the capital.  Blasco Nunez persisted in his determination,

menacing that body with force, if necessary.  The judges appealed to the

citizens to support them in resisting such an arbitrary measure.  They

mustered a force for their own protection, and that same day passed a

decree that the viceroy should be arrested.



Late at night, Blasco Nunez was informed of the hostile preparations of

the judges.  He instantly summoned his followers, to the number of more

than two hundred, put on his armour, and prepared to march out at the

head of his troops against the Audience.  This was the true course; for in

a crisis like that in which he was placed, requiring promptness and

decision, the presence of the leader is essential to insure success.  But,

unluckily, he yielded to the remonstrances of his brother and other

friends, who dissuaded him from rashly exposing his life in such a

venture.



What Blasco Nunez neglected to do was done by the judges.  They

sallied forth at the head of their followers, whose number, though small

at first, they felt confident would be swelled by volunteers as they

advanced.  Rushing forward, they cried out,--"Liberty!  Liberty!  Long

live the king and the Audience! " It was early dawn, and the inhabitants,

startled from their slumbers, ran to the windows and balconies, and,

learning the object of the movement, some snatched up their arms and

joined in it, while the women, waving their scarfs and kerchiefs, cheered

on the assault.



When the mob arrived before the viceroy's palace, they halted for a

moment, uncertain what to do.  Orders were given to fire on them from

the windows, and a volley passed over their heads.  No one was injured;

and the greater part of the viceroy's men, with most of the officers,

including some of those who had been so anxious for his personal safety,

--now openly joined the populace.  The palace was then entered, and

abandoned to pillage.  Blasco Nunez, deserted by all but a few faithful

adherents, made no resistance.  He surrendered to the assailants, was led

before the judges, and by them was placed in strict confinement.  The

citizens, delighted with the result, provided a collation for the soldiers;

and the affair ended without the loss of a single life.  Never was there so

bloodless a revolution.17



The first business of the judges was to dispose of the prisoner.  He was

sent, under a strong guard, to a neighboring island, till some measures

could be taken respecting him.  He was declared to be deposed from his

office; a provisional government was established, consisting of their own

body, with Cepeda at its head, as president; and its first act was to

pronounce the detested ordinances suspended, till instructions could be

received from Court.  It was also decided to send Blasco Nunez back to

Spain with one of their own body, who should explain to the emperor the

nature of the late disturbances, and vindicate the measures of the

Audience.  This was soon put in execution.  The Licentiate Alvarez was

the person selected to bear the viceroy company; and the unfortunate

commander, after passing several days on the desolate island, with

scarcely any food, and exposed to all the inclemencies of the weather,

took his departure for Panama.18



A more formidable adversary yet remained in Gonzalo Pizarro, who had

now advanced to Xauxa, about ninety miles from Lima.  Here he halted,

while numbers of the citizens prepared to join his banner, choosing

rather to take service under him than to remain under the selfconstituted

authority of the Audience.  The judges, meanwhile, who had tasted the

sweets of office too short a time to be content to resign them, after

considerable delay, sent an embassy to the Procurator.  They announced

to him the revolution that had taken place, and the suspension of the

ordinances.  The great object of his mission had been thus accomplished;

and, as a new government was now organized, they called on him to

show his obedience to it, by disbanding his forces, and withdrawing to

the unmolested enjoyment of his estates.  It was a bold demand, though

couched in the most courteous and complimentary phrase,--to make of

one in Pizarro's position.  It was attempting to scare away the eagle just

ready to stoop on his prey.  If the chief had faltered, however, he would

have been reassured by his lion-hearted lieutenant.  "Never show faint

heart," exclaimed the latter, "when you are so near the goal.  Success has

followed every step of your path.  You have now only to stretch forth

your hand, and seize the government.  Every thing else will follow."--

The envoy who brought the message from the judges was sent back with

the answer, that "the people had called Gonzalo Pizarro to the

government of the country, and, if the Audience did not at once invest

him with it, the city should be delivered up to pillage." 19



The bewildered magistrates were thrown into dismay by this decisive

answer.  Yet loth to resign, they took counsel in their perplexity of Vaca

de Castro, still detained on board of one of the vessels.  But that

commander had received too little favor at the hands of his successors to

think it necessary to peril his life on their account by thwarting the plans

of Pizarro.  He maintained a discreet silence, therefore, and left the

matter to the wisdom of the Audience.



Meanwhile, Carbajal was sent into the city to quicken their deliberations.

He came at night, attended only by a small party of soldiers, intimating

his contempt of the power of the judges.  His first act was to seize a

number of cavaliers, whom he dragged from their beds, and placed under

arrest.  They were men of Cuzco, the same already noticed as having left

Pizarro's ranks soon after his departure from that capital.  While the

Audience still hesitated as to the course they should pursue, Carbajal

caused three of his prisoners, persons of consideration and property, to

be placed on the backs of mules, and escorted out of town to the suburbs,

where, with brief space allowed for confession, he hung them all on the

branches of a tree.  He superintended the execution himself, and

tauntingly complimented one of his victims, by telling him, that, "in

consideration of his higher rank, he should have the privilege of selecting

the bough on which to be hanged!"20  The ferocious officer would have

proceeded still further in his executions, it is said, had it not been for

orders received from his leader.  But enough was done to quicken the

perceptions of the Audience as to their course, for they felt their own

lives suspended by a thread in such unscrupulous hands.  Without further

delay, therefore, they sent to invite Gonzalo Pizarro to enter the city,

declaring that the security of the country and the general good required

the government to be placed in his hands.21



That chief had now advanced within half a league of the capital, which

soon after, on the twenty-eighth of October, 1544, he entered in battle-

array.  His whole force was little short of twelve hundred Spaniards,

besides several thousand Indians, who dragged his heavy guns in the

advance.22  Then came the files of spearmen and arquebusiers, making a

formidable corps of infantry for a colonial army; and lastly, the cavalry,

at the head of which rode Pizarro himself, on a powerful charger, gaily

caparisoned.  The rider was in complete mail, over which floated a richly

embroidered surcoat, and his head was protected by a crimson cap,

highly ornamented,--his showy livery setting off his handsome,

soldierlike person to advantage.23  Before him was borne the royal

standard of Castile; for every one, royalist or rebel, was careful to fight

under that sign.  This emblem of loyalty was supported on the right by a

banner, emblazoned with the arms of Cuzco, and by another on the left,

displaying the armorial bearings granted by the Crown to the Pizarros.

As the martial pageant swept through the streets of Lima, the air was rent

with acclamations from the populace, and from the spectators in the

balconies.  The cannon sounded at intervals, and the bells of the city--

those that the viceroy had spared rang out a joyous peal, as if in honor of

a victory!



The oaths of office were duly administered by the judges of the Royal

Audience, and Gonzalo Pizarro was proclaimed Governor and Captain

General of Peru, till his Majesty's pleasure could be known in respect to

the government.  The new ruler then took up his quarters in the palace of

his brother,--where the stains of that brother's blood were not yet effaced.

Fetes, bull-fights, and tournaments graced the ceremony of inauguration,

and were prolonged for several days, while the giddy populace of the

capital abandoned themselves to jubilee, as if a new and more auspicious

order of things had commenced for Peru!  24







Book 4



Chapter 9



Measures Of Gonzalo Pizarro--Escape Of Vaca De Castro--

Reappearance Of The Viceroy--His Disastrous Retreat--

Defeat And Death Of The Viceroy--Gonzalo Pizarro Lord Of Peru



1544--1546



The first act of Gonzalo Pizarro was to cause those persons to be

apprehended who had taken the most active part against him in the late

troubles.  Several he condemned to death; but afterwards commuted the

sentence, and contented himself with driving them into banishment and

confiscating their estates.1  His next concern was to establish his

authority on a firm basis.  He filled the municipal government of Lima

with his own partisans.  He sent his lieutenants to take charge of the

principal cities.  He caused galleys to be built at Arequipa to secure the

command of the seas; and brought his forces into the best possible

condition, to prepare for future emergencies.



The Royal Audience existed only in name; for its powers were speedily

absorbed by the new ruler, who desired to place the government on the

same footing as under the marquess, his brother.  Indeed, the Audience

necessarily fell to pieces, from the position of its several members.

Alvarez had been sent with the viceroy to Castile.  Cepeda, the most

aspiring of the court, now that he had failed in his own schemes of

ambition, was content to become a tool in the hands of the military chief

who had displaced him.  Zarate, a third judge, who had, from the first,

protested against the violent measures of his colleagues, was confined to

his house by a mortal illness;2 and Tepeda, the remaining magistrate,

Gonzalo now proposed to send back to Castile with such an account of

the late transactions as should vindicate his own conduct in the eyes of

the emperor.  This step was opposed by Carbajal, who bluntly told his

commander that "he had gone too far to expect favor from the Crown;

and that he had better rely for his vindication on his pikes and muskets!"

3



But the ship which was to transport Tepeda was found to have suddenly

disappeared from the port.  It was the same in which Vaca de Castro was

confined; and that officer, not caring to trust to the forbearance of one

whose advances, on a former occasion, he had so unceremoniously

repulsed, and convinced, moreover, that his own presence could profit

nothing in a land where he held no legitimate authority, had prevailed on

the captain to sail with him to Panama.  He then crossed the Isthmus, and

embarked for Spain.  The rumors of his coming had already preceded

him, and charges were not wanting against him from some of those

whom he had offended by his administration.  He was accused of having

carried measures with a high hand, regardless of the rights, both of the

colonist and of the native; and, above all, of having embezzled the public

moneys, and of returning with his coffers richly freighted to Castile.

This last was an unpardonable crime.



No sooner had the governor set foot in his own country than he was

arrested, and hurried to the fortress of Arevalo; and, though he was

afterwards removed to better quarters, where he was treated with the

indulgence due to his rank, he was still kept a prisoner of state for twelve

years, when the tardy tribunals of Castile pronounced a judgment in his

favor.  He was acquitted of every charge that had been brought against

him, and, so far from peculation, was proved to have returned home no

richer than he went.  He was released from confinement, reinstated in his

honors and dignities, took his seat anew in the royal council, and Vaca

de Castro enjoyed, during the remainder of his days, the consideration to

which he was entitled by his deserts.4  The best eulogium on the wisdom

of his administration was afforded by the troubles brought on the

colonies by that of his successor.  The nation became gradually sensible

of the value of his services; though the manner in which they were

requited by the government must be allowed to form a cold commentary

on the gratitude of princes.



Gonzalo Pizarro was doomed to experience a still greater disappointment

than that caused by the escape of Vaca de Castro, in the return of Blasco

Nunez.  The vessel which bore him from the country had hardly left the

shore, when Alvarez, the judge, whether from remorse at the part which

he had taken, or apprehensive of the consequences of carrying back the

viceroy to Spain, presented himself before that dignitary, and announced

that he was no longer a prisoner.  At the same time he excused himself

for the part he had taken, by his desire to save the life of Blasco Nunez,

and extricate him from his perilous situation.  He now placed the vessel

at his disposal, and assured him it should take him wherever he chose.



The viceroy, whatever faith he may have placed in the judge's

explanation, eagerly availed himself of his offer.  His proud spirit

revolted at the idea of returning home in disgrace, foiled, as he had been,

in every object of his mission.  He determined to try his fortune again in

the land, and his only doubt was, on what point to attempt to rally his

partisans around him.  At Panama he might remain in safety, while he

invoked assistance from Nicaragua, and other colonies at the north.  But

this would be to abandon his government at once; and such a confession

of weakness would have a bad effect on his followers in Peru.  He

determined, therefore, to direct his steps towards Quito, which, while it

was within his jurisdiction, was still removed far enough from the theatre

of the late troubles to give him time to rally, and make head against his

enemies.



In pursuance of this purpose, the viceroy and his suite disembarked at

Tumbez, about the middle of October, 1544.  On landing, he issued a

manifesto setting forth the violent proceedings of Gonzalo Pizarro and

his followers, whom he denounced as traitors to their prince, and he

called on all true subjects in the colony to support him in maintaining the

royal authority.  The call was not unheeded; and volunteers came in,

though tardily, from San Miguel, Puerto Viejo, and other places on the

coast, cheering the heart of the viceroy with the conviction that the

sentiment of loyalty was not yet extinct in the bosoms of the Spaniards.



But, while thus occupied, he received tidings of the arrival of one of

Pizarro's captains on the coast, with a force superior to his own.  Their

number was exaggerated; but Blasco Nunez, without waiting to ascertain

the truth, abandoned his position at Tumbez, and, with as much

expedition as he could make across a wild and mountainous country half-

buried in snow, he marched to Quito.  But this capital, situated at the

northern extremity of his province, was not a favorable point for the

rendezvous of his followers; and, after prolonging his stay till he had

received assurance from Benalcazar, the loyal commander at Popayan,

that he would support him with all his strength in the coming conflict, he

made a rapid countermarch to the coast, and took up his position at the

town of San Miguel.  This was a spot well suited to his purposes, as lying

on the great high road along the shores of the Pacific, besides being the

chief mart for commercial intercourse with Panama and the north.



Here the viceroy erected his standard, and in a few weeks found himself

at the head of a force amounting to nearly five hundred in all, horse and

foot, ill provided with arms and ammunition, but apparently zealous in

the cause.  Finding himself in sufficient strength to commence active

operations, he now sallied forth against several of Pizarro's captains in

the neighborhood, over whom he obtained some decided advantages,

which renewed his confidence, and flattered him with the hopes of

reestablishing his ascendency in the country.5



During this time, Gonzalo Pizarro was not idle.  He had watched with

anxiety the viceroy's movements; and was now convinced that it was

time to act, and that, if he would not be unseated himself, he must

dislodge his formidable rival.  He accordingly placed a strong garrison

under a faithful officer in Lima, and, after sending forward a force of

some six hundred men by land to Truxillo, he embarked for the same

port himself, on the 4th of March, 1545, the very day on which the

viceroy had marched from Quito.



At Truxillo, Pizarro put himself at the head of his little army, and moved

without loss of time against San Miguel.  His rival, eager to bring their

quarrel to an issue, would fain have marched out to give him battle; but

his soldiers, mostly young and inexperienced levies, hastily brought

together, were intimidated by the name of Pizarro.  They loudly insisted

on being led into the upper country, where they would be reinforced by

Benalcazar; and their unfortunate commander, like the rider of some

unmanageable steed, to whose humors he is obliged to submit, was

hurried away in a direction contrary to his wishes.  It was the fate of

Blasco Nunez to have his purposes baffled alike by his friends and his

enemies.



On arriving before San Miguel, Gonzalo Pizarro found, to his great

mortification, that his antagonist had left it.  Without entering the town,

he quickened his pace, and, after traversing a valley of some extent,

reached the skirts of a mountain chain, into which Blasco Nunez had

entered but a few hours before.  It was late in the evening; but Pizarro,

knowing the importance of despatch, sent forward Carbajal with a party

of light troops to overtake the fugitives.  That captain succeeded in

coming up with their lonely bivouac among the mountains at midnight,

when the weary troops were buried in slumber.  Startled from their

repose by the blast of the trumpet, which, strange to say, their enemy had

incautiously sounded,6 the viceroy and his men sprang to their feet,

mounted their horses, grasped their arquebuses, and poured such a volley

into the ranks of their assailants, that Carbajal, disconcerted by his

reception, found it prudent, with his inferior force, to retreat.  The

viceroy followed, till, fearing an ambuscade in the darkness of the night,

he withdrew, and allowed his adversary to rejoin the main body of the

army under Pizarro.



This conduct of Carbajal, by which he allowed the game to slip through

his hands, from mere carelessness, is inexplicable.  It forms a singular

exception to the habitual caution and vigilance displayed in his military

career.  Had it been the act of any other captain, it would have cost him

his head.  But Pizarro, although greatly incensed, set too high a value on

the services and well-tried attachment of his lieutenant, to quarrel with

him.  Still it was considered of the last importance to overtake the

enemy, before he had advanced much farther to the north, where the

difficulties of the ground would greatly embarrass the pursuit.  Carbajal,

anxious to retrieve his error, was accordingly again placed at the head of

a corps of light troops, with instructions to harass the enemy's march, cut

off his stores, and keep him in check, if possible, till the arrival of

Pizarro.7



But the viceroy had profiled by the recent delay to gain considerably on

his pursuers.  His road led across the valley of Caxas, a broad,

uncultivated district, affording little sustenance for man or beast.  Day

after day, his troops held on their march through this dreary region,

intersected with barrancas and rocky ravines that added incredibly to

their toil.  Their principal food was the parched corn, which usually

formed the nourishment of the travelling Indians, though held of much

less account by the Spaniards; and this meagre fare was reinforced by

such herbs as they found on the way-side, which, for want of better

utensils, the soldiers were fain to boil in their helmets.8  Carbajal,

meanwhile, pressed on them so close, that their baggage, ammunition,

and sometimes their mules, fell into his hands.  The indefatigable warrior

was always on their track, by day and by night, allowing them scarcely

any repose.  They spread no tent, and lay down in their arms, with their

steeds standing saddled beside them; and hardly had the weary soldier

closed his eyes, when he was startled by the cry that the enemy was upon

him.9



At length, the harassed followers of Blasco Nunez reached the

depoblado, or desert of Paltos, which stretches towards the north for

many a dreary league.  The ground, intersected by numerous streams, has

the character of a great quagmire, and men and horses floundered about

in the stagnant waters, or with difficulty worked their way over the

marsh, or opened a passage through the tangled underwood that shot up

in rank luxuriance from the surface.  The wayworn horses, without food,

except such as they could pick up in the wilderness, were often spent

with travel, and, becoming unserviceable, were left to die on the road,

with their hamstrings cut, that they might be of no use to the enemy;

though more frequently they were despatched to afford a miserable

banquet to their masters.10  Many of the men now fainted by the way

from mere exhaustion, or loitered in the woods, unable to keep up with

the march.  And woe to the straggler who fell into the hands of Carbajal,

at least if he had once belonged to the party of Pizarro.  The mere

suspicion of treason sealed his doom with the unrelenting soldier.11



The sufferings of Pizarro and his troop were scarcely less than those of

the viceroy; though they were somewhat mitigated by the natives of the

country, who, with ready instinct, discerned which party was the

strongest, and, of course, the most to be feared.  But, with every

alleviation, the chieftain's sufferings were terrible.  It was repeating the

dismal scenes of the expedition to the Amazon.  The soldiers of the

Conquest must be admitted to have purchased their triumphs dearly.



Yet the viceroy had one source of disquietude, greater, perhaps, than any

arising from physical suffering.  This was the distrust of his own

followers.  There were several of the principal cavaliers in his suite

whom he suspected of being in correspondence with the enemy, and even

of designing to betray him into their hands.  He was so well convinced of

this, that he caused two of these officers to be put to death on the march;

and their dead bodies, as they lay by the roadside, meeting the eye of the

soldier, told him that there were others to be feared in these frightful

solitudes besides the enemy in his rear.12



Another cavalier, who held the chief command under the viceroy, was

executed, after a more formal investigation of his case, at the first place

where the army halted.  At this distance of time, it is impossible to

determine how far the suspicions of Blasco Nunez were founded on

truth.  The judgments of contemporaries are at variance.13  In times of

political ferment, the opinion of the writer is generally determined by the

complexion of his party.  To judge from the character of Blasco Nunez,

jealous and irritable, we might suppose him to have acted without

sufficient cause.  But this consideration is counterbalanced by that of the

facility with which his followers swerved from their allegiance to their

commander, who seems to have had so light a hold on their affections,

that they were shaken off by the least reverse of fortune.  Whether his

suspicions were well or ill founded, the effect was the same on the mind

of the viceroy.  With an enemy in his rear whom he dared not fight, and

followers whom he dared not trust, the cup of his calamities was nearly

full.



At length, he issued forth on firm ground, and, passing through

Tomebamba, Blasco Nunez reentered his northern capital of Quito.  But

his reception was not so cordial as that which he had before experienced.

He now came as a fugitive, with a formidable enemy in pursuit; and he

was soon made to feel that the surest way to receive support is not to

need it.



Shaking from his feet the dust of the disloyal city, whose superstitious

people were alive to many an omen that boded his approaching ruin,14

the unfortunate commander held on his way towards Pastos, in the

jurisdiction of Benalcazar.  Pizarro and his forces entered Quito not long

after, disappointed, that, with all his diligence, the enemy still eluded his

pursuit.  He halted only to breathe his men, and, declaring that "he would

follow up the viceroy to the North Sea but he would overtake him," 15

he resumed his march.  At Pastos, he nearly accomplished his object.

His advance-guard came up with Blasco Nunez as the latter was halting

on the opposite bank of a rivulet.  Pizarro's men, fainting from toil and

heat, staggered feebly to the water-side, to slake their burning thirst, and

it would have been easy for the viceroy's troops, refreshed by repose, and

superior in number to their foes, to have routed them.  But Blasco Nunez

could not bring his soldiers to the charge.  They had fled so long before

their enemy, that the mere sight of him filled their hearts with panic, and

they would have no more thought of turning against him than the hare

would turn against the hound that pursues her.  Their safety, they felt,

was to fly, not to fight, and they profited by the exhaustion of their

pursuers only to quicken their retreat.



Gonzalo Pizarro continued the chase some leagues beyond Pastos; when,

finding himself carried farther than he desired into the territories of

Benalcazar, and not caring to encounter this formidable captain at

disadvantage, he came to a halt, and, notwithstanding his magnificent

vaunt about the North Sea, ordered a retreat, and made a rapid

countermarch on Quito.  Here he found occupation in repairing the

wasted spirits of his troops, and in strengthening himself with fresh

reinforcements, which much increased his numbers; though these were

again diminished by a body that he detached under Carbajal to suppress

an insurrection, which he now learned had broken out in the south.  It

was headed by Diego Centeno, one of his own officers, whom he had

established in La Plata, the inhabitants of which place had joined in the

revolt and raised the standard for the Crown.  With the rest of his forces,

Pizarro resolved to remain at Quito, waiting the hour when the viceroy

would reenter his dominions; as the tiger crouches by some spring in the

wilderness, patiently waiting the return of his victims.



Meanwhile Blasco Nunez had pushed forward his retreat to Popayan, the

capital of Benalcazar's province.  Here he was kindly received by the

people; and his soldiers, reduced by desertion and disease to one fifth of

their original number, rested from the unparalleled fatigues of a march

which had continued for more than two hundred leagues.16  It was not

long before he was joined by Cabrera, Benalcazar's lieutenant with a

stout reinforcement, and, soon after, by that chieftain himself.  His whole

force now amounted to near four hundred men, most of them in good

condition, and well trained in the school of American warfare.  His own

men were sorely deficient both in arms and ammunition; and he set about

repairing the want by building furnaces for manufacturing arquebuses

and pikes.17--One familiar with the history of these times is surprised to

see the readiness with which the Spanish adventurers turned their hands

to various trades and handicrafts usually requiring a long apprenticeship.

They displayed the dexterity so necessary to settlers in a new country,

where every man must become in some degree his own artisan.  But this

state of things, however favorable to the ingenuity of the artist, is not

very propitious to the advancement of the art; and there can be little

doubt that the weapons thus made by the soldiers of Blasco Nunez were

of the most rude and imperfect construction.



As week after week rolled away, Gonzalo Pizarro, though fortified with

the patience of a Spanish soldier, felt uneasy at the protracted stay of

Blasco Nunez in the north, and he resorted to stratagem to decoy him

from his retreat.  He marched out of Quito with the greater part of his

forces, pretending that he was going to support his lieutenant in the

south, while he left a garrison in the city under the command of Puelles,

the same officer who had formerly deserted from the viceroy.  These

tidings he took care should be conveyed to the enemy's camp.  The

artifice succeeded as he wished.  Blasco Nunez and his followers,

confident in their superiority over Puelles, did not hesitate for a moment

to profit by the supposed absence of Pizarro.  Abandoning Popayan, the

viceroy, early in January, 1546, moved by rapid marches towards the

south.  But before he reached the place of his destination, he became

appraised of the snare into which he had been drawn.  He communicated

the fact to his officers; but he had already suffered so much from

suspense, that his only desire now was, to bring his quarrel with Pizarro

to the final arbitrament of arms.



That chief, meanwhile, had been well informed, through his spies, of the

viceroy's movements.  On learning the departure of the latter from

Popayan, he had reentered Quito, joined his forces with those of Puelles,

and, issuing from the capital, had taken up a strong position about three

leagues to the north, on a high ground that commanded a stream, across

which the enemy must pass.  It was not long before the latter came in

sight, and Blasco Nunez, as night began to fall, established himself on

the opposite bank of the rivulet.  It was so near to the enemy's quarters,

that the voices of the sentinels could be distinctly heard in the opposite

camps, and they did not fail to salute one another with the epithet of

"traitors."  In these civil wars, as we have seen, each party claimed for

itself the exclusive merit of loyalty.18



But Benalcazar soon saw that Pizarro's position was too strong to be

assailed with any chance of success.  He proposed, therefore, to the

viceroy, to draw off his forces secretly in the night; and, making a detour

round the hills, to fall on the enemy's rear, where he would be least

prepared to receive them.  The counsel was approved; and, no sooner

were the two hosts shrouded from each other's eyes by the darkness,

than, leaving his camp-fires burning to deceive the enemy, Blasco Nunez

broke up his quarters, and began his circuitous march in the direction of

Quito.  But either he had been misinformed, or his guides misled him; for

the roads proved so impracticable, that he was compelled to make a

circuit of such extent, that dawn broke before he drew near the point of

attack.  Finding that he must now abandon the advantage of a surprise, he

pressed forward to Quito, where he arrived with men and horses sorely

fatigued by a night-march of eight leagues, from a point which, by the

direct route, would not have exceeded three.  It was a fatal error on the

eve of an engagement.19



He found the capital nearly deserted by the men.  They had all joined the

standard of Pizarro; for they had now caught the general spirit of

disaffection, and looked upon that chief as their protector from the

oppressive ordinances.  Pizarro was the representative of the people.

Greatly moved at this desertion, the unhappy viceroy, lifting his hands to

heaven, exclaimed, --"Is it thus, Lord, that you abandonest thy servants?"

The women and children came out, and in vain offered him food, of

which he stood obviously in need, asking him, at the same time, "Why he

had come there to die?"  His followers, with more indifference than their

commander, entered the houses of the inhabitants, and unceremoniously

appropriated whatever they could find to appease the cravings of

appetite.



Benalcazar, who saw the temerity of giving battle, in their present

condition, recommended the viceroy to try the effect of negotiation, and

offered himself to go to the enemy's camp, and arrange, if possible, terms

of accommodation with Pizarro.  But Blasco Nunez, if he desponded for

a moment, had now recovered his wonted constancy, and he proudly

replied,--"There is no faith to be kept with traitors.  We have come to

fight, not to parley; and we must do our duty like good and loyal

cavaliers.  I will do mine," he continued, "and be assured I will be the

first man to break a lance with the enemy." 20



He then called his troops together, and addressed to them a few words

preparatory to marching.  "You are all brave men," he said, "and loyal to

your sovereign.  For my own part, I hold life as little in comparison with

my duty to my prince.  Yet let us not distrust our success; the Spaniard,

in a good cause, has often overcome greater odds than these.  And we are

fighting for the right; it is the cause of God,--the cause of God," 21 he

concluded, and the soldiers, kindled by his generous ardor, answered him

with huzzas that went to the heart of the unfortunate commander, little

accustomed of late to this display of enthusiasm.



It was the eighteenth of January, 1546, when Blasco Nunez marched out

at the head of his array, from the ancient city of Quito.  He had

proceeded but a mile,22 when he came in view of the enemy, formed

along the crest of some high lands, which, by a gentle swell, rose

gradually from the plains of Anaquito.  Gonzalo Pizarro, greatly

chagrined on ascertaining the departure of the viceroy, early in the

morning, had broken up his camp, and directed his march on the capital,

fully resolved that his enemy should not escape him.



The viceroy's troops, now coming to a halt, were formed in order of

battle.  A small body of arquebusiers was stationed in the advance to

begin the fight.  The remainder of that corps was distributed among the

spearmen, who occupied the centre, protected on the flanks by the horse

drawn up in two nearly equal squadrons.  The cavalry amounted to about

one hundred and forty, being little inferior to that on the other side,

though the whole number of the viceroy's forces, being less than four

hundred, did not much exceed the half of his rival's.  On the right, and in

front of the royal banner, Blasco Nunez, supported by thirteen chosen

cavaliers, took his station, prepared to head the attack.



Pizarro had formed his troops in a corresponding manner with that of his

adversary.  They mustered about seven hundred in all, well appointed, in

good condition, and officered by the best knights in Peru.23  As,

notwithstanding his superiority of numbers, Pizarro, did not seem

inclined to abandon his advantageous position, Blasco Nunez gave

orders to advance.  The action commenced with the arquebusiers, and in

a few moments the dense clouds of smoke, rolling over the field,

obscured every object; for it was late in the day when the action began,

and the light was rapidly fading.



The infantry, now leveling their pikes, advanced under cover of the

smoke, and were soon hotly engaged with the opposite files of spearmen.

Then came the charge of the cavalry, which--notwithstanding they were

thrown into some disorder by the fire of Pizarro's arquebusiers, far

superior in number to their own--was conducted with such spirit that the

enemy's horse were compelled to reel and fall back before it.  But it was

only to recoil with greater violence, as, like an overwhelming wave,

Pizarro's troopers rushed on their foes, driving them along the slope, and

bearing down man and horse in indiscriminate ruin.  Yet these, in turn, at

length rallied, cheered on by the cries and desperate efforts of their

officers.  The lances were shivered, and they fought hand to hand with

swords and battle-axes mingled together in wild confusion.  But the

struggle was of no long duration; for, though the numbers were nearly

equal, the viceroy's cavalry, jaded by the severe march of the previous

night,24 were no match for their antagonists.  The ground was strewn

with the wreck of their bodies; and horses and riders, the dead and the

dying, lay heaped on one another.  Cabrera, the brave lieutenant of

Benalcazar, was slain, and that commander was thrown under his horse's

feet, covered with wounds, and left for dead on the field.  Alvarez, the

judge, was mortally wounded.  Both he and his colleague Cepeda were in

the action, though ranged on opposite sides, fighting as if they had been

bred to arms, not to the peaceful profession of the law.



Yet Blasco Nunez and his companions maintained a brave struggle on

the right of the field.  The viceroy had kept his word by being the first to

break his lance against the enemy, and by a well-directed blow had borne

a cavalier, named Alonso de Montalvo, clean out of his saddle.  But he

was at length overwhelmed by numbers, and, as his companions, one

after another, fell by his side, he was left nearly unprotected.  He was

already wounded, when a blow on the head from the battle-axe of a

soldier struck him from his horse, and he fell stunned on the ground.

Had his person been known, he might have been taken alive, but he wore

a sobre-vest of Indian cotton over his armour, which concealed the

military order of St. James, and the other badges of his rank.25



His person, however, was soon recognized by one of Pizarro's followers,

who, not improbably, had once followed the viceroy's banner.  The

soldier immediately pointed him out to the Licentiate Carbajal.  This

person was the brother of the cavalier whom, as the reader may

remember, Blasco Nunez had so rashly put to death in his palace at

Lima.  The licentiate had afterwards taken service under Pizarro, and,

with several of his kindred, was pledged to take vengeance on the

viceroy.  Instantly riding up, he taunted the fallen commander with the

murder of his brother, and was in the act of dismounting to despatch him

with his own hand, when Puelles remonstrating on this, as an act of

degradation, commanded one of his attendants, a black slave, to cut off

the viceroy's head.  This the fellow executed with a single stroke of his

sabre, while the wretched man, perhaps then dying of his wounds, uttered

no word, but with eyes imploringly turned up towards heaven, received

the fatal blow.26  The head was then borne aloft on a pike, and some

were brutal enough to pluck out the grey hairs from the beard and set

them in their caps, as grisly trophies of their victory.27  The fate of the

day was now decided.  Yet still the infantry made a brave stand, keeping

Pizarro's horse at bay with their bristling array of pikes.  But their

numbers were thinned by the arquebusiers; and, thrown into disorder,

they could no longer resist the onset of the horse, who broke into their

column, and soon scattered and drove them off the ground.  The pursuit

was neither long nor bloody; for darkness came on, and Pizarro bade his

trumpets sound, to call his men together under their banners.



Though the action lasted but a short time, nearly one third of the

viceroy's troops had perished.  The loss of their opponents was

inconsiderable.28  Several of the vanquished cavaliers took refuge in the

churches of Quito.  But they were dragged from the sanctuary, and some

---probably those who had once espoused the cause of Pizarro--were led

to execution, and others banished to Chili.  The greater part were

pardoned by the conqueror.  Benalcazar, who recovered from his

wounds, was permitted to return to his government, on condition of no

more bearing arms against Pizarro.  His troops were invited to take

service under the banner of the victor, who, however, never treated them

with the confidence shown to his ancient partisans.  He was greatly

displeased at the indignities offered to the viceroy; whose mangled

remains he caused to be buried with the honors due to his rank in the

cathedral of Quito.  Gonzalo Pizarro, attired in black, walked as chief

mourner in the procession.---It was usual with the Pizarros, as we have

seen, to pay these obituary honors to their victims.29



Such was the sad end of Blasco Nunez Vela, first viceroy of Peru.  It was

less than two years since he had set foot in the country, a period of

unmitigated disaster and disgrace.  His misfortunes may be imputed

partly to circumstances, and partly to his own character.  The minister of

an odious and oppressive law, he was intrusted with no discretionary

power in the execution of it.30  Yet every man may, to a certain extent,

claim the right to such a power; since, to execute a commission, which

circumstances show must certainly defeat the object for which it was

designed, would be absurd.  But it requires sagacity to determine the

existence of such a contingency, and moral courage to assume the

responsibility of acting on it.  Such a crisis is the severest test of

character.  To dare to disobey from a paramount sense of duty is a

paradox that a little soul can hardly comprehend.  Unfortunately, Blasco

Nunez was a pedantic martinet, a man of narrow views, who could not

feel himself authorized under any circumstances to swerve from the letter

of the law.  Puffed up by his brief authority, moreover, he considered

opposition to the ordinances as treason to himself; and thus, identifying

himself with his commission, he was prompted by personal feelings,

quite as much as by those of a public and patriotic nature.



Neither was the viceroy's character of a kind that tended to mitigate the

odium of his measures, and reconcile the people to their execution.  It

afforded a strong contrast to that of his rival, Pizarro, whose frank,

chivalrous bearing, and generous confidence in his followers, made him

universally popular, blinding their judgments, and giving to the worse

the semblance of the better cause.  Blasco Nunez, on the contrary,

irritable and suspicious, placed himself in a false position with all whom

he approached; for a suspicious temper creates an atmosphere of distrust

around it that kills every kindly affection.  His first step was to alienate

the members of the Audience who were sent to act in concert with him.

But this was their fault as well as his, since they were as much too lax, as

he was too severe, in the interpretation of the law.31  He next alienated

and outraged the people whom he was appointed to govern.  And, lastly,

he disgusted his own friends, and too often turned them into enemies; so

that, in his final struggle for power and for existence, he was obliged to

rely on the arm of the stranger.  Yet in the catalogue of his qualities we

must not pass in silence over his virtues.  There are two to the credit of

which he is undeniably entitled,--a loyalty, which shone the brighter

amidst the general defection around him, and a constancy under

misfortune, which might challenge the respect even of his enemies.  But

with the most liberal allowance for his merits, it can scarcely be doubted

that a person more incompetent to the task assigned him could not have

been found in Castile.32



The victory of Anaquito was received with general joy in the

neighboring capital; all the cities of Peru looked on it as sealing the

downfall of the detested ordinances, and the name of Gonzalo Pizarro

was sounded from one end of the country to the other as that of its

deliverer.  That chief continued to prolong his stay in Quito during the

wet season, dividing his time between the licentious pleasures of the

reckless adventurer and the cares of business that now pressed on him as

ruler of the state.  His administration was stained with fewer acts of

violence than might have been expected from the circumstances of his

situation.  So long as Carbajal, the counsellor in whom he unfortunately

placed greatest reliance, was absent, Gonzalo sanctioned no execution, it

was observed, but according to the forms of law.33  He rewarded his

followers by new grants of land, and detached several on expeditions, to

no greater distance, however, than would leave it in his power readily to

recall them.  He made various provisions for the welfare of the natives,

and some, in particular, for instructing them in the Christian faith.  He

paid attention to the faithful collection of the royal dues, urging on the

colonists that they should deport themselves so as to conciliate the

goodwill of the Crown, and induce a revocation of the ordinances.  His

administration, in short, was so conducted, that even the austere Gasca,

his successor, allowed "it was a good government,--for a tyrant." 34



At length, in July, 1546, the new governor bade adieu to Quito, and,

leaving there a sufficient garrison under his officer Puelles, began his

journey to the south.  It was a triumphal progress, and everywhere he

was received on the road with enthusiasm by the people.  At Truxillo, the

citizens came out in a body to welcome him, and the clergy chanted

anthems in his honor, extolling him as the "victorious prince," and

imploring the Almighty "to lengthen his days, and give him honor."35

At Lima, it was proposed to clear away some of the buildings, and open

a new street for his entrance, which might ever after bear the name of the

victor.  But the politic chieftain declined this flattering tribute, and

modestly preferred to enter the city by the usual way.  A procession was

formed of the citizens, the soldiers, and the clergy, and Pizarro made his

entry into the capital with two of his principal captains on foot, holding

the reins of his charger, while the archbishop of Lima, and the bishops of

Cuzco, Quito, and Bogota, the last of whom had lately come to the city

to be consecrated, rode by his side.  The streets were strewn with

boughs, the walls of the houses hung with showy tapestries, and

triumphal arches were thrown over the way in honor of the victor.  Every

balcony, veranda, and house-top was crowded with spectators, who sent

up huzzas, loud and long, saluting the victorious soldier with the titles of

"Liberator, and Protector of the people."  The bells rang out their joyous

peal, as on his former entrance into the capital; and amidst strains of

enlivening music, and the blithe sounds of jubilee, Gonzalo held on his

way to the palace of his brother.  Peru was once more placed under the

dynasty of the Pizarros.36



Deputies came from different parts of the country, tending the

congratulations of their respective cities; and every one eagerly urged his

own claims to consideration for the services he had rendered in the

revolution.  Pizarro, at the same time, received the welcome intelligence

of the success of his arms in the south.  Diego Centeno, as before stated,

had there raised the standard of rebellion, or rather, of loyalty to his

sovereign.  He had made himself master of La Plata, and the spirit of

insurrection had spread over the broad province of Charcas.  Carbajal,

who had been sent against him from Quito, after repairing to Lima, had

passed at once to Cuzco, and there, strengthening his forces, had

descended by rapid marches on the refractory district.  Centeno did not

trust himself in the field against this formidable champion.  He retreated

with his troops into the fastnesses of the sierra.  Carbajal pursued,

following on his track with the pertinacity of a bloodhound; over

mountain and moor, through forests and dangerous ravines, allowing him

no respite, by day or by night.  Eating, drinking, sleeping in his saddle,

the veteran, eighty years of age, saw his own followers tire one after

another, while he urged on the chase, like the wild huntsman of Burger,

as if endowed with an unearthly frame, incapable of fatigue!  During this

terrible pursuit, which continued for more than two hundred leagues over

a savage country, Centeno found himself abandoned by most of his

followers.  Such of them as fell into Carbajal's hands were sent to speedy

execution; for that inexorable chief had no mercy on those who had been

false to their party.37  At length, Centeno, with a handful of men, arrived

on the borders of the Pacific, and there, separating from one another,

they provided, each in the best way he could, for their own safety.  Their

leader found an asylum in a cave in the mountains, where he was secretly

fed by an Indian curaca, till the time again for him to unfurl the standard

of revolt.38



Carbajal, after some further decisive movements, which fully established

the ascendency of Pizarro over the south, returned in triumph to La Plata.

There he occupied himself with working the silver mines of Potosi, in

which a vein, recently opened, promised to make richer returns than any

yet discovered in Mexico or Peru;39 and he was soon enabled to send

large remittances to Lima, deducting no stinted commission for himself,-

-for the cupidity of the lieutenant was equal to his cruelty.



Gonzalo Pizarro was now undisputed master of Peru.  From Quito to the

northern confines of Chili, the whole country acknowledged his

authority.  His fleet rode triumphant on the Pacific, and gave him the

command of every city and hamlet on its borders.  His admiral,

Hinojosa, a discreet and gallant officer, had secured him Panama, and,

marching across the Isthmus, had since obtained for him the possession

of Nombre de Dios,--the principal key of communication with Europe.

His forces were on an excellent footing, including the flower of the

warriors who had fought under his brother, and who now eagerly rallied

under the name of Pizarro; while the tide of wealth that flowed in from

the mines of Potosi supplied him with the resources of an European

monarch.



The new governor now began to assume a state correspondent with his

full-blown fortunes.  He was attended by a body-guard of eighty soldiers.

He dined always in public, and usually with not less than a hundred

guests at table.  He even affected, it was said, the most decided etiquette

of royalty, giving his hand to be kissed, and allowing no one, of whatever

rank, to be seated in his presence.40  But this is denied by others.  It

would not be strange that a vain man like Pizarro, with a superficial,

undisciplined mind, when he saw himself thus raised from an humble

condition to the highest post in the land, should be somewhat intoxicated

by the possession of power, and treat with superciliousness those whom

he had once approached with deference.  But one who had often seen

him in his prosperity assures us, that it was not so, and that the governor

continued to show the same frank and soldierlike bearing as before his

elevation, mingling on familiar terms with his comrades, and displaying

the same qualities which had hitherto endeared him to the people.41



However this may be, it is certain there were not wanting those who

urged him to throw off his allegiance to the Crown, and set up an

independent government for himself.  Among these was his lieutenant,

Carbajal, whose daring spirit never shrunk from following things to their

consequences.  He plainly counselled Pizarro to renounce his allegiance

at once.  "In fact, you have already done so," he said.  "You have been in

arms against a viceroy, have driven him from the country, beaten and

slain him in battle.  What favor, or even mercy, can you expect from the

Crown?  You have gone too far either to halt, or to recede.  You must go

boldly on, proclaim yourself king; the troops, the people, will support

you."  And he concluded, it is said, by advising him to marry the Coya,

the female representative of the Incas, that the two races might

henceforth repose in quiet under a common sceptre! 42



The advice of the bold counsellor was, perhaps, the most politic that

could have been given to Pizarro under existing circumstances.  For he

was like one who had heedlessly climbed far up a dizzy precipice,--too

far to descend safely, while he had no sure hold where he was.  His only

chance was to climb still higher, till he had gained the summit.  But

Gonzalo Pizarro shrunk from the attitude, in which this placed him, of

avowed rebellion.  Notwithstanding the criminal course into which he

had been, of late, seduced, the sentiment of loyalty was too deeply

implanted in his bosom to be wholly eradicated.  Though in arms against

the measures and ministers of his sovereign, he was not prepared to raise

the sword against the sovereign himself.  He, doubtless, had conflicting

emotion in his bosom; like Macbeth, and many a less noble nature,



'"Would not play false,

And yet would wrongly win."



And however grateful to his vanity might be the picture of the airdrawn

sceptre thus painted to his imagination, he had not the audacity --we

may, perhaps, say, the criminal ambition--to attempt to grasp it.



Even at this very moment, when urged to this desperate extremity, he

was preparing a mission to Spain, in order to vindicate the course he had

taken, and to solicit an amnesty for the past, with a full confirmation of

his authority, as successor to his brother in the government of Peru.--

Pizarro did not read the future with the calm, prophetic eye of Carbajal.



Among the biographical notices of the writers on Spanish colonial

affairs, the name of Herrera, who has done more for this vast subject

than any other author, should certainly not be omitted.  His account of

Peru takes its proper place in his great work, the Historia General de las

lndias, according to the chronological plan on which that history is

arranged.  But as it suggests reflections not different in character from

those suggested by other portions of the work, I shall take the liberty to

refer the reader to the Postscript to Book Third of the Conquest of

Mexico, for a full account of these volumes and their learned author.



Another chronicler, to whom I have been frequently indebted in the

progress of the narrative, is Francisco Lopez de Gomara.  The reader

will also find a notice of this author in the Conquest of Mexico, Book 5,

Postscript.  But as the remarks on his writings are there confined to his

Cronica de Nueva Espana, it may be well to add here some reflections on

his greater work, Historia de las Indias, in which the Peruvian story bears

a conspicuous part.



The "History of the Indies" is intended to give a brief view of the whole

range of Spanish conquest in the islands and on the American continent,

as far as had been achieved by the middle of the sixteenth century.  For

this account, Gomara, though it does not appear that he ever visited the

New World, was in a situation that opened to him the best means of

information.  He was well acquainted with the principal men of the time,

and gathered the details of their history from their own lips; while, from

his residence at court, he was in possession of the state of opinion there,

and of the impression made by passing events on those most competent

to judge of them.  He was thus enabled to introduce into his work many

interesting particulars, not to be found in other records of the period.  His

range of inquiry extended beyond the mere doings of the Conquerors,

and led him to a survey of the general resources of the countries he

describes, and especially of their physical aspect and productions.  The

conduct of his work, no less than its diction, shows the cultivated

scholar, practised in the art of composition.  Instead of the naivete,

engaging, but childlike, of the old military chroniclers, Gomara handles

his various topics with the shrewd and piquant criticism of a man of the

world; while his descriptions are managed with a comprehensive brevity

that forms the opposite to the long-winded and rambling paragraphs of

the monkish annalist.  These literary merits, combined with the

knowledge of the writer's opportunities for information, secured his

productions from the oblivion which too often awaits the unpublished

manuscript; and he had the satisfaction to see them pass into more than

one edition in his own day.  Yet they do not bear the highest stamp of

authenticity.  The author too readily admits accounts into his pages

which are not supported by contemporary testimony.  This he does, not

from credulity, for his mind rather leans in an opposite direction, but

from a Want, apparently, of the true spirit of historic conscientiousness.

The imputation of carelessness in his statements--to use a temperate

phrase--was brought against Gomara in his own day; and Garcilasso tells

us, that, when called to account by some of the Peruvian cavaliers for

misstatements which bore hard on themselves, the historian made but an

awkward explanation.  This is a great blemish on his productions, and

renders them of far less value to the modern compiler, who seeks for the

well of truth undefiled, than many an humbler but less unscrupulous

chronicle.



There is still another authority used in this work, Gonzalo Fernandez de

Oviedo, of whom I have given an account elsewhere; and the reader

curious in the matter will permit me to refer him for a critical notice of

his life and writings to the Conquest of Mexico, Book 4, Postscript.--His

account of Peru is incorporated into his great work, Natural & General

Historia de las lndias, MS., where it forms the forty-sixth and forty-

seventh books.  It extends from Pizarro's landing at Tumbez to

Almagro's return from Chili, and thus covers the entire portion of what

may be called the conquest of the country.  The style of its execution,

corresponding with that of the residue of the work to which it belongs,

affords no ground for criticism different from that already passed on the

general character of Oviedo's writings.



This eminent person was at once a scholar and a man of the world.

Living much at court, and familiar with persons of the highest distinction

in Castile, he yet passed much of his time in the colonies, and thus added

the fruits of personal experience to what he had gained from the reports

of others.  His curiosity was indefatigable, extending to every department

of natural science, as well as to the civil and personal history of the

colonists.  He was, at once, their Pliny and their Tacitus.  His works

abound in portraitures of character, sketched with freedom and

animation.  His reflections are piquant, and often rise to a philosophic

tone, which discards the usual trammels of the age; and the progress of

the story is varied by a multiplicity of personal anecdotes, that give a

rapid insight into the characters of the parties.



With his eminent qualifications, and with a social position that

commanded respect, it is strange that so much of his writings-the whole

of his great Historia de las Indias, and his curious Quincuagenas--should

be so long suffered to remain in manuscript.  This is partly chargeable to

the caprice of fortune; for the History was more than once on the eve of

publication, and is even now understood to be prepared for the press.

Yet it has serious defects, which may have contributed to keep it in its

present form.  In its desultory and episodical style of composition, it

resembles rather notes for a great history, than history itself.  It may be

regarded in the light of commentaries, or as illustrations of the times.  In

that view his pages are of high worth, and have been frequently resorted

to by writers who have not too scrupulously appropriated the statements

of the old chronicler, with slight acknowledgments to their author.



It is a pity that Oviedo should have shown more solicitude to tell what

was new, than to ascertain how much of it was strictly true.  Among his

merits will scarcely be found that of historical accuracy.  And yet we

may find an apology for this, to some extent, in the fact, that his writings,

as already intimated, are not so much in the nature of finished

compositions, as of loose memoranda, where everything, rumor as well

as fact,--even the most contradictory rumors,--are all set down at

random, forming a miscellaneous heap of materials, of which the discreet

historian may avail himself to rear a symmetrical fabric on foundations

of greater strength and solidity.



Another author worthy of particular note is Pedro Cieza de Leon.  His

Cronica del Peru should more properly be styled an Itinerary, or rather

Geography, of Peru.  It gives a minute topographical view of the country

at the time of the Conquest; of its provinces and towns, both Indian and

Spanish; its flourishing sea-coast; its forests, valleys, and interminable

ranges of mountains in the interior; with many interesting particulars of

the existing population,--their dress, manners, architectural remains, and

public works, while, scattered here and there, may be found notices of

their early history and social polity.  It is, in short, a lively picture of the

country in its physical and moral relations, as it met the eye at the time of

the Conquest, and in that transition period when it was first subjected to

European influences.  The conception of a work, at so early a period, on

this philosophical plan, reminding us of that of Malte-Brun in our own

time,--parva componere magnis,-was, of itself, indicative of great

comprehensiveness of mind in its author.  It was a task of no little

difficulty, where there was yet no pathway opened by the labors of the

antiquarian; no hints from the sketch-book of the traveller, or the

measurements of the scientific explorer.  Yet the distances from place to

place are all carefully jotted down by the industrious compiler, and the

bearings of the different places and their peculiar features are exhibited

with sufficient precision, considering the nature of the obstacles he had

to encounter.  The literary execution of the work, moreover, is highly

respectable, sometimes even rich and picturesque; and the author

describes the grand and beautiful scenery of the Cordilleras with a

sensibility to its charms, not often found in the tasteless topographer, still

less often in the rude Conqueror.



Cieza de Leon came to the New World, as he informs us, at the early age

of thirteen.  But it is not till Gasca's time that we find his name enrolled

among the actors in the busy scenes of civil strife, when he accompanied

the president in his campaign against Gonzalo Pizarro.  His Chronicle,

or, at least, the notes for it, was compiled in such leisure as he could

snatch from his more stirring avocations; and after ten years from the

time he undertook it, the First Part--all we have---was completed in

1550, when the author had reached only the age of thirty-two.  It

appeared at Seville in 1553, and the following year at Antwerp; while an

Italian translation, printed at Rome, in 1555, attested the rapid celebrity

of the work.  The edition of Antwerp--the one used by me in this

compilation--is in the duodecimo form, exceedingly well printed, and

garnished with wood-cuts, in which Satan,-for the author had a full

measure of the ancient credulity,--with his usual bugbear

accompaniments frequently appears in bodily presence.  In the Preface,

Cieza announces his purpose to continue the work in three other parts,

illustrating respectively the ancient history of the country under the

Incas, its conquest by the Spaniards, and the civil wars which ensued.

He even gives, with curious minuteness, the contents of the several

books of the projected history.  But the First Part, as already noticed,

was alone completed; and the author, having returned to Spain, died

there in 1560, at the premature age of forty-two, without having covered

any portion of the magnificent ground-plan which he had thus

confidently laid out.  The deficiency is much to be regretted, considering

the talent of the writer, and his opportunities for personal observation.

But he has done enough to render us grateful for his labors.  By the vivid

delineation of scenes and scenery, as they were presented fresh to his

own eyes, he has furnished us with a background to the historic picture,--

the landscape, as it were, in which the personages of the time might be

more fitly portrayed.  It would have been impossible to exhibit the

ancient topography of the land so faithfully at a subsequent period, when

old things had passed away, and the Conqueror, breaking down the

landmarks of ancient civilization, had effaced many of the features even

of the physical aspect of the country, as it existed under the elaborate

culture of the Incas.


