






History Of The Conquest Of Peru



by William Hickling Prescott



Book 1



Introduction



View Of The Civilization Of The Incas



Chapter 1



Physical Aspect Of The Country--Sources Of Peruvian Civilization--

Empire Of The Incas--Royal Family--Nobility



Of the numerous nations which occupied the great American continent at

the time of its discovery by the Europeans, the two most advanced in

power and refinement were undoubtedly those of Mexico and Peru.  But,

though resembling one another in extent of civilization, they differed

widely as to the nature of it; and the philosophical student of his species

may feel a natural curiosity to trace the different steps by which these two

nations strove to emerge from the state of barbarism, and place

themselves on a higher point in the scale of humanity.--In a former work I

have endeavored to exhibit the institutions and character of the ancient

Mexicans, and the story of their conquest by the Spaniards.  The present

will be devoted to the Peruvians; and, if their history shall be found to

present less strange anomalies and striking contrasts than that of the

Aztecs, it may interest us quite as much by the pleasing picture it offers of

a well-regulated government and sober habits of industry under the

patriarchal sway of the Incas.



The empire of Peru, at the period of the Spanish invasion, stretched along

the Pacific from about the second degree north to the thirty-seventh

degree of south latitude; a line, also, which describes the western

boundaries of the modern republics of Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, and Chili.

Its breadth cannot so easily be determined; for, though bounded

everywhere by the great ocean on the west, towards the east it spread out,

in many parts, considerably beyond the mountains, to the confines of

barbarous states, whose exact position is undetermined, or whose names

are effaced from the map of history.  It is certain, however, that its breadth

was altogether disproportioned to its length.1



The topographical aspect of the country is very remarkable.  A strip of

land, rarely exceeding twenty leagues in width, runs along the coast, and

is hemmed in through its whole extent by a colossal range of mountains,

which, advancing from the Straits of Magellan, reaches its highest

elevation-indeed, the highest on the American continent--about the

seventeenth degree south, 2 and, after crossing the line, gradually subsides

into hills of inconsiderable magnitude, as it enters the isthmus of Panama.

This is the famous Cordillera of the Andes, or "copper mountains," 3 as

termed by the natives, though they might with more reason have been

called "mountains of gold." Arranged sometimes in a single line, though

more frequently in two or three lines running parallel or obliquely to each

other, they seem to the voyager on the ocean but one continuous chain;

while the huge volcanoes, which to the inhabitants of the tableland look

like solitary and independent masses, appear to aim only like so many

peaks of the same vast and magnificent range.  So immense is the scale on

which Nature works in these regions, that it is only when viewed from a

great distance, that the spectator can, in any degree, comprehend the

relation of the several parts to the stupendous whole.  Few of the works of

Nature, indeed, are calculated to produce impressions of higher sublimity

than the aspect of this coast, as it is gradually unfolded to the eye of the

mariner sailing on the distant waters of the Pacific; where mountain is

seen to rise above mountain, and Chimborazo, with its glorious canopy of

snow, glittering far above the clouds, crowns the whole as with a celestial

diadem.4



The face of the country would appear to be peculiarly unfavorable to the

purposes both of agriculture and of internal communication.  The sandy

strip along the coast, where rain never falls, is fed only by a few scanty

streams, that furnish a remarkable contrast to the vast volumes of water

which roll down the eastern sides of the Cordilleras into the Atlantic.  The

precipitous steeps of the sierra, with its splintered sides of porphyry and

granite, and its higher regions wrapped in snows that never melt under the

fierce sun of the equator, unless it be from the desolating action of its own

volcanic fires, might seem equally unpropitious to the labors of the

husbandman.  And all communication between the parts of the long-

extended territory might be thought to be precluded by the savage

character of the region, broken up by precipices, furious torrents, and

impassable quebradas,--those hideous rents in the mountain chain, whose

depths the eye of the terrified traveller, as he winds along his aerial

pathway, vainly endeavors to fathom.5  Yet the industry, we might almost

say, the genius, of the Indian was sufficient to overcome all these

impediments of Nature.



By a judicious system of canals and subterraneous aqueducts, the waste

places on the coast were refreshed by copious streams, that clothed them

in fertility and beauty.  Terraces were raised upon the steep sides of the

Cordillera; and, as the different elevations had the effect of difference of

latitude, they exhibited in regular gradation every variety of vegetable

form, from the stimulated growth of the tropics, to the temperate products

of a northern clime; while flocks of llamas--the Peruvian sheep--wandered

with their shepherds over the broad, snow-covered wastes on the crests of

the sierra, which rose beyond the limits of cultivation.  An industrious

population settled along the lofty regions of the plateaus, and towns and

hamlets, clustering amidst orchards and widespreading gardens, seemed

suspended in the air far above the ordinary elevation of the clouds.  6

Intercourse was maintained between these numerous settlements by means

of great roads which traversed the mountain passes, and opened an easy

communication between the capital and the remotest extremities of the

empire.



The source of this civilization is traced to the valley of Cuzco, the central

region of Peru, as its name implies.7  The origin of the Peruvian empire,

like the origin of all nations, except the very few which, like our own,

have had the good fortune to date from a civilized period and people, is

lost in the mists of fable, which, in fact, have settled as darkly round its

history as round that of any nation, ancient or modern, in the Old World.

According to the tradition most familiar to the European scholar, the time

was, when the ancient races of the continent were all plunged in

deplorable barbarism; when they worshipped nearly every object in nature

indiscriminately; made war their pastime, and feasted on the flesh of their

slaughtered captives.  The Sun, the great luminary and parent of mankind,

taking compassion on their degraded condition, sent two of his children,

Manco Capac and Mama Oello Huaco, to gather the natives into

communities, and teach them the arts of civilized life.  The celestial pair,

brother and sister, husband and wife, advanced along the high plains in

the neighborhood of Lake Titicaca, to about the sixteenth degree south.

They bore with them a golden wedge, and were directed to take up their

residence on the spot where the sacred emblem should without effort sink

into the ground.  They proceeded accordingly but a short distance, as far

as the valley of Cuzco, the spot indicated by the performance of the

miracle, since there the wedge speedily sank into the earth and

disappeared for ever.  Here the children of the Sun established their

residence, and soon entered upon their beneficent mission among the rude

inhabitants of the country; Manco Capac teaching the men the arts of

agriculture, and Mama Oello  8 initiating her own sex in the mysteries of

weaving and spinning.  The simple people lent a willing ear to the

messengers of Heaven, and, gathering together in considerable numbers,

laid the foundations of the city of Cuzco.  The same wise and benevolent

maxims, which regulated the conduct of the first Incas, 9 descended to

their successors, and under their mild sceptre a community gradually

extended itself along the broad surface of the table-land, which asserted

its superiority over the surrounding tribes.  Such is the pleasing picture of

the origin of the Peruvian monarchy, as portrayed by Garcilasso de la

Vega, the descendant of the Incas, and through him made familiar to the

European reader.10



But this tradition is only one of several current among the Peruvian

Indians, and probably not the one most generally received.  Another

legend speaks of certain white and bearded men, who, advancing from the

shores of Lake Titicaca, established an ascendancy over the natives, and

imparted to them the blessings of civilization.  It may remind us of the

tradition existing among the Aztecs in respect to Quetzalcoatl, the good

deity, who with a similar garb and aspect came up the great plateau from

the east on a like benevolent mission to the natives.  The analogy is the

more remarkable, as there is no trace of any communication with, or even

knowledge of, each other to be found in the two nations.11



The date usually assigned for these extraordinary events was about four

hundred years before the coming of the Spaniards, or early in the twelfth

century.12  But, however pleasing to the imagination, and however

popular, the legend of Manco Capac, it requires but little reflection to

show its improbability, even when divested of supernatural

accompaniments.  On the shores of Lake Titicaca extensive ruins exist at

the present day, which the Peruvians themselves acknowledge to be of

older date than the pretended advent of the Incas, and to have furnished

them with the models of their architecture.13  The date of their

appearance, indeed, is manifestly irreconcilable with their subsequent

history.  No account assigns to the Inca dynasty more than thirteen princes

before the Conquest.  But this number is altogether too small to have

spread over four hundred years, and would not carry back the foundations

of the monarchy, on any probable computation, beyond two centuries and

a half,-an antiquity not incredible in itself, and which, it may be remarked,

does not precede by more than half a century the alleged foundation of the

capital of Mexico.  The fiction of Manco Capac and his sister-wife was

devised, no doubt, at a later period, to gratify the vanity of the Peruvian

monarchs, and to give additional sanction to their authority by deriving it

from a celestial origin.



We may reasonably conclude that there existed in the country a race

advanced in civilization before the time of the Incas; and, in conformity

with nearly every tradition, we may derive this race from the

neighborhood of Lake Titicaca; 14 a conclusion strongly confirmed by the

imposing architectural remains which still endure, after the lapse of so

many years, on its borders.  Who this race were, and whence they came,

may afford a tempting theme for inquiry to the speculative antiquarian.

But it is a land of darkness that lies far beyond the domain of history.15



The same mists that hang round the origin of the Incas continue to settle

on their subsequent annals; and, so imperfect were the records employed

by the Peruvians, and so confused and contradictory their traditions, that

the historian finds no firm footing on which to stand till within a century

of the Spanish conquest.16  At first, the progress of the Peruvians seems

to have been slow, and almost imperceptible.  By their wise and temperate

policy, they gradually won over the neighboring tribes to their dominion,

as these latter became more and more convinced of the benefits of a just

and well-regulated government.  As they grew stronger, they were enabled

to rely more directly on force; but, still advancing under cover of the same

beneficent pretexts employed by their predecessors, they proclaimed

peace and civilization at the point of the sword.  The rude nations of the

country, without any principle of cohesion among themselves, fell one

after another before the victorious arm of the Incas.  Yet it was not till the

middle of the fifteenth century that the famous Topa Inca Yupanqui,

grandfather of the monarch who occupied the throne at the coming of the

Spaniards, led his armies across the terrible desert of Atacama, and,

penetrating to the southern region of Chili, fixed the permanent boundary

of his dominions at the river Maule.  His son, Huayna Capac, possessed of

ambition and military talent fully equal to his father's, marched along the

Cordillera towards the north, and, pushing his conquests across the

equator, added the powerful kingdom of Quito to the empire of Peru.17



The ancient city of Cuzco, meanwhile, had been gradually advancing in

wealth and population, till it had become the worthy metropolis of a great

and flourishing monarchy.  It stood in a beautiful valley on an elevated

region of the plateau, which, among the Alps, would have been buried in

eternal snows, but which within the tropics enjoyed a genial and

salubrious temperature.  Towards the north it was defended by a lofty

eminence, a spur of the great Cordillera; and the city was traversed by a

river, or rather a small stream, over which bridges of timber, covered with

heavy slabs of stone, furnished an easy means of communication with the

opposite banks.  The streets were long and narrow; the houses low, and

those of the poorer sort built of clay and reeds.  But Cuzco was the royal

residence, and was adorned with the ample dwellings of the great nobility;

and the massy fragments still incorporated in many of the modern edifices

bear testimony to the size and solidity of the ancient.18



The health of the city was promoted by spacious openings and squares, in

which a numerous population from the capital and the distant country

assembled to celebrate the high festivals of their religion.  For Cuzco was

the "Holy City"; 19 and the great temple of the Sun, to which pilgrims

resorted from the furthest borders of the empire, was the most magnificent

structure in the New World, and unsurpassed, probably, in the costliness

of its decorations by any building in the Old.



Towards the north, on the sierra or rugged eminence already noticed, rose

a strong fortress, the remains of which at the present day, by their vast

size, excite the admiration of the traveller.20 It was defended by a single

wall of great thickness, and twelve hundred feet long on the side facing

the city, where the precipitous character of the ground was of itself almost

sufficient for its defence.  On the other quarter, where the approaches

were less difficult, it was protected by two other semicircular walls of the

same length as the preceding.  They were separated, a considerable

distance from one another and from the fortress; and the intervening

ground was raised so that the walls afforded a breastwork for the troops

stationed there in times of assault.  The fortress consisted of three towers,

detached from one another.  One was appropriated to the Inca, and was

garnished with the sumptuous decorations befitting a royal residence,

rather than a military post.  The other two were held by the garrison,

drawn from the Peruvian nobles, and commanded by an officer of the

blood royal; for the position was of too great importance to be intrusted to

inferior hands.  The hill was excavated below the towers, and several

subterraneous galleries communicated with the city and the palaces of the

Inca.21



The fortress, the walls, and the galleries were all built of stone, the heavy

blocks of which were not laid in regular courses, but so disposed that the

small ones might fill up the interstices between the great.  They formed a

sort of rustic work, being rough-hewn except towards the edges, which

were finely wrought; and, though no cement was used, the several blocks

were adjusted with so much exactness and united so closely, that it was

impossible to introduce even the blade of a knife between them.22  Many

of these stones were of vast size; some of them being full thirty-eight feet

long, by eighteen broad, and six feet thick.23



We are filled with astonishment, when we consider, that these enormous

masses were hewn from their native bed and fashioned into shape, by a

people ignorant of the use of iron; that they were brought from quarries,

from four to fifteen leagues distant, 24 without the aid of beasts of burden;

were transported across rivers and ravines, raised to their elevated

position on the sierra, and finally adjusted there with the nicest accuracy,

without the knowledge of tools and machinery familiar to the European.

Twenty thousand men are said to have been employed on this great

structure, and fifty years consumed in the building.25  However this may

be, we see in it the workings of a despotism which had the lives and

fortunes of its vassals at its absolute disposal, and which, however mild in

its general character, esteemed these vassals, when employed in its

service, as lightly as the brute animals for which they served as a

substitute.



The fortress of Cuzco was but part of a system of fortifications established

throughout their dominions by the Incas.  This system formed a prominent

feature in their military policy; but before entering on this latter, it will

be proper to give the reader some view of their civil institutions and

scheme of government.



The sceptre of the Incas, if we may credit their historian, descended in

unbroken succession from father to son, through their whole dynasty.

Whatever we may think of this, it appears probable that the right of

inheritance might be claimed by the eldest son of the Coya, or lawful

queen, as she was styled, to distinguish her from the host of concubines

who shared the affections of the sovereign.26  The queen was further

distinguished, at least in later reigns, by the circumstance of being

selected from the sisters of the Inca, an arrangement which, however

revolting to the ideas of civilized nations, was recommended to the

Peruvians by its securing an heir to the crown of the pure heaven-born

race, uncontaminated by any mixture of earthly mould.27



In his early years, the royal offspring was intrusted to the care of the

amautas, or "wise men," as the teachers of Peruvian science were called,

who instructed him in such elements of knowledge as they possessed, and

especially in the cumbrous ceremonial of their religion, in which he was

to take a prominent part.  Great care was also bestowed on his military

education, of the last importance in a state which, with its professions of

peace and good-will, was ever at war for the acquisition of empire.



In this military school he was educated with such of the Inca nobles as

were nearly of his own age; for the sacred name of Inca--a fruitful source

of obscurity in their annals--was applied indifferently to all who

descended by the male line from the founder of the monarchy.28  At the

age of sixteen the pupils underwent a public examination, previous to

their admission to what may be called the order of chivalry.  This

examination was conducted by some of the oldest and most illustrious

Incas.  The candidates were required to show their prowess in the athletic

exercises of the warrior; in wrestling and boxing, in running such long

courses as fully tried their agility and strength, in severe fasts of several

days' duration, and in mimic combats, which, although the weapons were

blunted, were always attended with wounds, and sometimes with death.

During this trial, which lasted thirty days, the royal neophyte fared no

better than his comrades, sleeping on the bare ground, going unshod, and

wearing a mean attire,--a mode of life, it was supposed, which might tend

to inspire him with more sympathy with the destitute.  With all this show

of impartiality, however, it will probably be doing no injustice to the

judges to suppose that a politic discretion may have somewhat quickened

their perceptions of the real merits of the heir-apparent.



At the end of the appointed time, the candidates selected as worthy of the

honors of their barbaric chivalry were presented to the sovereign, who

condescended to take a principal part in the ceremony of inauguration.

He began with a brief discourse, in which, after congratulating the young

aspirants on the proficiency they had shown in martial exercises, he

reminded them of the responsibilities attached to their birth and station;

and, addressing them affectionately as "children of the Sun," he exhorted

them to imitate their great progenitor in his glorious career of beneficence

to mankind.  The novices then drew near, and, kneeling one by one before

the Inca, he pierced their ears with a golden bodkin; and this was suffered

to remain there till an opening had been made large enough for the

enormous pendants which were peculiar to their order, and which gave

them, with the Spaniards, the name of orejones.29  This ornament was so

massy in the ears of the sovereign, that the cartilage was distended by it

nearly to the shoulder, producing what seemed a monstrous deformity in

the eyes of the Europeans, though, under the magical influence of fashion,

it was regarded as a beauty by the natives.



When this operation was performed, one of the most venerable of the

nobles dressed the feet of the candidates in the sandals worn by the order,

which may remind us of the ceremony of buckling on the spurs of the

Christian knight.  They were then allowed to assume the girdle or sash

around the loins, corresponding with the toga virilis of the Romans, and

intimating that they had reached the season of manhood.  Their heads

were adorned with garlands of flowers, which, by their various colors,

were emblematic of the clemency and goodness that should grace the

character of every true warrior; and the leaves of an evergreen plant were

mingled with the flowers, to show that these virtues should endure without

end.30  The prince's head was further ornamented by a fillet, or tasselled

fringe, of a yellow color, made of the fine threads of the vicuna wool,

which encircled the forehead as the peculiar insignia of the heir apparent.

The great body of the Inca nobility next made their appearance, and,

beginning with those nearest of kin, knelt down before the prince, and did

him homage as successor to the crown.  The whole assembly then moved

to the great square of the capital, where songs, and dances, and other

public festivities closed the important ceremonial of the huaracu.31



The reader will be less surprised by the resemblance which this

ceremonial bears to the inauguration of a Christian knight in the feudal

ages, if he reflects that a similar analogy may be traced in the institutions

of other people more or less civilized; and that it is natural that nations,

occupied with the one great business of war, should mark the period,

when the preparatory education for it was ended, by similar characteristic

ceremonies.

Having thus honorably passed through his ordeal, the heir-apparent was

deemed worthy to sit in the councils of his father, and was employed in

offices of trust at home, or, more usually, sent on distant expeditions to

practise in the field the lessons which he had hitherto studied only in the

mimic theatre of war.  His first campaigns were conducted under the

renowned commanders who had grown grey in the service of his father;

until, advancing in years and experience, he was placed in command

himself, and, like Huayna Capac, the last and most illustrious of his line,

carried the banner of the rainbow, the armorial ensign of his house, far

over the borders, among the remotest tribes of the plateau.



The government of Peru was a despotism, mild in its character, but in its

form a pure and unmitigated despotism.  The sovereign was placed at an

immeasurable distance above his subjects.  Even the proudest of the Inca

nobility, claiming a descent from the same divine original as himself,

could not venture into the royal presence, unless barefoot, and bearing a

light burden on his shoulders in token of homage.32  As the

representative of the Sun, he stood at the head of the priesthood, and

presided at the most important of the religious festivals.33  He raised

armies, and usually commanded them in person.  He imposed taxes, made

laws, and provided for their execution by the appointment of judges,

whom he removed at pleasure.  He was the source from which every thing

flowed, all dignity, all power, all emolument.  He was, in short, in the well-

known phrase of the European despot, "himself the state." 34



The Inca asserted his claims as a superior being by assuming a pomp in

his manner of living well calculated to impose on his people.  His dress

was of the finest wool of the vicuna, richly dyed, and ornamented with a

profusion of gold and precious stones.  Round his head was wreathed a

turban of many-colored folds, called the llautu; and a tasselled fringe, like

that worn by the prince, but of a scarlet color, with two feathers of a rare

and curious bird, called the coraquenque, placed upright in it, were the

distinguishing insignia of royalty.  The birds from which these feathers

were obtained were found in a desert country among the mountains; and it

was death to destroy or to take them, as they were reserved for the

exclusive purpose of supplying the royal head-gear.  Every succeeding

monarch was provided with a new pair of these plumes, and his credulous

subjects fondly believed that only two individuals of the species had ever

existed to furnish the simple ornament for the diadem of the Incas.35



Although the Peruvian monarch was raised so far above the highest of his

subjects, he condescended to mingle occasionally with them, and took

great pains personally to inspect the condition of the humbler classes.  He

presided at some of the religious celebrations, and on these occasions

entertained the great nobles at his table, when he complimented them,

after the fashion of more civilized nations, by drinking the health of those

whom he most delighted to honor.36



But the most effectual means taken by the Incas for communicating with

their people were their progresses through the empire.  These were

conducted, at intervals of several years, with great state and magnificence.

The sedan, or litter, in which they travelled, richly emblazoned with gold

and emeralds, was guarded by a numerous escort.  The men who bore it

on their shoulders were provided by two cities, specially appointed for the

purpose.  It was a post to be coveted by no one, if, as is asserted, a fall

was punished by death.37  They travelled with ease and expedition,

halting at the tambos, or inns, erected by government along the route, and

occasionally at the royal palaces, which in the great towns afforded ample

accommodations to the whole of the monarch's retinue.  The noble roads

which traversed the table-land were lined with people who swept away the

stones and stubble from their surface, strewing them with sweet-scented

flowers, and vying with each other in carrying forward the baggage from

one village to another.  The monarch halted from time to time to listen to

the grievances of his subjects, or to settle some points which had been

referred to his decision by the regular tribunals.  As the princely train

wound its way along the mountain passes, every place was thronged with

spectators eager to catch a glimpse of their sovereign; and, when he raised

the curtains of his litter, and showed himself to their eyes, the air was rent

with acclamations as they invoked blessings on his head.38  Tradition

long commemorated the spots at which he halted, and the simple people

of the country held them in reverence as places consecrated by the

presence of an Inca.39



The royal palaces were on a magnificent scale, and, far from being

confined to the capital or a few principal towns, were scattered over all

the provinces of their vast empire.40  The buildings were low, but

covered a wide extent of ground.  Some of the apartments were spacious,

but they were generally small, and had no communication with one

another, except that they opened into a common square or court.  The

walls were made of blocks of stone of various sizes, like those described

in the fortress of Cuzco, rough-hewn, but carefully wrought near the line

of junction, which was scarcely visible to the eye.  The roofs were of

wood or rushes, which have perished under the rude touch of time, that

has shown more respect for the walls of the edifices.  The whole seems to

have been characterized by solidity and strength, rather than by any

attempt at architectural elegance.41



But whatever want of elegance there may have been in the exterior of the

imperial dwellings, it was amply compensated by the interior, in which all

the opulence of the Peruvian princes was ostentatiously displayed.  The

sides of the apartments were thickly studded with gold and silver

ornaments.  Niches, prepared in the walls, were filled with images of

animals and plants curiously wrought of the same costly materials; and

even much of the domestic furniture, including the utensils devoted to the

most ordinary menial services, displayed the like wanton magnificence!

42  With these gorgeous decorations were mingled richly colored stuffs of

the delicate manufacture of the Peruvian wool, which were of so beautiful

a texture, that the Spanish sovereigns, with all the luxuries of Europe and

Asia at their command, did not disdain to use them.43  The royal

household consisted of a throng of menials, supplied by the neighboring

towns and villages, which, as in Mexico, were bound to furnish the

monarch with fuel and other necessaries for the consumption of the

palace.



But the favorite residence of the Incas was at Yucay, about four leagues

distant from the capital.  In this delicious valley, locked up within the

friendly arms of the sierra, which sheltered it from the rude breezes of the

east, and refreshed by gushing fountains and streams of running water,

they built the most beautiful of their palaces.  Here, when wearied with

the dust and toil of the city, they loved to retreat, and solace themselves

with the society of their favorite concubines, wandering amidst groves and

airy gardens, that shed around their soft, intoxicating odors, and lulled the

senses to voluptuous repose.  Here, too, they loved to indulge in the

luxury of their baths, replenished by streams of crystal water which were

conducted through subterraneous silver channels into basins of gold.  The

spacious gardens were stocked with numerous varieties of plants and

flowers that grew without effort in this temperate region of the tropics,

while parterres of a more extraordinary kind were planted by their side,

glowing with the various forms of vegetable life skilfully imitated in gold

and silver! Among them the Indian corn, the most beautiful of American

grains, is particularly commemorated, and the curious workmanship is

noticed with which the golden ear was half disclosed amidst the broad

leaves of silver, and the light tassel of the same material that floated

gracefully from its top.44



If this dazzling picture staggers the faith of the reader, he may reflect that

the Peruvian mountains teemed with gold; that the natives understood the

art of working the mines, to a considerable extent; that none of the ore, as

we shall see hereafter, was converted into coin, and that the whole of it

passed into the hands of the sovereign for his own exclusive benefit,

whether for purposes of utility or ornament.  Certain it is that no fact is

better attested by the Conquerors themselves, who had ample means of

information, and no motive for misstatement.--The Italian poets, in their

gorgeous pictures of the gardens of Alcina and Morgana, came nearer the

truth than they imagined.



Our surprise, however, may reasonably be excited, when we consider that

the wealth displayed by the Peruvian princes was only that which each

had amassed individually for himself.  He owed nothing to inheritance

from his predecessors.  On the decease of an Inca, his palaces were

abandoned, all his treasures, except what were employed in his obsequies,

his furniture and apparel, were suffered to remain as he left them, and his

mansions, save one, were closed up for ever.  The new sovereign was to

provide himself with every thing new for his royal state.  The reason of

this was the popular belief, that the soul of the departed monarch would

return after a time to reanimate his body on earth; and they wished that he

should find every thing to which he had been used in life prepared for his

reception.45



When an Inca died, or, to use his own language, "was called home to the

mansions of his father, the Sun,"  46 his obsequies were celebrated with

great pomp and solemnity.  The bowels were taken from the body, and

deposited in the temple of Tampu, about five leagues from the capital.  A

quantity of his plate and jewels was buried with them, and a number of his

attendants and favorite concubines, amounting sometimes, it is said, to a

thousand, were immolated on his tomb.47  Some of them showed the

natural repugnance to the sacrifice occasionally manifested by the victims

of a similar superstition in India.  But these were probably the menials

and more humble attendants; since the women have been known, in more

than one instance, to lay violent hands on themselves, when restrained

from testifying their fidelity by this act of conjugal martyrdom.  This

melancholy ceremony was followed by a general mourning throughout the

empire.  At stated intervals, for a year, the people assembled to renew the

expressions of their sorrow, processions were made, displaying the banner

of the departed monarch; bards and minstrels were appointed to chronicle

his achievements, and their songs continued to be rehearsed at high

festivals in the presence of the reigning monarch,--thus stimulating the

living by the glorious example of the dead.48



The body of the deceased Inca was skilfully embalmed, and removed to

the great temple of the Sun at Cuzco.  There the Peruvian sovereign, on

entering the awful sanctuary, might behold the effigies of his royal

ancestors, ranged in opposite files,--the men on the right, and their queens

on the left, of the great luminary which blazed in refulgent gold on the

walls of the temple.  The bodies, clothed in the princely attire which they

had been accustomed to wear, were placed on chairs of gold, and sat with

their heads inclined downward, their hands placidly crossed over their

bosoms, their countenances exhibiting their natural dusky hue,--less liable

to change than the fresher coloring of a European complexion,--and their

hair of raven black, or silvered over with age, according to the period at

which they died! It seemed like a company of solemn worshippers fixed in

devotion,--so true were the forms and lineaments to life.  The Peruvians

were as successful as the Egyptians in the miserable attempt to perpetuate

the existence of the body beyond the limits assigned to it by nature.49



They cherished a still stranger illusion in the attentions which they

continued to pay to these insensible remains, as if they were instinct with

life.  One of the houses belonging to a deceased Inca was kept open and

occupied by his guard and attendants, with all the state appropriate to

royalty.  On certain festivals, the revered bodies of the sovereigns were

brought out with great ceremony into the public square of the capital.

Invitations were sent by the captains of the guard of the respective Incas

to the different nobles and officers of the court; and entertainments were

provided in the names of their masters, which displayed all the profuse

magnificence of their treasures,--and "such a display," says an ancient

chronicler, "was there in the great square of Cuzco, on this occasion, of

gold and silver plate and jewels, as no other city in the world ever

witnessed." 50  The banquet was served by the menials of the respective

households, and the guests partook of the melancholy cheer in the

presence of the royal phantom with the same attention to the forms of

courtly etiquette as if the living monarch had presided! 51



The nobility of Peru consisted of two orders, the first and by far the most

important of which was that of the Incas, who, boasting a common

descent with their sovereign, lived, as it were, in the reflected light of his

glory.  As the Peruvian monarchs availed themselves of the right of

polygamy to a very liberal extent, leaving behind them families of one or

even two hundred children, 52 the nobles of the blood royal, though

comprehending only their descendants in the male line, came in the course

of years to be very numerous.53  They were divided into different

lineages, each of which traced its pedigree to a different member of the

royal dynasty, though all terminated in the divine founder of the empire.



They were distinguished by many exclusive and very important privileges;

they wore a peculiar dress; spoke a dialect, if we may believe the

chronicler, peculiar to themselves; 54 and had the choicest portion of the

public domain assigned for their support.  They lived, most of them, at

court, near the person of the prince, sharing in his counsels, dining at his

board, or supplied from his table.  They alone were admissible to the great

offices in the priesthood.  They were invested with the command of

armies, and of distant garrisons, were placed over the provinces, and, in

short, filled every station of high trust and emolument.55  Even the laws,

severe in their general tenor, seem not to have been framed with reference

to them; and the people, investing the whole order with a portion of the

sacred character which belonged to the sovereign, held that an Inca noble

was incapable of crime.56



The other order of nobility was the Curacas, the caciques of the

conquered nations, or their descendants.  They were usually continued by

the government in their places, though they were required to visit the

capital occasionally, and to allow their sons to be educated there as the

pledges of their loyalty.  It is not easy to define the nature or extent of

their privileges.  They were possessed of more or less power, according to

the extent of their patrimony, and the number of their vassals.  Their

authority was usually transmitted from father to son, though sometimes

the successor was chosen by the people.57  They did not occupy the

highest posts of state, or those nearest the person of the sovereign, like the

nobles of the blood.  Their authority seems to have been usually local, and

always in subordination to the territorial jurisdiction of the great

provincial governors, who were taken from the Incas.58



It was the Inca nobility, indeed, who constituted the real strength.of the

Peruvian monarchy.  Attached to their prince by ties of consanguinity,

they had common sympathies and, to a considerable extent, common

interests with him.  Distinguished by a peculiar dress and insignia, as well

as by language and blood, from the rest of the community, they were

never confounded with the other tribes and nations who were incorporated

into the great Peruvian monarchy.  After the lapse of centuries, they still

retained their individuality as a peculiar people.  They were to the

conquered races of the country what the Romans were to the barbarous

hordes of the Empire, or the Normans to the ancient inhabitants of the

British Isles.  Clustering around the throne, they formed an invincible

phalanx, to shield it alike from secret conspiracy and open insurrection.

Though living chiefly in the capital, they were also distributed throughout

the country in all its high stations and strong military posts, thus

establishing lines of communication with the court, which enabled the

sovereign to act simultaneously and with effect on the most distant

quarters of his empire.  They possessed, moreover, an intellectual

preeminence, which, no less than their station, gave them authority with

the people.  Indeed, it may be said to have been the principal foundation

of their authority.  The crania of the Inca race show a decided superiority

over the other races of the land in intellectual power; 59 and it cannot be

denied that it was the fountain of that peculiar civilization and social

polity, which raised the Peruvian monarchy above every other state in

South America.  Whence this remarkable race came, and what was its

early history, are among those mysteries that meet us so frequently in the

annals of the New World, and which time and the antiquary have as yet

done little to explain.







Book 1



Chapter 2



Orders Of The State--Provisions For Justice--Division Of Lands-

Revenues And Registers--Great Roads And Posts-

Military Tactics And Policy



If we are surprised at the peculiar and original features of what may be

called the Peruvian aristocracy, we shall be still more so as we descend

to the lower orders of the community, and see the very artificial character

of their institutions,--as artificial as those of ancient Sparta, and, though

in a different way, quite as repugnant to the essential principles of our

nature.  The institutions of Lycurgus, however, were designed for a petty

state, while those of Peru, although originally intended for such, seemed,

like the magic tent in the Arabian tale, to have an indefinite power of

expansion, and were as well suited to the most flourishing condition of

the empire as to its infant fortunes.  In this remarkable accommodation to

change of circumstances we see the proofs of a contrivance that argues

no slight advance in civilization.



The name of Peru was not known to the natives.  It was given by the

Spaniards, and originated, it is said, in a misapprehension of the Indian

name of "river."1  However this may be, it is certain that the natives had

no other epithet by which to designate the large collection of tribes and

nations who were assembled under the sceptre of the Incas, than that of

Tavantinsuyu, or "four quarters of the world."2  This will not surprise a

citizen of the United States, who has no other name by which to class

himself among nations than what is borrowed from a quarter of the

globe.3  The kingdom, conformably to its name, was divided into four

parts, distinguished each by a separate title, and to each of which ran one

of the four great roads that diverged from Cuzco, the capital or navel of

the Peruvian monarchy.  The city was in like manner divided into four

quarters; and the various races, which gathered there from the distant

parts of the empire, lived each in the quarter nearest to its respective

province.  They all continued to wear their peculiar national costume, so

that it was easy to determine their origin; and the same order and system

of arrangement prevailed in the motley population of the capital, as in

the great provinces of the empire.  The capital, in fact, was a miniature

image of the empire.4



The four great provinces were each placed under a viceroy or governor,

who ruled over them with the assistance of one or more councils for the

different departments.  These viceroys resided, some portion of their

time, at least, in the capital, where they constituted a sort of council of

state to the Inca.5  The nation at large was distributed into decades, or

small bodies of ten; and every tenth man, or head of a decade, had

supervision of the rest,---being required to see that they enjoyed the

rights and immunities to which they were entitled, to solicit aid in their

behalf from government, when necessary, and to bring offenders to

justice.  To this last they were stimulated by a law that imposed on them,

in case of neglect, the same penalty that would have been incurred by the

guilty party.  With this law hanging over his head, the magistrate of Peru,

we may well believe, did not often go to sleep on his post.6



The people were still further divided into bodies of fifty, one hundred,

five hundred, and a thousand, with each an officer having general

supervision over those beneath, and the higher ones possessing, to a

certain extent, authority in matters of police.  Lastly, the whole empire

was distributed into sections or departments of ten thousand inhabitants,

with a governor over each, from the Inca nobility, who had control over

the curacas and other territorial officers in the district.  There were, also,

regular tribunals of justice, consisting of magistrates in each of the towns

or small communities, with jurisdiction over petty offences, while those

of a graver character were carried before superior judges, usually the

governors or rulers of the districts.  These judges all held their authority

and received their support from the Crown, by which they were

appointed and removed at pleasure.  They were obliged to determine

every suit in five days from the time it was brought before them; and

there was no appeal from one tribunal to another.  Yet there were

important provisions for the security of justice.  A committee of visitors

patrolled the kingdom at certain times to investigate the character and

conduct of the magistrates; and any neglect or violation of duty was

punished in the most exemplary manner.  The inferior courts were also

required to make monthly returns of their proceedings to the higher ones,

and these made reports in like manner to the viceroys; so that the

monarch, seated in the centre of his dominions, could look abroad, as it

were, to the most distant extremities, and review and rectify any abuses

in the administration of the law.7



The laws were few and exceedingly severe.  They related almost wholly

to criminal matters.  Few other laws were needed by a people who had

no money, little trade, and hardly any thing that could be called fixed

property.  The crimes of theft, adultery, and murder were all capital;

though it was wisely provided that some extenuating circumstances

might be allowed to mitigate the punishment.8   Blasphemy against the

Sun, and malediction of the Inca,--offences, indeed, of the same

complexion were also punished with death.  Removing landmarks,

turning the water away from a neighbor's land into one's own, burning a

house, were all severely punished.  To burn a bridge was death.  The inca

allowed no obstacle to those facilities of communication so essential to

the maintenance of public order.  A rebellious city or province was laid

waste, and its inhabitants exterminated.  Rebellion against the "Child of

the Sun," was the greatest of all crimes.9



The simplicity and severity of the Peruvian code may be thought to infer

a state of society but little advanced; which had few of those complex

interests and relations that grow up in a civilized community, and which

had not proceeded far enough in the science of legislation to economize

human suffering by proportioning penalties to crimes.  But the Peruvian

institutions must be regarded from a different point of view from that in

which we study those of other nations.  The laws emanated from the

sovereign, and that sovereign held a divine commission, and was

possessed of a divine nature.  To violate the law was not only to insult

the majesty of the throne, but it was sacrilege.  The slightest offence,

viewed in this light, merited death; and the gravest could incur no

heavier penalty.10  Yet, in the infliction of their punishments, they

showed no unnecessary cruelty; and the sufferings of the victim were not

prolonged by the ingenious torments so frequent among barbarous

nations.11



These legislative provisions may strike us as very defective, even as

compared with those of the semi-civilized races of Anahuac, where a

gradation of courts, moreover, with the fight of appeal, afforded a

tolerable security for justice.  But in a country like Peru, where few but

criminal causes were known, the right of appeal was of less consequence.

The law was simple, its application easy; and, where the judge was

honest, the case was as likely to be determined correctly on the first

hearing as on the second.  The inspection of the board of visitors, and the

monthly returns of the tribunals, afforded no slight guaranty for their

integrity.  The law which required a decision within five days would

seem little suited to the complex and embarrassing litigation of a modern

tribunal.  But, in the simple questions submitted to the Peruvian judge,

delay would have been useless; and the Spaniards, familiar with the evils

growing out of long-protracted suits, where the successful litigant is too

often a ruined man, are loud in their encomiums of this swift-handed and

economical justice.12



The fiscal regulations of the Incas, and the laws respecting property, are

the most remarkable features in the Peruvian polity.  The whole territory

of the empire was divided into three parts, one for the Sun, another for

the Inca, and the last for the people.  Which of the three was the largest

is doubtful.  The proportions differed materially in different provinces.

The distribution, indeed, was made on the same general principle, as

each new conquest was added to the monarchy; but the propertion varied

according to the amount of population, and the greater or less amount of

land consequently required for the support of the inhabirants.13



The lands assigned to the Sun furnished a revenue to support the

temples, and maintain the costly ceremonial of the Peruvian worship and

the multitudinous priesthood.  Those reserved for the Inca went to

support the royal state, as well as the numerous members of his

household and his kindred, and supplied the various exigencies of

government.  The remainder of the lands was divided, per capita, in

equal shares among the people.  It was provided by law, as we shall see

hereafter, that every Peruvian should marry at a certain age.  When this

event took place, the community or district in which he lived furnished

him with a dwelling, which, as it was constructed of humble materials,

was done at little cost.  A lot of land was then assigned to him sufficient

for his own maintenance and that of his wife.  An additional portion was

granted for every child, the amount allowed for a son being the double of

that for a daughter.  The division of the soil was renewed every year, and

the possessions of the tenant were increased or diminished according to

the numbers in his family.14  The same arrangement was observed with

reference to the curacas, except only that a domain was assigned to them

corresponding with the superior dignity of their stations.15



A more thorough and effectual agrarian law than this cannot be

imagined.  In other countries where such a law has been introduced, its

operation, after a time, has given way to the natural order of events, and,

under the superior intelligence and thrift of some and the prodigality of

others, the usual vicissitudes of fortune have been allowed to take their

course, and restore things to their natural inequality.  Even the iron law

of Lycurgus ceased to operate after a time, and melted away before the

spirit of luxury and avarice.  The nearest approach to the Peruvian

constitution was probably in Judea, where, on the recurrence of the great

national jubilee, at the close of every half-century, estates reverted to

their original proprietors.  There was this important difference in Peru;

that not only did the lease, if we may so call it, terminate with the year,

but during that period the tenant had no power to alienate or to add to his

possessions.  The end of the brief term found him in precisely the same

condition that he was in at the beginning.  Such a state of things might be

supposed to be fatal to any thing like attachment to the soil, or to that

desire of improving it, which is natural to the permanent proprietor, and

hardly less so to the holder of a long lease.  But the practical operation of

the law seems to have been otherwise; and it is probable, that, under the

influence of that love of order and aversion to change which marked the

Peruvian institutions, each new partition of the soil usually confirmed the

occupant in his possession, and the tenant for a year was converted into a

proprietor for life.



The territory was cultivated wholly by the people.  The lands belonging

to the Sun were first attended to.  They next tilled the lands of the old, of

the sick, of the widow and the orphan, and of soldiers engaged in actual

service; in short, of all that part of the community who, from bodily

infirmity or any other cause, were unable to attend to their own concerns.

The people were then allowed to work on their own ground, each man

for himself, but with the general obligation to assist his neighbor, when

any circumstance--the burden of a young and numerous family, for

example--might demand it.16  Lastly, they cultivated the lands of the

Inca.  This was done, with great ceremony, by the whole population in a

body.  At break of day, they were summoned together by proclamation

from some neighboring tower or eminence, and all the inhabitants of the

district, men, women, and children, appeared dressed in their gayest

apparel, bedecked with their little store of finery and ornaments, as if for

some great jubilee.  They went through the labors of the day with the

same joyous spirit, chanting their popular ballads which commemorated

the heroic deeds of the Incas, regulating their movements by the measure

of the chant, and all mingling in the chorus, of which the word hailli, or

"triumph," was usually the burden.  These national airs had something

soft and pleasing in their character, that recommended them to the

Spaniards; and many a Peruvian song was set to music by them after the

Conquest, and was listened to by the unfortunate natives with

melancholy satisfaction, as it called up recollections of the past, when

their days glided peacefully away under the sceptre of the Incas.17



A similar arrangement prevailed with respect to the different

manufactures as to the agricultural products of the country.  The flocks

of llamas, or Peruvian sheep, were appropriated exclusively to the Sun

and to the Inca.18  Their number was immense.  They were scattered

over the different provinces, chiefly in the colder regions of the country,

where they were intrusted to the care of experienced shepherds, who

conducted them to different pastures according to the change of season.

A large number was every year sent to the capital for the consumption of

the Court, and for the religious festivals and sacrifices.  But these were

only the males, as no female was allowed to be killed.  The regulations

for the care and breeding of these flocks were prescribed with the

greatest minuteness, and with a sagacity which excited the admiration of

the Spaniards, who were familiar with the management of the great

migratory flocks of merinos in their own country.19



At the appointed season, they were all sheared, and the wool was

deposited in the public magazines.  It was then dealt out to each family in

such quantities as sufficed for its wants, and was consigned to the female

part of the household, who were well instructed in the business of

spinning and weaving.  When this labor was accomplished, and the

family was provided with a coarse but warm covering, suited to the cold

climate of the mountains,--for, in the lower country, cotton, furnished in

like manner by the Crown, took the place, to a certain extent, of wool,--

the people were required to labor for the Inca.  The quantity of the cloth

needed, as well as the peculiar kind and quality of the fabric, was first

determined at Cuzco.  The work was then apportioned among the

different provinces.  Officers, appointed for the purpose, superintended

the distribution of the wool, so that the manufacture of the different

articles should be intrusted to the most competent hands.20  They did not

leave the matter here, but entered the dwellings, from time to time, and

saw that the work was faithfully executed.  This domestic inquisition was

not confined to the labors for the Inca.  It included, also, those for the

several families; and care was taken that each household should employ

the materials furnished for its own use in the manner that was intended,

so that no one should be unprovided with necessary apparel.21  In this

domestic labor all the female part of the establishment was expected to

join.  Occupation was found for all, from the child five years old to the

aged matron not too infirm to hold a distaff.  No one, at least none but

the decrepit and the sick, was allowed to eat the bread of idleness in

Peru.  Idleness was a crime in the eye of the law, and, as such, severely

punished; while industry was publicly commended and stimulated by

rewards.22



The like course was pursued with reference to the other requisitions of

the government.  All the mines in the kingdom belonged to the Inca.

They were wrought exclusively for his benefit, by persons familiar with

this service, and selected from the districts where the mines were

situated.23  Every Peruvian of the lower class was a husbandman, and,

with the exception of those already specified, was expected to provide

for his own support by the cultivation of his land.  A small portion of the

community, however, was instructed in mechanical arts; some of them of

the more elegant kind, subservient to the purposes of luxury and

ornament.  The demand for these was chiefly limited to the sovereign

and his Court; but the labor of a larger number of hands was exacted for

the execution of the great public works which covered the land.  The

nature and amount of the services required were all determined at Cuzco

by commissioners well instructed in the resources of the country, and in

the character of the inhabitants of different provinces.24



This information was obtained by an admirable regulation, which has

scarcely a counterpart in the annals of a semi-civilized people.  A

register was kept of all the births and deaths throughout the country, and

exact returns of the actual population were made to government every

year, by means of the quipus, a curious invention, which will be

explained hereafter.25  At certain intervals, also, a general survey of the

country was made, exhibiting a complete view of the character of the

soil, its fertility, the nature of its products, both agricultural and mineral,-

-in short, of all that constituted the physical resources of the empire.26

Furnished with these statistical details, it was easy for the government,

after determining the amount of requisitions, to distribute the work

among the respective provinces best qualified to execute it.  The task of

apportioning the labor was assigned to the local authorities, and great

care was taken that it should be done in such a manner, that, while the

most competent hands were selected, it should not fall disproportionately

heavy on any.27



The different provinces of the country furnished persons peculiarly

suited to different employments, which, as we shall see hereafter, usually

descended from father to son.  Thus, one district supplied those most

skilled in working the mines, another the most curious workers in metals,

or in wood, and so on.28  The artisan was provided by government with

the materials; and no one was required to give more than a stipulated

portion of his time to the public service.  He was then succeeded by

another for the like term; and it should be observed, that all who were

engaged in the employment of the government--and the remark applies

equally to agricultural labor--were maintained, for the time, at the public

expense.29  By this constant rotation of labor, it was intended that no

one should be overburdened, and that each man should have time to

provide for the demands of his own household.  It was impossible--in the

judgment of a high Spanish authority--to improve on the system of

distribution, so carefully was it accommodated to the condition and

comfort of the artisan.30  The security of the working classes seems to

have been ever kept in view in the regulations of the government; and

these were so discreetly arranged, that the most wearing and

unwholesome labors, as those of the mines, occasioned no detriment to

the health of the laborer; a striking contrast to his subsequent condition

under the Spanish rule.31



A part of the agricultural produce and manufactures was transported to

Cuzco, to minister to the immediate demands of the Inca and his Court.

But far the greater part was stored in magazines scattered over the

different provinces.  These spacious buildings, constructed of stone,

were divided between the Sun and the Inca, though the greater share

seems to have been appropriated by the monarch.  By a wise regulation,

any deficiency in the contributions of the Inca might be supplied from

the granaries of the Sun.32  But such a necessity could rarely have

happened; and the providence of the government usually left a large

surplus in the royal depositories, which was removed to a third class of

magazines, whose design was to supply the people in seasons of scarcity,

and, occasionally, to furnish relief to individuals, whom sickness or

misfortune had reduced to poverty; thus, in a manner, justifying the

assertion of a Castilian document, that a large portion of the revenues of

the Inca found its way back again, through one channel or another, into

the hands of the people.33  These magazines were found by the

Spaniards, on their arrival, stored with all the various products and

manufactures of the country,--with maize, coca, quinua, woolen and

cotton stuffs of the finest quality, with vases and utensils of gold, silver,

and copper, in short, with every article of luxury or use within the

compass of Peruvian skill.34  The magazines of grain, in particular,

would frequently have sufficed for the consumption of the adjoining

district for several years.35  An inventory of the various products of the

country, and the quarters whence they were obtained, was every year

taken by the royal officers, and recorded by the quipucamayus on their

registers, with surprising regularity and precision.  These registers were

transmitted to the capital, and submitted to the Inca, who could thus at a

glance, as it were, embrace the whole results of the national industry, and

see how far they corresponded with the requisitions of government.36



Such are some of the most remarkable features of the Peruvian

institutions relating to property, as delineated by writers who, however

contradictory in the details, have a general conformity of outline.  These

institutions are certainly so remarkable, that it is hardly credible they

should ever have been enforced throughout a great empire, and for a long

period of years.  Yet we have the most unequivocal testimony to the fact

from the Spaniards, who landed in Peru in time to witness their

operation; some of whom, men of high judicial station and character,

were commissioned by the government to make investigations into the

state of the country under its ancient rulers.



The impositions on the Peruvian people seem to have been sufficiently

heavy.  On them rested the whole burden of maintaining, not only their

own order, but every other order in the state.  The members of the royal

house, the great nobles, even the public functionaries, and the numerous

body of the priesthood, were all exempt from taxation.37  The whole

duty of defraying the expenses of the government belonged to the

people.  Yet this was not materially different from the condition of things

formerly existing in most parts of Europe, where the various privileged

classes claimed exemption--not always with success, indeed--from

bearing part of the public burdens.  The great hardship in the case of the

Peruvian was, that he could not better his condition.  His labors were for

others, rather than for himself.  However industrious, he could not add a

rood to his own possessions, nor advance himself one hair's breadth in

the social scale.  The great and universal motive to honest industry, that

of bettering one's lot, was lost upon him.  The great law of human

progress was not for him.  As he was born, so he was to die.  Even his

time he could not properly call his own.  Without money, with little

property of any kind, he paid his taxes in labor.38  No wonder that the

government should have dealt with sloth as a crime.  It was a crime

against the state, and to be wasteful of time was, in a manner, to rob the

exchequer.  The Peruvian, laboring all his life for others, might be

compared to the convict in a treadmill, going the same dull round of

incessant toil, with the consciousness, that, however profitable the results

to the state, they were nothing to him.



But this is the dark side of the picture.  If no man could become rich in

Peru, no man could become poor.  No spendthrift could waste his

substance in riotous luxury.  No adventurous schemer could impoverish

his family by the spirit of speculation.  The law was constantly directed

to enforce a steady industry and a sober management of his affairs.  No

mendicant was tolerated in Peru.  When a man was reduced by poverty

or misfortune, (it could hardly be by fault,) the arm of the law was

stretched out to minister relief; not the stinted relief of private charity,

nor that which is doled out, drop by drop, as it were, from the frozen

reservoirs of "the parish," but in generous measure, bringing no

humiliation to the object of it, and placing him on a level with the rest of

his countrymen.39



No man could be rich, no man could be poor, in Peru; but all might

enjoy, and did enjoy, a competence.  Ambition, avarice, the love of

change, the morbid spirit of discontent, those passions which most

agitate the minds of men, found no place in the bosom of the Peruvian.

The very condition of his being seemed to be at war with change.  He

moved on in the same unbroken circle in which his fathers had moved

before him, and in which his children were to follow.  It was the object

of the Incas to infuse into their subjects a spirit of passive obedience and

tranquillity,--a perfect acquiescence in the established order of things.  In

this they fully succeeded.  The Spaniards who first visited the country are

emphatic in their testimony, that no government could have been better

suited to the genius of the people; and no people could have appeared

more contented with their lot, or more devoted to their government.40



Those who may distrust the accounts of Peruvian industry will find their

doubts removed on a visit to the country.  The traveller still meets,

especially in the central regions of the table-land, with memorials of the

past, remains of temples, palaces, fortresses, terraced mountains, great

military roads, aqueducts, and other public works, which, whatever

degree of science they may display in their execution, astonish him by

their number, the massive character of the materials, and the grandeur of

the design.  Among them, perhaps the most remarkable are the great

roads, the broken remains of which are still in sufficient preservation to

attest their former magnificence.  There were many of these roads,

traversing different parts of the kingdom; but the most considerable were

the two which extended from Quito to Cuzco, and, again diverging from

the capital, continued in a southern direction towards Chili.



One of these roads passed over the grand plateau, and the other along the

lowlands on the borders of the ocean.  The former was much the more

difficult achievement, from the character of the country.  It was

conducted over pathless sierras buried in snow; galleries were cut for

leagues through the living rock; rivers were crossed by means of bridges

that swung suspended in the air; precipices were scaled by stairways

hewn out of the native bed; ravines of hideous depth were filled up with

solid masonry; in short, all the difficulties that beset a wild and

mountainous region, and which might appall the most courageous

engineer of modern times, were encountered and successfully overcome.

The length of the road, of which scattered fragments only remain, is

variously estimated, from fifteen hundred to two thousand miles; and

stone pillars, in the manner of European milestones, were erected at

stated intervals of somewhat more than a league, all along the route.  Its

breadth scarcely exceeded twenty feet.41  It was built of heavy flags of

freestone, and in some parts, at least, covered with a bituminous cement,

which time has made harder than the stone itself.  In some places, where

the ravines had been filled up with masonry, the mountain torrents,

wearing on it for ages, have gradually eaten a way through the base, and

left the superincumbent mass--such is the cohesion of the materials--still

spanning the valley like an arch ! 42



Over some of the boldest streams it was necessary to construct

suspension bridges, as they are termed, made of the tough fibres of the

maguey, or of the osier of the country, which has an extraordinary degree

of tenacity and strength.  These osiers were woven into cables of the

thickness of a man's body.  The huge ropes, then stretched across the

water, were conducted through rings or holes cut in immense buttresses

of stone raised on the opposite banks of the river, and there secured to

heavy pieces of timber.  Several of these enormous cables, bound

together, formed a bridge, which, covered with planks, well secured and

defended by a railing of the same osier materials on the sides, afforded a

safe passage for the traveller.  The length of this aerial bridge, sometimes

exceeding two hundred feet, caused it, confined, as it was, only at the

extremities, to dip with an alarming inclination towards the centre, while

the motion given to it by the passenger occasioned an oscillation still

more frightful, as his eye wandered over the dark abyss of waters that

foamed and tumbled many a fathom beneath.  Yet these light and fragile

fabrics were crossed without fear by the Peruvians, and are still retained

by the Spaniards over those streams which, from the depth or

impetuosity of the current, would seem impracticable for the usual

modes of conveyance.  The wider and more tranquil waters were crossed

on balsas--a kind of raft still much used by the natives--to which sails

were attached, furnishing the only instance of this higher kind of

navigation among the American Indians.43



The other great road of the Incas lay through the level country between

the Andes and the ocean.  It was constructed in a different manner, as

demanded by the nature of the ground, which was for the most part low,

and much of it sandy.  The causeway was raised on a high embankment

of earth, and defended on either side by a parapet or wall of clay; and

trees and odoriferous shrubs were planted along the margin, regaling the

sense of the traveller with their perfumes, and refreshing him by their

shades, so grateful under the burning sky of the tropics.  In the strips of

sandy waste, which occasionally intervened, where the light and volatile

soil was incapable of sustaining a road, huge piles, many of them to be

seen at this day, were driven into the ground to indicate the route to the

traveller.44



All along these highways, caravansaries, or tambos, as they were called,

were erected, at the distance of ten or twelve miles from each other, for

the accommodation, more particularly, of the Inca and his suite, and

those who journeyed on the public business.  There were few other

travellers in Peru.  Some of these buildings were on an extensive scale,

consisting of a fortress, barracks, and other military works, surrounded

by a parapet of stone, and covering a large tract of ground.  These were

evidently destined for the accommodation of the imperial armies, when

on their march across the country.  The care of the great roads was

committed to the districts through which they passed, and a large number

of hands was constantly employed under the Incas to keep them in repair.

This was the more easily done in a country where the mode of travelling

was altogether on foot; though the roads are said to have been so nicely

constructed, that a carriage might have rolled over them as securely as on

any of the great roads of Europe.45  Still, in a region where the elements

of fire and water are both actively at work in the business of destruction,

they must, without constant supervision, have gradually gone to decay.

Such has been their fate under the Spanish conquerors, who took no care

to enforce the admirable system for their preservation adopted by the

Incas.  Yet the broken portions that still survive, here and there, like the

fragments of the great Roman roads scattered over Europe, bear

evidence to their primitive grandeur, and have drawn forth the eulogium

from a discriminating traveller, usually not too profuse in his panegyric,

that "the roads of the Incas were among the most useful and stupendous

works ever executed by man." 46



The system of communication through their dominions was still further

improved by the Peruvian sovereigns, by the introduction of posts, in the

same manner as was done by the Aztecs.  The Peruvian posts, however,

established on all the great routes that conducted to the capital, were on a

much more extended plan than those in Mexico.  All along these routes,

small buildings were erected, at the distance of less than five miles

asunder,47 in each of which a number of runners, or chasquis, as they

were called, were stationed to carry forward the despatches of

government.48  These despatches were either verbal, or conveyed by

means of quipus, and sometimes accompanied by a thread of the crimson

fringe worn round the temples of the Inca, which was regarded with the

same implicit deference as the signet ring of an Oriental despot.49



The chasquis were dressed in a peculiar livery, intimating their

profession.  They were all trained to the employment, and selected for

their speed and fidelity.  As the distance each courier had to perform was

small, and as he had ample time to refresh himself at the stations, they

tart over the ground with great swiftness, and messages were carried

through the whole extent of the long routes, at the rate of a hundred and

fifty miles a day.  The office of the chasquis was not limited to carrying

despatches.  They frequently brought various articles for the use of the

Court; and in this way, fish from the distant ocean, fruits, game, and

different commodities from the hot regions on the coast, were taken to

the capital in good condition, and served fresh at the royal table.50  It is

remarkable that this important institution should have been known to

both the Mexicans and the Peruvians without any correspondence with

one another; and that it should have been found among two barbarian

nations of the New World, long before it was introduced among the

civilized nations of Europe.51



By these wise contrivances of the Incas, the most distant parts of the

long-extended empire of Peru were brought into intimate relations with

each other.  And while the capitals of Christendom, but a few hundred

miles apart, remained as far asunder as if seas had rolled between them,

the great capitals Cuzco and Quito were placed by the high roads of the

Incas in immediate correspondence.  Intelligence from the numerous

provinces was transmitted on the wings of the wind to the Peruvian

metropolis, the great focus to which all the lines of communication

converged.  Not an insurrectionary movement could occur, not an

invasion, on the remotest frontier, before the tidings were conveyed to

the capital, and the imperial armies were on their march across the

magnificent roads of the country to suppress it.  So admirable was the

machinery contrived by the American despots for maintaining

tranquillity throughout their dominions! It may remind us of the similar

institutions of ancient Rome, when, under the Caesars, she was mistress

of half the world.



A principal design of the great roads was to serve the purposes of

military communication.  It formed an important item of their military

policy, which is quite as well worth studying as their municipal.



Notwithstanding the pacific professions of the Incas, and the pacific

tendency, indeed, of their domestic institutions, they were constantly at

war.  It was by war that their paltry territory had been gradually enlarged

to a powerful empire.  When this was achieved, the capital, safe in its

central position, was no longer shaken by these military movements, and

the country enjoyed, in a great degree, the blessings of tranquillity and

order.  But, however tranquil at heart, there is not a reign upon record in

which the nation was not engaged in war against the barbarous nations

on the frontier.  Religion furnished a plausible pretext for incessant

aggression, and disguised the lust of conquest in the Incas, probably,

from their own eyes, as well as from those of their subjects.  Like the

followers of Mahomet, bearing the sword in one hand and the Koran in

the other, the Incas of Peru offered no alternative but the worship of the

Sun or war.



It is true, their fanaticism--or their policy--showed itself in a milder form

than was found in the descendants of the Prophet.  Like the great

luminary which they adored, they operated by gentleness more potent

than violence.52  They sought to soften the hearts of the rude tribes

around them, and melt them by acts of condescension and kindness.  Far

from provoking hostilities, they allowed time for the salutary example of

their own institutions to work its effect, trusting that their less civilized

neighbors would submit to their sceptre, from a conviction of the

blessings it would secure to them.  When this course failed, they

employed other measures, but still of a pacific character; and endeavored

by negotiation, by conciliatory treatment, and by presents to the leading

men, to win them over to their dominion.  In short, they practised all the

arts familiar to the most subtle politician of a civilized land to secure the

acquisition of empire.  When all these expedients failed, they prepared

for war.



Their levies were drawn from all the different provinces; though from

some, where the character of the people was particularly hardy, more

than from others.53  It seems probable that every Peruvian, who had

reached a certain age, might be called to bear arms.  But the rotation of

military service, and the regular drills, which took place twice or thrice

in a month, of the inhabitants of every village, raised the soldiers

generally above the rank of a raw militia.  The Peruvian army, at first

inconsiderable, came, with the increase of population, in the latter days

of the empire, to be very large, so that their monarchs could bring into

the field, as contemporaries assure us, a force amounting to two hundred

thousand men.  They showed the same skill and respect for order in their

military organization, as in other things.  The troops were divided into

bodies corresponding with our battalions and companies, led by officers,

that rose, in regular gradation, from the lowest subaltern to the Inca

noble, who was intrusted with the general command.54



Their arms consisted of the usual weapons employed by nations, whether

civilized or uncivilized, before the invention of powder,--bows and

arrows, lances, darts, a short kind of sword, a battle-axe or partisan, and

slings, with which they were very expert.  Their spears and arrows were

tipped with copper, or, more commonly, with bone, and the weapons of

the Inca lords were frequently mounted with gold or silver.  Their heads

were protected by casques made either of wood or of the skins of wild

animals, and sometimes richly decorated with metal and with precious

stones, surmounted by the brilliant plumage of the tropical birds.  These,

of course, were the ornaments only of the higher orders.  The great mass

of the soldiery were dressed in the peculiar costume of their provinces,

and their heads were wreathed with a sort of turban or roll of different-

colored cloths, that produced a gay and animating effect.  Their

defensive armor consisted of a shield or buckler, and a close tunic of

quilted cotton, in the same manner as with the Mexicans.  Each company

had its particular banner, and the imperial standard, high above all,

displayed the glittering device and the rainbow,--the armorial ensign of

the Incas, intimating their claims as children of the skies.55



By means of the thorough system of communication established in the

country, a short time sufficed to draw the levies together from the most

distant quarters.  The army was put under the direction of some

experienced chief, of the blood royal, or, more frequently, headed by the

Inca in person.  The march was rapidly performed, and with little fatigue

to the soldier; for, all along the great routes, quarters were provided for

him, at regular distances, where he could find ample accommodations.

The country is still covered with the remains of military works,

constructed of porphyry or granite, which tradition assures us were

designed to lodge the Inca and his army.56



At regular intervals, also, magazines were established, filled with grain,

weapons, and the different munitions of war, with which the army was

supplied on its march.  It was the especial care of the government to see

that these magazines, which were furnished from the stores of the Incas,

were always well filled.  When the Spaniards invaded the country, they

supported their own armies for a long time on the provisions found in

them.57  The Peruvian soldier was forbidden to commit any trespass on

the property of the inhabitants whose territory lay in the line of march.

Any violation of this order was punished with death.58  The soldier was

clothed and fed by the industry of the people, and the Incas rightly re-

solved that he should not repay this by violence.  Far from being a tax on

the labors of the husbandman, or even a burden on his hospitality, the

imperial armies traversed the country, from one extremity to the other,

with as little inconvenience to the inhabitants, as would be created by a

procession of peaceful burghers, or a muster of holiday soldiers for a

review.



From the moment war was proclaimed, the Peruvian monarch used all

possible expedition in assembling his forces, that he might anticipate the

movements of his enemies, and prevent a combination with their allies.

It was, however, from the neglect of such a principle of combination, that

the several nations of the country, who might have prevailed by

confederated strength, fell one after another under the imperial yoke.

Yet, once in the field the Inca did not usually show any disposition to

push his advantages to the utmost, and urge his foe to extremity.  In

every stage of the war, he was open to propositions for peace; and

although he sought to reduce his enemies by carrying off their harvests

and distressing them by famine, he allowed his troops to commit no

unnecessary outrage on person or property.  "We must spare our

enemies," one of the Peruvian princes is quoted as saying, "or it will be

our loss, since they and all that belong to them must soon be ours." 59  It

was a wise maxim, and, like most other wise maxims, founded equally on

benevolence and prudence.  The Incas adopted the policy claimed for the

Romans by their countryman, who tells us that they gained more by

clemency to the vanquished than by their victories.60



In the same considerate spirit, they were most careful to provide for the

security and comfort of their own troops; and, when a war was long

protracted, or the climate proved unhealthy, they took care to relieve

their men by frequent reinforcements, allowing the earlier recruits to

return to their homes.61  But while thus economical of life, both in their

own followers and in the enemy, they did not shrink from sterner

measures when provoked by the ferocious or obstinate character of the

resistance; and the Peruvian annals contain more than one of those

sanguinary pages which cannot be pondered at the present day without a

shudder.  It should be added, that the beneficent policy, which I have

been delineating as characteristic of the Incas, did not belong to all; and

that there was more than one of the royal line who displayed a full

measure of the bold and unscrupulous spirit of the vulgar conqueror.



The first step of the government, after the reduction of a country, was to

introduce there the worship of the Sun.  Temples were erected, and

placed under the care of a numerous priesthood, who expounded to the

conquered people the mysteries of their new faith, and dazzled them by

the display of its rich and stately ceremonial.62  Yet the religion of the

conquered was not treated with dishonor.  The Sun was to be worshipped

above all; but the images of their gods were removed to Cuzco and

established in one of the temples, to hold their rank among the inferior

deities of the Peruvian Pantheon.  Here they remained as hostages, in

some sort, for the conquered nation, which would be the less inclined to

forsake its allegiance, when by doing so it must leave its own gods in the

hands of its enemies.63



The Incas provided for the settlement of their new conquests, by

ordering a census to be taken of the population, and a careful survey to

be made of the country, ascertaining its products, and the character and

capacity of its soil.64  A division of the territory was then made on the

same principle with that adopted throughout their own kingdom; and

their respective portions were assigned to the Sun, the sovereign, and the

people.  The amount of the last was regulated by the amount of the

population, but the share of each individual was uniformly the same.  It

may seem strange, that any people should patiently have acquiesced in an

arrangement which involved such a total surrender of property.  But it

was a conquered nation that did so, held in awe, on the least suspicion of

meditating resistance, by armed garrisons, who were established at

various commanding points throughout the country.65  It is probable,

too, that the Incas made no greater changes than was essential to the new

arrangement, and that they assigned estates, as far as possible, to their

former proprietors.  The curacas, in particular, were confirmed in their

ancient authority; or, when it was found expedient to depose the existing

curaca, his rightful heir was allowed to succeed him.66  Every respect

was shown to the ancient usages and laws of the land, as far as was

compatible with the fundamental institutions of the Incas.  It must also be

remembered, that the conquered tribes were, many of them, too little

advanced in civilization to possess that attachment to the soil which

belongs to a cultivated nation.67  But, to whatever it be referred, it seems

probable that the extraordinary institutions of the Incas were established

with little opposition in the conquered territories.68



Yet the Peruvian sovereigns did not trust altogether to this show of

obedience in their new vassals; and, to secure it more effectually, they

adopted some expedients too remarkable to be passed by in silence.-

Immediately after a recent conquest, the curacas and their families were

removed for a time to Cuzco.  Here they learned the language of the

capital, became familiar with the manners and usages of the court, as

well as with the general policy of government, and experienced such

marks of favor from the sovereign as would be most grateful to their

feelings, and might attach them most warmly to his person.  Under the

influence of these sentiments, they were again sent to rule over their

vassals, but still leaving their eldest sons in the capital, to remain there as

a guaranty for their own fidelity, as well as to grace the court of the

Inca.69



Another expedient was of a bolder and more original character.  This

was nothing less than to revolutionize the language of the country.  South

America, like North, was broken up into a great variety of dialects, or

rather languages, having little affinity with one another.  This

circumstance occasioned great embarrassment to the government in the

administration of the different provinces, with whose idioms they were

unacquainted.  It was determined, therefore, to substitute one universal

language, the Quichua,--the language of the court, the capital, and the

surrounding country,--the richest and most comprehensive of the South

American dialects.  Teachers were provided in the towns and villages

throughout the land, who were to give instruction to all, even the

humblest classes; and it was intimated at the same time, that no one

should be raised to any office of dignity or profit, who was unacquainted

with this tongue.  The curacas and other chiefs, who attended at the

capital became familiar with this dialect in their intercourse with the

Court and, on their return home, set the example of conversing in it

among themselves.  This example was imitated by their followers, and

the Quichua gradually became the language of elegance and fashion, in

the same manner as the Norman French was affected by all those who

aspired to any consideration in England, after the Conquest.  By this

means, while each province retained its peculiar tongue, a beautiful

medium of communication was introduced, which enabled the

inhabitants of one part of the country to hold intercourse with every

other, and the Inca and his deputies to communicate with all.  This was

the state of things on the arrival of the Spaniards.  It must be admitted,

that history furnishes few examples of more absolute authority than such

a revolution in the language of an empire, at the bidding of a master.70



Yet little less remarkable was another device of the Incas for securing the

loyalty of their subjects.  When any portion of the recent conquests

showed a pertinacious spirit of disaffection, it was not uncommon to

cause a part of the population, amounting, it might be, to ten thousand

inhabitants or more, to remove to a distant quarter of the kingdom,

occupied by ancient vassals of undoubted fidelity to the crown.  A like

number of these last was transplanted to the territory left vacant by the

emigrants.  By this exchange, the population was composed of two

distinct races, who regarded each other with an eye of jealousy, that

served as an effectual check on any mutinous proceeding.  In time, the

influence of the well affected prevailed, supported, as they were, by

royal authority, and by the silent working of the national institutions, to

which the strange races became gradually accustomed.  A spirit of

loyalty sprang up by degrees in their bosoms, and, before a generation

had passed away, the different tribes mingled in harmony together as

members of the same community.71  Yet the different races continued to

be distinguished by difference of dress; since, by the law of the land,

every citizen was required to wear the costume of his native province.72

Neither could the colonist, who had been thus unceremoniously

transplanted, return to his native district for, by another law, it was

forbidden to any one to change his residence without license.73  He was

settled for life.  The Peruvian government ascribed to every man his

local habitation, his sphere of action, nay, the very nature and quality of

that action.  He ceased to be a free agent; it might be almost said, that it

relieved him of personal responsibility.



In following out this singular arrangement, the Incas showed as much

regard for the comfort and convenience of the colonist as was compatible

with the execution of their design.  They were careful that the mitimaes,

as these emigrants were styled, should be removed to climates most

congenial with their own.  The inhabitants of the cold countries were not

transplanted to the warm, nor the inhabitants of the warm countries to the

cold.74  Even their habitual occupations were consulted, and the

fisherman was settled in the neighborhood of the ocean, or the great

lakes; while such lands were assigned to the husbandman as were best

adapted to the culture with which he was most familiar.75  And, as

migration by many, perhaps by most, would be regarded as a calamity,

the government was careful to show particular marks of favor to the

mitimaes, and, by various privileges and immunities, to ameliorate their

condition, and thus to reconcile them, if possible, to their lot.76



The Peruvian institutions, though they may have been modified and

matured under successive sovereigns, all bear the stamp of the same

original,--were all cast in the same mould.  The empire, strengthening

and enlarging at every successive epoch of its history, was, in its latter

days, but the development, on a great scale, of what it was in miniature at

its commencement, as the infant germ is said to contain within itself all

the ramifications of the future monarch of the forest.  Each succeeding

Inca seemed desirous only to tread in the path, and carry out the plans, of

his predecessor.  Great enterprises, commenced under one, were

continued by another, and completed by a third.  Thus, while all acted on

a regular plan, without any of the eccentric or retrograde movements

which betray the agency of different individuals, the state seemed to be

under the direction of a single hand, and steadily pursued, as if through

one long reign, its great career of civilization and of conquest.



The ultimate aim of its institutions was domestic quiet.  But it seemed as

if this were to be obtained only by foreign war.  Tranquillity in the heart

of the monarchy, and war on its borders, was the condition of Peru.  By

this war it gave occupation to a part of its people, and, by the reduction

and civilization of its barbarous neighbors, gave security to all.   Every

Inca sovereign, however mild and benevolent in his domestic rule, was a

warrior, and led his armies in person.  Each successive reign extended

still wider the boundaries of the empire.  Year after year saw the

victorious monarch return laden with spoils, and followed by a throng of

tributary chieftains to his capital.  His reception there was a Roman

triumph.  The whole of its numerous population poured out to welcome

him, dressed in the gay and picturesque costumes of the different

provinces, With banners waving above their heads, and strewing

branches and flowers along the path of the conqueror.  The Inca, borne

aloft in his golden chair on the shoulders of his nobles, moved in solemn

procession, under the triumphal arches that were thrown across the way,

to the great temple of the Sun.  There, without attendants,--for all but the

monarch were excluded from the hallowed precincts,--the victorious

prince, stripped of his royal insignia, barefooted, and with all humility,

approached the awful shrine, and offered up sacrifice and thanksgiving

to the glorious Deity who presided over the fortunes of the Incas.  This

ceremony concluded, the whole population gave itself up to festivity;

music, revelry, and dancing were heard in every quarter of the capital,

and illuminations and bonfires commemorated the victorious campaign

of the Inca, and the accession of a new territory to his empire.77



In this celebration we see much of the character of a religious festival.

Indeed, the character of religion was impressed on all the Peruvian wars.

The life of an Inca was one long crusade against the infidel, to spread

wide the worship of the Sun, to reclaim the benighted nations from their

brutish superstitions, and impart to them the blessings of a well-regulated

government.  This, in the favorite phrase of our day, was the "mission"

of the Inca.  It was also the mission of the Christian conqueror who

invaded the empire of this same Indian potentate.  Which of the two

executed his mission most faithfully, history must decide.



Yet the Peruvian monarchs did not show a childish impatience in the

acquisition of empire.  They paused after a campaign, and allowed time

for the settlement of one conquest before they undertook another; and, in


this interval, occupied themselves with the quiet administration of their

kingdom, and with the long progresses, which brought them into nearer

intercourse with their people.  During this interval, also, their new

vassals had begun to accommodate themselves to the strange institutions

of their masters.  They learned to appreciate the value of a government

which raised them above the physical evils of a state of barbarism,

secured them protection of person, and a full participation in all the

privileges enjoyed by their conquerors; and, as they became more

familiar with the peculiar institutions of the country, habit, that second

nature, attached them the more strongly to these institutions, from their

very peculiarity.  Thus, by degrees, and without violence, arose the great

fabric of the Peruvian empire, composed of numerous independent and

even hostile tribes, yet, under the influence of a common religion,

common language, and common government, knit together as one nation,

animated by a spirit of love for its institutions and devoted loyalty to its

sovereign.  What a contrast to the condition of the Aztec monarchy, on

the neighboring continent, which, composed of the like heterogeneous

materials, without any internal principle of cohesion, was only held

together by the stern pressure, from without, of physical force !--Why the

Peruvian monarchy should have fared no better than its rival, in its

conflict with European civilization, will appear in the following pages.







Book 1



Chapter 3



Peruvian Religion--Deities--Gorgeous Temples--Festivals-

Virgins Of The Sun--Marriage



It is a remarkable fact, that many, if not most, of the rude tribes

inhabiting the vast American continent, however disfigured their creeds

may have been in other respects by a childish superstition, had attained

to the sublime conception of one Great Spirit, the Creator of the

Universe, who, immaterial in his own nature, was not to be dishonored

by an attempt at visible representation, and who, pervading all space,

was not to be circumscribed within the walls of a temple.  Yet these

elevated ideas, so far beyond the ordinary range of the untutored

intellect, do not seem to have led to the practical consequences that

might have been expected; and few of the American nations have shown

much solicitude for the maintenance of a religious worship, or found in

their faith a powerful spring of action.



But, with progress in civilization, ideas more akin to those of civilized

communities were gradually unfolded; a liberal provision was made, and

a separate order instituted, for the services of religion, which were

conducted with a minute and magnificent ceremonial, that challenged

comparison, in some respects, with that of the most polished nations of

Christendom.  This was the case with the nations inhabiting the table-

land of North America, and with the natives of Bogota, Quito, Peru, and

the other elevated regions on the great Southern continent.  It was, above

all, the case with the Peruvians, who claimed a divine original for the

founders of their empire, whose laws all rested on a divine sanction, and

whose domestic institutions and foreign wars were alike directed to

preserve and propagate their faith.  Religion was the basis of their polity,

the very condition, as it were, of their social existence.  The government

of the Incas, in its essential principles, was a theocracy.



Yet, though religion entered so largely into the fabric and conduct of the

political institutions of the people, their mythology, that is, the

traditionary legends by which they affected to unfold the mysteries of the

universe, was exceedingly mean and puerile.  Scarce one of their

traditions--except the beautiful one respecting the founders of their royal

dynasty--is worthy of note, or throws much light on their own antiquities,

or the primitive history of man.  Among the traditions of importance is

one of the deluge, which they held in common with so many of the

nations in all parts of the globe, and which they related with some

particulars that bear resemblance to a Mexican legend.1



Their ideas in respect to a future state of being deserve more attention.

They admitted the existence of a soul hereafter, and connected with this

a belief in the resurrection of the body.  They assigned two distinct

places for the residence of the good and of the wicked, the latter of

which they fixed in the centre of the earth.  The good they supposed were

to pass a luxurious life of tranquillity and ease, which comprehended

their highest notions of happiness.  The wicked were to expiate their

crimes by ages of wearisome labor.  They associated with these ideas a

belief in an evil principle or spirit, bearing the name of Cupay, whom

they did not attempt to propitiate by sacrifices, and who seems to have

been only a shadowy personification of sin, that exercised little influence

over their conduct.2



It was this belief in the resurrection of the body, which led them to

preserve the body with so much solicitude, by a simple process,

however, that, unlike the elaborate embalming of the Egyptians,

consisted in exposing it to the action of the cold, exceedingly dry, and

highly rarefied atmosphere of the mountains.3  As they believed that the

occupations in the future world would have great resemblance to those of

the present, they buried with the deceased noble some of his apparel, his

utensils, and, frequently, his treasures; and completed the gloomy

ceremony by sacrificing his wives and favorite domestics, to bear him

company and do him service in the happy regions beyond the clouds.4

Vast mounds of an irregular, or, more frequently, oblong shape,

penetrated by galleries running at right angles to each other, were raised

over the dead, whose dried bodies or mummies have been found in

considerable numbers, sometimes erect, but more often in the sitting

posture, common to the Indian tribes of both continents.  Treasures of

great value have also been occasionally drawn from these monumental

deposits, and have stimulated, speculators to repeated excavations with

the hope of similar good-fortune.  It was a lottery like that of searching

after mines, but where the chances have proved still more against the

adventurers.5



The Peruvians, like so many other of the Indian races, acknowledged a

Supreme Being, the Creator and Ruler of the Universe, whom they

adored under the different names of Pachacamac and Viracocha.6  No

temple was raised to this invisible Being, save one only in the valley

which took its name from the deity himself, not far from the Spanish city

of Lima.  Even this temple had existed there before the country came

under the sway of the Incas, and was the great resort of Indian pilgrims

from remote parts of the land; a circumstance which suggests the idea,

that the worship of this Great Spirit, though countenanced, perhaps, by

their accommodating policy, did not originate with the Peruvian

princes.7



The deity whose worship they especially inculcated, and which they

never failed to establish wherever their banners were known to penetrate,

was the Sun.  It was he, who, in a particular manner, presided over the

destinies of man; gave light and warmth to the nations, and life to the

vegetable world; whom they reverenced as the father of their royal

dynasty, the founder of their empire; and whose temples rose in every

city and almost every village throughout the land, while his altars

smoked with burnt offerings,--a form of sacrifice peculiar to the

Peruvians among the semi-civilized nations of the New World.8



Besides the Sun, the Incas acknowledged various objects of worship in

some way or other connected with this principal deity.  Such was the

Moon, his sister-wife; the Stars, revered as part of her heavenly train,-

though the fairest of them, Venus, known to the Peruvians by the name

of Chasca, or the "youth with the long and curling locks," was adored as

the page of the Sun, whom he attends so closely in his rising and in his

setting.  They dedicated temples also to the Thunder and Lightning,9 in

whom they recognized the Sun's dread ministers, and to the Rainbows

whom they worshipped as a beautiful emanation of their glorious

deity.10



In addition to these, the subjects of the Incas enrolled among their

inferior deities many objects in nature, as the elements, the winds, the

earth, the air, great mountains and rivers, which impressed them with

ideas of sublimity and power, or were supposed in some way or other to

exercise a mysterious influence over the destinies of man.11  They

adopted also a notion, not unlike that professed by some of the schools

of ancient philosophy, that every thing on earth had its archetype or idea,

its mother, as they emphatically styled it, which they held sacred, as, in

some sort, its spiritual essence.12  But their system, far from being

limited even to these multiplied objects of devotion, embraced within its

ample folds the numerous deities of the conquered nations, whose

images were transported to the capital, where the burdensome charges of

their worship were defrayed by their respective provinces.  It was a rare

stroke of policy in the Incas, who could thus accommodate their religion

to their interests.13



But the worship of the Sun constituted the peculiar care of the Incas, and

was the object of their lavish expenditure.  The most ancient of the many

temples dedicated to this divinity was in the Island of Titicaca, whence

the royal founders of the Peruvian line were said to have proceeded.

From this circumstance, this sanctuary was held in peculiar veneration.

Every thing which belonged to it, even the broad fields of maize, which

Surrounded the temple, and formed part of its domain, imbibed a portion

of its sanctity.  The yearly produce was distributed among the different

public magazines, in small quantities to each, as something that would

sanctify the remainder of the store.  Happy was the man who could

secure even an ear of the blessed harvest for his own granary! 14



But the most renowned of the Peruvian temples, the pride of the capital,

and the wonder of the empire, was at Cuzco, where, under the

munificence of successive sovereigns, it had become so enriched, that it

received the name of Coricancha, or "the Place of Gold." It consisted of

a principal building and several chapels and inferior edifices, covering a

large extent of ground in the heart of the city, and completely

encompassed by a wall, which, with the edifices, was all constructed of

stone.  The work was of the kind already described in the other public

buildings of the country, and was so finely executed, that a Spaniard,

who saw it in its glory, assures us, he could call to mind only two

edifices in Spain, which, for their workmanship, were at all to be

compared with it.15  Yet this substantial, and, in some respects,

magnificent structure, was thatched with straw !



The interior of the temple was the most worthy of admiration.  It was

literally a mine of gold.  On the western wall was emblazoned a

representation of the deity, consisting of a human countenance, looking

forth from amidst innumerable rays of light, which emanated from it in

every direction, in the same manner as the sun is often personified with

us.  The figure was engraved on a massive plate of gold of enormous

dimensions, thickly powdered with emeralds and precious stones.16  It

was so situated in front of the great eastern portal, that the rays of the

morning sun fell directly upon it at its rising, lighting up the whole

apartment with an effulgence that seemed more than natural, and which

was reflected back from the golden ornaments with which the walls and

ceiling were everywhere in crusted.  Gold, in the figurative language of

the people was "the tears wept by the sun," 17  and every part of the

interior of the temple glowed with burnished plates and studs of the

precious metal.  The cornices, which surrounded the walls of the

sanctuary, were of the same costly material; and a broad belt or frieze of

gold, let into the stonework, encompassed the whole exterior of the

edifice.18



Adjoining the principal structure were several chapels of smaller

dimensions.  One of them was consecrated to the Moon, the deity held

next in reverence, as the mother of the Incas.  Her effigy was delineated

in the same manner as that of the Sun, on a vast plate that nearly covered

one side of the apartment.  But this plate, as well as all the decorations of

the building, was of silver, as suited to the pale, silvery light of the

beautiful planet.  There were three other chapels, one of which was

dedicated to the host of Stars, who formed the bright court of the Sister

of the Sun; another was consecrated to his dread ministers of vengeance,

the Thunder and the Lightning; and a third, to the Rainbow, whose

many-colored arch spanned the walls of the edifice with hues almost as

radiant as its own.  There were besides several other buildings, or

insulated apartments, for the accommodation of the numerous priests

who officiated in the services of the temple.19



All the plate, the ornaments, the utensils of every description,

appropriated to the uses of religion, were of gold or silver.  Twelve

immense vases of the latter metal stood on the floor of the great saloon,

filled with grain of the Indian corn;20  the censers for the perfumes, the

ewers which held the water for sacrifice, the pipes which conducted it

through subterraneous channels into the buildings, the reservoirs that

received it, even the agricultural implements used in the gardens of the

temple, were all of the same rich materials.  The gardens, like those

described, belonging to the royal palaces, sparkled with flowers of gold

and silver, and various imitations of the vegetable kingdom.  Animals,

also, were to be found there,--among which the llama, with its golden

fleece, was most conspicuous,--executed in the same style, and with a

degree of skill, which, in this instance, probably, did not surpass the

excellence of the material.21



If the reader sees in this fairy picture only the romantic coloring of some

fabulous El Dorado, he must recall what has been said before in

reference to the palaces of the Incas, and consider that these "Houses of

the Sun," as they were styled, were the common reservoir into which

flowed all the streams of public and private benefaction throughout the

empire.  Some of the statements, through credulity, and others, in the

desire of exciting admiration, may be greatly exaggerated; but, in the

coincidence of contemporary testimony, it is not easy to determine the

exact line which should mark the measure of our skepticism.  Certain it

is, that the glowing picture I have given is warranted by those who saw

these buildings in their pride, or shortly after they had been despoiled by

the cupidity of their countrymen.  Many of the costly articles were buried

by the natives, or thrown into the waters of the rivers and the lakes; but

enough remained to attest the unprecedented opulence of these religious

establishments.  Such things as were in their nature portable were

speedily removed, to gratify the craving of the Conquerors, who even

tore away the solid cornices and frieze of gold from the great temple,

filling the vacant places with the cheaper, but--since it affords no

temptation to avarice--more durable, material of plaster.  Yet even thus

shorn of their splendor, the venerable edifices still presented an

attraction to the spoiler, who found in their dilapidated walls an

inexhaustable quarry for the erection of other buildings.  On the very

ground once crowned by the gorgeous Coricancha rose the stately church

of St. Dominic, one of the most magnificent structures of the New

World.  Fields of maize and lucerne now bloom on the spot which

glowed with the golden gardens of the temple; and the friar chants his

orisons within the consecrated precincts once occupied by the Children

of the Sun.22



Besides the great temple of the Sun, there was a large number of inferior

temples and religious houses in the Peruvian capital and its environs,

amounting, as is stated, to three or four hundred.23 For Cuzco was a

sanctified spot, venerated not only as the abode of the Incas, but of all

those deities who presided over the motley nations of the empire.  It was

the city beloved of the Sun; where his worship was maintained in its

splendor; "where every fountain, pathway, and wall," says an ancient

chronicler, "was regarded as a holy mystery." 24  And unfortunate was

the Indian noble who, at some period or other of his life, had not made

his pilgrimage to the Peruvian Mecca.



Other temples and religious dwellings were scattered over the provinces;

and some of them constructed on a scale of magnificence, that almost

rivalled that of the metropolis.  The attendants on these composed an

army of themselves.  The whole number of functionaries, including those

of the sacerdotal order, who officiated at the Coricancha alone, was no

less than four thousand.25



At the head of all, both here and throughout the land, stood the great

High-Priest, or Villac Vmu, as he was called.  He was second only to the

Inca in dignity, and was usually chosen from his brothers or nearest

kindred.  He was appointed by the monarch, and held his office for life;

and he, in turn, appointed to all the subordinate stations of his own order.

This order was very numerous.  Those members of it who officiated in

the House of the Sun, in Cuzco, were taken exclusively from the sacred

race of the Incas.  The ministers in the provincial temples were drawn

from the families of the curacas; but the office of high-priest in each

district was reserved for one of the blood royal.  It was designed by this

regulation to preserve the faith in its purity, and to guard against any

departure from the stately ceremonial which it punctiliously

prescribed.26



The sacerdotal order, though numerous, was not distinguished by any

peculiar badge or costume from the rest of the nation.  Neither was it the

sole depository of the scanty science of the country, nor was it charged

with the business of instruction, nor with those parochial duties, if they

may so be called, which bring the priest in contact with the great body of

the people,--as was the case in Mexico.  The cause of this peculiarity

may probably be traced to the existence of a superior order, like that of

the Inca nobles, whose sanctity of birth so far transcended all human

appointments, that they in a manner engrossed whatever there was of

religious veneration in the people.  They were, in fact, the holy order of

the state.  Doubtless, any of them might, as very many of them did, take

on themselves the sacerdotal functions; and their own insignia and

peculiar privileges were too well understood to require any further badge

to separate them from the people.



The duties of the priest were confined to ministration in the temple.

Even here his attendance was not constant, as he was relieved after a

stated interval by other brethren of his order, who succeeded one another

in regular rotation.  His science was limited to an acquaintance with the

fasts and festivals of his religion, and the appropriate ceremonies which

distinguished them.  This, however frivolous might be its character, was

no easy acquisition; for the ritual of the Incas involved a routine of

observances, as complex and elaborate as ever distinguished that of any

nation, whether pagan or Christian.  Each month had its appropriate

festival, or rather festivals.  The four principal had reference to the Sun,

and commemorated the great periods of his annual progress, the solstices

and equinoxes.  Perhaps the most magnificent of all the national

solemnities was the feast of Raymi, held at the period of the summer

solstice, when the Sun, having touched the southern extremity of his

course, retraced his path, as if to gladden the hearts of his chosen people

by his presence.  On this occasion, the Indian nobles from the different

quarters of the country thronged to the capital to take part in the great

religious celebration.



For three days previous, there was a general fast, and no fire was allowed

to be lighted in the dwellings.  When the appointed day arrived, the Inca

and his court, followed by the whole population of the city, assembled at

early dawn in the great square to greet the rising of the Sun.  They were

dressed in their gayest apparel, and the Indian lords vied with each other

in the display of costly ornaments and jewels on their persons, while

canopies of gaudy feather-work and richly tinted stuffs, borne by the

attendants over their heads, gave to the great square, and the streets that

emptied into it, the appearance of being spread over with one vast and

magnificent awning.  Eagerly they watched the coming of their deity,

and, no sooner did his first yellow rays strike the turrets and loftiest

buildings of the capital, than a shout of gratulation broke forth from the

assembled multitude, accompanied by songs of triumph, and the wild

melody of barbaric instruments, that swelled louder and louder as his

bright orb, rising above the mountain range towards the east, shone in

full splendor on his votaries.  After the usual ceremonies of adoration, a

libation was offered to the great deity by the Inca, from a huge golden

vase, filled with the fermented liquor of maize or of maguey, which,

after the monarch had tasted it himself, he dispensed among his royal

kindred.  These ceremonies completed, the vast assembly was arranged

in order of procession, and took its way towards the Coricancha.27



As they entered the street of the sacred edifice, all divested themselves of

their sandals, except the Inca and his family, who did the same on

passing through the portals of the temple, where none but these august

personages were admitted.28  After a decent time spent in devotion, the

sovereign, attended by his courtly train, again appeared, and preparations

were made to commence the sacrifice.  This, with the Peruvians,

consisted of animals, grain, flowers, and sweet-scented gums; sometimes

of human beings, on which occasions a child or beautiful maiden was

usually selected as the victim.  But such sacrifices were rare, being

reserved to celebrate some great public event, as a coronation, the birth

of a royal heir, or a great victory.  They were never followed by those

cannibal repasts familiar to the Mexicans, and to many of the fierce

tribes conquered by the Incas.  Indeed, the conquests of these princes

might well be deemed a blessing to the Indian nations, if it were only

from their suppression of cannibalism, and the diminution, under their

rule, of human sacrifices.29



At the feast of Raymi, the sacrifice usually offered was that of the llama;

and the priest, after opening the body of his victim, sought in the

appearances which it exhibited to read the lesson of the mysterious

future.  If the auguries were unpropitious, a second victim was

slaughtered, in the hope of receiving some more comfortable assurance.

The Peruvian augur might have learned a good lesson of the Roman,--to

consider every omen as favorable, which served the interests of his

country.30



A fire was then kindled by means of a concave mirror of polished metal,

which, collecting the rays of the sun into a focus upon a quantity of dried

cotton, speedily set it on fire.  It was the expedient used on the like

occasions in ancient Rome, at least under the reign of the pious Numa.

When the sky was overcast, and the face of the good deity was hidden

from his worshippers, which was esteemed a bad omen, fire was

obtained by means of friction.  The sacred flame was intrusted to the care

of the Virgins of the Sun, and if, by any neglect, it was suffered to go out

in the course of the year, the event was regarded as a calamity that boded

some strange disaster to the monarchy.31  A burnt offering of the victims

was then made on the altars of the deity.  This sacrifice was but the

prelude to the slaughter of a great number of llamas, part of the flocks of

the Sun, which furnished a banquet not only for the Inca and his Court,

but for the people, who made amends at these festivals for the frugal fare

to which they were usually condemned.  A fine bread or cake, kneaded

of maize flour by the fair hands of the Virgins of the Sun, was also

placed on the royal board, where the Inca, presiding over the feast,

pledged his great nobles in generous goblets of the fermented liquor of

the country, and the long revelry of the day was closed at night by music

and dancing.  Dancing and drinking were the favorite pastimes of the

Peruvians.  These amusements continued for several days, though the

sacrifices terminated on the first.--Such was the great festival of Raymi;

and the recurrence of this and similar festivities gave relief to the

monotonous routine of toil prescribed to the lower orders of the

community.32



In the distribution of bread and wine at this high festival, the orthodox

Spaniards, who first came into the country, saw a striking resemblance to

the Christian communion; 33  as in the practice of confession and

penance, which, in a most irregular form, indeed, seems to have been

used by the Peruvians, they discerned a coincidence with another of the

sacraments of the Church.34  The good fathers were fond of tracing such

coincidences, which they considered as the contrivance of Satan, who

thus endeavored to delude his victims by counterfeiting the blessed rites

of Christianity.35  Others, in a different vein, imagined that they saw in

such analogies the evidence, that some of the primitive teachers of the

Gospel, perhaps an apostle himself, had paid a visit to these distant

regions, and scattered over them the seeds of religious truth.36  But it

seems hardly necessary to invoke the Prince of Darkness, or the

intervention of the blessed saints, to account for coincidences which

have existed in countries far removed from the light of Christianity, and

in ages, indeed, when its light had not yet risen on the world.  It is much

more reasonable to refer such casual points of resemblance to the general

constitution of man, and the necessities of his moral nature.37



Another singular analogy with Roman Catholic institutions is presented

by the Virgins of the Sun, the "elect," as they were called,38 to whom I

have already had occasion to refer.  These were young maidens,

dedicated to the service of the deity, who, at a tender age, were taken

from their homes, and introduced into convents, where they were placed

under the care of certain elderly matrons, mamaconas, who had grown

grey within their walls.39  Under these venerable guides, the holy virgins

were instructed in the nature of their religious duties.  They were

employed in spinning and embroidery, and, with the fine hair of the

vicuna wove the hangings for the temples, and the apparel for the Inca

and his household.40  It was their duty, above all, to watch over the

sacred fire obtained at the festival of Raymi.  From the moment they

entered the establishment, they were cut off from all connection with the

world, even with their own family and friends.  No one but the Inca, and

the Coya or queen, might enter the consecrated precincts.  The greatest

attention was paid to their morals, and visitors were sent every year to

inspect the institutions, and to report on the state of their discipline.41

Woe to the unhappy maiden who was detected in an intrigue!  By the

stern law of the Incas, she was to be buried alive, her lover was to be

strangled, and the town or village to which he belonged was to be razed

to the ground, and "sowed with stones," as if to efface every memorial of

his existence.42  One is astonished to find so close a resemblance

between the institutions of the American Indian, the ancient Roman, and

the modern Catholic! Chastity and purity of life are virtues in woman,

that would seem to be of equal estimation with the barbarian and with the

civilized.--Yet the ultimate destination of the inmates of these religious

houses was materially different.



The great establishment at Cuzco consisted wholly of maidens of the

royal blood, who amounted, it is said, to no less than fifteen hundred.

The provincial convents were supplied from the daughters of the curacas

and inferior nobles, and, occasionally, where a girl was recommended by

great personal attractions, from the lower classes of the people.43  The

"Houses of the Virgins of the Sun" consisted of low ranges of stone

buildings, covering a large extent of ground, surrounded by high walls,

which excluded those within entirely from observation.  They were

provided with every accommodation for the fair inmates, and were

embellished in the same sumptuous and costly manner as the palaces of

the Incas, and the temples; for they received the particular care of

government, as an important part of the religious establishment.44



Yet the career of all the inhabitants of these cloisters was not confined

within their narrow walls.  Though Virgins of the Sun, they were brides

of the Inca, and, at a marriageable age, the most beautiful among them

were selected for the honors of his bed, and transferred to the royal

seraglio.  The full complement of this amounted in time not only to

hundreds, but thousands, who all found accommodations in his different

palaces throughout the country.  When the monarch was disposed to

lessen the number of his establishment, the concubine with whose society

he was willing to dispense returned, not to her former monastic

residence, but to her own home; where, however humble might be her

original condition, she was maintained in great state, and, far from being

dishonored by the situation she had filled, was held in universal

reverence as the Inca's bride.45



The great nobles of Peru were allowed, like their sovereign, a plurality of

wives.  The people, generally, whether by law, or by necessity stronger

than law, were more happily limited to one.  Marriage was conducted in

a manner that gave it quite as original a character as belonged to the

other institutions of the country.  On an appointed day of the year, all

those of a marriageable age--which, having reference to their ability to

take charge of a family, in the males was fixed at not less than

twentyfour years, and in the women at eighteen or twenty--were called

together in the great squares of their respective towns and villages,

throughout the empire.  The Inca presided in person over the assembly of

his own kindred, and taking the hands of the different couples who were

to be united, he placed them within each other, declaring the parties man

and wife.  The same was done by the curacas towards all persons of their

own or inferior degree in their several districts.  This was the simple

form of marriage in Peru.  No one was allowed to select a wife beyond

the community to which he belonged, which generally comprehended all

his own kindred; 46 nor was any but the sovereign authorized to dispense

with the law of nature--or at least, the usual law of nations--so far as to

marry his own sister.47  No marriage was esteemed valid without the

consent of the parents; and the preference of the parties, it is said, was

also to be consulted; though, considering the barriers imposed by the

prescribed age of the candidates, this must have been within rather

narrow and whimsical limits.  A dwelling was got ready for the new-

married pair at the charge of the district, and the prescribed portion of

land assigned for their maintenance.  The law of Peru provided for the

future, as well as for the present.  It left nothing to chance.--The simple

ceremony of marriage was followed by general festivities among the

friends of the parties, which lasted several days; and as every wedding

took place on the same day, and as there were few families who had not

someone of their members or their kindred personally interested, there

was one universal bridal jubilee throughout the empire.48



The extraordinary regulations respecting marriage under the Incas are,

eminently characteristic of the genius of the government; which, far from

limiting itself to matters of public concern, penetrated into the most

private recesses of domestic life, allowing no man, however humble, to

act for himself, even in those personal matters in which none but himself,

or his family at most, might be supposed to be interested.  No Peruvian

was too low for the fostering vigilance of government.  None was so high

that he was not made to feel his dependence upon it in every act of his

life.  His very existence as an individual was absorbed in that of the

community.  His hopes and his fears, his joys and his sorrows, the

tenderest sympathies of his nature, which would most naturally shrink

from observation, were all to be regulated by law.  He was not allowed

even to be happy in his own way.  The government of the Incas was the

mildest, --but the most searching of despotisms.







Book 1



Chapter 4



Education--Quipus-Astronomy-Agriculture--Aqueducts-Guano--

Important Esculents



"Science was not intended for the people; but for those of generous

blood.  Persons of low degree are only puffed up by it, and rendered

vain and arrogant.  Neither should such meddle with the affairs of

government; for this would bring high offices into disrepute, and cause

detriment to the state.1 Such was the favorite maxim, often repeated, of

Tupac Inca Yupanqui, one of the most renowned of the Peruvian

sovereigns.  It may seem strange that such a maxim should ever have

been proclaimed in the New World, where popular institutions have beer

established on a more extensive scale than was ever before witnessed;

where government rests wholly on the people; and education--at least, in

the great northern division of the continent--is mainly directed to qualify

the people for the duties of government.  Yet this maxim was strictly

conformable to the genius of the Peruvian monarchy, and may serve as a

key to its habitual policy; since, while it watched with unwearied

solicitude over its subjects, provided for their physical necessities, was

mindful of their morals, and showed, throughout, the affectionate

concern of a parent for his children, it yet regarded them only as

children, who were never to emerge from the state of pupilage, to act or

to think for themselves, but whose whole duty was comprehended in the

obligation of implicit obedience.



Such was the humiliating condition of the people under the Incas: while

the numerous families of the blood royal enjoyed the benefit of all the

light of education, which the civilization of the country could afford;

and, long after the Conquest, the spots continued to be pointed out where

the seminaries had existed for their instruction.  These were placed

under the care of the amautas, or "wise men," who engrossed the scanty

stock of science--if science it could be called--possessed by the

Peruvians, and who were the sole teachers of youth.  It was natural that

the monarch should take a lively interest in the instruction of the young

nobility, his own kindred.  Several of the Peruvian princes are said to

have built their palaces in the neighborhood of the schools, in order that

they might the more easily visit them and listen to the lectures of the

amautas, which they occasionally reinforced by a homily of their own.2

In these schools, the royal pupils were instructed in all the different kinds

of knowledge in which their teachers were versed, with especial

reference to the stations they were to occupy in after-life.  They studied

the laws, and the principles of administering the government, in which

many of them were to take part.  They were initiated in the peculiar rites

of their religion, most necessary to those who were to assume the

sacerdotal functions.  They learned also to emulate the achievements of

their royal ancestors by listening to the chronicles compiled by the

amautas.  They were taught to speak their own dialect with purity and

elegance; and they became acquainted with the mysterious science of the

quipus, which supplied the Peruvians with the means of communicating

their ideas to one another, and of transmitting them to future

generations.3



The quipu was a cord about two feet long, composed of different colored

threads tightly twisted together, from which a quantity of smaller threads

were suspended in the manner of a fringe.  The threads were of different

colors and were tied into knots.  The word quipu, indeed, signifies a

knot.  The colors denoted sensible objects; as, for instance, white

represented silver, and yellow, gold.  They sometimes also stood for

abstract ideas.  Thus, white signified peace, and red, war.  But the

quipus were chiefly used for arithmetical purposes.  The knots served

instead of ciphers, and could be combined in such a manner as to

represent numbers to any amount they required.  By means of these they

went through their calculations with great rapidity, and the Spaniards

who first visited the country bear testimony to their accuracy.4



Officers were established in each of the districts, who, under the title of

quipucamayus, Or "keepers of the quipus," were required to furnish the

government with information on various important matters.  One had

charge of the revenues, reported the quantity of raw material distributed

among the laborers, the quality and quantity of the fabrics made from it,

and the amount of stores, of various kinds, paid into the royal magazines.

Another exhibited the register of births and deaths, the marriages, the

number of those qualified to bear arms, and the like details in reference

to the population of the kingdom.  These returns were annually

forwarded to the capital, where they were submitted to the inspection of

officers acquainted with the art of deciphering these mystic records.

The government was thus provided with a valuable mass of statistical

information, and the skeins of many-colored threads, collected and

carefully preserved, constituted what might be called the national

archives.5



But, although the quipus sufficed for all the purposes of arithmetical

computation demanded by the Peruvians, they were incompetent to

represent the manifold ideas and images which are expressed by writing,

Even here, however, the invention was not without its use.  For,

independently of the direct representation of simple objects, and even of

abstract ideas, to a very limited extent, as above noticed, it afforded great

help to the memory by way of association.  The peculiar knot or color,

in this way, suggested what it could not venture to represent; in the same

manner-to borrow the homely illustration of an old writer--as the number

of the Commandment calls to mind the Commandment itself.  The

quipus, thus used, might be regarded as the Peruvian system of

mnemonics.



Annalists were appointed in each of the principal communities, whose

business it was to record the most important events which occurred in

them.  Other functionaries of a higher character, usually the amautas,

were intrusted with the history of the empire, and were selected to

chronicle the great deeds of the reigning Inca, or of his ancestors.6  The

narrative, thus concocted, could be communicated only by oral tradition;

but the quipus served the chronicler to arrange the incidents with

method, and to refresh his memory.  The story, once treasured up in the

mind, was indelibly impressed there by frequent repetition.  It was

repeated by the amauta to his pupils, and in this way history, conveyed

partly by oral tradition, and partly by arbitrary signs, was handed down

from generation to generation, with sufficient discrepancy of details, but

with a general conformity of outline to the truth.



The Peruvian quipus were, doubtless, a wretched substitute for that

beautiful contrivance, the alphabet, which, employing a few simple

characters as the representatives of sounds, instead of ideas, is able to

convey the most delicate shades of thought that ever passed through the

mind of man.  The Peruvian invention, indeed, was far below that of the

hieroglyphics, even below the rude picture-writing of the Aztecs; for the

latter art, however incompetent to convey abstract ideas, could depict

sensible objects with tolerable accuracy.  It is evidence of the total

ignorance in which the two nations remained of each other, that the

Peruvians should have borrowed nothing of the hieroglyphical system of

the Mexicans, and this, notwithstanding that the existence of the maguey

plant agave, in South America might have furnished them with the very

material used by the Aztecs for the construction of their maps.7



It is impossible to contemplate without interest the struggles made by

different nations, as they emerge from barbarism, to supply themselves

with some visible symbols of thought,--that mysterious agency by which

the mind of the individual may be put in communication with the minds

of a whole community.  The want of such a symbol is itself the greatest

impediment to the progress of civilization.  For what is it but to

imprison the thought, which has the elements of immortality, within the

bosom of its author, or of the small circle who come in contact with him,

instead of sending it abroad to give light to thousands, and to generations

yet unborn! Not only is such a symbol an essential element of

civilization, but it may be assumed as the very criterion of civilization;

for the intellectual advancement of a people will keep pace pretty nearly

with its facilities for intellectual communication.



Yet we must be careful not to underrate the real value of the Peruvian

system; nor to suppose that the quipus were as awkward an instrument, in

the hand of a practised native, as they would be in ours.  We know the

effect of habit in all mechanical operations, and the Spaniards bear

constant testimony to the adroitness and accuracy of the Peruvians in

this.  Their skill is not more surprising than the facility with which habit

enables us to master the contents of a printed page, comprehending

thousands of separate characters, by a single glance, as it were, though

each character must require a distinct recognition by the eye, and that,

too, without breaking the chain of thought in the reader's mind.  We

must not hold the invention of the quipus too lightly, when we reflect

that they supplied the means of calculation demanded for the affairs of a

great nation, and that, however insufficient, they afforded no little help to

what aspired to the credit of literary composition.



The office of recording the national annals was not wholly confined to

the amautas.  It was assumed in part by the haravecs, or poets, who

selected the most brilliant incidents for their songs or ballads, which

were chanted at the royal festivals and at the table of the Inca.8  In this

manner, a body of traditional minstrelsy grew up, like the British and

Spanish ballad poetry, by means of which the name of many a rude

chieftain, that might have perished for want of a chronicler, has been

borne down the tide of rustic melody to later generations.



Yet history may be thought not to gain much by this alliance with poetry;

for the domain of the poet extends over an ideal realm peopled with the

shadowy forms of fancy, that bear little resemblance to the rude realities

of life.  The Peruvian annals may be deemed to show somewhat of the

effects of this union, since there is a tinge of the marvellous spread over

them down to the very latest period, which, like a mist before the reader's

eye, makes it difficult to distinguish between fact and fiction.



The poet found a convenient instrument for his purposes in the beautiful

Quichua dialect.  We have already seen the extraordinary measures

taken by the Incas for propagating their language throughout their

empire.  Thus naturalized in the remotest provinces, it became enriched

by a variety of exotic words and idioms, which, under the influence of

the Court and of poetic culture, if I may so express myself, was gradually

blended, like some finished mosaic made up of coarse and disjointed

materials, into one harmonious whole.  The Quichua became the most

comprehensive and various, as well as the most elegant, of the South

American dialects.9



Besides the compositions already noticed, the Peruvians, it is said,

showed some talent for theatrical exhibitions; not those barren

pantomimes which, addressed simply to the eye, have formed the

amusement of more than one rude nation.  The Peruvian pieces aspired

to the rank of dramatic compositions, sustained by character and

dialogue, founded sometimes on themes of tragic interest, and at others

on such as, from their light and social character, belong to comedy.10

Of the execution of these pieces we have now no means of judging.  It

was probably rude enough, as befitted an unformed people.  But,

whatever may have been the execution, the mere conception of such an

amusement is a proof of refinement that honorably distinguishes the

Peruvian from the other American races, whose pastime was war, or the

ferocious sports that reflect the image of it.



The intellectual character of the Peruvians, indeed, seems to have been

marked rather by a tendency to refinement than by those hardier qualities

which insure success in the severer walks of science.  In these they were

behind several of the semi-civilized nations of the New World.  They

had some acquaintance with geography, so far as related to their own

empire, which was indeed extensive; and they constructed maps with

lines raised on them to denote the boundaries and localities, on a similar

principle with those formerly used by the blind.  In astronomy, they

appear to have made but moderate proficiency.  They divided the year

into twelve lunar months, each of which, having its own name, was

distinguished by its appropriate festival.11  They had, also, weeks; but of

what length, whether of seven, nine, or ten days, is uncertain.  As their

lunar year would necessarily fall short of the true time, they rectified

their calendar by solar observations made by means of a number of

cylindrical columns raised on the high lands round Cuzco, which served

them for taking azimuths; and, by measuring their shadows, they

ascertained the exact times of the solstices.  The period of the equinoxes

they determined by the help of a solitary pillar, or gnomon, placed in the

centre of a circle, which was described in the area of the great temple,

and traversed by a diameter that was drawn from east to west.  When the

shadows were scarcely visible under the noontide rays of the sun, they

said that "the god sat with all his light upon the column." 12  Quito

which lay immediately under the equator, where the vertical rays of the

sun threw no shadow at noon, was held in especial veneration as the

favored abode of the great deity.  The period of the equinoxes was

celebrated by public rejoicings.  The pillar was crowned by the golden

chair of the Sun, and, both then and at the solstices, the columns were

hung with garlands, and offerings of flowers and fruits were made, while

high festival was kept throughout the empire.  By these periods the

Peruvians regulated their religious rites and ceremonial, and prescribed

the nature of their agricultural labors.  The year itself took its departure

from the date of the winter solstice.13



This meagre account embraces nearly all that has come down to us of

Peruvian astronomy.  It may seem strange that a nation, which had

proceeded thus far in its observations, should have gone no farther; and

that, notwithstanding its general advance in civilization, it should in this

science have fallen so far short, not only of the Mexicans, but of the

Muyscas, inhabiting the same elevated regions of the great southern

plateau with themselves.  These latter regulated their calendar on the

same general plan of cycles and periodical series as the Aztecs,

approaching yet nearer to the system pursued by the people of Asia.14



It might have been expected that the Incas, the boasted children of the

Sun, would have made a particular study of the phenomena of the

heavens, and have constructed a calendar on principles as scientific as

that of their semi-civilized neighbors.  One historian, indeed, assures us

that they threw their years into cycles of ten, a hundred, and a thousand

years, and that by these cycles they regulated their chronology.15  But

this assertion--not improbable in itself--rests on a writer but little gifted

with the spirit of criticism, and is counter-balanced by the silence of

every higher and earlier authority, as well as by the absence of any

monument, like those found among other American nations, to attest the

existence of such a calendar.  The inferiority of the Peruvians may be,

perhaps, in part explained by the fact of their priesthood being drawn

exclusively from the body of the Incas, a privileged order of nobility,

who had no need, by the assumption of superior learning, to fence

themselves round from the approaches of the vulgar.  The little true

science possessed by the Aztec priest supplied him with a key to unlock

the mysteries of the heavens, and the false system of astrology which he

built upon it gave him credit as a being who had something of divinity in

his own nature.  But the Inca noble was divine by birth.  The illusory

study of astrology, so captivating to the unenlightened mind, engaged no

share of his attention.  The only persons in Peru, who claimed the power

of reading the mysterious future, were the diviners, men who, combining

with their pretensions some skill in the healing art, resembled the

conjurors found among many of the Indian tribes.  But the office was

held in little repute, except among the lower classes, and was abandoned

to those whose age and infirmity disqualified them for the real business

of life.16



The Peruvians had knowledge of one or two constellations, and watched

the motions of the planet Venus, to which, as we have seen, they

dedicated altars.  But their ignorance of the first principles of

astronomical science is shown by their ideas of eclipses, which, they

supposed, denoted some great derangement of the planet; and when the

moon labored under one of these mysterious infirmities, they sounded

their instruments, and filled the air with shouts and lamentations, to rouse

her from her lethargy.  Such puerile conceits as these form a striking

contrast with the real knowledge of the Mexicans, as displayed in their

hieroglyphical maps, in which the true cause of this phenomenon is

plainly depicted.17



But, if less successful in exploring the heavens, the Incas must be

admitted to have surpassed every other American race in their dominion

over the earth.  Husbandry was pursued by them on principles that may

be truly called scientific.  It was the basis of their political institutions.

Having no foreign commerce, it was agriculture that furnished them with

the means of their internal exchanges, their subsistence, and their

revenues.  We have seen their remarkable provisions for distributing the

land in equal shares among the people, while they required every man,

except the privileged orders, to assist in its cultivation.  The Inca himself

did not disdain to set the example.  On one of the great annual festivals,

he proceeded to the environs of Cuzco, attended by his Court, and, in the

presence of all the people, turned up the earth with a golden plough,--or

an instrument that served as such,--thus consecrating the occupation of

the husbandman as one worthy to be followed by the Children of the

Sun.18



The patronage of the government did not stop with this cheap display of

royal condescension, but was shown in the most efficient measures for

facilitating the labors of the husbandman.  Much of the country along the

sea-coast suffered from want of water, as little or no rain fell there, and

the few streams, in their short and hurried course from the mountains,

exerted only a very limited influence on the wide extent of territory.  The

soil, it is true, was, for the most part, sandy and sterile; but many places

were capable of being reclaimed, and, indeed, needed only to be

properly irrigated to be susceptible of extraordinary production.  To

these spots water was conveyed by means of canals and subterraneous

aqueducts, executed on a noble scale.  They consisted of large slabs of

freestone nicely fitted together without cement, and discharged a volume

of water sufficient, by means of latent ducts or sluices, to moisten the

lands in the lower level, through which they passed.  Some of these

aqueducts were of great length.  One that traversed the district of

Condesuyu measured between four and five hundred miles.  They were

brought from some elevated lake or natural reservoir in the heart of the

mountains, and were fed at intervals by other basins which lay in their

route along the slopes of the sierra.  In this descent, a passage was

sometimes to be opened through rocks,--and this without the aid of iron

tools; impracticable mountains were to be turned; rivers and marshes to

be crossed; in short, the same obstacles were to be encountered as in the

construction of their mighty roads.  But the Peruvians seemed to take

pleasure in wrestling with the difficulties of nature.  Near Caxamarca, a

tunnel is still visible, which they excavated in the mountains, to give an

outlet to the waters of a lake, when these rose to a height in the rainy

season that threatened the country with inundation.19



Most of these beneficent works of the Incas were suffered to go to decay

by their Spanish conquerors.  In some spots, the waters are still left to

flow in their silent, subterraneous channels, whose windings and whose

sources have been alike unexplored.  Others, though partially

dilapidated, and closed up with rubbish and the rank vegetation of the

soil, still betray their course by occasional patches of fertility.  Such are

the remains in the valley of Nasca, a fruitful spot that lies between long

tracts of desert; where the ancient water-courses of the Incas, measuring

four or five feet in depth by three in width, and formed of large blocks of

uncemented masonry, are conducted from an unknown distance.



The greatest care was taken that every occupant of the land through

which these streams passed should enjoy the benefit of them.  The

quantity of water alloted to each was prescribed by law; and royal

overseers superintended the distribution, and saw that it was faithfully

applied to the irrigation of the ground.20



The Peruvians showed a similar spirit of enterprise in their schemes for

introducing cultivation into the mountainous parts of their domain.

Many of the hills, though covered with a strong soil, were too precipitous

to be tilled.  These they cut into terraces, faced with rough stone,

diminishing in regular gradation towards the summit; so that, while the

lower strip, or anden, as it was called by the Spaniards, that belted round

the base of the mountain, might comprehend hundreds of acres, the

upper-most was only large enough to accommodate a few rows of Indian

corn.21  Some of the eminences presented such a mess of solid rock,

that, after being hewn into terraces, they were obliged to be covered deep

with earth, before they could serve the purpose of the husbandman.  With

such patient toil did the Peruvians combat the formidable obstacles

presented by the face of their country! Without the use of tools or the

machinery familiar to the European, each individual could have done

little; but acting in large masses, and under a common direction, they

were enabled by indefatigable perseverance to achieve results, to have

attempted which might have filled even the European with dismay.22



In the same spirit of economical husbandry which redeemed the rocky

sierra from the curse of sterility, they dug below the arid soil of the

valleys, and sought for a stratum where some natural moisture might be

found.  These excavations, called by the Spaniards hoyas, or "pits," were

made on a great scale, comprehending frequently more than an acre,

sunk to the depth of fifteen or twenty feet, and fenced round within by a

wall of adobes, or bricks baked in the sun.  The bottom of the

excavation, well prepared by a rich manure of the sardines,--a small fish

obtained in vast quantities along the coast,--was planted with some kind

or grain or vegetable.23



The Peruvian farmers were well acquainted with the different kinds of

manures, and made large use of them; a circumstance rare in the rich

lands of the tropics, and probably not elsewhere practised by the rude

tribes of America.  They made great use of guano, the valuable deposit

of sea-fowl, that has attracted so much attention, of late, from the

agriculturists both of Europe and of our own country, and the stimulating

and nutritious properties of which the Indians perfectly appreciated.

This was found in such immense quantities on many of the little islands

along the coast, as to have the appeaarnce of lofty hills, which, covered

with a white saline incrustation, led the Conquerors to give them the

name of the sierra nevada, or "snowy mountains."



The Incas took their usual precautions for securing the benefits of this

important article to the husbandman.  They assigned the small islands on

the coast to the use of the respective districts which lay adjacent to them.

When the island was large, it was distributed among several districts, and

the boundaries for each were clearly defined.  All encroachment on the

rights of another was severely punished.  And they secured the

preservation of the fowl by penalties as stern as those by which the

Norman tyrants of England protected their own game.  No one was

allowed to set foot on the island during the season for breeding, under

pain of death; and to kill the birds at any time was punished in the like

manner.24



With this advancement in agricultural science, the Peruvians might be

supposed to have had some knowledge of the plough, in such general use

among the primitive nations of the eastern continent.  But they had

neither the iron ploughshare of the Old World, nor had they animals for

.draught, which, indeed, were nowhere found in the New.  The

instrument which they used was a strong, sharp-pointed stake, traversed

by a horizontal piece, ten or twelve inches from the point, on which the

ploughman might set his foot and force it into the ground.  Six or eight

strong men were attached by ropes to the stake, and dragged it forcibly

along, --pulling together, and keeping time as they moved by chanting

their national songs, in which they were accompanied by the women who

followed in their-train, to break up the sods with their rakes.  The mellow

soil offered slight resistance; and the laborer., by long practice, acquired

a dexterity which enabled him to turn up the ground to the requisite

depth with astonishing facility.  This substitute for the plough was but a

clumsy contrivance; yet it is curious as the only specimen of the kind

among the American aborigines, and was perhaps not much inferior to

the wooden instrument introduced in its stead by the European

conquerors .25



It was frequently the policy of the Incas, after providing a deserted tract

with the means for irrigation, and thus fitting it for the labors of the

husbandman, to transplant there a colony of mitimaes, who brought it

under cultivation by raising the crops best suited to the soil.  While the

peculiar character and capacity of the lands were thus consulted, a means

of exchange of the different products was afforded to the neighboring

provinces, which, from the formation of the country, varied much more

than usual within the same limits.  To facilitate these agricultural

exchanges, fairs were instituted, which took place three times a month in

some of the most populous places, where, as money was unknown, a

rude kind of commerce was kept up by the barter of their respective

products.  These fairs afforded so many holidays for the relaxation of the

industrious laborer.26



Such were the expedients adopted by the Incas for the improvement of

their territory; and, although imperfect, they must be allowed to show an

acquaintance with the principles of agricultural science, that gives them

some claim to the rank of a civilized people.  Under their patient and

discriminating culture, every inch of good soil was tasked to its greatest

power of production; while the most-unpromising spots were compelled

to contribute something to the subsistence of the people.  Everywhere the

land teemed with evidence of agricultural wealth, from the smiling

valleys along the coast to the terraced steeps of the sierra, which, rising

into pyramids of verdure, glowed with all the splendors of tropical

vegetation.



The formation of the country was particularly favorable, as already

remarked, to an infinite variety of products, not so much from its extent

as from its various elevations, which, more remarkable, even, than those

in Mexico, comprehend every degree of latitude from the equator to the

polar regions.  Yet, though the temperature changes in this region with

the degree of elevation, it remains nearly the same in the same spots

throughout the year; and the inhabitant feels none of those grateful

vicissitudes of season which belong to the temperate latitudes of the

globe.  Thus, while the summer lies in full power on the burning regions

of the palm and the cocoa-tree that fringe the borders of the ocean, the

broad surface of the table-land blooms with the freshness of perpetual

spring, and the higher summits of the Cordilleras are white with

everlasting winter.



The Peruvians turned this fixed variety of climate, if I may so say, to the

best account by cultivating the productions appropriate to each; and they

particularly directed their attention to those which afforded the most

nutriment to man.  Thus, in the lower level were to be found the

cassavatree and the banana, that bountiful plant, which seems to have

relieved man from the primeval curse--if it were not rather a blessing--of

toiling for his sustenance.27  As the banana faded from the landscape, a

good substitute was found in the maize, the great agricultural staple of

both the northern and southern divisions of the American continent; and

which, after its exportation to the Old World, spread so rapidly there, as

to suggest the idea of its being indigenous to it.28  The Peruvians were

well acquainted with the different modes of preparing this useful

vegetable, though it seems they did not use it for bread, except at

festivals; and they extracted a sort of honey from the stalk, and made an

intoxicating liquor from the fermented grain, to which, like the Aztecs,

they were immoderately addicted.29



The temperate climate of the table-land furnished them with the maguey,

agave Americana, many of the extraordinary qualities of which they

comprehended, though not its most important one of affording a material

for paper.  Tobacco, too, was among the products of this elevated region.

Yet the Peruvians differed from every other Indian nation to whom it was

known, by using it only for medicinal purposes, in the form of snuff.30

They may have found a substitute for its narcotic qualities in the coco

(Erythroxylum Peruvianurn), or cuca, as called by the natives.  This is a

shrub which grows to the height of a man.  The leaves when gathered are

dried in the sun, and, being mixed with a little lime, form a preparation

for chewing, much like the betel-leaf of the East.31  With a small supply

of this cuca in his pouch, and a handful of roasted maize, the Peruvian

Indian of our time performs his wearisome journeys, day ,after day,

without fatigue, or, at least, without complaint.  Even food the most

invigorating is less grateful to him than his loved narcotic.  Under the

Incas, it is said to have been exclusively reserved for the noble orders.  If

so, the people gained one luxury by the Conquest; and, after that period,

it was so extensively used by them, that this article constituted a most

important item of the colonial revenue of Spain.32  Yet, with the

soothing charms of an opiate, this weed so much vaunted by the natives,

when used to excess, is said to be attended with all the mischievous

effects of habitual intoxication.33



Higher up on the slopes of the Cordilleras, beyond the limits of the maize

and of the quinoa,--a grain bearing some resemblance to rice, and largely

cultivated by the Indians,--was to be found the potato, the introduction of

which into Europe has made an era in the history of agriculture.

Whether indigenous to Peru, or imported from the neighboring country

of Chili, it formed the great staple of the more elevated plains, under the

Incas, and its culture was continued to a height in the equatorial regions

which reached many thousand feet above the limits of perpetual snow in

the temperate latitudes of Europe.34  Wild specimens of the vegetable

might be seen still higher, springing up spontaneously amidst the stunted

shrubs that clothed the lofty sides of the Cordilleras till these gradually

subsided into the mosses and the short yellow grass: pajonal, which, like

a golden carpet, was unrolled around the base of the mighty cones, that

rose far into the regions of eternal silence, covered with the snows of

centuries.35







Book 1



Chapter 5



Peruvian Sheep--Great Hunts--Manufactures--Mechanical Skill--

Architecture--Concluding Reflections



A Nation which had made such progress in agriculture might be

reasonably expected to have made, also, some proficiency in the

mechanical arts--especially when, as in the case of the Peruvians, their

agricultural economy demanded in itself no inconsiderable degree of

mechanical skill.  Among most nations, progress in manufactures has

been found to have an intimate connection with the progress of

husbandry.  Both arts are directed to the same great object of supplying

the necessaries, the comforts, or, in a more refined condition of society,

the luxuries of life; and when the one is brought to a perfection that

infers a certain advance in civilization, the other must naturally find a

corresponding development under the increasing demands and capacities

of such a state.  The subjects of the Incas, in their patient and tranquil

devotion to the more humble occupations of industry which bound them

to their native soil, bore greater resemblance to the Oriental nations, as

the Hindoos and Chinese, than they bore to the members of the great

Anglo-Saxon family whose hardy temper has driven them to seek their

fortunes on the stormy ocean, and to open a commerce with the most

distant regions of the globe.  The Peruvians, though lining a long extent

of sea-coast, had no foreign commerce.



They had peculiar advantages for domestic manufacture in a material

incomparably superior to anything possessed by the other races of the

Western continent.  They found a good substitute for linen in a fabric

which, like the Aztecs, they knew how to weave from the tough thread of

the maguey.  Cotton grew luxuriantly on the low, sultry level of the

coast, and furnished them with a clothing suitable to the milder latitudes

of the country.  But from the llama and the kindred species of Peruvian

sheep they obtained a fleece adapted to the colder climate of the

table]and, "more estimable," to quote the language of a well-informed

writer, "than the down of the Canadian beaver, the fleece of the brebis

des Calmoucks, or of the Syrian goat." 1



Of the four varieties of the Peruvian sheep, the llama, the one most

familiarly known, is the least valuable on account of its wool.  It is

chiefly employed as a beast of burden, for which, although it is

somewhat larger than any of the other varieties, its diminutive size and

strength would seem to disqualify it.  It carries a load of little more than

a hundred pounds, and cannot travel above three or four leagues in a day.

But all this is compensated by the little care and cost required for its

management and its maintenance.  It picks up an easy subsistence from

the moss and stunted herbage that grow scantily along the withered sides

and the steeps of the Cordilleras.  The structure of its stomach, like that

of the camel, is such as to enable it to dispense with any supply of water

for weeks, nay, months together.  Its spongy hoof, armed with a claw or

pointed talon to enable it to take secure hold on the ice, never requires to

be shod; and the load laid upon its back rests securely in its bed of wool,

without the aid of girth or saddle.  The llamas move in troops of five

hundred or even a thousand, and thus, though each individual carries but

little, the aggregate is considerable.  The whole caravan travels on at its

regular pace, passing the night in the open air without suffering from the

coldest temperature, and marching in perfect order, and in obedience to

the voice of the driver.  It is only when overloaded that the spirited little

animal refuses to stir, and neither blows nor caresses can induce him to

rise from the ground.  He is as sturdy in asserting his rights on this

occasion, as he is usually docile and unresisting.2



The employment of domestic animals distinguished the Peruvians from

the other races of the New World.  This economy of human labor by the

substitution of the brute is an important element of civilization, interior

only to what is gained by the substitution of machinery for both.  Yet the

ancient Peruvians seem to have made much less account of it than their

Spanish conquerors, and to have valued the llama, in common with the

other animals of that genus, chiefly for its fleece.  Immense herds of

these "large cattle," as they were called, and of the "smaller cattle," 3 or

alpacas, were held by the government, as already noticed, and placed

under the direction of shepherds, who conducted them from one quarter

of the country to another, according to the changes of the season.  These

migrations were regulated with all the precision with which the code of

the mesta determined the migrations of the vast merino flocks in Spain;

and the Conquerors, when they landed in Peru, were amazed at finding a

race of animals so similar to their own in properties and habits, and

under the control of a system of legislation which might seem to have

been imported from their native land.4



But the richest store of wool was obtained, not from these domesticated

animals, but from the two other species, the huanacos and the vicunas,

which roamed in native freedom over the frozen ranges of the

Cordilleras; where not unfrequently they might be seen scaling the snow-

covered peaks which no living thing inhabits save the condor, the huge

bird of the Andes, whose broad pinions bear him up in the atmosphere to

the height of more than twenty thousand feet above the level of the sea.5

In these rugged pastures, "the flock without a fold" finds sufficient

sustenance in the ychu, a species of grass which is found scattered all

along the great ridge of the Cordilleras, from the equator to the southern

limits of Patagonia.  And as these limits define the territory traversed by

the Peruvian sheep, which rarely, if ever, venture north of the line, it

seems not improbable that this mysterious little plant is so important to

their existence, that the absence of it is the principal reason why they

have not penetrated to the northern latitudes of Quito and New

Granada.6



But, although thus roaming without a master over the boundless wastes

of the Cordilleras, the Peruvian peasant was never allowed to hunt these

wild animals, which were protected by laws as severe as were the sleek

herds that grazed on the more cultivated slopes of the plateau.  The wild

game of the forest and the mountain was as much the property of the

government, as if it had been inclosed within a park, or penned within a

fold.7  It was only on stated occasions, at the great hunts, which took

place once a year, under the personal superintendence of the Inca or his

principal officers, that the game was allowed to be taken.  These hunts.

were not repeated in the same quarter of the country oftener than once.

in four years, that time might be allowed for the waste occasioned by

them to be replenished.  At the appointed time, all those living in the

district and its neighborhood, to the number, it might be, of fifty or sixty

thousand men,8 were distributed round, so as to form a cordon of

immense extent, that should embrace the whole country which was to be

hunted over.  The men were armed with long poles and spears, with

which they beat up game of every description lurking in the woods, the

valleys, and the mountains, killing the beasts of prey without mercy, and

driving the others, consisting chiefly of the deer of the country, and the

huanacos and vicunas, towards the centre of the wide-extended circle;

until, as this gradually contracted, the timid inhabitants of the forest were

concentrated on some spacious plain, where the eye of the hunter might

range freely over his victims, who found no place for shelter or escape.



The male deer and some of the coarser kind of the Peruvian sheep were

slaughtered; their skins were reserved for the various useful

manufactures to which they are ordinarily applied, and their flesh, cut

into thin slices, was distributed among the people, who converted it into

charqui, the dried meat of the country, which constituted then the sole, as

it has since the principal, animal food of the lower classes of Peru.9



But nearly the whole of the sheep, amounting usually to thirty or forty

thousand, or even a larger number, after being carefully sheared, were

suffered to escape and regain their solitary haunts among the mountains.

The wool thus collected was deposited in the royal magazines, whence,

in due time, it was dealt out to the people.  The coarser quality was

worked up into garments for their own use, and the finer for the Inca; for

none but an Inca noble could wear the fine fabric of the vicuna.10



The Peruvians showed great skill in the manufacture of different articles

for the royal household from this delicate material, which, under the

name of vigonia wool, is now familiar to the looms of Europe.  It was

wrought into shawls, robes, and other articles of dress for the monarch,

and into carpets, coverlets, and hangings for the imperial palaces and the

temples.  The cloth was finished on both sides alike; 11 the delicacy of

the texture was such as to give it the lustre of silk; and the brilliancy of

the dyes excited the admiration and the envy of the European artisan.12

The Peruvians produced also an article of great strength and durability

by mixing the hair of animals with wool; and they were expert in the

beautiful feather-work, which they held of less account than the

Mexicans from the superior quality of the materials for other fabrics,

which they had at their command.13



The natives showed a skill in other mechanical arts similar to that

displayed by their manufactures of cloth.  Every man in Peru was

expected to be acquainted with the various handicrafts essential to

domestic comfort.  No long apprenticeship was required for this, where

the wants were so few as among the simple peasantry of the Incas.  But,

if this were all, it would imply but a very moderate advancement in the

arts.  There were certain individuals, however, carefully trained to those

occupations which minister to the demands of the more opulent classes

of society.  These occupations, like every other calling and office in

Peru, always descended from father to son.14  The division of castes, in

this particular, was as precise as that which existed in Egypt or

Hindostan.  If this arrangement be unfavorable to originality, or to the

development of the peculiar talent of the individual, it at least conduces

to an easy and finished execution by familiarizing the artist with the

practice of his art from childhood.15



The royal magazines and the huacas or tombs of the Incas have been

found to contain many specimens of curious and elaborate workmanship.

Among these are vases of gold and silver, bracelets, collars, and other

ornaments for the person; utensils of every description, some of fine

clay, and many more of copper; mirrors of a hard, polished stone, or

burnished silver, with a great variety of other articles made frequently on

a whimsical pattern, evincing quite as much ingenuity as taste or

inventive talent.16  The character of the Peruvian mind led to imitation,

in fact, rather than invention, to delicacy and minuteness of finish, rather

than to boldness or beauty of design.



That they should have accomplished these difficult works with such tools

as they possessed, is truly wonderful.  It was comparativeIy easy to cast

and even sculpture metallic substances, both of which they did with

consummate skill.  But that they should have shown the like facility in

cutting the hardest substances, as emeralds and other precious stones, is

not easy to explain.  Emeralds they obtained in considerable quantity

from the barren district of Atacames, and this inflexible material seems

to have been almost as ductile in the hands of the Peruvian artist as if it

had been made of clay.17  Yet the natives were unacquainted with the

use of iron, though the soil was largely impregnated with it.18  The tools

used were of stone, or more frequently of copper.  But the material on

which they relied for the execution of their most difficult tasks was

formed by combining a very small portion of tin with copper.19  This

composition gave a hardness to the metal which seems to have been little

inferior to that of steel.  With the aid of it, not only did the Peruvian

artisan hew into shape porphyry and granite, but by his patient industry

accomplished works which the European would not have ventured to

undertake.  Among the remains of the monuments of Cannar may be seen

movable rings in the muzzles of animals, all nicely sculptured of one

entire block of granite.20  It is worthy of remark, that the Egyptians, the

Mexicans, and the Peruvians, in their progress towards civilization,

should never have detected the use of iron, which lay around them in

abundance; and that they should each, without any knowledge of the

other, have found a substitute for it in such a curious composition of

metals as gave to their tools almost the temper of steel; 21 a secret that

has been lost--or, to speak more correctly, has never been discovered-by

the civilized European.



I have already spoken of the large quantity of gold and silver wrought

into various articles of elegance and utility for the Incas; though the

amount was inconsiderable, in comparison with what could have been

afforded by the mineral riches of the land, and with what has since been

obtained by the more sagacious and unscrupulous cupidity of the white

.man.  Gold was gathered by the Incas from the deposits of the streams.

They extracted the ore also in considerable quantities from the valley of

Curimayo, northeast of Caxamarca, as well as from other places; and the

silver mines of Porco, in particular, yielded them considerable returns.

Yet they did not attempt to penetrate into the bowels of the earth 'by

sinking a shaft, but simply excavated a cavern in the steep sides of the

mountain, or, at most, opened a horizonal vein of moderate depth.  They

were equally deficient in the knowledge of the best means of detaching

the precious metal from the dross with which it was united, and had no

idea of the virtues of quicksilver,--a mineral not rare in Peru, as an

amalgam to effect this decomposition.22  Their method of smelting the

ore was by means of furnaces built in elevated and exposed situations,

where they might be fanned by the strong breezes of the mountains.  The

subjects of the Incas, in short, with all their patient perseverance, did

little more than penetrate below the crust, the outer rind, as it were,

formed over those golden caverns which lie hidden in the dark depths of

the Andes.  Yet what they gleaned from the surface was more than

adequate for all their demands.  For they were not a commercial people,

and had no knowledge of money.23  In this they differed from the

ancient Mexicans, who had an established currency of a determinate

value.  In one respect, however, they were superior to their American

rivals, since they made use of weights to determine the quantity of their

commodities, a thing wholly unknown to the Aztecs.  This fact is

ascertained by the discovery of silver balances, adjusted with perfect

accuracy, in some of the tombs of the Incas.24



But the surest test of the civilization of a people--at least, as sure as any--

afforded by mechanical art is to be found in their architecture, which

presents so noble a field for the display of the grand and the beautiful,

and which, at the same time, is so intimately connected with the essential

comforts of life.  There is no object on which the resources of the

wealthy are more freely lavished, or which calls out more effectually the

inventive talent of the artist.  The painter and the sculptor may display

their individual genius in creations of surpassing excellence, but it is the

great monuments of architectural taste and magnificence that are

stamped in a peculiar manner by the genius of the nation.  The Greek, the

Egyptian, the Saracen, the Gothic,--what a key do their respective styles

afford to the character and condition of the people! The monuments of

China, of Hindostan, and of Central America are all indicative of an

immature period, in which the imagination has not been disciplined by

study, and which, therefore, in its best results, betrays only the

illregulated aspirations after the beautiful, that belong to a semi-civilized

people.



The Peruvian architecture, bearing also the general characteristics of an

imperfect state of refinement, had still its peculiar character; and so

uniform was that character, that the edifices throughout the country seem

to have been all cast in the same mould.25  They were usually built of

porphyry or granite; not unfrequently of brick.  This, which was formed

into blocks or squares of much larger dimensions than our brick, was

made of a tenacious earth mixed up with reeds or tough grass, and

acquired a degree of hardness with age that made it insensible alike to

the storms and the more trying sun of the tropics.26  The walls were of

great thickness, but low, seldom reaching to more than twelve or

fourteen feet in height.  It is rare to meet with accounts of a building that

rose to a  second story.27



The apartments had no communication with one another, but usually

opened into a court; and, as they were unprovided with windows, or

apertures that served for them, the only light from without must have

been admitted by the doorways.  These were made with the sides

approaching each other towards the top, so that the lintel was

considerably narrower than the threshold, a peculiarity, also, in Egyptian

architecture.  The roofs have for the most part disappeared with time.

Some few survive in the less ambitious edifices, of a singular bell-shape,

and made of a composition of earth and pebbles.  They are supposed,

however, to have been generally formed of more perishable materials, of

wood or straw.  It is certain that some of the most considerable stone-

buildings were thatched with straw.  Many seem to have been

constructed without the aid of cement; and writers have contended that

the Peruvians were unacquainted with the use of mortar, or cement of

any kind.28  But a close, tenacious mould, mixed with lime, may be

discovered filling up the interstices of the granite in some buildings; and

in others, where the wellfitted blocks leave no room for this coarser

material, the eye of the antiquary has detected a fine bituminous glue, as

hard as the rock itself.29



The greatest simplicity is observed in the construction of the buildings.

which are usually free from outward ornament; though in some the huge

stones are shaped into a convex form with great regularity, and adjusted

with such nice precision to one another, that it would be impossible, but

for the flutings, to determine the line of junction.  In others, the stone is

rough, as it was taken from the quarry, in the most irregular forms, with

the edges nicely wrought and fitted to each other.  There is no

appearance of columns or of arches; though there is some contradiction

as to the latter point.  But it is not to be doubted, that, although they may

have made some approach to this mode of construction by the greater or

less inclination of the walls, the Peruvian architects were wholly

unacquainted with the true principle of the circular arch reposing on its

key-stone.30



The architecture of the Incas is characterized, says an eminent traveller,

"by simplicity, symmetry, and solidity."31  It may seem unphilosophical

to condemn the peculiar fashion of a nation as indicating want of taste,

because its standard of taste differs from our own.  Yet there is an

incongruity in the composition of the Peruvian buildings which argues a

very imperfect acquaintance with the first principles of architecture.

While they put together their bulky masses of porphyry and granite with

the nicest art, they were incapable of mortising their timbers, and, in their

ignorance of iron, knew no better way of holding the beams together that

tying them with thongs of maguey.  In the same incongruous spirit, the

building that was thatched with straw, and unilluminated by a window,

was glowing with tapestries of gold and silver! These are the

inconsistencies of a rude people, among whom the arts are but partially

developed.  It might not be difficult to find examples of like

inconsistency in the architecture and domestic arrangements of our

Anglo-Saxon, and, at a still later period of our Norman ancestors.



Yet the buildings of the Incas were accommodated to the character of the

climate, and were well fitted to resist those terrible convulsions which

belong to the land of volcanoes.  The wisdom of their plan is attested by

the number which still survive, while the more modern constructions of

the Conquerors have been buried in ruins.  The hand of the Conquerors,

indeed, has fallen heavily on these venerable monuments, and, in their

blind and superstitious search for hidden treasure, has caused infinitely

more ruin than time or the earthquake.32  Yet enough of these

monuments still remain to invite the researches of the antiquary.  Those

only in the most conspicuous situations have been hitherto examined.

But, by the testimony of travellers, many more are to be found in the less

frequented parts of the country; and we may hope they will one day call

forth a kindred spirit of enterprise to that which has so successfully

explored the mysterious recesses of Central America and Yucatan.



I cannot close this analysis of the Peruvian institutions without a few

reflections on their general character and tendency, which, if they

involve some repetition of previous remarks, may, I trust, be excused,

from my desire to leave a correct and consistent impression on the

reader.  In this survey, we cannot but be struck with the total

dissimilarity between these institutions and those of the Aztecs,--the

other great nation who led in the march of civilization on this western

continent, and whose empire in the northern portion of it was as

conspicuous as that of the Incas in the south.  Both nations came on the

plateau, and commenced their career of conquest, at dates, it may be, not

far removed from each other.33  And it is worthy of notice, that, in

America, the elevated region along the crests of the great mountain

ranges should have been the chosen seat of civilization in both

hemispheres.



Very different was the policy pursued by the two races in their military

career.  The Aztecs, animated by the most ferocious spirit, carried on a

war of extermination, signalizing their triumphs by the sacrifice of

hecatombs of captives; while the Incas, although they pursued the game

of conquest with equal pertinacity, preferred a milder policy, substituting

negotiation and intrigue for violence, and dealt with their antagonists so

that their future resources should not be crippled, and that they should

come as friends, not as foes, into the bosom of the empire.



Their policy toward the conquered forms a contrast no less striking to

that pursued by the Aztecs.  The Mexican vassals were ground by

excessive imposts and military conscriptions.  No regard was had to their

welfare, and the only limit to oppression was the power of endurance.

They were over-awed by fortresses and armed garrisons, and were made

to feel every hour that they were not part and parcel of the nation, but

held only in subjugation as a conquered people.  The Incas, on the other

hand, admitted their new subjects at once to all the rights enjoyed by the

rest of the community; and, though they made them conform to the

established laws and usages of the empire, they watched over their

personal security and comfort with a sort of parental solicitude.  The

motley population, thus bound together by common interest, was

animated by a common feeling of loyality, which gave greater strength

and stability to the empire, as it became more and more widely extended;

while the various tribes who successively came under the Mexican

sceptre, being held together only by the pressure of external force, were

ready to fall asunder the moment that that force was withdrawn.  The

policy of the two nations displayed the principle of fear as contrasted

with the principle of love.



The characteristic features of their religious systems had as little

resemblance to each other.  The whole Aztec pantheon partook more or

less of the sanguinary spirit of the terrible war-god who presided over it,

and their frivolous ceremonial almost always terminated with human

sacrifice and cannibal orgies.  But the rites of the Peruvians were of a

more innocent cast, as they tended to a more spiritual worship.  For the

worship of the Creator is most nearly approached by that of the heavenly

bodies, which, as they revolve in their bright orbits, seem to be the most

glorious symbols of his beneficence and power.



In the minuter mechanical arts, both showed considerable skill; but in the

construction of important public works, of roads, aqueducts, canals, and

in agriculture in all its details, the Peruvians were much superior.

Strange that they should have fallen so far below their rivals in their

efforts after a higher intellectual culture, in astronomical science, more

especially, and in the art of communicating thought by visible symbols.

When we consider the greater refinement of the Incas, their inferiority to

the Aztecs in these particulars can be explained only by the fact, that the

latter in all probability were indebted for their science to the race who

preceded them in the land,--that shadowy race whose origin and whose

end are alike veiled from the eye of the inquirer, but who possibly may

have sought a refuge from their ferocious invaders in those regions of

Central America the architectural remains of which now supply us with

the most pleasing monuments of Indian civilization.  It is with this more

polished race, to whom the Peruvians seem to have borne some

resemblance in their mental and moral organization, that they should be

compared.  Had the empire of the Incas been permitted to extend itself

with the rapid strides with which it was advancing at the period of the

Spanish conquest, the two races might have come into conflict, or,

perhaps, into alliance with one another.



The Mexicans and Peruvians, so different in the character of their

peculiar civilization, were, it seems probable, ignorant of each other's

existence; and it may appear singular, that, during the simultaneous

continuance of their empires, some of the seeds of science and of art,

which pass so imperceptibly from one people to another, should not have

found their way across the interval which separated the two nations.

They furnish an interesting example of the opposite directions which the

human mind may take in its struggle to emerge from darkness into the

light of civilization,



A closer resemblance--as I have more than once taken occasion to

notice--may be found between the Peruvian institutions and some of the

despotic governments of Eastern Asia; those governments where

despotism appears in its more mitigated form, and the whole people,

under the patriarchal sway of its sovereign, seem to be gathered together

like the members of one vast family.  Such were the Chinese, for

example, whom the Peruvians resembled in their implicit obedience to

authority, their mild yet somewhat stubborn temper, their solicitude for

forms, their reverence for ancient usage, their skill in the minuter

manufactures, their imitative rather than inventive cast of mind, and their

invincible patience, which serves instead of a more adventurous spirit for

the execution of difficult undertakings.34



A still closer analogy may be found with the natives of Hindostan in their

division into castes, their worship of the heavenly bodies and the

elements of nature, and their acquaintance with the scientific principles

of husbandry.  To the ancient Egyptians, also, they bore considerable

resemblance in the same particulars, as well as in those ideas of a future

existence which led them to attach so much importance to the permanent

preservation of the body.



But we shall look in vain in the history of the East for a parallel to the

absolute control exercised by the Incas over their subjects.  In the East,

this was rounded on physical power,--on the external resources of the

government.  The authority of the Inca might be compared with that of

the Pope in the day of his might, when Christendom trembled at the

thunders of the Vatican, and the successor of St.  Peter set his foot on the

necks of princes.  But the authority of the Pope was founded on opinion.

His temporal power was nothing.  The empire of the Incas rested on

both.  It was a theocracy more potent in its operation than that of the

Jews; for, though the sanction of the law might be as great among the

latter, the law was expounded by a human lawgiver, the servant and

representative of Divinity.  But the Inca was both the lawgiver and the

law.  He was not merely the representative of Divinity, or, like the Pope,

its vicegerent, but he was Divinity itself.  The violation of his ordinance

was sacrilege.  Never was there a scheme of government enforced by

such terrible sanctions, or which bore so oppressively on the subjects of

it.  For it reached not only to the visible acts, but to the private conduct,

the words, the very thoughts, of its vassals.



It added not a little to the efficacy of the government, that, below the

sovereign, there was an order of hereditary nobles of the same divine

original with himself, who, placed far below himself, were still

immeasurably above the rest of the community, not merely by descent,

but, as it would seem, by their intellectual nature.  These were the

exclusive depositaries of power, and, as their long hereditary training

made them familiar with their vocation, and secured them implicit

deference from the multitude, they became the prompt and well-practised

agents for carrying out the executive measures of the administration.  All

that occurred throughout the wide extent of his empire---such was the

perfect system of communication--passed in review, as it were, before

the eyes of the monarch, and a thousand hands, armed with irresistible

authority, stood ready in every quarter to do his bidding.  Was it not, as

we have said, the most oppressive, though the mildest, of despotisms?



It was the mildest, from the very circumstance, that the transcendent rank

of the sovereign, and the humble, nay, superstitious, devotion to his will

make it superfluous to assert this will be acts of violence or rigor.  The

great mass of the people may have appeared to his eyes as but little

removed above the condition of the brute, formed to minister to his

pleasures.  But, from their very helplessness, he regarded them with

feelings of commiseration, like those which a kind master might feel for

the poor animals committed to his charge, or--to do justice to the

beneficent character attributed to many of the Incas--that a parent might

feel for his young and impotent offspring.  The laws were carefully

directed to their preservation and personal comfort.  The people were not

allowed to be employed on works pernicious to their health, nor to pine--

a sad contrast to their subsequent destiny--under the imposition of tasks

too heavy for their powers.  They were never made the victims of public

or private extortion; and a benevolent forecast watched carefully over

their necessities, and provided for their relief in seasons of infirmity, and

for their sustenance in health.  The government of the Incas, however

arbitrary in form, was in its spirit truly patriarchal.



Yet in this there was nothing cheering to the dignity of human nature.

What the people had was conceded as a boon, not as a right.  When a

nation was brought under the sceptre of the Incas, it resigned every

personal right, even the rights dearest to humanity.  Under this

extraordinary polity, a people advanced in many of the social

refinements, well skilled in manufactures and agriculture, were

unacquainted, as we have seen, with money.  They had nothing that

deserved to be called property.  They could follow no craft, could

engage in no labor, no amusement, but such as was specially provided by

law.  They could not change their residence or their dress without a

license from the government.  They could not even exercise the freedom

which is conceded to the most abject in other countries, that of selecting

their own wives.  The imperative spirit of despotism would not allow

them to be happy or miserable in any way but that established by law.

The power of free agency--the inestimable and inborn right of every

human being--was annihilated in Peru.



The astonishing mechanism of the Peruvian polity could have resulted

only from the combined authority of opinion and positive power in the

ruler to an extent unprecedented in the history of man.  Yet that it should

have so successfully gone into operation, and so long endured, in

opposition to the taste, the prejudices, and the very principles of our

nature, is a strong proof of a generally wise and temperate administration

of the government.



The policy habitually pursued by the Incas for the prevention of evils

that might have disturbed the order of things is well exemplified in their

provisions against poverty and idleness.  In these they rightly discerned

the two great causes of disaffection in a populous community.  The

industry of the people was secured not only by their compulsory

occupations at home, but by their employment on those great public

works which covered every part of the country, and which still bear

testimony in their decay to their primitive grandeur.  Yet it may well

astonish us to find, that the natural difficulty of these undertakings,

sufficiently great in itself, considering the imperfection of their tools and

machinery, was inconceivably enhanced by the politic contrivance of

government.  The royal edifices of Quito, we are assured by the Spanish

conquerors, were constructed of huge masses of stone, many of which

were carried all the way along the mountain roads from Cuzco, a

distance of several hundred leagues.35  The great square of the capital

was filled to a considerable depth with mould brought with incredible

labor up the steep slopes of the Cordilleras from the distant shores of the

Pacific Ocean.36  Labor was regarded not only as a means, but as an

end, by the Peruvian law.



With their manifold provisions against poverty the reader has already

been made acquainted.  They were so perfect, that, in their wide extent of

territory,--much of it smitten with the curse of barrenness,--no man,

however humble, suffered from the want of food and clothing.  Famine,

so common a scourge in every other American nation, so common at that

period in every country of civilized Europe, was an evil unknown in the

dominions of the Incas.



The most enlightened of the Spaniards who first visited Peru, struck with

the general appearance of plenty and prosperity, and with the astonishing

order with which every thing throughout the country was regulated, are

loud in their expressions of admiration.  No better government, in their

opinion, could have been devised for the people.  Contented with their

condition, and free from vice, to borrow the language of an eminent

authority of that early day, the mild and docile character of the Peruvians

would have well fitted them to receive the teachings of Christianity, had

the love of conversion, instead of gold, animated the breasts of the

Conquerors.37  And a philosopher of a later time, warmed by the

contemplation of the picture--which his own fancy had colored---of

public prosperity and private happiness under the rule of the Incas,

pronounces "the moral man in Peru far superior to the European." 38



Yet such results are scarcely reconcilable with the theory of the

government I have attempted to analyze.  Where there is no free agency,

there can be no morality.  Where there is no temptation, there can be

little claim to virtue.  Where the routine is rigorously prescribed by law,

the law, and not the man, must have the credit of the conduct.  if that

government is the best, which is felt the least, which encroaches on the

natural liberty of the subject only so far as is essential to civil

subordination, then of all governments devised by man the Peruvian has

the least real.  claim to our admiration.



It is not easy to comprehend the genius and the full import of institutions

so opposite to those of our own free republic, where every man, however

humble his condition, may aspire to the highest honors of the state,--may

select his own career, and carve out his fortune in his own way; where

the light of knowledge, instead of being concentrated on a chosen few, is

shed abroad like the light of day, and suffered to fall equally on the poor

and the rich; where the collision of man with man wakens a generous

emulation that calls out latent talent and tasks the energies to the utmost;

where consciousness of independence gives a feeling of self-reliance

unknown to the timid subjects of a despotism; where, in short, the

government is made for man,--not as in Peru, where man seemed to be

made only for the government.  The New World is the theatre in which

these two political systems, so opposite in their character, have been

carried into operation.  The empire of the Incas has passed away and left

no trace.  The other great experiment is still going on,--the experiment

which is to solve the problem, so long contested in the Old World, of the

capacity of man for self-government.  Alas for humanity, if it should fail!



The testimony of the Spanish conquerors is not uniform m respect to the

favorable influence exerted by the Peruvian institutions on the character

of the people.  Drinking and dancing are said to have been the pleassures

to which they were immoderately addicted.  Like the slaves and serfs in

other lands, whose position excluded them from more serious and

ennobling occupations, they found a substitute in frivolous or sensual

indulgence.  Lazy, luxurious, and licentious, are the epithets bestowed on

them by one of those who saw them at the Conquest, but whose pen was

not too friendly to the Indian.39  Yet the spirit of independence could

hardly be strong in a people who had no interest in the soil, no personal

rights to defend; and the facility with which they yielded to the Spanish

invader--after every allowance for their comparative inferiority--argues a

deplorable destitution of that patriotic feeling which holds life as little in

comparison with freedom.



But we must not judge too hardly of the unfortunate native, because he

quailed before the civilization of the European.  We must not be

insensible to the really great results that were achieved by the

government of the Incas.  We must not forget, that, under their rule, the

meanest of the people enjoyed a far greater degree of personal comfort,

at least, a greater exemption from physical suffering, than was possessed

by similar classes in other nations on the American continent,--greater,

probably, than was possessed by these classes in most of the countries of

feudal Europe.  Under their sceptre, the higher orders of the state had

made advances in many of the arts that belong to a cultivated

community.  The foundations of a regular government were laid, which,

in an age of rapine, secured to its subjects the inestimable blessings of

tranquillity and safety.  By the well-sustained policy of the Incas, the

rude tribes of the forest were gradually drawn from their fastnesses, and

gathered within the folds of civilization; and of these materials was

constructed a flourishing and populous empire, such as was to be found

in no other quarter of the American continent.  The defects of this

government were those of overrefinement in legislation,--the last defects

to have been looked for, certainly, in the American aborigines.





Note.   I have not thought it necessary to swell this Introduction by an

inquiry into the origin of the Peruvian civilization, like that appended to

the history of the Mexican.   The Peruvian history doubtless suggests

analogies with more than one nation in the East, some of which have

been briefly adverted to in the preceding pages; although these analogies

are adduced there not as evidence of a common origin, but as showing

the coincidences which might naturally spring up among different

nations under the same phase of civilization.  Such coincidences are

neither so numerous nor so striking as those afforded by the Aztec

history.  The correspondence presented by the astronomical science of

the Mexicans is alone of more importance than all the rest, Yet the light

of analogy, afforded by the institutions of the Incas, seems to point, as

far as it goes, towards the same direction; and as the investigation could

present but little substantially to confirm, and still less to confute, the

views taken in the former disquisition, I have not thought it best to

fatigue the reader with it.





Two of the prominent authorities on whom I have relied in this

Introductory portion of the work, are Juan de Sarmiento and the

Licentiate Ondegardo.  Of the former I have been able to collect no

information beyond what is afforded by his own writings.  In the title

prefixed to his manuscript, he is styled President of the Council of the

Indies, a post of high authority, which infers a weight of character in the

party, and means of information, that entitle his opinions on colonial

topics to great deference.



These means of information were much enlarged by Sarmiento's visit to

the colonies, during the administration of Gasca.  Having conceived the

design of compiling a history of the ancient Peruvian institutions, he

visited Cuzco, as he tells us, in 1550, and there drew from the natives

themselves the materials for his narrative.  His position gave him access

to the most authentic sources of knowledge, and from the lips of the Inca

nobles, the best instructed of the conquered race, he gathered the

traditions of their national history and institutions.  The quipus formed,

as we have seen, an imperfect system of mnemonics, requiring constant

attention, and much inferior to the Mexican hieroglyphics.  It was only

by diligent instruction that they were made available to historical

purposes; and this instruction was so far neglected after the Conquest,

that the ancient annals of the country would have perished with the

generation which was the sole depositary of them, had it not been for the

efforts of a few intelligent scholars, like Sarmiento, who saw the

importance, at this critical period, of cultivating an intercourse with the

natives, and drawing from them their hidden stores of information.



To give still further authenticity to his work, Sarmiento travelled over the

country, examined the principal objects of interest with his own eyes,

and thus verified the accounts of the natives as far as possible by

personal observation.  The result of these labors was his work entitled,

"Relacion de la sucesion y govierno de las Yngas Senores naturales que

fueron de las Provincias del Peru y otras cosas tocantes a aquel Reyno,

para el Iltmo.  Senor Dn Juan Sarmiento, Presidente del Consejo Rl de

Indias."



It is divided into chapters, and embraces about four hundred folio pages

in manuscript.  The introductory portion of the work is occupied with the

traditionary tales of the origin and early period of the Incas; teeming, as

usual, in the antiquities of a barbarous people, with legendary fables of

the most wild and monstrous character.  Yet these puerile conceptions

afford an inexhaustible mine for the labors of the antiquarian, who

endeavors to unravel the allegorical web which a cunning priesthood had

devised as symbolical of those mysteries of creation that it was beyond

their power to comprehend.  But Sarmiento happily confines himself to

the mere statement of traditional fables, without the chimerical ambition

to explain them.



From this region of romance, Sarmiento passes to the institutions of the

Peruvians, describes their ancient polity, their religion, their progress in

the arts, especially agriculture; and presents, in short, an elaborate

picture of the civilization which they reached under the Inca dynasty.

This part of his work, resting, as it does, on the best authority, confirmed

in many instances by his own observation, is of unquestionable value,

and is written with an apparent respect for truth, that engages the

confidence of the reader.  The concluding portion of the manuscript is

occupied with the civil history of the country.  The reigns of the early

Incas, which lie beyond the sober province of history.  he despatches

with commendable brevity.  But on the three last reigns, and fortunately

of the greatest princes who occupied the Peruvian throne, he is more

diffuse.  This was comparatively firm ground for the chronicler, for the

events were too recent to be obscured by the vulgar legends that gather

like moss round every incident of the older time.  His account stops with

the Spanish invasion: for this story, Sarmiento felt, might be safely left to

his contemporaries who acted a part in it, but whose taste and education

had qualified them but indifferently for exploring the antiquities and

social institutions of the natives.



Sarmiento's work is composed in a simple, perspicuous style, without

that ambition of rhetorical display too common with his countrymen.  He

writes with honest candor, and while he does ample justice to the merits

and capacity of the conquered races, be notices with indignation the

atrocities of the Spaniards and the demoralizing tendency of the

Conquest.  It may be thought, indeed, that he forms too high an estimate

of the attainments of the nation under the Incas.  And it is not

improbable, that, astonished by the vestiges it afforded of an original

civilization, he became enamoured of his subject, and thus exhibited it in

colors somewhat too glowing to the eye of the European.  But this was

an amiable failing, not too largely shared by the stern Conquerors, who

subverted the institutions of the country, and saw little to admire in it,

save its gold.  It must be further admitted, that Sarmiento has no design

to impose on his reader, and that he is careful to distinguish between

what he reports on hearsay, and what on personal experience.  The

Father of History himself does not discriminate between these two things

more carefully.



Neither is the Spanish historian to be altogether vindicated from the

superstition which belongs to his time; and we often find him referring to

the immediate interposition of Satan those effects which might quite as

well be charged on the perverseness of man.  But this was common to the

age, and to the wisest men in it; and it is too much to demand of a man to

be wiser than his generation.  It is sufficient praise of Sarmiento, that, in

an age when superstition was too often allied with fanaticism, he seems

to have had no tincture of bigotry in his nature.  His heart opens with

benevolent fulness to the unfortunate native; and his language, while it is

not kindled into the religious glow of the missionary, is warmed by a

generous ray of philanthropy that embraces the conquered, no less than

the conquerors, as his brethren.



Notwithstanding the great value of Sarmiento's work for the information

it affords of Peru under the Incas, it is but little known, has been rarely

consulted by historians, and still remains among the unpublished

manuscripts which lie, like uncoined bullion, in the secret chambers of

the Escurial.



The other authority to whom I have alluded, the Licentiate Polo de

Ondegardo, was a highly respectable jurist, whose name appears

frequently in the affairs of Peru.  I find no account of the period when he

first came into the country.  But he was there on the arrival of Gasca, and

resided at Lima under the usurpation of Gonzalo Pizarro.  When the

artful Cepeda endeavored to secure the signatures of the inhabitants to

the instrument proclaiming the sovereignty of his chief, we find

Ondegardo taking the lead among those of his profession in resisting it.

On Gasca's arrival, he consented to take a commission in his army.  At

the close of the rebellion he was made corregidor of La Plata, and

subsequently of Cuzco, in which honorable station he seems to have

remained several years.  In the exercise of his magisterial functions, he

was brought into familiar intercourse with the natives, and had ample

opportunity for studying their laws and ancient customs.  He conducted

himself with such prudence and moderation, that he seems to have won

the confidence not only of his countrymen but of the Indians; while the

administration was careful to profit by his large experience in devising

measures for the better government of the colony.



The Relaciones, so often cited in this History, were prepared at the

suggestion of the viceroys, the first being addressed to the Marques de

Canete, in 1561, and the second, ten years later, to the Conde de Nieva.

The two cover about as much ground as Sarmiento's manuscript; and the

second memorial, written so long after the first, may be thought to

intimate the advancing age of the author, in the greater carelessness and

diffuseness of the composition.



As these documents are in the nature of answers to the interrogatories

propounded by government- the range of topics might seem to be limited

within narrower bounds than the modern historian would desire.  These

queries, indeed, had particular reference to the revenues, tributes,--the

financial administration, in short, of the Incas; and on these obscure

topics the communication of Ondegardo is particularly full.  But the

enlightened curiosity of government embraced a far wider range; and the

answers necessarily implied an acquaintance with the domestic policy of

the Incas, with their laws, social habits, their religion, science, and arts,

in short, with all that make up the elements of civilization.  Ondegardo's

memoirs, therefore, cover the whole ground of inquiry for the

philosophic historian.



In the management of these various subjects, Ondegardo displays both

acuteness and erudition.  He never shrinks from the discussion, however

difficult; and while he gives his conclusions with an air of modesty, it is

evident that he feels conscious of having derived his information through

the most authentic channels.  He rejects the fabulous with disdain;

decides on the probabilities of such facts as he relates, and candidly

exposes the deficiency of evidence.  Far from displaying the simple

enthusiasm of the well-meaning but credulous missionary, he proceeds

with the cool and cautious step of a lawyer accustomed to the conflict of

testimony and the uncertainty of oral tradition.  This circumspect manner

of proceeding, and the temperate character of his judgments, entitle

Ondegardo to much higher consideration as an authority than most of his

countrymen who have treated of Indian antiquities.



There runs through his writings a vein of humanity, shown particularly in

his tenderness to the unfortunate natives, to whose ancient civilization he

does entire, but not extravagant, justice; while, like Sarmiento, he

fearlessly denounces the excesses of his own countrymen, and admits the

dark reproach they had brought on the honor of the nation.  But while

this censure forms the strongest ground for condemnation of the

Conquerors, since it comes from the lips of a Spaniard like themselves, it

proves, also, that Spain in this age of violence could send forth from her

bosom wise and good men who refused to make common cause with the

licentious rabble around them.  Indeed, proof enough is given in these

very memorials of the unceasing efforts of the colonial government, from

the good viceroy Mendoza downwards, to secure protection and the

benefit of a mild legislation to the unfortunate natives.  But the iron

Conquerors, and the colonist whose heart softened only to the touch of

gold, presented a formidable barrier to improvement.



Ondegardo's writings are honorably distinguished by freedom from that

superstition which is the debasing characteristic of the times; a

superstition shown in the easy credit given to the marvellous, and this

equally whether in heathen or in Christian story; for in the former the eye

of credulity could discern as readily the direct interposition of Satan, as

in the latter the hand of the Almighty.  It is this ready belief in a spiritual

agency, whether for good or for evil, which forms one of the most

prominent features in the writings of the sixteenth century.  Nothing

could be more repugnant to the true spirit of philosophical inquiry or

more irreconcilable with rational criticism.  Far from betraying such

weakness, Ondegardo writes in a direct and business-like manner,

estimating things for what they are worth by the plain rule of common-

sense.  He keeps the main object of his argument ever in view, without

allowing himself, like the garrulous chroniclers of the period, to be led

astray into a thousand rambling episodes that bewilder the reader and

lead to nothing.



Ondegardo's memoirs deal not only with the antiquities of the nation, but

with its actual condition, and with the best means for redressing the

manifold evils to which it was subjected under the stern rule of its

conquerors.  His suggestions are replete with wisdom, and a merciful

policy, that would reconcile the interests of government with the

prosperity and happiness of its humblest vassal.  Thus, while his

contemporaries gathered light from his suggestions as to the present

condition of affairs, the historian of later times is no less indebted to him

for information in respect to the past.  His manuscript was freely

consulted by Herrera and the reader, as he peruses the pages of the

learned historian of the Indies, is unconsciously enjoying the benefit of

the researches of Ondegardo.  His valuable Relaciones thus had their

uses for future generations, though they have never been admitted to the

honors of the press.  The copy in my possession, like that of Sarmiento's

manuscript, for which I am indebted to that industrious bibliographer,

Mr.  Rich formed part of the magnificent collection of Lord

Kingsborough,--a name ever to be held in honor by the scholar for his

indefatigable efforts to illustrate the antiquities of America.



Ondegardo's manuscripts, it should be remarked, do not bear his

signature.  But they contain allusions to several actions of the writer's

life, which identify them, beyond any reasonable doubt, as his

production.  In the archives of Simancas is a duplicate copy of the first

memorial, Relacion Primera, though, like the one in the Escurial, without

its author's name.  Munoz assigns it to the pen of Gabriel de Rojas, a

distinguished cavalier of the Conquest.  This is clearly an error; for the

author of the manuscript identifies himself with Ondegardo, by

declaring, in his reply to the fifth interrogatory, that he was the person

who discovered the mummies of the Incas in Cuzco; an act expressly

referred both by Acosta and Garcilasso, to the Licentiate Polo de

Ondegardo, when corregidor of that city.--Should the savans of Madrid

hereafter embrace among the publications of valuable manuscripts these

Relaciones, they should be careful not to be led into an error here, by the

authority of a critic like Munoz whose criticism is rarely at fault.


