





History of the Conquest of Peru



by William Hickling Prescott



Book 2



Discovery of Peru



Chapter 1



Ancient And Modern Science--Art Of Navigation--Maritime Discovery--

Spirit Of The Spaniards--Possessions In The New World-

Rumors Concerning Peru



Whatever difference of opinion may exist as to the comparative merle of

the ancients and the moderns in the arts, in poetry, eloquence, and all

that depends on imagination, there can be no doubt that in science the

moderns have eminently the advantage.  It could not be otherwise.  In the

early ages of the world, as in the early period of life, there was the

freshness of a morning existence, when the gloss of novelty was on every

thing that met the eye; when the senses, not blunted by familiarity, were

more keenly alive to the beautiful, and the mind, under the influence of a

healthy and natural taste, was not perverted by philosophical theory;

when the simple was necessarily connected with the beautiful, and the

epicurean intellect, sated by repetition, had not begun to seek for

stimulants in the fantastic and capricious.  The realms of fancy were all

untravelled, and its fairest flowers had not been gathered, nor its beauties

despoiled, by the rude touch of those who affected to cultivate them.

The wing of genius was not bound to the earth by the cold and

conventional rules of criticism, but was permitted to take its flight far

and wide over the broad expanse of creation.



But with science it was otherwise.  No genius could suffice for the

creation of facts,--hardly for their detection.  They were to be gathered in

by painful industry; to be collected from careful observation and

experiment.  Genius, indeed, might arrange and combine these facts into

new forms, and elicit from their combinations new and important

inferences; and in this process might almost rival in originality the

creations of the poet and the artist.  But if the processes of science are

necessarily slow, they are sure.  There is no retrograde movement in her

domain.  Arts may fade, the Muse become dumb, a moral lethargy may

lock up the faculties of a nation.  the nation itself may pass away and

leave only the memory of its existence but the stores of science it has

garnered up will endure for ever.  As other nations come upon the stage,

and new forms of civilization arise.  the monuments of art and of

imagination, productions of an older time, will lie as an obstacle in the

path of improvement.  They cannot be built upon; they occupy the

ground which the new aspirant for immortality would cover.  The whole

work is to be gone over again, and other forms of beauty--whether higher

or lower in the scale of merit, but unlike the past--must arise to take a

place by their side.  But, in science, every stone that has been laid

remains as the foundation for another.  The coming generation takes up

the work where the preceding left it.  There is no retrograde movement.

The individual nation may recede, but science still advances.  Every step

that has been gained makes the ascent easier for those who come after.

Every step carries the patient inquirer after truth higher and higher

towards heaven, and unfolds to him, as he rises, a wider horizon, and

new and more magnificent views of the universe.



Geography partook of the embarrassments which belonged to every other

department of science in the primitive ages of the world.  The knowledge

of the earth could come only from an extended commerce; and

commerce is founded on artificial wants or an enlightened curiosity,

hardly compatible with the earlier condition of society.  In the infancy of

nations, the different tribes, occupied with their domestic feuds, found

few occasions to wander beyond the mountain chain or broad stream that

formed the natural boundary of their domains.  The Phoenicians, it is

true, are said to have sailed beyond the Pillars of Hercules, and to have

launched out on the great western ocean.  But the adventures of these

ancient voyagers belong to the mythic legends of antiquity, and ascend

far beyond the domain of authentic record.



The Greeks, quick and adventurous.  skilled in mechanical art, had many

of the qualities of successful navigators, and within the limits of their

little inland sea ranged fearlessly and freely.  But the conquests of

Alexander did more to extend the limits of geographical science, and

opened an acquaintance with the remote countries of the East.  Yet the

march of the conqueror is slow in comparison with the movements of the

unencumbered traveller.  The Romans were still less enterprising than

the Greeks, were less commercial in their character.  The contributions to

geographical knowledge grew with the slow acquisitions of empire.  But

their system was centralizing in its tendency; and instead of taking an

outward direction and looking abroad for discovery, every part of the

vast imperial domain turned towards the capital at its head and central

point of attraction.  The Roman conqueror pursued his path by land, not

by sea.  But the water is the great highway between nations, the true

element for the discoverer.  The Romans were not a maritime people.  At

the close of their empire, geographical science could hardly be said to

extend farther than to an acquaintance with Europe,--and this not its

more northern division,--together with a portion of Asia and Africa;

while they had no other conception of a world beyond the western waters

than was to be gathered from the fortunate prediction of the poet.1



Then followed the Middle Ages; the dark ages, as they are called, though

in their darkness were matured those seeds of knowledge, which, in

fulness of time, were to spring up into new and more glorious forms of

civilization.  The organization of society became more favorable to

geographical science.  Instead of one overgrown, lethargic empire,

oppressing every thing by its colossal weight, Europe was broken up into

various independent communities, many of which, adopting liberal forms

of government, felt all the impulses natural to freemen; and the petty

republics on the Mediterranean and the Baltic sent forth their swarms of

seamen in a profitable commerce, that knit together the different

countries scattered along the great European waters.



But the improvements which took place in the art of navigation, the more

accurate measurement of time, and, above all, the discovery of the

polarity of the magnet, greatly advanced the cause of geographical

knowledge.  Instead of creeping timidly along the coast, or limiting his

expeditions to the narrow basins of inland waters, the voyager might now

spread his sails boldly on the deep, secure of a guide to direct his bark

unerringly across the illimitable waste.  The consciousness of this power

led thought to travel in a new direction; and the mariner began to look

with earnestness for another path to the Indian Spice-islands than that by

which the Eastern caravans had traversed the continent of Asia.  The

nations on whom the spirit of enterprise, at this crisis, naturally

descended, were Spain and Portugal, placed, as they were, on the

outposts of the European continent, commanding the great theatre of

future discovery.



Both countries felt the responsibility of their new position.  The crown of

Portugal was constant in its efforts, through the fifteenth century, to find

a passage round the southern point of Africa into the Indian Ocean;

though so timid was the navigation, that every fresh headland became a

formidable barrier; and it was not till the latter part of the century that

the adventurous Diaz passed quite round the Stormy Cape, as he termed

it, but which John the Second, with happier augury, called the Cape of

Good Hope.  But, before Vasco de Gama had availed himself of this

discovery to spread his sails in the Indian seas, Spain entered on her

glorious career, and sent Columbus across the western waters.



The object of the great navigator was still the discovery of a route to

India, but by the west instead of the east.  He had no expectation of

meeting with a continent in his way, and, after repeated voyages, he

remained in his original error, dying, as is well known, in the conviction

that it was the eastern shore of Asia which he had reached.  It was the

same object which directed the nautical enterprises of those who

followed in the Admiral's track; and the discovery of a strait into the

Indian Ocean was the burden of every order from the government, and

the design of many an expedition to different points of the new continent,

which seemed to stretch its leviathan length along from one pole to the

other.  The discovery of an Indian passage is the true key to the maritime

movements of the fifteenth and the first half of the sixteenth centuries.  It

was the great leading idea that gave the character to the enterprise of the

age.



It is not easy at this time to comprehend the impulse given to Europe by

the discovery of America.  It was not the gradual acquisition of some

border territory, a province or a kingdom that had been gained, but a

New World that was now thrown open to the Europeans.  The races of

animals, the mineral treasures, the vegetable forms, and the varied

aspects of nature, man in the different phases of civilization, filled the

mind with entirely new sets of ideas, that changed the habitual current of

thought and stimulated it to indefinite conjecture.  The eagerness to

explore the wonderful secrets of the new hemisphere became so active,

that the principal cities of Spain were, in a manner, depopulated, as

emigrants thronged one after another to take their chance upon the

deep.2  It was a world of romance that was thrown open; for, whatever

might be the luck of the adventurer, his reports on his return were tinged

with a coloring of romance that stimulated still higher the sensitive

fancies of his countrymen, and nourished the chimerical sentiments of an

age of chivalry.  They listened with attentive ears to tales of Amazons

which seemed to realize the classic legends of antiquity, to stories of

Patagonian giants, to flaming pictures of an El Dorado, where the sands

sparkled with gems, and golden pebbles as large as birds' eggs were

dragged in nets out of the rivers.



Yet that the adventurers were no impostors, but dupes, too easy dupes of

their own credulous fancies, is shown by the extravagant character of

their enterprises; by expeditions in search of the magical Fountain of

Health, of the golden Temple of Doboyba, of the golden sepulchres of

Zenu; for gold was ever floating before their distempered vision, and the

name of Castilla del Oro, Golden Castile, the most unhealthy and

unprofitable region of the Isthmus, held out a bright promise to the

unfortunate settler, who too frequently, instead of gold, found there only

his grave.



In this realm of enchantment, all the accessories served to maintain the

illusion.  The simple natives, with their defenceless bodies and rude

weapons, were no match for the European warrior armed to the teeth in

mail.  The odds were as great as those found in any legend of chivalry,

where the lance of the good knight overturned hundreds at a touch.  The

perils that lay in the discoverer's path, and the sufferings he had to

sustain, were scarcely inferior to those that beset the knight-errant.

Hunger and thirst and fatigue, the deadly effluvia of the morass with its

swarms of venomous insects, the cold of mountain snows, and the

scorching sun of the tropics, these were the lot of every cavalier who

came to seek his fortunes in the New World.  It was the reality of

romance.  The life of the Spanish adventurer was one chapter more--and

not the least remarkable --in the chronicles of knight-errantry.



The character of the warrior took somewhat of the exaggerated coloring

shed over his exploits.  Proud and vainglorious, swelled with lofty

anticipations of his destiny, and an invincible confidence in his own

resources, no danger could appall and no toil could tire him.  The greater

the danger, indeed, the higher the charm; for his soul revelled in

excitement, and the enterprise without peril wanted that spur of romance

which was necessary to rouse his energies into action.  Yet in the motives

of action meaner influences were strangely mingled with the loftier, the

temporal with the spiritual.  Gold was the incentive and the recompense,

and in the pursuit of it his inflexible nature rarely hesitated as to the

means.  His courage was sullied with cruelty, the cruelty that flowed

equally--strange as it may seem--from his avarice and his religion;

religion as it was understood in that age,--the religion of the Crusader.  It

was the convenient cloak for a multitude of sins, which covered them

even from himself.  The Castilian, too proud for hypocrisy, committed

more cruelties in the name of religion than were ever practised by the

pagan idolater or the fanatical Moslem.  The burning of the infidel was a

sacrifice acceptable to Heaven, and the conversion of those who survived

amply atoned for the foulest offences.  It is a melancholy and mortifying

consideration, that the most uncompromising spirit of intolerance--the

spirit of the Inquisitor at home, and of the Crusader abroad-should have

emanated from a religion which preached peace upon earth and good-

will towards man!



What a contrast did these children of Southern Europe present to the

Anglo-Saxon races who scattered themselves along the great northern

division of the western hemisphere! For the principle of action with these

latter was not avarice, nor the more specious pretext of proselytism; but

independence---independence religious and political.  To secure this,

they were content to earn a bare subsistence by a life of frugality and toil.

They asked nothing from the soil, but the reasonable returns of their own

labor.  No golden visions threw a deceitful halo around their path and

beckoned them onwards through seas of blood to the subversion of an

unoffending dynasty.  They were content with the slow but steady

progress of their social polity.  They patiently endured the privations of

the wilderness, watering the tree of liberty with their tears and with the

sweat of their brow, till it took deep root in the land and sent up its

branches high towards the heavens; while the communities of the

neighboring continent, shooting up into the sudden splendors of a

tropical vegetation, exhibited, even in their prime, the sure symptoms of

decay.



It would seem to have been especially ordered by Providence that the

discovery of the two great divisions of the American hemisphere should

fall to the two races best fitted to conquer and colonize them.  Thus the

northern section was consigned to the Anglo-Saxon race, whose orderly,

industrious habits found an ample field for development under its colder

skies and on its more rugged soil; while the southern portion, with its

rich tropical products and treasures of mineral wealth, held out the most

attractive bait to invite the enterprise of the Spaniard.  How different

might have been the result, if the bark of Columbus had taken a more

northerly direction, as he at one time meditated, and landed its band of

adventurers on the shores of what is now Protestant America!



Under the pressure of that spirit of nautical enterprise which filled the

maritime communities of Europe in the sixteenth century, the whole

extent of the mighty continent, from Labrador to Terra del Fuego, was

explored in less than thirty years after its discovery; and in 1521, the

Portuguese Maghellan, sailing under the Spanish flag, solved the

problem of the strait, and found a westerly way to the long sought Spice-

islands of India,--greatly to the astonishment of the Portuguese, who,

sailing from the opposite direction, there met their rivals, face to face, at

the antipodes.  But while the whole eastern coast of the American

continent had been explored, and the central portion of it colonized,--

even after the brilliant achievement of the Mexican conquest,---the veil

was not yet raised that hung over the golden shores of the Pacific.



Floating rumors had reached the Spaniards, from time to time, of

countries in the far west, teeming with the metal they so much coveted;

but the first distinct notice of Peru was about the year 1511, when Vasco

Nunez de Balboa, the discoverer of the Southern Sea, was weighing

some gold which he had collected from the natives.  A young barbarian

chieftain, who was present, struck the scales with his fist, and, scattering

the glittering metal around the apartment, exclaimed,---"If this is what

you prize so much that you are willing to leave your distant homes, and

risk even life itself for it, I can tell you of a land where they eat and drink

out of golden vessels, and gold is as cheap as iron is with you." It was

not long after this startling intelligence that Balboa achieved the

formidable adventure of scaling the mountain rampart of the Isthmus

which divides the two mighty oceans from each other; when, armed with

sword and buckler, he rushed into the waters of the Pacific, and cried

out, in the true chivalrous vein, that "he claimed this unknown sea with

all that it contained for the king of Castile, and that he would make good

the claim against all, Christian or infidel, who dared to gainsay it!"3  All

the broad continent and sunny isles washed by the waters of the Southern

Ocean! Little did the bold cavalier comprehend the full import of his

magnificent vaunt.



On this spot he received more explicit tidings of the Peruvian empire,

heard proofs recounted of its civilization, and was shown drawings of the

llama, which, to the European eye, seemed a species of the Arabian

camel.  Bat, although he steered his caravel for these golden realms, and

even pushed his discoveries some twenty leagues south of the Gulf of St.

Michael, the adventure was not reserved for him.  The illustrious

discoverer was doomed to fall a victim to that miserable jealousy with

which a little spirit regards the achievements of a great one.



The Spanish colonial domain was broken up into a number of petty

governments, which were dispensed sometimes to court favorites,

though, as the duties of the post, at this early period, were of an arduous

nature, they were more frequently reserved for men of some practical

talent and enterprise.  Columbus, by virtue of his original contract with

the Crown, had jurisdiction over the territories discovered by himself,

embracing some of the principal islands, and a few places on the

continent.  This jurisdiction differed from that of other functionaries,

inasmuch as it was hereditary; a privilege found in the end too

considerable for a subject, and commuted, therefore, for a title and a

pension.  These colonial governments were multiplied with the increase

of empire, and by the year 1524, the period at which our narrative

properly commences, were scattered over the islands, along the Isthmus

of Darien, the broad tract of Terra Firma, and the recent conquests of

Mexico.  Some of these governments were of no great extent.  Others,

like that of Mexico, were of the dimensions of a kingdom; and most had

an indefinite range for discovery assigned to them in their immediate

neighborhood, by which each of the petty potentates might enlarge his

territorial sway, and enrich his followers and himself.  This politic

arrangement best served the ends of the Crown, by affording a perpetual

incentive to the spirit of enterprise.  Thus living on their own little

domains at a long distance from the mother country, these military rulers

held a sort of vice-regal sway, and too frequently exercised it in the most

oppressive and tyrannical manner; oppressive to the native, and

tyrannical towards their own followers.  It was the natural consequence,

when men, originally low in station, and unprepared by education for

office, were suddenly called to the possession of a brief, but in its nature

irresponsible, authority.  It was not till after some sad experience of these

results, that measures were taken to hold these petty tyrants in check by

means of regular tribunals, or Royal Audiences, as they were termed,

which, composed of men of character and learning, might interpose the

arm of the law, or, at least, the voice of remonstrance, for the protection

of both colonist and native.



Among the colonial governors, who were indebted for their situation to

their rank at home, was Don Pedro Arias de Avila, or Pedrarias, as

usually called.  He was married to a daughter of Dona Beatriz de

Bobadilla, the celebrated Marchioness of Moya, best known as the friend

of Isabella the Catholic.  He was a man of some military experience and

considerable energy of character.  But, as it proved, he was of a

malignant temper; and the base qualities, which might have passed

unnoticed in the obscurity of private life, were made conspicuous, and

perhaps created in some measure, by sudden elevation to power; as the

sunshine, which operates kindly on a generous soil, and stimulates it to

production, calls forth from the unwholesome marsh only foul and

pestilent vapors.  This man was placed over the territory of Castilla del

Oro, the ground selected by Nunez de Balboa for the theatre of his

discoveries.  Success drew on this latter the jealousy of his superior, for

it was crime enough in the eyes of Pedrarias to deserve too well.  The

tragical history of this cavalier belongs to a period somewhat earlier than

that with which we are to be occupied.  It has been traced by abler hands

than mine, and, though brief, forms one of the most brilliant passages in

the annals of the American conquerors.4



But though Pedrarias was willing to cut short the glorious career of his

rival, he was not insensible to the important consequences of his

discoveries.  He saw at once the unsuitableness of Darien for prosecuting

expeditions on the Pacific, and, conformably to the original suggestion of

Balboa, in 1519, he caused his rising capital to be transferred from the

shores of the Atlantic to the ancient site of Panama, some distance east of

the present city of that name.5  This most unhealthy spot, the cemetery of

many an unfortunate colonist, was favorably situated for the great object

of maritime enterprise; and the port, from its central position, afforded

the best point of departure for expeditions, whether to the north or south,

along the wide range of undiscovered coast that lined the Southern

Ocean.  Yet in this new and more favorable position, several years were

suffered to elapse before the course of discovery took the direction of

Peru.  This was turned exclusively towards the north, or rather west, in'

obedience to the orders of government, which had ever at heart the

detection of a strait that, as was supposed, must intersect some part or

other of the long-extended Isthmus.  Armament after armament was

fitted out with this chimerical object; and Pedrarias saw his domain

extending every year farther and farther without deriving any

considerable advantage from his acquisitions.  Veragua, Costa Rica,

Nicaragua, were successively occupied; and his brave cavaliers forced a

way across forest and mountain and warlike tribes of savages, till, at

Honduras, they came in collision with the companions of Cortes, the

Conquerors of Mexico, who had descended from the great northern

plateau on the regions of Central America, and thus completed the

survey of this wild and mysterious land.



It was not till 1522 that a regular expedition was despatched in the

direction south of Panama, under the conduct of Pascual de Andagoya, a

cavalier of much distinction in the colony.  But that officer penetrated

only to the Puerto de Pinas, the limit of Balboa's discoveries, when the

bad state of his health compelled him to reembark and abandon his

enterprise at its commencement.6



Yet the floating rumors of the wealth and civilization of a mighty nation

at the South were continually reaching the ears and kindling the dreamy

imaginations of the colonists; and it may seem astonishing that an

expedition in that direction should have been so long deferred.  But the

exact position and distance of this fairy realm were matter of conjecture.

The long tract of intervening country was occupied by rude and warlike

races; and the little experience which the Spanish navigators had already

had of the neighboring coast and its inhabitants, and still more, the

tempestuous character of the seas--for their expeditions had taken place

at the most unpropitious seasons of the year--enhanced the apparent

difficulties of the undertaking, and made even their stout hearts shrink

from it.



Such was the state of feeling in the little community of Panama for

several years after its foundation.  Meanwhile, the dazzling conquest of

Mexico gave a new impulse to the ardor of discovery, and, in 1524, three

men were found in the colony, in whom the spirit of adventure triumphed

over every consideration of difficulty and danger that obstructed the

prosecution of the enterprise.  One among them was selected as fitted by

his character to conduct it to a successful issue.  That man was Francisco

Pizarro; and as he held the same conspicuous post in the Conquest of

Peru that was occupied by Cortes in that of Mexico it will be necessary

to take a brief review of his early history.







Book 2



Chapter 2



Francisco Pizarro--His Early History--First Expedition To The South--

Distresses Of The Voyagers--Sharp Encounters--Return To Panama--

Almagro's Expedition



1524-1525



Francisco Pizarro was born at Truxillo, a city of Estremadura, in Spain.

The period of his birth is uncertain; but probably it was not far from

1471.1  He was an illegitimate child, and that his parents should not have

taken pains to perpetuate the date of his birth is not surprising.  Few care

to make a particular record of their transgressions.  His father, Gonzalo

Pizarro, was a colonel of infantry, and served with some distinction in

the Italian campaigns under the Great Captain, and afterwards in the

wars of Navarre.  His mother, named Francisca Gonzales, was a person

of humble condition in the town of Truxillo.2



But little is told of Francisco's early years, and that little not always

deserving of credit.  According to some, he was deserted by both his

parents, and left as a foundling at the door of one of the principal

churches of the city.  It is even said that he would have perished, had he

not been nursed by a sow.3  This is a more discreditable fountain of

supply than that assigned to the infant Romulus.  The early history of

men who have made their names famous by deeds in after-life, like the

early history of nations, affords a fruitful field for invention.



It seems certain that the young Pizarro received little care from either of

his parents, and was suffered to grow up as nature dictated.  He was

neither taught to read nor write, and his principal occupation was that of

a swineherd.  But this torpid way of life did not suit the stirring spirit of

Pizarro, as he grew older, and listened to the tales, widely circulated and

se captivating to a youthful fancy, of the New World.  He shared in the

popular enthusiasm, and availed himself of a favorable moment to

abandon his ignoble charge, and escape to Seville, the port where the

Spanish adventurers embarked to seek their fortunes in the West.  Few of

them could have turned their backs on their native land with less cause

for regret than Pizarro.4



In what year this important change in his destiny took place we are not

informed.  The first we hear of him in the New World is at the island of

Hispaniola, in 1510, where he took part in the expedition to Uraba in

Terra Firma, under Alonzo de Ojeda, a cavalier whose character and

achievements find no parallel but in the pages of Cervantes.  Hernando

Cortes, whose mother was a Pizarro, and related, it is said, to the father

of Francis, was then in St.  Domingo, and prepared to accompany

Ojeda's expedition, but was prevented by a temporary lameness.  Had he

gone, the fall of the Aztec empire might have been postponed for some

time longer, and the sceptre of Montezuma have descended in peace to

his posterity.  Pizarro shared in the disastrous fortunes of Ojeda's colony,

and, by his discretion, obtained so far the confidence of his commander,

as to be left in charge of the settlement, when the latter returned for

supplies to the islands.  The lieutenant continued at his perilous post for

nearly two months, waiting deliberately until death should have thinned

off the colony sufficiently to allow the miserable remnant to be

embarked in the single small vessel that remained to it.5



After this, we find him associated with Balboa, the discoverer of the

Pacific, and cooperating with him in establishing the settlement at

Darien.  He had the glory of accompanying this gallant cavalier in his

terrible march across the mountains, and of being among the first

Europeans, therefore, whose eyes were greeted with the long-promised

vision of the Southern Ocean.



After the untimely death of his commander, Pizarro attached himself to

the fortunes of Pedrarias, and was employed by that governor in several

military expeditions, which, if they afforded nothing else, gave him the

requisite training for the perils and privations that lay in the path of the

future Conqueror of Peru.



In 1515, he was selected, with another cavalier named Morales, to cross

the Isthmus and traffic with the natives on the shores of the Pacific.  And

there, while engaged in collecting his booty of gold and pearls from the

neighbouring islands, as his eye ranged along the shadowy line of coast

till it faded in the distance, his imagination may have been first fired with

the idea of, one day, attempting the conquest of the mysterious regions

beyond the mountains.  On the removal of the seat of government across

the Isthmus to Panama, Pizarro accompanied Pedrarias, and his name

became conspicuous among the cavaliers who extended the line of

conquest to the north over the martial tribes of Veragua.  But all these

expeditions, whatever glory they may have brought him, were productive

of very little gold; and, at the age of fifty, the captain Pizarro found

himself in possession only of a tract of unhealthy land in the

neighborhood of the capital, and of such repartimientos of the natives as

were deemed suited to his military services.6  The New World was a

lottery, where the great prizes were so few that the odds were much

against the player; yet in the game he was content to stake health,

fortune, and, too often, his fair fame.



Such was Pizarro's situation when, in 1522, Andagoya returned from his

unfinished enterprise to the south of Panama, bringing back with him

more copious accounts than any hitherto received of the opulence and

grandeur of the countries that lay beyond.7  It was at this time, too, that

the splendid achievements of Cortes made their impression on the public

mind, and gave a new impulse to the spirit of adventure.  The southern

expeditions became a common topic of speculation among the colonists

of Panama.  But the region of gold, as it lay behind the mighty curtain of

the Cordilleras, was still veiled in obscurity.  No idea could be formed of

its actual distance; and the hardships and difficulties encountered by the

few navigators who had sailed in that direction gave a gloomy character

to the undertaking, which had hitherto deterred the most daring from

embarking in it.  There is no evidence that Pizarro showed any particular

alacrity in the cause.  Nor were his own funds such as to warrant any

expectation of success without great assistance from others.  He found

this in two individuals of the colony, who took too important a part in the

subsequent transactions not to be particularly noticed.



One of them, Diego de Almagro, was a soldier of fortune somewhat

older, it seems probable, than Pizarro; though little is known of his birth,

and even the place of it is disputed.  It is supposed to have been the town

of Almagro in New Castile, whence his own name, for want of a better

source was derived; for, like Pizarro, he was a foundling.8  Few

particulars are known of him till the present period of our history; for he

was one of those whom the working of turbulent times first throws upon

the surface,--less fortunate, perhaps, than if left in their original

obscurity.  In his military career, Almagro had earned the reputation of a

gallant soldier.  He was frank and liberal in his disposition, somewhat

hasty and ungovernable in his passions, but, like men of a sanguine

temperament, after the first sallies had passed away, not difficult to be

appeased.  He had, in short, the good qualities and the defects incident to

an honest nature, not improved by the discipline of early education or

self-control.



The other member of the confederacy was Hernando de Luque, a

Spanish ecclesiastic, who exercised the functions of vicar at Panama, and

had formerly filled the office of schoolmaster in the Cathedral of Darien.

He seems to have been a man of singular prudence and knowledge of the

world; and by his respectable qualities had acquired considerable

influence in the little community to which he belonged, as well as the

control of funds, which made his cooperation essential to the success of

the present enterprise.



It was arranged among the three associates, that the two cavaliers should

contribute their little stock towards defraying the expenses of the

armament, but by far the greater part of the funds was to be furnished by

Luque.  Pizarro was to take command of the expedition, and the business

of victualling and equipping the vessels was assigned to Almagro.  The

associates found no difficulty in obtaining the consent of the governor to

their undertaking.  After the return of Andagoya, he had projected

another expedition, but the officer to whom it was to be intrusted died.

Why he did not prosecute his original purpose, and commit the affair to

an experienced captain like Pizarro, does not appear.  He was probably

not displeased that the burden of the enterprise should be borne by

others, so long as a good share of the profits went into his own coffers.

This he did not overlook in his stipulations.9



Thus fortified with the funds of Luque, and the consent of the governor,

Almagro was not slow to make preparations for the voyage.  Two small

vessels were purchased, the larger of which had been originally built by

Balboa, for himself, with a view to this same expedition.  Since his

death, it had lain dismantled in the harbor of Panama.  It was now

refitted as well as circumstances would permit, and put in order for sea,

while the stores and provisions were got on board with an alacrity which

did more credit, as the event proved, to Almagro's zeal than to his

forecast.



There was more difficulty in obtaining the necessary complement of

hands; for a general feeling of distrust had gathered round expeditions in

this direction, which could not readily be overcome.  But there were

many idle hangers-on in the colony, who had come out to mend their

fortunes, and were willing to take their chance of doing so, however

desperate.  From such materials as these, Almagro assembled a body of

somewhat more than a hundred men;10 and every thing being ready,

Pizarro assumed the command, and, weighing anchor, took his departure

from the little port of Panama, about the middle of November, 1524..

Almagro was to follow in a second vessel of inferior size, as soon as it

could be fitted out.11



The time of year was the most unsuitable that could have been selected

for the voyage; for it was the rainy season, when the navigation to the

south, impeded by contrary winds, is made doubly dangerous by the

tempests that sweep over the coast.  But this was not understood by the

adventurers.  After touching at the Isle of Pearls, the frequent resort of

navigators, at a few leagues' distance from Panama, Pizarro hold his way

across the Gulf of St.  Michael, and steered almost due south for the

Puerto de Pinas, a headland in the province of Biruquete, which marked

the limit of Andagoya's voyage.  Before his departure, Pizarro had

obtained all the information which he could derive from that officer in

respect to the country, and the route he was to follow.  But the cavalier's

own experience had been too limited to enable him to be of much

assistance.



Doubling the Puerto de Pinas, the little vessel entered the river Biru, the

misapplication of which name is supposed by some to have given rise to

that of the empire of the Incas.12  After sailing up this stream for a

couple of leagues, Pizarro came to anchor, and disembarking his whole

force except the sailors, proceeded at the head of it to explore the

country.  The land spread out into a vast swamp, where the heavy rains

had settled in pools of stagnant water, and the muddy soil afforded no

footing to the traveller.  This dismal morass was fringed with woods,

through whose thick and tangled undergrowth they found it difficult to

penetrate and emerging from them, they came out on a hilly country, so

rough and rocky in its character, that their feet were cut to the bone, and

the weary soldier, encumbered with his heavy mail or thick-padded

doublet of cotton, found it difficult to drag one foot after the other.  The

heat at times was oppressive; and, fainting with toil and famished for

want of food, they sank down on the earth from mere exhaustion.  Such

was the ominous commencement of the expedition to Peru.



Pizarro, however, did not lose heart.  He endeavored to revive the spirits

of his men, and besought them not to be discouraged by difficulties

which a brave heart would be sure to overcome, reminding them of the

golden prize which awaited those who persevered.  Yet it was obvious

that nothing was to be gained by remaining longer in this desolate region.

Returning to their vessel, therefore, it was suffered to drop down the

river and proceed along its southern course on the great ocean.



After coasting a few leagues, Pizarro anchored off a place not very

inviting in its appearance, where he took in a supply of wood and water.

Then, stretching more towards the open sea, he held on in the same

direction towards the south.  But in this he was baffled by a succession of

heavy tempests, accompanied with such tremendous peals of thunder and

floods of rain as are found only in the terrible storms of the tropics.  The

sea was lashed into fury, and, swelling into mountain billows, threatened

every moment to overwhelm the crazy little bark, which opened at every

seam.  For ten days the unfortunate voyagers were tossed about by the

pitiless elements, and it was only by incessant exertions--the exertions of

despair--that they preserved the ship from foundering.  To add to their

calamities, their provisions began to fail, and they were short of water, of

which they had been furnished only with a small number of casks; for

Almagro had counted on their recruiting their scanty supplies, from time

to time, from the shore.  Their meat was wholly consumed, and they

were reduced to the wretched allowance of two ears of Indian corn a day

for each man.



Thus harassed by hunger and the elements, the battered voyagers were

too happy to retrace their course and regain the port where they had last

taken in supplies of wood and water.  Yet nothing could be more

unpromising than the aspect of the country.  It had the same character of

low, swampy soil, that distinguished the former landing-place; while

thick-matted forests, of a depth which the eye could not penetrate,

stretched along the coast to an interminable length.  It was in vain that





840

the wearied Spaniards endeavored to thread the mazes of this tangled

thicket, where the creepers and flowering vines, that shoot up luxuriant

in a hot and humid atmosphere, had twined themselves round the huge

trunks of the forest-trees, and made a network that could be opened only

with the axe.  The rain, in the mean time, rarely slackened, and the

ground, strewed with leaves and saturated with moisture, seemed to slip

away beneath their feet.



Nothing could be more dreary and disheartening than the aspect of these

funereal forests; where the exhalations from the overcharged surface of

the ground poisoned the air, and seemed to allow no life, except that,

indeed, of myriads of insects, whose enamelled wings glanced to and fro,

like sparks of fire, in every opening of the woods.  Even the brute

creation appeared instinctively to have shunned the fatal spot, and

neither beast nor bird of any description was seen by the wanderers.

Silence reigned unbroken in the heart of these dismal solitudes; at least,

the only sounds that could be heard were the plashing of the rain-drops

on the leaves, and the tread of the forlorn adventurers.13



Entirely discouraged by the aspect of the country, the Spaniards began to

comprehend that they had gained nothing by changing their quarters

from sea to shore, and they felt the most serious apprehensions of

perishing from famine in a region which afforded nothing but such

unwholesome berries as they could pick up here and there in the woods.

They loudly complained of their hard lot, accusing their commander as

the author of all their troubles, and as deluding them with promises of a

fairy land, which seemed to recede in proportion as they advanced.  It

was of no use, they said, to contend against fate, and it was better to take

their chance of regaining the port of Panama in time to save their lives,

than to wait where they were to die of hunger.



But Pizarro was prepared to encounter much greater evils than these,

before returning to Panama, bankrupt in credit, an object of derision as a

vainglorious dreamer, who had persuaded others to embark in an

adventure which he had not the courage to carry through himself.  The

present was his only chance.  To return would be ruin.  He used every

argument, therefore, that mortified pride or avarice could suggest to turn

his followers from their purpose; represented to them that these were the

troubles that necessarily lay in the path of the discoverer; and called to

mind the brilliant successes of their countrymen in other quarters, and

the repeated reports, which they had themselves received, of the rich

regions along the coast, of which it required only courage and constancy

on their part to become the masters.  Yet, as their present exigencies

were pressing, he resolved to send back the vessel to the Isle of Pearls, to

lay in a fresh stock of provisions for his company, which might enable

them to go forward with renewed confidence.  The distance was not

great, and in a few days they would all be relieved from their perilous

position.  The officer detached on this service was named Montenegro;

and taking with him nearly half the company, after receiving Pizarro's

directions, he instantly weighed anchor, and steered for the Isle of Pearls.



On the departure of his vessel, the Spanish commander made an attempt

to explore the country, and see if some Indian settlement might not be

found, where he could procure refreshments for his followers.  But his

efforts were vain, and no trace was visible of a human dwelling; though,

in the dense and impenetrable foliage of the equatorial regions, the

distance of a few rods might suffice to screen a city from observation.

The only means of nourishment left to the unfortunate adventurers were

such shell-fish as they occasionally picked up on the shore, or the bitter

buds of the palm-tree, and such berries and unsavory herbs as grew wild

in the woods.  Some of these were so poisonous, that the bodies of those

who ate them swelled up and were tormented with racking pains.  Others,

preferring famine to this miserable diet, pined away from weakness and

actually died of starvation.  Yet their resolute leader strove to maintain

his own cheerfulness and to keep up the drooping spirits of his men.  He

freely shared with them his scanty stock of provisions, was unwearied in

his endeavors to procure them sustenance, tended the sick, and ordered

barracks to be constructed for their accommodation, which might, at

least, shelter them from the drenching storms of the season.  By this

ready sympathy with his followers in their sufferings, he obtained an

ascendency over their rough natures, which the assertion of authority, at

least in the present extremity, could never have secured to him.



Day after day, week after week, had now passed away, and no tidings

were heard of the vessel that was to bring relief to the wanderers.  In vain

did they strain their eyes over the distant waters to catch a glimpse of

their coming friends.  Not a speck was to be seen in the blue distance,

where the canoe of the savage dared not venture, and the sail of the white

man was not yet spread.  Those who had borne up bravely at first now

gave way to despondency, as they felt themselves abandoned by their

countrymen on this desolate shore.  They pined under that sad feeling

which "maketh the heart sick." More than twenty of the little band had

already died, and the survivors seemed to be rapidly following.14



At this crisis reports were brought to Pizarro of a light having been seen

through a distant opening in the woods.  He hailed the tidings with

eagerness, as intimating the existence of some settlement in the

neighborhood; and, putting himself at the head of a small party, went in

the direction pointed out, to reconnoitre.  He was not disappointed, and,

after extricating himself from a dense wilderness of underbrush and

foliage, he emerged into an open space, where a small Indian village was

planted.  The timid inhabitants, on the sudden apparition of the strangers,

quitted their huts in dismay; and the famished Spaniards, rushing in,

eagerly made themselves masters of their contents.  These consisted of

different articles of food, chiefly maize and cocoanuts.  The supply,

though small, was too seasonable not to fill them with rapture.



The astonished natives made no attempt at resistance.  But, gathering

more confidence as no violence was offered to their persons, they drew

nearer the white men, and inquired, "Why they did not stay at home and

till their own lands, instead of roaming about to rob others who had

never harmed them?"15  Whatever may have been their opinion as to.

the question of right, the Spaniards, no doubt, felt then that it would have

been wiser to do so.  But the savages wore about their persons gold

ornaments of some size, though of clumsy workmanship.  This furnished

the best reply to their demand.  It was the golden bait which lured the

Spanish adventurer to forsake his pleasant home for the trials of the

wilderness.  From the Indians Pizarro gathered a confirmation of the

reports he had so often received of a rich country lying farther south; and

at the distance of ten days' journey across the mountains, they told him,

there dwelt a mighty monarch whose dominions had been invaded by

another still more powerful, the Child of the Sun.16  It may have been

the invasion of Quito that was meant, by the valiant Inca Huayna Capac,

which took place some years previous to Pizarro's expedition.



At length, after the expiration of more than six weeks, the Spaniards

beheld with delight the return of the wandering bark that had borne away

their comrades, and Montenegro sailed into port with an ample supply of

provisions for his famishing countrymen.  Great was his horror at the

aspect presented by the latter, their wild and haggard countenances and

wasted frames,--so wasted by hunger and disease, that their old

companions found it difficult to recognize them.  Montenegro accounted

for his delay by incessant head winds and bad weather; and he himself

had also a doleful tale to tell of the distress to which he and his crew had

been reduced by hunger, on their passage to the Isle of Pearls.--It is

minute incidents like these with which we have been occupied, that

enable one to comprehend the extremity of suffering to which the

Spanish adventurer was subjected in the prosecution of his great work of

discovery.



Revived by the substantial nourishment to which they had so long been

strangers, the Spanish cavaliers, with the buoyancy that belongs to men

of a hazardous and roving life, forgot their past distresses in their

eagerness to prosecute their enterprise.  Reembarking therefore on board

his vessel, Pizarro bade adieu to the scene of so much suffering, which

he branded with the appropriate name of Puerto de la Hambre, the Port

of Famine, and again opened his sails to a favorable breeze that bore him

onwards towards the south.



Had he struck boldly out into the deep, instead of hugging the

inhospitable shore, where he had hitherto found so little to recompense

him, he might have spared himself the repetition of wearisome and

unprofitable adventures, and reached by a shorter route the point of his

destination.  But the Spanish mariner groped his way along these

unknown coasts, landing at every convenient headland, as if fearful lest

some fruitful region or precious mine might be overlooked, should a

single break occur in the line of survey.  Yet it should be remembered,

that, though the true point of Pizarro's destination is obvious to us,

familiar with the topography of these countries, he was wandering in the

dark, feeling his way along, inch by inch, as it were, without chart to

guide him, without knowledge of the seas or of the bearings of the coast,

and even with no better defined idea of the object at which he aimed than

that of a land teeming with gold, that lay somewhere at the south! It was

a hunt after an El Dorado; on information scarcely more circumstantial

or authentic than that which furnished the basis of so many chimerical

enterprises in this land of wonders.  Success only, the best argument with

the multitude, redeemed the expeditions of Pizarro from a similar

imputation of extravagance.



Holding on his southerly course under the lee of the shore, Pizarro, after

a short run, found himself abreast of an open reach of country, or at least

one less encumbered with wood, which rose by a gradual swell, as it

receded from the coast.  He landed with a small body of men, and,

advancing a short distance into the interior, fell in with an Indian hamlet.

It was abandoned by the inhabitants, who, on the approach of the

invaders, had betaken themselves to the mountains; and the Spaniards,

entering their deserted dwellings, found there a good store of maize and

other articles of food, and rude ornaments of gold of considerable value.

Food was not more necessary for their bodies than was the sight of gold,

from time to time, to stimulate their appetite for adventure.  One

spectacle, however, chilled their blood with horror.  This was the sight of

human flesh, which they found roasting before the fire, as the barbarians

had left it, preparatory to their obscene repast.  The Spaniards,

conceiving that they had fallen in with a tribe of Caribs, the only race in

that part of the New World known to be cannibals, retreated precipitately

to their vessel.17  They were not steeled by sad familiarity with the

spectacle, like the Conquerors of Mexico.



The weather, which had been favorable, now set in tempestuous, with

heavy squalls, accompanied by incessant thunder and lightning, and the

rain, as usual in these tropical tempests, descended not so much in drops

as in unbroken sheets of water.  The Spaniards, however, preferred to

take their chance on the raging element rather than remain in the scene of

such brutal abominations.  But the fury of the storm gradually subsided,

and the little vessel held on her way along the coast, till, coming abreast

of a bold point of land named by Pizarro Punts Quemada, he gave orders

to anchor.  The margin of the shore was fringed with a deep belt of

mangrove-trees, the long roots of which, interlacing one another, formed

a kind of submarine lattice-work that made the place difficult of

approach.  Several avenues, opening through this tangled thicket, led

Pizarro to conclude that the country must be inhabited, and he

disembarked, with the greater part of his force, to explore the interior.



He had not penetrated more than a league, when he found his conjecture

verified by the sight of an Indian town of larger size than those he had

hitherto seen, occupying the brow of an eminence, and well detended by

palisades.  The inhabitants, as usual, had fled; but left in their dwellings a

good supply of provisions and some gold trinkets, which the Spaniards

made no difficulty of appropriating to themselves.  Pizarro's flimsy bark

had been strained by the heavy gales it had of late encountered, so that it

was unsafe to prosecute the voyage further without more thorough

repairs than could be given to her on this desolate coast.  He accordingly

determined to send her back with a few hands to be careened at Panama,

and meanwhile to establish his quarters in his present position, which

was so favorable for defence.  But first he despatched a small party

under Montenegro to reconnoitre the country, and, if possible, to open a

communication with the natives.



The latter were a warlike race.  They had left their habitations in order to

place their wives and children in safety.  But they had kept an eye on the

movements of the invaders, and, when they saw their forces divided, they

resolved to fall upon each body singly before it could communicate with

the other.  So soon, therefore, as Montenegro had penetrated through the

defiles of the lofty hills, which shoot out like spurs of the Cordilleras

along this part of the coast, the Indian warriors, springing from their

ambush, sent off a cloud of arrows and other missiles that darkened the

air, while they made the forest ring with their shrill warwhoop.  The

Spaniards, astonished at the appearance of the savages, with their naked

bodies gaudily painted, and brandishing their weapons as they glanced

among the trees and straggling underbrush that choked up the defile,

were taken by surprise and thrown for a moment into disarray.  Three of

their number were killed and several wounded.  Yet, speedily rallying,

they returned the discharge of the assailants with their cross-bows,--for

Pizarro's troops do not seem to have been provided with muskets on this

expedition,--and then gallantly charging the enemy, sword in hand,

succeeded in driving them back into the fastnesses of the mountains.  But

it only led them to shift their operations to another quarter, and make an

assault ,,n Pizarro before he could be relieved by his lieutenant.



Availing themselves of their superior knowledge of the passes, they

reached that commander's quarters long before Montenegro, who had

commenced a countermarch in the same direction.  And issuing from the

woods, the bold savages saluted the Spanish garrison with a tempest of

darts and arrows, some of which found their way through the joints of the

harness and the quilted mail of the cavaliers.  But Pizarro was too well

practised a soldier to be off his guard.  Calling his men about him, he

resolved not to abide the assault tamely in the works, but to sally out, and

meet the enemy on their own ground.  The barbarians, who had advanced

near the defences, fell back as the Spaniards burst forth with their valiant

leader at their head.  But, soon returning with admirable ferocity to the

charge, they singled out Pizarro, whom, by his bold bearing and air of

authority, they easily recognized as the chief; and, hurling at him a storm

of missiles, wounded him, in spite of his armour, in no less than seven

places.18



Driven back by the fury of the assault directed against his own person,

the Spanish commander retreated down the slope of the hill, still

defending himself as he could with sword and buckler, when his foot

slipped and he fell.  The enemy set up a fierce yell of triumph, and some

of the boldest sprang forward to despatch him.  But Pizarro was on his

feet in an instant, and, striking down two of the foremost with his strong

arm, held the rest at bay till his soldiers could come to the rescue.  The

barbarians, struck with admiration at his valor, began to falter, when

Montenegro luckily coming on the ground at the moment, and falling on

their rear, completed their confusion; and, abandoning the field, they

made the best of their way into the recesses of the mountains.  The

ground was covered with their slain; but the victory was dearly

purchased by the death of two more Spaniards and a long list of

wounded.



A council of war was then called.  The position had lost its charm in the

eyes of the Spaniards, who had met here with the first resistance they had

yet experienced on their expedition.  It was necessary to place the

wounded in some secure spot, where their injuries could be attended to.

Yet it was not safe to proceed farther, in the crippled state of their vessel.

On the whole, it was decided to return and report their proceedings to the

governor; and, though the magnificent hopes of the adventurers had not

been realized, Pizarro trusted that enough had been done to vindicate the

importance of the enterprise, and to secure the countenance of Pedrarias

for the further prosecution of it.19



Yet Pizarro could not make up his mind to present himself, in the present

state of the undertaking, before the governor.  He determined, therefore,

to be set on shore with the principal part of his company at Chicarea, a

place on the main land, at a short distance west of Panama From this

place, which he reached without any further accident, he despatched the

vessel, and in it his treasurer, Nicolas de Ribera, with the gold he had

collected, and with instructions to lay before the governor in full account

of his discoveries, and the result of the expedition.



While these events were passing, Pizarro's associate, Almagro, had been

busily employed in fitting out another vessel for the expedition at the

port of Panama.  It was not till long after his friend's departure that he

was prepared to follow him.  With the assistance of Luque, he at length

succeeded in equipping a small caravel and embarking a body of

between sixty and seventy adventurers, mostly of the lowest order of the

colonists.  He steered in the track of his comrade, with the intention of

overtaking him as soon as possible.  By a signal previously concerted of

notching the trees, he was able to identify the spots visited by Pizarro,--

Puerto de Pinas, Puerto de la Hambre, Pueblo Quemado--touching

successively at every point of the coast explored by his countrymen,

though in a much shorter time.  At the last-mentioned place he was

received by the fierce natives with the same hostile demonstrations as

Pizarro, though in the present encounter the Indians did not venture

beyond their defences.  But the hot blood of Almagro was so exasperated

by this check, that he assaulted the place and carried it sword in hand,

setting fire to the outworks and dwellings, and driving the wretched

inhabitants into the forests.



His victory cost him dear.  A wound from a javelin on the head caused

an inflammation in one of his eyes, which, after great anguish, ended in

the loss of it.  Yet the intrepid adventurer did not hesitate to pursue his

voyage, and, after touching at several places on the coast, some of which

rewarded him with a considerable booty in gold, he reached the mouth of

the Rio de San Juan, about the fourth degree of north latitude.  He was

struck with the beauty of the stream, and with the cultivation on its

borders, which were sprinkled with Indian cottages showing some skill in

their construction, and altogether intimating a higher civilization than

any thing he had yet seen.



Still his mind was filled with anxiety for the fate of Pizarro and his

followers.  No trace of them had been found on the coast for a long time,

and it was evident they must have foundered at sea, or made their way

back to Panama.  This last he deemed most probable; as the vessel might

have passed him unnoticed under the cover of the night, or of the dense

fogs that sometimes hang over the coast.



Impressed with this belief, he felt no heart to continue his voyage of

discovery, for which, indeed, his single bark, with its small complement

of men, was altogether inadequate.  He proposed, therefore, to return

without delay.  On his way, he touched at the Isle of Pearls, and there

learned the result of his friend's expedition, and the place of his present

residence.  Directing his course, at once, to Chicama, the two cavaliers

soon had the satisfaction of embracing each other, and recounting their

several exploits and escapes.  Almagro returned even better freighted

with gold than his confederate, and at every step of his progress he had

collected fresh confirmation of the existence of some great and opulent

empire in the South.  The confidence of the two friends was much

strengthened by their discoveries; and they unhesitatingly pledged

themselves to one another to die rather than abandon the enterprise.20



The best means of obtaining the levies requisite for so formidable an

undertaking--more formidable, as it now appeared to them, than before --

were made the subject of long and serious discussion.  It was at length

decided that Pizarro should remain in his present quarters, inconvenient

and even unwholesome as they were rendered by the humidity of the

climate, and the pestilent swarms of insects that filled the atmosphere.

Almagro would pass over to Panama, lay the case before the governor,

and secure, if possible, his good-will towards the prosecution of the

enterprise.  If no obstacle were thrown in their way from this quarter,

they might hope, with the assistance of Luque, to raise the necessary

supplies; while the results of the recent expedition were sufficiently

encouraging to draw adventurers to their standard in a community which

had a craving for excitement that gave even danger a charm, and which

held life cheap in comparison with gold.







Book 2



Chapter 3



The Famous Contract-Second Expedition--Ruiz Explores The Coast--

Pizarro's Sufferings In The Forests--Arrival Of New Recruits-

Fresh Discoveries And Disasters--Pizarro On The Isle Of Gallo



1526--1527



On his arrival at Panama, Almagro found that events had taken a turn

less favorable to his views than he had anticipated.  Pedrarias, the

governor, was preparing to lead an expedition in person against a

rebellious officer in Nicaragua; and his temper, naturally not the most

amiable, was still further soured by this defection of his lieutenant, and

the necessity it imposed on him of a long and perilous march.  When,

therefore, Almagro appeared before him with the request that he might

be permitted to raise further levies to prosecute his enterprise, the

governor received him with obvious dissatisfaction, listened coldly to the

narrative of his losses, turned an incredulous ear to his magnificent

promises for the future, and bluntly demanded an account of the lives,

which had been sacrificed by Pizarro's obstinacy, but which, had they

been spared, might have stood him in good stead in his present

expedition to Nicaragua.  He positively declined to countenance the rash

schemes of the two adventurers any longer, and the conquest of Peru

would have been crushed in the bud, but for the efficient interposition of

the remaining associate, Fernando de Luque.



This sagacious ecclesiastic had received a very different impression from

Almagro's narrative, from that which had been made on the mind of the

irritable governor.  The actual results of the enterprise in gold and silver,

thus far, indeed, had been small,--forming a mortifying contrast to the

magnitude of their expectations.  But, in another point of view, they were

of the last importance; since the intelligence which the adventurers had

gained in every successive stage of their progress confirmed, in the

strongest manner, the previous accounts, received from Andogoya and

others, of a rich Indian empire at the south, which might repay the

trouble of conquering it as well as Mexico had repaid the enterprise of

Cortes.  Fully entering, therefore, into the feelings of his military

associates, he used all his influence with the governor to incline him to a

more favorable view of Almagro's petition; and no one in the little

community of Panama exercised greater influence over the councils of

the executive than Father Luque, for which he was indebted no less to his

discretion and acknowledged sagacity than to his professional station.



But while Pedrarias, overcome by the arguments or importunity of the

churchman, yielded a reluctant assent to the application, he took care to

testify his displeasure with Pizarro, on whom he particularly charged the

loss of his followers, by naming Almagro as his equal in command in the

proposed expedition.  This mortification sunk deep into Pizarro's mind.

He suspected his comrade, with what reason does not appear, of

soliciting this boon from the governor.  A temporary coldness arose

between them, which subsided, in outward show, at least, on Pizarro's

reflecting that it was better to have this authority conferred on a friend

than on a stranger, perhaps an enemy.  But the seeds of permanent

distrust were left in his bosom, and lay waiting for the due season to

ripen into a fruitful harvest of discord.1



Pedrarias had been originally interested in the enterprise, at least, so far

as to stipulate for a share of the gains, though he had not contributed, as

it appears, a single ducat towards the expenses.  He was at length,

however, induced to relinquish all right to a share of the contingent

profits.  But, in his manner of doing so, he showed a mercenary spirit,

better becoming a petty trader than a high officer of the Crown.  He

stipulated that the associates should secure to him the sum of one

thousand pesos de oro in requital of his good-will, and they eagerly

closed with his proposal, rather than be encumbered with his pretensions.

For so paltry a consideration did he resign his portion of the rich spoil of

the Incas! 2  But the governor was not gifted with the eye of a prophet.

His avarice was of that short-sighted kind which defeats itself.  He had

sacrificed the chivalrous Balboa just as that officer was opening to him

the conquest of Peru, and he would now have quenched the spirit of

enterprise, that was taking the same direction, in Pizarro and his

associates.



Not long after this, in the following year, he was succeeded in his

government by Don Pedro de los Rios, a cavalier of Cordova.  It was the

policy of the Castilian Crown to allow no one of the great colonial

officers to occupy the same station so long as to render himself

formidable by his authority.3  It had, moreover, many particular causes

of disgust with Pedrarias.  The functionary they sent out to succeed him

was fortified with ample instructions for the good of the colony, and

especially of the natives, whose religious conversion was urged as a

capital object, and whose personal freedom was unequivocally asserted,

as loyal vassals of the Crown.  It is but justice to the Spanish government

to admit that its provisions were generally guided by a humane and

considerate policy, which was as regularly frustrated by the cupidity of

the colonist, and the capricious cruelty of the conqueror.  The few

remaining years of Pedrarias were spent in petty squabbles, both of a

personal and official nature; for he was still continued in office, though

in one of less consideration than that which he had hitherto filled.  He

survived but a few years, leaving behind him a reputation not to be

envied, of one who united a pusillanimous spirit with uncontrollable

passions; who displayed, notwithstanding, a certain energy of character,

or, to speak more correctly, an impetuosity of purpose, which might have

led to good results had it taken a right direction.  Unfortunately, his lack

of discretion was such, that the direction he took was rarely of service to

his country or to himself.



Having settled their difficulties with the governor, and obtained his

sanction to their enterprise, the confederates lost no time in making the

requisite preparations for it.  Their first step was to execute the

memorable contract which served as the basis of their future

arrangements; and, as Pizarro's name appears in this, it seems probable

that that chief had crossed over to Panama so soon as the favorable

disposition of Pedrarias had been secured.4  The instrument, after

invoking in the most solemn manner the names of the Holy Trinity and

Our Lady the Blessed Virgin, sets forth, that, whereas the parties have

full authority to discover and subdue the countries and provinces lying

south of the Gulf, belonging to the empire of Peru, and as Fernando de

Luque had advanced the funds for the enterprise in bars of gold of the

value of twenty thousand pesos, they mutually bind themselves to divide

equally among them the whole of the conquered territory.  This

stipulation is reiterated over and over again, particularly with reference

to Luque, who, it is declared, is to be entitled to one third of all lands,

repartimientos, treasures of every kind, gold, silver, and precious stones,-

-to one third even of all vassals, rents, and emoluments arising from such

grants as may be conferred by the Crown on either of his military

associates, to be held for his own use, or for that of his heirs, assigns, or

legal representative.



The two captains solemnly engage to devote themselves exclusively to

the present undertaking until it is accomplished; and, in case of failure in

their part of the covenant, they pledge themselves to reimburse Luque for

his advances, for which all the property they possess shall be held

responsible, and this declaration is to be a sufficient warrant for the

execu.  tion of judgment against them, in the same manner as if it had

proceed.  ed from the decree of a court of justice.



The commanders, Pizarro and Almagro, made oath, in the name of God

and the Holy Evangelists, sacredly to keep this covenant, swearing it on

the missal, on which they traced with their own hands the sacred emblem

of the cross.  To give still greater efficacy to the compact, Father Luque

administered the sacrament to the parties, dividing the consecrated wafer

into three portions, of which each one of them partook; while the

bystanders, says an historian, were affected to tears by this spectacle of

the solemn ceremonial with which these men voluntarily devoted

themselves to a sacrifice that seemed little short of insanity.5



The instrument, which was dated March 10, 1526, was subscribed by

Luque, and attested by three respectable citizens of Panama, one of

whom signed on behalf of Pizarro, and the other for Almagro; since

neither of these parties, according to the avowal of the instrument, was

able to subscribe his own name.6



Such was the singular compact by which three obscure individuals coolly

carved out and partitioned among themselves, an empire of whose

extent, power, and resources, of whose situation, of whose existence,

even, they had no sure or precise knowledge.  The positive and

unhesitating manner in which they speak of the grandeur of this empire,

of its stores of wealth, so conformable to the event, but of which they

could have really known so little, forms a striking contrast with the

general skepticism and indifference manifested by nearly every other

person, high and low, in the community of Panama.7



The religious tone of the instrument is not the least remarkable feature in

it, especially when we contrast this with the relentless policy, pursued by

the very men who were parties to it, in their conquest of the country.  "In

the name of the Prince of Peace," says the illustrious historian of

America, "they ratified a contract of which plunder and bloodshed were

the objects."8  The reflection seems reasonable.  Yet, in criticizing what

is done, as well as what is written, we must take into account the spirit of

the times.9  The invocation of Heaven was natural, where the object of

the undertaking was, in part, a religious one.  Religion entered, more or

less, into the theory, at least, of the Spanish conquests in the New World.

That motives of a baser sort mingled largely with these higher ones, and

in different proportions according to the character of the individual, no

one will deny.  And few are they that have proposed to themselves a long

career of action without the intermixture of some vulgar personal motive,

--fame, honors, or emolument.  Yet that religion furnishes a key to the

American crusades, however rudely they may have been conducted, is

evident from the history of their origin; from the sanction openly given to

them by the Head of the Church; from the throng of self-devoted

missionaries, who followed in the track of the conquerors to garner up

the rich harvest of souls; from the reiterated instructions of the Crown,

the great object of which was the conversion of the natives; from those

superstitious acts of the iron-hearted soldiery themselves, which,

however they may be set down to fanaticism, were clearly too much in

earnest to leave any ground for the charge of hypocrisy.  It was indeed a

fiery cross that was borne over the devoted land, scathing and consuming

it in its terrible progress; but it was still the cross, the sign of man's

salvation, the only sign by which generations and generations yet unborn

were to be rescued from eternal perdition.



It is a remarkable fact, which has hitherto escaped the notice of the

historian, that Luque was not the real party to this contract.  He

represented another, who placed in his hands the funds required for the

undertaking.  This appears from an instrument signed by Luque himself

and certified before the same notary that prepared the original contract.

The instrument declares that the whole sum of twenty thousand pesos

advanced for the expedition was furnished by the Licentiate Gaspar de

Espinosa, then at Panama; that the vicar acted only as his agent and by

his authority; and that, in consequence, the said Espinosa and no other

was entitled to a third of all the profits and acquisitions resulting from

the conquest of Peru.  This instrument, attested by three persons, one of

them the same who had witnessed the original contract, was dated on the

6th of August, 1531.10  The Licentiate Espinosa was a respectable

functionary, who had filled the office of principal alcalde in Darien, and

since taken a conspicuous part in the conquest and settlement of Tierra

Firme.  He enjoyed much consideration for his personal character and

station; and it is remarkable that so little should be known of the manner

in which the covenant, so solemnly made, was executed in reference to

him.  As in the case of Columbus, it is probable that the unexpected

magnitude of the results was such as to prevent a faithful adherence to

the original stipulation; and yet, from the same consideration, one can

hardly doubt that the twenty thousand pesos of the bold speculator must

have brought him a magnificent return.  Nor did the worthy vicar of

Panama, as the history will show hereafter, go without his reward.



Having completed these preliminary arrangements, the three associates

lost no time in making preparations for the voyage.  Two vessels were

purchased, larger and every way better than those employed on the

former occasion.  Stores were laid in, as experience dictated, on a larger

scale than before, and proclamation was made of "an expedition to

Peru." But the call was not readily answered by the skeptical citizens of

Panama.  Of nearly two hundred men who had embarked on the former

cruise, not more than three fourths now remained.11 This dismal

mortality, and the emaciated, poverty-stricken aspect of the survivors,

spoke more eloquently than the braggart promises and magnificent

prospects held out by the adventurers.  Still there were men in the

community of such desperate circumstances, that any change seemed like

a chance of bettering their condition.  Most of the former company also,

strange to say, felt more pleased to follow up the adventure to the end

than to abandon it, as they saw the light of a better day dawning upon

them.  From these sources the two captains succeeded in mustering about

one hundred and sixty men, making altogether a very inadequate force

for the conquest of an empire.  A few horses were also purchased, and a

better supply of ammunition and military stores than before, though still

on a very limited scale.  Considering their funds, the only way of

accounting for this must be by the difficulty of obtaining supplies at

Panama, which, recently founded, and on the remote coast of the Pacific,

could be approached only by crossing the rugged barrier of mountains,

which made the transportation of bulky articles extremely difficult.  Even

such scanty stock of materials as it possessed was probably laid under

heavy contribution, at the present juncture, by the governor's

preparations for his own expedition to the north.



Thus indifferently provided, the two captains, each in his own vessel,

again took their departure from Panama, under the direction of

Bartholomew Ruiz, a sagacious and resolute pilot, well experienced in

the navigation of the Southern Ocean.  He was a native of Moguer, in

Andalusia, that little nursery of nautical enterprise, which furnished so

many seamen for the first voyages of Columbus.  Without touching at the

intervening points of the coast, which offered no attraction to the

voyagers, they stood farther out to sea, steering direct for the Rio de San

Juan, the utmost limit reached by Almagro.  The season was better

selected than on the former occasion, and they were borne along by

favorable breezes to the place of their destination, which they reached

without accident in a few days.  Entering the mouth of the river, they saw

the banks well lined with Indian habitations; and Pizarro, disembarking,

at the head of a party of soldiers, succeeded in surprising a small village

and carrying off a considerable booty of gold ornaments found in the

dwellings, together with a few of the natives.12



Flushed with their success, the two chiefs were confident that the sight of

the rich spoil so speedily obtained could not fall to draw adventurers to

their standard in Panama; and, as they felt more than ever the necessity

of a stronger force to cope with the thickening population of the country

which they were now to penetrate, it was decided that Almagro should

return with the treasure and beat up for reinforcements, while the pilot

Ruiz, in the other vessel, should reconnoitre the country towards the

south, and obtain such information as might determine their future

movements.  Pizarro, with the rest of the force, would remain in the

neighborhood of the river, as he was assured by the Indian prisoners, that

not far in the interior was an open reach of country, where he and his

men could find comfortable quarters.  This arrangement was instantly put

in execution.  We will first accompany the intrepid pilot in his cruise

towards the south.



Coasting along the great continent, with his canvas still spread to

favorable winds, the first place at which Ruiz cast anchor was off the

little island of Gallo, about two degrees north.  The inhabitants, who

were not numerous, were prepared to give him a hostile reception,--for

tidings of the invaders had preceded them along the country, and even

reached this insulated spot.  As the object of Ruiz was to explore, not

conquer, he did not care to entangle himself in hostilities with the

natives; so, changing his purpose of landing, he weighed anchor, and ran

down the coast as far as what is now called the Bay of St. Matthew.  The

country, which, as he advanced, continued to exhibit evidence of a better

culture as well as of a more dense population than the parts hitherto seen,

was crowded, along the shores, with spectators, who gave no signs of

fear or hostility.  They stood gazing on the vessel of the white men as it

glided smoothly into the crystal waters of the bay, fancying it, says an

old writer, some mysterious being descended from the skies.



Without staying long enough on this friendly coast to undeceive the

simple people, Ruiz, standing off shore, struck out into the deep sea; but

he had not sailed far in that direction, when he was surprised by the sight

of a vessel, seeming in the distance like a caravel of considerable size,

traversed by a large sail that carried it sluggishly over the waters.  The

old navigator was not a little perplexed by this phenomenon, as he was

confident no European bark could have been before him in these

latitudes, and no Indian nation, yet discovered, not even the civilized

Mexican, was acquainted with the use of sails in navigation.  As he drew

near, he found it was a large vessel, or rather raft, called balsa by the

natives, consisting of a number of huge timbers of a light, porous wood,

tightly lashed together, with a frail flooring of reeds raised on them by

way of deck.  Two masts or sturdy poles, erected in the middle of the

vessel, sustained a large square-sail of cotton, while a rude kind of

rudder and a movable keel, made of plank inserted between the logs,

enabled the mariner to give a direction to the floating fabric, which held

on its course without the aid of oar or paddle.13  The simple architecture

of this craft was sufficient for the purposes of the natives, and indeed has

continued to answer them to the present day; for the balsa, surmounted

by small thatched huts or cabins, still supplies the most commodious

means for the transportation of passengers and luggage on the streams

and along the shores of this part of the South American continent.



On coming alongside, Ruiz found several Indians, both men and women,

on board, some with rich ornaments on their persons, besides several

articles wrought with considerable skill in gold and silver, which they

were carrying for purposes of traffic to the different places along the

coast.  But what most attracted his attention was the woollen cloth of

which some of their dresses were made.  It was of a fine texture,

delicately embroidered with figures of birds and flowers, and dyed in

brilliant colors.  He also observed in the boat a pair of balances made to

weigh the precious metals.14  His astonishment at these proofs of

ingenuity and civilization, so much higher than anything he had ever

seen in the country, was heightened by the intelligence which he

collected from some of these Indians.  Two of them had come from

Tumbez, a Peruvian port, some degrees to the south; and they gave him

to understand, that in their neighborhood the fields were covered with

large flocks of the animals from which the wool was obtained, and that

gold and silver were almost as common as wood in the palaces of their

monarch.  The Spaniards listened greedily to reports which harmonized

so well with their fond desires.  Though half distrusting the exaggeration,

Ruiz resolved to detain some of the Indians, including the natives of

Tumbez, that they might repeat the wondrous tale to his commander, and

at the same time, by learning the Castilian, might hereafter serve as

interpreters with their countrymen.  The rest of the party he suffered to

proceed without further interruption on their voyage.  Then holding on

his course, the prudent pilot, without touching at any other point of the

coast, advanced as far as the Punta de Pasado, about half a degree south,

having the glory of being the first European who, sailing in this direction

on the Pacific, had crossed the equinoctial line.  This was the limit' of his

discoveries; on reaching which he tacked about, and standing away to the

north, succeeded, after an absence of several weeks, in regaining the spot

where he had left Pizarro and his comrades.15



It was high time; for the spirits of that little band had been sorely tried by

the perils they had encountered.  On the departure of his vessels, Pizarro

marched into the interior, in the hope of finding the pleasant champaign

country which had been promised him by the natives.  But at every step

the forests seemed to grow denser and darker, and the trees towered to a

height such as he had never seen, even in these fruitful regions, where

Nature works on so gigantic a scale.16  Hill continued to rise above hill,

as he advanced, rolling onward, as it were, by successive waves to join

that colossal barrier of the Andes, whose frosty sides, far away above the

clouds, spread out like a curtain of burnished silver, that seemed to

connect the heavens with the earth.



On crossing these woody eminences, the forlorn adventurers would

plunge into ravines of frightful depth, where the exhalations of a humid

soil steamed up amidst the incense of sweet-scented flowers, which

shone through the deep glooms in every conceivable variety of color.

Birds.  especially of the parrot tribe, mocked this fantastic variety of

nature with tints as brilliant as those of the vegetable world.  Monkeys

chattered in crowds above their heads, and made grimaces like the

fiendish spirits of these solitudes; while hideous reptiles, engendered in

the slimy depths of the pools, gathered round the footsteps of the

wanderers.  Here was seen the gigantic boa, coiling his unwieldy folds

about the trees, so as hardly to be distinguished from their trunks, till he

was ready to dart upon his prey; and alligators lay basking on the borders

of the streams, or, gliding under the waters, seized their incautious victim

before he was aware of their approach.17  Many of the Spaniards

perished miserably in this way, and others were waylaid by the natives,

who kept a jealous eye on their movements, and availed themselves of

every opportunity to take them at advantage.  Fourteen of Pizarro's men

were cut off at once in a canoe which had stranded on the bank of a

stream.18



Famine came in addition to other troubles, and it was with difficulty that

they found the means of sustaining life on the scanty fare of the forest,--

occasionally the potato, as it grew without cultivation, or the wild cocoa-

nut, or, on the shore, the salt and bitter fruit of the mangrove; though the

shore was less tolerable than the forest, from the swarms of mosquitos

which compelled the wretched adventurers to bury their bodies up to

their very faces in the sand.  In this extremity of suffering, they thought

only of return; and all schemes of avarice and ambition--except with

Pizarro and a few dauntless spirits--were exchanged for the one craving

desire to return to Panama.



It was at this crisis that the pilot Ruiz returned with the report of his

brilliant discoveries; and, not long after, Almagro sailed into port with

his vessel laden with refreshments, and a considerable reinforcement of

volunteers.  The voyage of that commander had been prosperous.  When

he arrived at Panama, he found the government in the hands of Don

Pedro de los Rios; and he came to anchor in the harbor, unwilling to trust

himself on shore, till he had obtained from Father Luque some account

of the dispositions of the executive.  These were sufficiently favorable;

for the new governor had particular instructions fully to carry out the

arrangements made by his predecessor with the associates.  On learning

Almagro's arrival, he came down to the port to welcome him, professing

his willingness to afford every facility for the execution of his designs.

Fortunately, just before this period, a small body of military adventurers

had come to Panama from the mother country, burning with desire to

make their fortunes in the New World.  They caught much more eagerly

than the old and wary colonists at the golden bait held out to them; and

with their addition, and that of a few supernumerary stragglers who hung

about the town, Almagro found himself at the head of a reinforcement of

at least eighty men, with which, having laid in a fresh supply of stores, he

again set sail for the Rio de San Juan.



The arrival of the new recruits all eager to follow up the expedition, the

comfortable change in their circumstances produced by an ample supply

of refreshments, and the glowing pictures of the wealth that awaited them

in the south, all had their effect on the dejected spirits of Pizarro's

followers.  Their late toils and privations were speedily forgotten, and,

with the buoyant and variable feelings incident to a freebooter's life, they

now called as eagerly on their commander to go forward in the voyage,

as they had before called on him to abandon it.  Availing themselves of

the renewed spirit of enterprise, the captains embarked on board their

vessels, and, under the guidance of the veteran pilot, steered in the same

track he had lately pursued.



But the favorable season for a southern course, which in these latitudes

lasts but a few months in the year, had been suffered to escape.  The

breezes blew steadily towards the north, and a strong current, not far

from shore, set in the same direction.  The winds frequently rose into

tempests, and the unfortunate voyagers were tossed about, for many

days, in the boiling surges, amidst the most awful storms of thunder and

lightning, until, at length, they found a secure haven in the island of

Gallo, already visited by Ruiz.  As they were now too strong in numbers

to apprehend an assault, the crews landed, and, experiencing no

molestation from the natives, they continued on the island for a fortnight,

refitting their damaged vessels, and recruiting themselves after the

fatigues of the ocean.  Then, resuming their voyage, the captains stood

towards the south until they reached the Bay of St. Matthew.  As they

advanced along the coast, they were struck, as Ruiz had been before,

with the evidences of a higher civilization constantly exhibited in the

general aspect of the country and its inhabitants.  The hand of cultivation

was visible in every quarter.  The natural appearance of the coast, too,

had something in it more inviting; for, instead of the eternal labyrinth of

mangrove-trees, with their complicated roots snarled into formidable

coils under the water, as if to waylay and entangle the voyager, the low

margin of the sea was covered with a stately growth of ebony, and with a

species of mahogany, and other hard woods that take the most brilliant

and variegated polish.  The sandal-wood, and many balsamic trees of

unknown names, scattered their sweet odors far and wide, not in an

atmosphere tainted with vegetable corruption, but on the pure breezes of

the ocean, bearing health as well as fragrance on their wings.  Broad

patches of cultivated land intervened, disclosing hill-sides covered with

the yellow maize and the potato, or checkered, in the lower levels, with

blooming plantations of cacao.19



The villages became more numerous; and, as the vessels rode at anchor

off the port of Tacamez, the Spaniards saw before them a town of two

thousand houses or more, laid out into streets, with a numerous

population clustering around it in the suburbs.20  The men and women

displayed many ornaments of gold and precious stones about their

persons, which may seem strange, considering that the Peruvian Incas

claimed a monopoly of jewels for themselves and the nobles on whom

they condescended to bestow them.  But, although the Spaniards had

now reached the outer limits of the Peruvian empire, it was not Peru, but

Quito, and that portion of it but recently brought under the sceptre of the

Incas, where the ancient usages of the people could hardly have been

effaced under the oppressive system of the American despots.  The

adjacent country was, moreover, particularly rich in gold, which,

collected from the washings of the streams, still forms one of the staple

products of Barbacoas.  Here, too, was the fair River of Emeralds, so

called from the quarries of the beautiful gem on its borders, from which

the Indian monarchs enriched their treasury.21



The Spaniards gazed with delight on these undeniable evidences of

wealth, and saw in the careful cultivation of the soil a comfortable

assurance that they had at length reached the land which had so long

been seen in brilliant, though distant, perspective before them.  But here

again they were doomed to be disappointed by the warlike spirit of the

people, who, conscious of their own strength, showed no disposition to

quail before the invaders.  On the contrary, several of their canoes shot

out, loaded with warriors, who, displaying a gold mask as their ensign,

hovered round the vessels with looks of defiance, and, when pursued,

easily took shelter under the lee of the land.22



A more formidable body mustered along the shore, to the number,

according to the Spanish accounts, of at least ten thousand warriors,

eager, apparently, to come to close action with the invaders.  Nor could

Pizarro, who had landed with a party of his men in the hope of a

conference with the natives, wholly prevent hostilities; and it might have

gone hard with the Spaniards, hotly pressed by their resolute enemy so

superior in numbers, but for a ludicrous accident reported by the

historians as happening to one of the cavaliers.  This was a fall from his

horse, which so astonished the barbarians, who were not prepared for

this division of what seemed one and the same being into two, that, filled

with consternation, they fell back, and left a way open for the Christians

to regain their vessels! 23



A council of war was now called.  It was evident that the forces of the

Spaniards were unequal to a contest with so numerous and well-

appointed a body of natives; and, even if they should prevail here, they

could have no hope of stemming the torrent which must rise against them

in their progress--for the country was becoming more and more thickly

settled, and towns and hamlets started into view at every new headland

which they doubled.  It was better, in the opinion of some,--the faint-

hearted,-to abandon the enterprise at once, as beyond their strength.  But

Almagro took a different view of the affair.  "To go home," he said,

"with nothing done, would be ruin, as well as disgrace.  There was

scarcely one but had left creditors at Panama, who looked for payment to

the fruits of this expedition.  To go home now would be to deliver

themselves at once into their hands.  It would be to go to prison.  Better

to roam a freeman, though in the wilderness, than to lie bound with

fetters in the dungeons of Panama.24  The only course for them," he

concluded, "was the one lately pursued.  Pizarro might find some more

commodious place where he could remain with part of the force while he

himself went back for recruits to Panama.  The story they had now to tell

of the riches of the land, as they had seen them with their own eyes,

would put their expedition in a very different light, and could not fail to

draw to their banner as many volunteers as they needed."



But this recommendation, however judicious, was not altogether to the

taste of the latter commander, who did not relish the part, which

constantly fell to him, of remaining behind in the swamps and forests of

this wild country.  "It is all very well," he said to Almagro, "for you, who

pass your time pleasantly enough, careering to and fro in your vessel, or

snugly sheltered in a land of plenty at Panama; but it is quite another

matter for those who stay behind to droop and die of hunger in the

wilderness.25  To this Almagro retorted with some heat, professing his

own willingness to take charge of the brave men who would remain with

him, if Pizarro declined it.  The controversy assuming a more angry and

menacing tone, from words they would have soon come to blows, as

both, laying their hands on their swords, were preparing to rush on each

other, when the treasurer Ribera, aided by the pilot Ruiz, succeeded in

pacifying them.  It required but little effort on the part of these cooler

counsellors to convince the cavaliers of the folly of a conduct which

must at once terminate the expedition in a manner little creditable to its

projectors.  A reconciliation consequently took place, sufficient, at least

in outward show, to allow the two commanders to act together in

concert.  Almagro's plan was then adopted; and it only remained to find

out the most secure and convenient spot for Pizarro's quarters.



Several days were passed in touching at different parts of the coast, as

they retraced their course; but everywhere the natives appeared to have

caught the alarm, and assumed a menacing, and from their numbers a

formidable, aspect.  The more northerly region, with its unwholesome

fens and forests, where nature wages a war even more relentless than

man, was not to be thought of.  In this perplexity, they decided on the

little island of Gallo, as being, on the whole, from its distance from the

shore, and from the scantiness of its population, the most eligible spot

for them in their forlorn and destitute condition.26



But no sooner was the resolution of the two captains made known, than a

feeling of discontent broke forth among their followers, especially those

who were to remain with Pizarro on the island, "What!" they exclaimed,

"were they to be dragged to that obscure spot to die by hunger? The

whole expedition had been a cheat and a failure, from beginning to end.

The golden countries, so much vaunted, had seemed to fly before them

as they advanced; and the little gold they had been fortunate enough to

glean had all been sent back to Panama to entice other fools to follow

their example.  What had they got in return for all their sufferings? The

only treasures they could boast were their bows and arrows, and they

were now to be left to die on this dreary island, without so much as a

rood of consecrated ground to lay their bones in!27



In this exasperated state of feeling, several of the soldiers wrote back to

their friends, informing them of their deplorable condition, and

complaining of the cold-blooded manner in which they were to be

sacrificed to the obstinate cupidity of their leaders.  But the latter were

wary enough to anticipate this movement, and Almagro defeated it by

seizing all the letters in the vessels, and thus cutting off at once the

means of communication with their friends at home.  Yet this act of

unscrupulous violence, like most other similar acts, fell short of its

purpose; for a soldier named Sarabia had the ingenuity to evade it by

introducing a letter into a ball of cotton, which was to be taken to

Panama as a specimen of the products of the country, and presented to

the governor's lady.28



The letter, which was signed by several of the disaffected soldiery

besides the writer, painted in gloomy colors the miseries of their

condition, accused the two commanders of being the authors of this, and

called on the authorities of Panama to interfere by sending a vessel to

take them from the desolate spot, while some of them might still be

found surviving the horrors of their confinement.  The epistle concluded

with a stanza, in which the two leaders were stigmatized as partners in a

slaughter-house; one being employed to drive in the cattle for the other

to butcher.  The verses, which had a currency in their day among the

colonists to which they were certainly not entitled by their poetical

merits, may be thus rendered into corresponding doggerel:



"Look out, Senor Governor,

For the drover while he's near;

Since he goes home to get the sheep

For the butcher who stays here." 29







Book 2



Chapter 4



Indignation Of The Governor--Stern Resolution Of Pizarro-

Prosecution Of The Voyage--Brilliant Aspect Of Tumbez-

Discoveries Along The Coast--Return To Panama-

Pizarro Embarks For Spain



1527--1528



Not long after Almagro's departure, Pizarro sent off the remaining vessel,

under the pretext of its being put in repair at Panama.  It probably

relieved him of a part of his followers, whose mutinous spirit made them

an obstacle rather than a help in his forlorn condition, and with whom he

was the more willing to part from the difficulty of finding subsistence on

the barren spot which he now occupied.



Great was the dismay occasioned by the return of Almagro and his

followers, in the little community of Panama; for the letter,

surreptitiously conveyed in the ball of cotton, fell into the hands for

which it was intended, and the contents soon got abroad with usual

quantity of exaggeration.  The haggard and dejected mien of the

adventurers, of itself, told a tale sufficiently disheartening, and it was

soon generally believed that the few ill-fated survivors of the expedition

were detained against their will by Pizarro, to end their days with their

disappointed leader on his desolate island.



Pedro de los Rios, the governor, was so much incensed at the result of

the expedition, and the waste of life it had occasioned to the colony, that

he turned a deaf ear to all the applications of Luque and Almagro for

further countenance in the affair; he derided their sanguine anticipations

of the future, and finally resolved to send an officer to the isle of Gallo,

with orders to bring back every Spaniard whom he should find still living

in that dreary abode.  Two vessels were immediately despatched for the

purpose, and placed under charge of a cavalier named Tafur, a native of

Cordova.



Meanwhile Pizarro and his followers were experiencing all the miseries

which might have been expected from the character of the barren spot on

which they were imprisoned.  They were, indeed, relieved from all

apprehensions of the natives, since these had quitted the island on its

occupation by the white men; but they had to endure the pains of hunger

even in a greater degree than they had formerly experienced in the wild

woods of the neighboring continent.  Their principal food was crabs and

such shell-fish as they could scantily pick up along the shores.  Incessant

storms of thunder and lightning, for it was the rainy season, swept over

the devoted island, and drenched them with a perpetual flood.  Thus,

halfnaked, and pining with famine, there were few in that little company

who did not feel the spirit of enterprise quenched within them, or who

looked for any happier termination of their difficulties than that afforded

by a return to Panama.  The appearance of Tafur, therefore, with his two

vessels, well stored with provisions, was greeted with all the rapture that

the crew of a sinking wreck might feel on the arrival of some unexpected

succour; and the only thought, after satisfying the immediate cravings of

hunger, was to embark and leave the detested isle forever.



But by the same vessel letters came to Pizarro from his two confederates,

Luque and Almagro, beseeching him not to despair in his present

extremity, but to hold fast to his original purpose.  To return under the

present circumstances would be to seal the fate of the expedition; and

they solemnly engaged, if he would remain firm at his post, to furnish

him in a short time with the necessary means for going forward.1



A ray of hope was enough for the courageous spirit of Pizarro.  It does

not appear that he himself had entertained, at any time, thoughts of

returning.  If he had, these words of encouragement entirely banished

them from his bosom, and he prepared to stand the fortune of the cast on

which he had so desperately ventured.  He knew, however, that

solicitations or remonstrances would avail little with the companions of

his enterprise; and he probably did not care to win over the more timid

spirits who, by perpetually looking back, would only be a clog on his

future movements.  He announced his own purpose, however, in a

laconic but decided manner, characteristic of a man more accustomed to

act than to talk, and well calculated to make an impression on his rough

followers.



Drawing his sword, he traced a line with it on the sand from east to west.

Then turning towards the south, "Friend and comrades!" he said, "on that

side are toil, hunger, nakedness, the drenching storm, desertion, and

death; on this side, ease and pleasure.  There lies Peru with its riches;

here, Panama, and its poverty.  Choose, each man, what best becomes a

brave Castilian.  For my part, I go to the south." So saying, he stepped

across the line.2  He was followed by the brave pilot Ruiz; next by Pedro

de Candia, a cavalier, born, as his name imports, in one of the isles of

Greece.  Eleven others successively crossed the line, thus intimating their

willingness to abide the fortunes of their leader, for good or for evil.3

Fame, to quote the enthusiastic language of an ancient chronicler, has

commemorated the names of this little band, "who thus, in the face or

difficulties unexampled in history, with death rather than riches for their

reward, preferred it all to abandoning their honor, and stood firm by their

leader as an example of loyalty to future ages." 4



But the act excited no such admiration in the mind of Tafur, who looked

on it as one of gross disobedience to the commands of the governor, and

as little better than madness, involving the certain destruction of the

parties engaged in it.  He refused to give any sanction to it himself by


leaving one of his vessels with the adventurers to prosecute their voyage,

and it was with great difficulty that he could be persuaded even to allow

them a part of the stores which he had brought for their support.  This

had no influence on their determination, and the little party, bidding

adieu to their returning comrades, remained unshaken in their purpose of

abiding the fortunes of their commander.5



There is something striking to the imagination in the spectacle of these

few brave spirits, thus consecrating themselves to a daring enterprise,

which seemed as far above their strength as any recorded in the fabulous

annals of knight-errantry.  A handful of men, without food, without

clothing, almost without arms, without knowledge of the land to which

they were bound, without vessel to transport them, were here left on a

lonely rock in the ocean with the avowed purpose of carrying on a

crusade against a powerful empire, staking their lives on its success.

What is there in the legends of chivalry that surpasses it? This was the

crisis of Pizarro's fate.  There are moments in the lives of men, which, as

they are seized or neglected, decide their future destiny.6  Had Pizarro

faltered from his strong purpose, and yielded to the occasion, now so

temptingly presented, for extricating himself and his broken band from

their desperate position, his name would have been buried with his

fortunes, and the conquest of Peru would have been left for other and

more successful adventurers.  But his constancy was equal to the

occasion, and his conduct here proved him competent to the perilous

post he had assumed, and inspired others with a confidence in him which

was the best assurance of success.



In the vessel that bore back Tafur and those who seceded from the

expedition the pilot Ruiz was also permitted to return, in order to

cooperate with Luque and Almagro in their application for further

succour.



Not long after the departure of the ships, it was decided by Pizarro to

abandon his present quarters, which had little to recommend them, and

which, he reflected, might now be exposed to annoyance from the

original inhabitants, should they take courage and return, on learning the

diminished number of the white men.  The Spaniards, therefore, by his

orders, constructed a rude boat or raft, on which they succeeded in

transporting themselves to the little island of Gorgona, twenty-five

leagues to the north of their present residence.  It lay about five leagues

from the continent, and was uninhabited.  It had some advantages over

the isle of Gallo; for it stood higher above the sea, and was partially

covered with wood, which afforded shelter to a species of pheasant, and

the hare or rabbit of the country, so that the Spaniards, with their cross-

bows, were enabled to procure a tolerable supply of game.  Cool streams

that issued from the living rock furnished abundance of water, though the

drenching rains that fell, without intermission, left them in no danger of

perishing by thirst.  From this annoyance they found some protection in

the rude huts which they constructed; though here, as in their former

residence, they suffered from the no less intolerable annoyance of

venomous insects, which multiplied and swarmed in the exhalations of

the rank and stimulated soil.  In this dreary abode Pizarro omitted no

means by which to sustain the drooping spirits of his men.  Morning

prayers were duly said, and the evening hymn to the Virgin was regularly

chanted; the festivals of the church were carefully commemorated, and

every means taken by their commander to give a kind of religious

character to his enterprise, and to inspire his rough followers with a

confidence in the protection of Heaven, that might support them in their

perilous circumstances.7



In these uncomfortable quarters, their chief employment was to keep

watch on the melancholy ocean, that they might hail the first signal of the

anticipated succour.  But many a tedious month passed away, and no

sign of it appeared.  All around was the same wide waste of waters,

except to the eastward, where the frozen crest of the Andes, touched with

the ardent sun of the equator, glowed like a ridge of fire along the whole

extent of the great continent.  Every speck in the distant horizon was

carefully noticed, and the drifting timber or masses of sea-weed, heaving

to and fro on the bosom of the waters, was converted by their

imaginations into the promised vessel; till, sinking under successive

disappointments, hope gradually gave way to doubt, and doubt settled

into despair.8



Meanwhile the vessel of Tafur had reached the port of Panama.  The

tidings which she brought of the inflexible obstinacy of Pizarro and his

followers filled the governor with indignation.  He could look on it in no

other light than as an act of suicide, and steadily refused to send further

assistance to men who were obstinately bent on their own destruction.

Yet Luque and Almagro were true to their engagements.  They

represented to the governor, that, if the conduct of their comrade was

rash, it was at least in the service of the Crown, and in prosecuting the

great work of discovery.  Rios had been instructed, on his taking the

government, to aid Pizarro in the enterprise; and to desert him now

would be to throw away the remaining chance of success, and to incur

the responsibility of his death and that of the brave men who adhered to

him.  These remonstrances, at length, so far operated on the mind of that

functionary, that he reluctantly consented that a vessel should be sent to

the island of Gorgona, but with no more hands than were necessary to

work her, and with positive instructions to Pizarro to return in six months

and report himself at Panama, whatever might be the future results of his

expedition.



Having thus secured the sanction of the executive, the two associates lost

no time in fitting out a small vessel with stores and a supply of arms and

ammunition, and despatched it to the island.  The unfortunate tenants of

this little wilderness, who had now occupied it for seven months,9 hardly

dared to trust their senses when they descried the white sails of the

friendly bark coming over the waters.  And although, when the vessel

anchored off the shore, Pizarro was disappointed to find that it brought

no additional recruits for the enterprise, yet he greeted it with joy, as

affording the means of solving the great problem of the existence of the

rich southern empire, and of thus opening the way for its future conquest.

Two of his men were so ill, that it was determined to leave them in the

care of some of the friendly Indians who had continued with him through

the whole of his sojourn, and to call for them on his return.  Taking with

him the rest of his hardy followers and the natives of Tumbez, he

embarked, and, speedily weighing anchor, bade adieu to the "Hell," as it

was called by the Spaniards, which had been the scene of so much

suffering and such undaunted resolution.10



Every heart was now elated with hope, as they found themselves once

more on the waters, under the guidance of the good pilot Ruiz, who,

obeying the directions of the Indians, proposed to steer for the land of

Tumbez, which would bring them at once into the golden empire of the

Incas, --the El Dorado, of which they had been so long in pursuit.

Passing by the dreary isle of Gallo, which they had such good cause to

remember, they stood farther out to sea until they made point Tacumez,

near which they had landed on their previous voyage.  They did not

touch at any part of the coast, but steadily held on their way, though

considerably impeded by the currents, as well as by the wind, which

blew with little variation from the south.  Fortunately, the wind was light,

and, as the weather was favorable, their voyage, though slow, was not

uncomfortable.  In a few days, they came in sight of Point Pasado, the

limit of the pilot's former navigation; and, crossing the line, the little bark

entered upon those unknown seas which had never been ploughed by

European keel before.  The coast, they observed, gradually declined

from its former bold and rugged character, gently sloping towards the

shore, and spreading out into sandy plains, relieved here and there by

patches of uncommon richness and beauty; while the white cottages of

the natives glistening along the margin of the sea, and the smoke that

rose among the distant hills, intimated the increasing population of the

country.



At length, after the lapse of twenty days from their departure from the

island, the adventurous vessel rounded the point of St. Helena, and

glided smoothly into the waters of the beautiful gulf of Guayaquil.  The

country was here studded along the shore with towns and villages,

though the mighty chain of the Cordilleras, sweeping up abruptly from

the coast, left but a narrow strip of emerald verdure, through which

numerous rivulets, spreading fertility around them, wound their way into

the sea.



The voyagers were now abreast of some of the most stupendous heights

of this magnificent range; Chimborazo, with its broad round summit,

towering like the dome of the Andes, and Cotopaxi, with its dazzling

cone of silvery white, that knows no change except from the action of its

own volcanic fires; for this mountain is the most terrible of the American

volcanoes, and was in formidable activity at no great distance from the

period of our narrative.  Well pleased with the signs of civilization that

opened on them at every league of their progress, the Spaniards, at

length, came to anchor, off the island of Santa Clara, lying at the

entrance of the bay of Tumbez.11



The place was uninhabited, but was recognized by the Indians on board,

as occasionally resorted to by the warlike people of the neighboring isle

of Puna, for purposes of sacrifice and worship.  The Spaniards found on

the spot a few bits of gold rudely wrought into various shapes, and

probably designed as offerings to the Indian deity.  Their hearts were

cheered, as the natives assured them they would see abundance of the

same precious metal in their own city of Tumbez.



The following morning they stood across the bay for this place.  As they

drew near, they beheld a town of considerable size, with many of the

buildings apparently of stone and plaster, situated in the bosom of a

fruitful meadow, which seemed to have been redeemed from the sterility

of the surrounding country by careful and minute irrigation.  When at

some distance from shore, Pizarro saw standing towards him several

large balsas, which were found to be filled with warriors going on an

expedition against the island of Puna.  Running alongside of the Indian

flotilla, he invited some of the chiefs to come on board of his vessel.

The Peruvians gazed with wonder on every object which met their eyes,

and especially on their own countrymen, whom they had little expected

to meet there.  The latter informed them in what manner they had fallen

into the hands of the strangers, whom they described as a wonderful race

of beings, that had come thither for no harm, but solely to be made

acquainted with the country and its inhabitants.  This account was

confirmed by the Spanish commander, who persuaded the Indians to

return in their balsas and report what they had learned to their townsmen,

requesting them at the same time to provide his vessel with refreshments,

as it was his desire to enter into a friendly intercourse with the natives.



The people of Tumbez were gathered along the shore, and were gazing

with unutterable amazement on the floating castle, which, now having

dropped anchor, rode lazily at its moorings in their bay.  They eagerly

listened to the accounts of their countrymen, and instantly reported the

affair to the curaca or ruler of the district, who, conceiving that the

strangers must be beings of a superior order, prepared at once to comply

with their request.  It was not long before several balsas were seen

steering for the vessel laden with bananas, plantains, yuca, Indian corn,

sweet potatoes, pine-apples, cocoa-nuts, and other rich products of the

bountiful vale of Tumbez.  Game and fish, also, were added, with a

number of llamas, of which Pizarro had seen the rude drawings

belonging to Balboa, but of which till now he had met with no living

specimen.  He examined this curious animal, the Peruvian sheep,--or, as

the Spaniards called it, the "little camel" of the Indians,--with much

interest, greatly admiring the mixture of wool and hair which supplied

the natives with the materials for their fabrics.



At that time there happened to be at Tumbez an Inca noble, or orejon, --

for so, as I have already noticed, men of his rank were called by the

Spaniards, from the huge ornaments of gold attached to their ears.  He

expressed great curiosity to see the wonderful strangers, and had,

accordingly, come out with the balsas for the purpose.  It was easy to

perceive from the superior quality of his dress, as well as from the

deference paid to him by the others, that he was a person of

consideration, and Pizarro received him with marked distinction.  He

showed him the different parts of the ship, explaining to him the uses of

whatever engaged his attention, and answering his numerous queries, as

well as he could, by means of the Indian interpreters.  The Peruvian chief

was especially desirous of knowing whence and why Pizarro and his

followers had come to these shores.  The Spanish captain replied, that he

was the vassal of a great prince, the greatest and most powerful in the

world, and that he had come to this country to assert his master's lawful

supremacy over it.  He had further come to rescue the inhabitants from

the darkness of unbelief in which they were now wandering.  They

worshipped an evil spirit, who would sink their souls into everlasting

perdition; and he would give them the knowledge of the true and only

God, Jesus Christ, since to believe in him was eternal salvation.12



The Indian prince listened with deep attention and apparent wonder; but

answered nothing.  It may be, that neither he nor his interpreters had any

very distinct ideas of the doctrines thus abruptly revealed to them.  It

may be that he did not believe there was any other potentate on earth

greater than the Inca; none, at least, who had a better right to rule over

his dominions.  And it is very possible he was not disposed to admit that

the great luminary whom he worshipped was inferior to the God of the

Spaniards.  But whatever may have passed in the untutored mind of the

barbarian, he did not give vent to it, but maintained a discreet silence,

without any attempt to controvert or to convince his Christian antagonist.



He remained on board the vessel till the hour of dinner, of which he

partook with the Spaniards, expressing his satisfaction at the strange

dishes, and especially pleased with the wine, which he pronounced far

superior to the fermented liquors of his own country.  On taking leave, he

courteously pressed the Spaniards to visit Tumbez, and Pizarro

dismissed him with the present, among other things, of an iron hatchet,

which had greatly excited his admiration; for the use of iron, as we have

seen, was as little known to the Peruvians as to the Mexicans.



On the day following, the Spanish captain sent one of his own men,

named Alonso de Molina, on shore, accompanied by a negro who had

come in the vessel from Panama, together with a present for the curaca

of some swine and poultry, neither of which were indigenous to the New

World.  Towards evening his emissary returned with a fresh supply of

fruits and vegetables, that the friendly people sent to the vessel.  Molina

had a wondrous tale to tell.  On landing, he was surrounded by the

natives, who expressed the greatest astonishment at his dress, his fair

complexion, and his long beard.  The women, especially, manifested

great curiosity in respect to him, and Molina seemed to be entirely won

by their charms and captivating manners.  He probably intimated his

satisfaction by his demeanor, since they urged him to stay among them,

promising in that case to provide him with a beautiful wife.



Their surprise was equally great at the complexion of his sable

companion.  They could not believe it was natural, and tried to rub off

the imaginary dye with their hands.  As the African bore all this with

characteristic good-humor, displaying at the same time his rows of ivory

teeth, they were prodigiously delighted.13  The animals were no less

above their comprehension; and, when the cock crew, the simple people

clapped their hands, and inquired what he was saying.14  Their intellects

were so bewildered by sights so novel, that they seemed incapable of

distinguishing between man and brute.



Molina was then escorted to the residence of the curaca, whom he found

living in much state, with porters stationed at his doors, and with a

quantity of gold and silver vessels, from which he was served.  He was

then taken to different parts of the Indian city, saw a fortress built of

rough stone, and, though low, spreading over a large extent of ground.15

Near this was a temple; and the Spaniard's description of its decorations.

blazing with gold and silver, seemed so extravagant, that Pizarro,

distrusting his whole account, resolved to send a more discreet and

trustworthy emissary on the following day.16



The person selected was Pedro de Candia, the Greek cavalier mentioned

as one of the first who intimated his intention to share the fortunes of his

commander.  He was sent on shore, dressed in complete mail as became

a good knight, with his sword by his side, and his arquebuse on his

shoulder.  The Indians were even more dazzled by his appearance than

by Molina's, as the sun fell brightly on his polished armour, and glanced

from his military weapons.  They had heard much of the formidable

arquebuse from their townsmen who had come in the vessel, and they

besought Candia "to let it speak to them." He accordingly set up a

wooden board as a target, and, taking deliberate aim, fired off the

musket.  The flash of the powder and the startling report of the piece, as

the board, struck by the ball, was shivered into splinters, filled the

nativeswith dismay.  Some fell on the ground, covering their faces with

their hands, and others approached the cavalier with feelings of awe,

which were gradually dispelled by the assurance they received from the

smiling expression of his countenance.17



They then showed him the same hospitable attentions which they had

paid to Molina; and his description of the marvels of the place, on his

return, fell nothing short of his predecessor's.  The fortress, which was

surrounded by a triple row of wall, was strongly garrisoned.  The temple

he described as literally tapestried with plates of gold and silver.

Adjoining this structure was a sort of convent appropriated to the Inca's

destined brides, who manifested great curiosity to see him.  Whether this

was gratified is not clear; but Candia described the gardens of the

convent, which he entered, as glowing with imitations of fruits and

vegetables all in pure gold and silver!18  He had seen a number of

artisans at work, whose sole business seemed to be to furnish these

gorgeous decorations for the religious houses.



The reports of the cavalier may have been somewhat over-colored.19  It

was natural that men coming from the dreary wilderness, in which they

had been buried the last six months, should have been vividly impressed

by the tokens of civilization which met them on the Peruvian coast.  But

Tumbez was a favorite city of the Peruvian princes.  It was the most

important place on the northern borders of the empire, contiguous to the

recent acquisition of Quito.  The great Tupac Yupanqui had established a

strong fortress there, and peopled it with a colony of mitimaes.  The

temple, and the house occupied by the Virgins of the Sun, had been

erected by Huayna Capac, and were liberally endowed by that Inca, after

the sumptuous fashion of the religious establishments of Peru.  The town

was well supplied with water by numerous aqueducts, and the fruitful

valley in which it was embosomed, and the ocean which bathed its

shores, supplied ample means of subsistence to a considerable

population.  But the cupidity of the Spaniards, after the Conquest, was

not stow in despoiling the place of its glories; and the site of its proud

towers and temples, in less than half a century after that fatal period, was

to be traced only by the huge mass of ruins that encumbered the

ground.20



The Spaniards were nearly mad with joy, says an old writer, at receiving

these brilliant tidings of the Peruvian city.  All their fond dreams were

now to be realized, and they had at length reached the realm which had

so long flitted in visionary splendor before them.  Pizarro expressed his

gratitude to Heaven for having crowned his labors with so glorious a

result; but he bitterly lamented the hard fate which, by depriving him of

his followers, denied him, at such a moment, the means of availing

himself of his success.  Yet he had no cause for lamentation; and the

devout Catholic saw in this very circumstance a providential

interposition which prevented the attempt at conquest, while such

attempts would have been premature.  Peru was not yet torn asunder by

the dissensions of rival candidates for the throne; and, united and strong

under the sceptre of a warlike monarch, she might well have bid defiance

to all the forces that Pizarro could muster.  "It was manifestly the work

of Heaven," exclaims a devout son of the Church, "that the natives of the

country should have received him in so kind and loving a spirit, as best

fitted to facilitate the conquest; for it was the Lord's hand which led him

and his followers to this remote region for the extension of the holy faith,

and for the salvation of souls." 21



Having now collected all the information essential to his object, Pizarro,

after taking leave of the natives of Tumbez, and promising a speedy

return, weighed anchor, and again turned his prow towards the south.

Still keeping as near as possible to the coast, that no place of importance

might escape his observation, he passed Cape Blanco, and, after sailing

about a degree and a half, made the port of Payta.  The inhabitants, who

had notice of his approach, came out in their balsas to get sight of the

wonderful strangers, bringing with them stores of fruits, fish, and

vegetables, with the same hospitable spirit shown by their countrymen at

Tumbez.



After staying here a short time, and interchanging presents of trifling

value with the natives, Pizarro continued his cruise; and, sailing by the

sandy plains of Sechura for an extent of near a hundred miles, he

doubled the Punta de Aguja, and swept down the coast as it fell off

towards the east, still carried forward by light and somewhat variable

breezes.  The weather now became unfavorable, and the voyagers

encountered a succession of heavy gales, which drove them some

distance out to sea, and tossed them about for many days.  But they did

not lose sight of the mighty ranges of the Andes, which, as they

proceeded towards the south, were still seen, at nearly the same distance

from the shore, rolling onwards, peak after peak, with their stupendous

surges of ice, like some vast ocean, that had been suddenly arrested and

frozen up in the midst of its wild and tumultuous career.  With this

landmark always in view, the navigator had little need of star or compass

to guide his bark on her course.



As soon as the tempest had subsided, Pizarro stood in again for the

continent, touching at the principal points as he coasted along.

Everywhere he was received with the same spirit of generous hospitality;

the natives coming out in their balsas to welcome him, laden with their

little cargoes of fruits and vegetables, of all the luscious varieties that

grow in the tierra caliente.  All were eager to have a glimpse of the

strangers, the "Children of the Sun," as the Spaniards began already to be

called, from their fair complexions, brilliant armour, and the

thunderbolts which they bore in their hands.22  The most favorable

reports, too, had preceded them, of the urbanity and gentleness of their

manners, thus unlocking the hearts of the simple natives, and disposing

them to confidence and kindness.  The iron-hearted soldier had not yet

disclosed the darker side of his character.  He was too weak to do so.

The hour of Conquest had not yet come.



In every place Pizarro received the same accounts of a powerful monarch

who ruled over the land, and held his court on the mountain plains of the

interior, where his capital was depicted as blazing with gold and silver,

and displaying all the profusion of an Oriental satrap.  The Spaniards,

except at Tumbez, seem to have met with little of the precious metals

among the natives on the coast.  More than one writer asserts that they

did not covet them, or, at least, by Pizarro's orders, affected not to do so.

He would not have them betray their appetite for gold, and actually

refused gifts when they were proffered!23  It is more probable that they

saw little display of wealth, except in the embellishments of the temples

and other sacred buildings, which they did not dare to violate.  The

precious metals, reserved for the uses of religion and for persons of high

degree, were not likely to abound in the remote towns and hamlets on the

coast.



Yet the Spaniards met with sufficient evidence of general civilization

and power to convince them that there was much foundation for the

reports of the natives.  Repeatedly they saw structures of stone and

plaster, and occasionally showing architectural skill in the execution, if

not elegance of design.  Wherever they cast anchor, they beheld green

patches of cultivated country redeemed from the sterility of nature, and

blooming with the variegated vegetation of the tropics; while a refined

system of irrigation, by means of aqueducts and canals, seemed to be

spread like a net-work over the surface of the country, making even the

desert to blossom as the rose.  At many places where they landed they

saw the great road of the Incas which traversed the sea-coast, often,

indeed, lost in the volatile sands, where no road could be maintained, but

rising into a broad and substantial causeway, as it emerged on a firmer

soil.  Such a provision for internal communication was in itself no slight

monument of power and civilization.



Still beating to the south, Pizarro passed the site of the future flourishing

city of Truxillo, founded by himself some years later, and pressed on till

he rode off the port of Santa.  It stood on the banks of a broad and

beautiful stream; but the surrounding country was so exceedingly arid

that it was frequently selected as a burial-place by the Peruvians, who

found the soil most favorable for the preservation of their mummies.  So

numerous, indeed, were the Indian guacas, that the place might rather be

called the abode of the dead than of the living.24



Having reached this point, about the ninth degree of southern latitude,

Pizarro's followers besought him not to prosecute the voyage farther.

Enough and more than enough had been done, they said, to prove the

existence and actual position of the great Indian empire of which they

had so long been in search.  Yet, with their slender force, they had no

power to profit by the discovery.  All that remained, therefore, was to

return and report the success of their enterprise to the governor at

Panama.  Pizarro acquiesced in the reasonableness of this demand.  He

had now penetrated nine degrees farther than any former navigator in

these southern seas, and, instead of the blight which, up to this hour, had

seemed to hang over his fortunes, he could now return in triumph to his

countrymen.  Without hesitation, therefore, he prepared to retrace his

course, and stood again towards the north.



On his way, he touched at several places where he had before landed.  At

one of these, called by the Spaniards Santa Cruz, he had been invited on

shore by an Indian woman of rank, and had promised to visit her on his

return.  No sooner did his vessel cast anchor off the village where she

lived, than she came on board, followed by a numerous train of

attendants.  Pizarro received her with every mark of respect, and on her

departure presented her with some trinkets which had a real value in the

eyes of an Indian princess.  She urged the Spanish commander and his

companions to return the visit, engaging to send a number of hostages on

board, as security for their good treatment.  Pizarro assured her that the

frank confidence she had shown towards them proved that this was

unnecessary.  Yet, no sooner did he put off in his boat, the following day,

to go on shore, than several of the principal persons in the place came

alongside of the ship to be received as hostages during the absence of the

Spaniards,--a singular proof of consideration for the sensitive

apprehensions of her guests.



Pizarro found that preparations had been made for his reception in a style

of simple hospitality that evinced some degree of taste.  Arbours were

formed of luxuriant and wide-spreading branches, interwoven with

fragrant flowers and shrubs that diffused a delicious perfume through the

air.  A banquet was provided, teeming with viands prepared in the style

of the Peruvian cookery, and with fruits and vegetables of tempting hue

and luscious to the taste, though their names and nature were unknown to

the Spaniards.  After the collation was ended, the guests were entertained

with music and dancing by a troop of young men and maidens simply

attired, who exhibited in their favorite national amusement all the agility

and grace which the supple limbs of the Peruvian Indians so well

qualified them to display.  Before his departure, Pizarro stated to his

kind host the motives of his visit to the country, in the same manner as he

had done on other occasions, and he concluded by unfurling the royal

banner of Castile, which he had brought on shore, requesting her and her

attendants to raise it in token of their allegiance to his sovereign.  This

they did with great good-humor, laughing all the while, says the

chronicler, and making it clear that they had a very imperfect conception

of the serious nature of the ceremony.  Pizarro was contented with this

outward display of loyalty, and returned to his vessel well satisfied with

the entertainment he had received, and meditating, it may be, on the best

mode of repaying it, hereafter, by the subjugation and conversion of the

country.



The Spanish commander did not omit to touch also at Tumbez, on his

homeward voyage.  Here some of his followers, won by the comfortable

aspect of the place and the manners of the people, intimated a wish to

remain, conceiving, no doubt, that it would be better to live where they

would be persons of consequence than to return to an obscure condition

in the community of Panama.  One of these men was Alonso de Molina,

the same who had first gone on shore at this place, and been captivated

by the charms of the Indian beauties.  Pizarro complied with their

wishes, thinking it would not be amiss to find, on his return, some of his

own followers who would be instructed in the language and usages of the

natives.  He was also allowed to carry back in his vessel two or three

Peruvians, for the similar purpose of instructing them in the Castilian.

One of them, a youth named by the Spaniards Felipillo, plays a part of

some importance in the history of subsequent events.



On leaving Tumbez, the adventurers steered directly for Panama,

touching only, on their way, at the ill-fated island of Gorgona to take on

board their two companions who were left there too ill to proceed with

them.  One had died, and, receiving the other, Pizarro and his gallant

little band continued their voyage; and, after an absence of at least

eighteen months, found themselves once more safely riding at anchor in

the harbor of Panama.25



The sensation caused by their arrival was great, as might have been

expected.  For there were few, even among the most sanguine of their

friends, who did not imagine that they had long since paid for their

temerity, and fallen victims to the climate or the natives, or miserably

perished in a watery grave.  Their joy was proportionably great,

therefore, as they saw the wanderers now returned, not only in health and

safety, but with certain tidings of the fair countries which had so long

eluded their grasp.  It was a moment of proud satisfaction to the three

associates, who, in spite of obloquy, derision, and every impediment

which the distrust of friends or the coldness of government could throw

in their way, had persevered in their great enterprise until they had

established the truth of what had been so generally denounced as a

chimera.  It is the misfortune of those daring spirits who conceive an idea

too vast for their own generation to comprehend, or, at least, to attempt

to carry out, that they pass for visionary dreamers.  Such had been the

fate of Luque and his associates.  The existence of a rich Indian empire

at the south, which, in their minds, dwelling long on the same idea and

alive to all the arguments in its favor, had risen to the certainty of

conviction, had been derided by the rest of their countrymen as a mere

mirage of the fancy, which, on nearer approach, would melt into air;

while the projectors, who staked their fortunes on the adventure, were

denounced as madmen.  But their hour of triumph, their slow and

hardearned triumph, had now arrived.



Yet the governor, Pedro de los Rios, did not seem, even at this moment,

to be possessed with a conviction of the magnitude of the discovery,--or,

perhaps, he was discouraged by its very magnitude.  When the

associates, now with more confidence, applied to him for patronage in an

undertaking too vast for their individual resources, he coldly replied, "He

had no desire to build up other states at the expense of his own; nor

would he be led to throw away more lives than had already been

sacrificed by the cheap display of gold and silver toys and a few Indian

sheep!" 26



Sorely disheartened by this repulse from the only quarter whence

effectual aid could be expected, the confederates, without funds, and

with credit nearly exhausted by their past efforts, were perplexed in the

extreme.  Yet to stop now,--what was it but to abandon the rich mine

which their own industry and perseverance had laid open, for others to

work at pleasure?  In this extremity the fruitful mind of Luque suggested

the only expedient by which they could hope for success.  This was to

apply to the Crown itself.  No one was so much interested in the result of

the expedition.  It was for the government, indeed, that discoveries were

to be made, that the country was to be conquered.  The government alone

was competent to provide the requisite means, and was likely to take a

much broader and more liberal view of the matter than a petty colonial

officer.



But who was there qualified to take charge of this delicate mission?

Luque was chained by his professional duties to Panama; and his

associates, unlettered soldiers, were much better fitted for the business of

the camp than of the court.  Almagro, blunt, though somewhat swelling

and ostentatious in his address, with a diminutive stature and a

countenance naturally plain, now much disfigured by the loss of an eye,

was not so well qualified for the mission as his companion in arms, who,

possessing a good person and altogether a commanding presence, was

plausible, and, with all his defects of education, could, where deeply

interested, be even eloquent in discourse.  The ecclesiastic, however,

suggested that the negotiation should be committed to the Licentiate

Corral, a respectable functionary, then about to return on some public

business to the mother country.  But to this Almagro strongly objected.

No one, he said, could conduct the affair so well as the party interested

in it.  He had a high opinion of Pizarro's prudence, his discernment of

character, and his cool, deliberate policy.27  He knew enough of his

comrade to have confidence that his presence of mind would not desert

him, even in the new, and therefore embarrassing, circumstances in

which he would be placed at court.  No one, he said, could tell the story

of their adventures with such effect, as the man who had been the chief

actor in them.  No one could so well paint the unparalleled sufferings and

sacrifices which they had encountered; no other could tell so forcibly

what had been done, what yet remained to do, and what assistance would

be necessary to carry it into execution.  He concluded, with characteristic

frankness, by strongly urging his confederate to undertake the mission.



Pizarro felt the force of Almagro's reasoning, and, though with

undisguised reluctance, acquiesced in a measure which was less to his

taste than an expedition to the wilderness.  But Luque came into the

arrangement with more difficulty.  "God grant, my children," exclaimed

the ecclesiastic, "that one of you may not defraud the other of his

blessing!" 28  Pizarro engaged to consult the interests of his associates

equally with his own.  But Luque, it is clear, did not trust Pizarro.



There was some difficulty in raising the funds necessary for putting the

envoy in condition to make a suitable appearance at court; so low had the

credit of the confederates fallen, and so little confidence was yet placed

in the result of their splendid discoveries.  Fifteen hundred ducats were at

length raised; and Pizarro, in the spring of 1528, bade adieu to Panama,

accompanied by Pedro de Candia.29  He took with him, also, some of

the natives, as well as two or three llamas, various nice fabrics of cloth,

with many ornaments and vases of gold and silver, as specimens of the

civilization of the country, and vouchers for his wonderful story.



Of all the writers on ancient Peruvian history, no one has acquired so

wide celebrity, or been so largely referred to by later compilers, as the

Inca Garcilasso de la Vega.  He was born at Cuzco, in 1540; and was a

mestizo, that is of mixed descent, his father being European, and his

mother Indian.  His father, Garcilasso de la Vega, was one of that

illustrious family whose achievements, both in arms and letters, shed

such lustre over the proudest period of the Castilian annals.  He came to

Peru, in the suite of Pedro de Alvarado, soon after the country had been

gained by Pizarro.  Garcilasso attached himself to the fortunes of this

chief, and, after his death, to those of his brother Gonzalo,--remaining.

constant to the latter, through his rebellion, up to the hour of his rout at

Xaquixaguana, when Garcilasso took the same course with most of his

faction, and passed over to the enemy.  But this demonstration of loyalty,

though it saved his life, was too late to redeem his credit with the

victorious party; and the obloquy which he incurred by his share in the

rebellion threw a cloud over his subsequent fortunes, and even over

those of his son, as it appears, in after years.



The historian's mother was of the Peruvian blood royal.  She was niece

of Huayna Capac, and granddaughter of the renowned Tupac Inca

Yupanqui.  Garcilasso, while he betrays obvious satisfaction that the

blood of the civilized European flows in his veins shows himself not a

little proud of his descent from the royal dynasty of Peru; and this he

intimated by combining with his patronymic the distinguishing title of

the Peruvian princes,---subscribing himself always Garcilasso Inca de la

Vega.



His early years were passed in his native land, where he was reared in the

Roman Catholic faith, and received the benefit of as good an education

as could be obtained, amidst the incessant din of arms and civil

commotion.  In 1560, when twenty years of age, he left America, and

from that time took up his residence in Spain.  Here he entered the

military service, and held a captain's commission in the war against the

Moriscos, and, afterwards, under Don John of Austria.  Though he

acquitted himself honorably in his adventurous career, he does not seem

to have been satisfied with the manner in which his services were

requited by the government.  The old reproach of the father's disloyalty

still clung to the son and Garcilasso assures us that this circumstance

defeated all his efforts to recover the large inheritance of landed property

belonging to his mother, which had escheated to the Crown.  "Such were

the prejudices against me," says he, "that I could not urge my ancient

claims or expectations; and I left the army so poor and so much in debt,

that I did not care to show myself again at court; but was obliged to

withdraw into an obscure solitudes where I lead a tranquil life for the

brief space that remains to me, no longer deluded by the world or its

vanities."



The scene of this obscure retreat was not, however, as the reader might

imagine from this tone of philosophic resignation, in the depths of some

rural wilderness, but in Cordova, once the gay capital of Moslem

science, and still the busy haunt of men.  Here our philosopher occupied

himself with literary labors, the more sweet and soothing to his wounded

spirit, that they tended to illustrate the faded glories of his native land,

and exhibit them in their primitive splendor to the eyes of his adopted

countrymen.  "And I have no reason to regret," he says in his Preface to

his account of Florida, "that Fortune has not smiled on me, since this

circumstance has opened a literary career which, I trust, will secure to

me a wider and more enduring fame than could flow from any worldly

prosperity."



In 1609, he gave to the world the First Part of his great work, the

Commentarios Reales, devoted to the history of the country under the

Incas; and in 1616, a few months before his death, he finished the

Second Part, embracing the story of the Conquest, which was published

at Cordova the following year.  The chronicler, who thus closed his

labors with his life, died at the ripe old age of seventy-six.  He left a

considerabe sum for the purchase of masses for his soul, showing that the

complaints of his poverty are not to be taken literally.  His remains were

interred in the cathedral church of Cordova, in a chapel which bears the

name of Garcilasso; and an inscription was placed on his monument,

intimating the high respect in which the historian was held both for his

moral worth and his literary attainments.



The First Part of the Commentarios Reales is occupied, as already

noticed, with the ancient history of the country, presenting a complete

picture of its civilization under the Incas,--far more complete than has

been given by any other writer.  Garcilasso's mother was but ten years

old at the time of her cousin Atahuallpa's accession, or rather usurpation,

as it is called by the party of Cuzco.  She had the good fortune to escape

the massacre which, according to the chroniclers befell most of her

kindred, and with her brother continued to reside in their ancient capital

after the Conquest.  Their conversations naturally turned to the good old

times of the Inca rule, which, colored by their fond regrets, may be

presumed to have lost nothing as seen through the magnifying medium of

the past.  The young Garcilasso Listened greedily to the stories which

recounted the magnificence and prowess of his royal ancestors, and

though he made no use of them at the time, they sunk deep into his

memory, to be treasured up for a future occasion.  When he prepared,

after the lapse of many years, in his retirement at Cordova, to compose

the history of his country, he wrote to his old companions and

schoolfellows, of the Inca family, to obtain fuller information than he

could get in Spain on various matters of historical interest.  He had

witnessed in his youth the ancient ceremonies and usages of his

countrymen, understood the science of their quipus, and mastered many

of their primitive traditions.  With the assistance he now obtained from

his Peruvian kindred, he acquired a familiarity with the history of the

great Inca race, and of their national institutions, to an extent that no

person could have possessed, unless educated in the midst of them,

speaking the same language, and with the same Indian blood flowing in

his veins.  Garcilasso, in short, was the representative of the conquered

race; and we might expect to find the lights and shadows of the picture

disposed under his pencil so as to produce an effect very different from

that which they had hitherto exhibited under the hands of the

Conquerors.



Such, to a certain extent, is the fact; and this circumstance affords a

means of comparison which would alone render his works of great value

in arriving at just historic conclusions.  But Garcilasso wrote late in life,

after the story had been often told by Castilian writers.  He naturally

deferred much to men, some of whom enjoyed high credit on the score

both of their scholarship and their social position.  His object, he

professes, was not so much to add any thing new of his own, as to correct

their errors and the misconceptions into which they had been brought by

their ignorance of the Indian languages and the usages of his people.  He

does, in fact, however, go far beyond this; and the stores of information

which he has collected have made his work a large repository, whence

later laborers in the same field have drawn copious materials.  He writes

from the fulness of his heart, and illuminates every topic that he touches

with a variety and richness of illustration, that leave little to be desired

by the most importunate curiosity.  The difference between reading his

Commentaries and the accounts of European writers is the difference that

exists between reading a work in the original and in a bald translation.

Garcilasso's writings are an emanation from the Indian mind.



Yet his Commentaries are open to a grave objection,--and one naturally

suggested by his position.  Addressing himself to the cultivated

European, he was most desirous to display the ancient glories of his

people, and still more of the Inca race, in their most imposing form.

This, doubtless, was the great spur to his literary labors, for which

previous education, however good for the evil time on which he was

cast, had far from qualified him.  Garcilasso, therefore, wrote to effect a

particular object.  He stood forth as counsel for his unfortunate

countrymen, pleading the cause of that degraded race before the tribunal

of posterity.  The exaggerated tone of panegyric consequent on this

becomes apparent in every page of his work.  He pictures forth a state of

society such as an Utopian philosopher would hardly venture to depict.

His royal ancestors became the types of every imaginery excellence, and

the golden age is revived for a nation, which, while the war of

proselytism is raging on its borders, enjoys within all the blessings of

tranquillity and peace.  Even the material splendors of the monarchy,

sufficiently great in this land of gold, become heightened, under the

glowing imagination of the Inca chronicler, into the gorgeous illusions of

a fairy tale.



Yet there is truth at the bottom of his wildest conceptions, and it would

be unfair to the Indian historian to suppose that he did not himself

believe most of the magic marvels which he describes.  There is no

credulity like that of a Christian convert,---one newly converted to the

faith.  From long dwelling in the darkness of paganism, his eyes, when

first opened to the light of truth, have not acquired the power of

discriminating the just proportions of objects, of distinguishing between

the real and the imaginary.  Garcilasso was not a convert indeed, for he

was bred from infancy in the Roman Catholic faith.  But he was

surrounded by converts and neophytes,--by those of his own blood, who,

after practising all their lives the rites of paganism, were now first

admitted into the Christian fold.  He listened to the teachings of the

missionary, learned from him to give implicit credit to the marvellous

legends of the Saints, and the no less marvellous accounts of his own

victories in his spiritual warfare for the propagation of the faith.  Thus

early accustomed to such large drafts on his credulity, his reason lost its

heavenly power of distinguishing truth from error, and he became so

familiar with the miraculous, that the miraculous was no longer a

miracle.



Yet, while large deductions are to be made on this account from the

chronicler's reports, there is always a germ of truth which it is not

difficult to detect, and even to disengage from the fanciful covering

which envelopes it; and after every allowance for the exaggerations of

national vanity, we shall find an abundance of genuine information in

respect to the antiquities of his country, for which we shall look in vain

in any European writer.



Garcilasso's work is the reflection of the age in which he lived.  It is

addressed to the imagination, more than to sober reason.  We are dazzled

by the gorgeous spectacle it perpetually exhibits, and delighted by the

variety of amusing details and animated gossip sprinkled over its pages.

The story of the action is perpetually varied by discussions on topics

illustrating its progress, so as to break up the monotony of the narrative,

and afford an agreeable relief to the reader.  This is true of the First Part

of his great work.  In the Second there was no longer room for such

discussion.  But he has supplied the place by garrulous reminiscences,

personal anecdotes, incidental adventures, and a host of trivial details,--

trivial in the eyes of the pedant,--which historians have been too willing

to discard, as below the dignity of history.  We have the actors in this

great drama in their private dress, become acquainted with their personal

habits, listen to their familiar sayings, and, in short gather up those

minutiae which in the aggregate make up so much of life and not less of

character.



It is this confusion of the great and the little, thus artlessly blended

together, that constitutes one of the charms of the old romantic

chronicle,--not the less true that, in this respect, it approaches nearer to

the usual tone of romance.  It is in such writings that we may look to find

the form and pressure of the age.  The wormeaten state-papers, official

correspondence, public records, are all serviceable, indispensable, to

history.  They are the framework on which it is to repose; the skeleton of

facts which gives it its strength and proportions.  But they are as

worthless as the dry bones of the skeleton, unless clothed with the

beautiful form and garb of humanity, and instinct with the spirit of the

age.--Our debt is large to the antiquarian, who with conscientious

precision lays broad and deep the foundations of historic truth; and no

less to the philosophic annalist who exhibits man in the dress of public

life,--man in masquerade; but our gratitude must surely not be withheld

from those, who, like Garcilasso de la Vega, and many a romancer of the

Middle Ages, have held up the mirror--distorted though it may somewhat

be-to the interior of life, reflecting every object, the great and the mean

the beautiful and the deformed, with their natural prominence and their

vivacity of coloring, to the eye of the spectator.  As a work of art, such a

production may be thought to be below criticism.  But, although it defy

the rules of art in its composition, it does not necessarily violate the

principles of taste; for it conforms in its spirit to the spirit of the age in

which it was written.  And the critic, who coldly condemns it on the

severe principles of art, will find a charm in its very simplicity, that will

make him recur again and again to its pages, while more correct and

classical compositions are laid aside and forgotten.



I cannot dismiss this notice of Garcilasso, though already long

protracted, without some allusion to the English translation of his

Commentaries.  It appeared in James the Second's reign, and is the work

of Sir Paul Rycaut, Knight.  It was printed at London in 1688, in folio,

with considerable pretension in its outward dress, well garnished with

wood-cuts, and a frontispiece displaying the gaunt and rather sardonic

features, not of the author, but his translator.  The version keeps pace

with the march of the original, corresponding precisely in books and

chapters, and seldom, though sometimes, using the freedom, so common

in these ancient versions, of abridgment and omission.  Where it does

depart from the original, it is rather from ignorance than intention.

Indeed, as far as the plea of ignorance will avail him, the worthy knight

may urge it stoutly in his defence.  No one who reads the book will doubt

his limited acquaintance with his own tongue, and no one who compares

it with the original will deny his ignorance of the Castilian.  It contains as

many blunders as paragraphs, and most of them such as might shame a

schoolboy.  Yet such are the rude charms of the original, that this ruder

version of it has found considerable favor with readers; and Sir Paul

Rycaut's translation, old as it is, may still be met with in many a private,

as well as public library.


