




History of the Conquest of Peru



by William Hickling Prescott



Book 5



Settlement Of The Country



Chapter 1



Great Sensation In Spain--Pedro De La Gasca--His Early Life-

His Mission To Peru--His Politic Conduct--His Offers To Pizarro-

Gains The Fleet



1545--1547



While the important revolution detailed in the preceding pages was going

forward in Peru, rumors of it, from time to time, found their way to the

mother-country; but the distance was so great, and opportunities for

communication so rare, that the tidings were usually very long behind the

occurrence of the events to which they related.  The government heard

with dismay of the troubles caused by the ordinances and the intemperate

conduct of the viceroy; and it was not long before it learned that this

functionary was deposed and driven from his capital, while the whole

country, under Gonzalo Pizarro, was arrayed in arms against him.  All

classes were filled with consternation at this alarming intelligence; and

many that had before approved the ordinances now loudly condemned

the ministers, who, without considering the inflammable temper of the

people, had thus rashly fired a train which menaced a general explosion

throughout the colonies.1  No such rebellion, within the memory of man,

had occurred in the Spanish empire.  It was compared with the famous

war of the comunidades, in the beginning of Charles the Fifth's reign.

But the Peruvian insurrection seemed the more formidable of the two.

The troubles of Castile, being under the eye of the Court, might be the

more easily managed; while it was difficult to make the same power felt

on the remote shores of the Indies.  Lying along the distant Pacific, the

principle of attraction which held Peru to the parent country was so

feeble, that this colony might, at any time, with a less impulse than that

now given to it, fly from its political orbit.



It seemed as if the fairest of its jewels was about to fall from the imperial

diadem!



Such was the state of things in the summer of 1545, when Charles the

Fifth was absent in Germany, occupied with the religious troubles of the

empire.  The government was in the hands of his son, who, under the

name of Philip the Second, was soon to sway the sceptre over the largest

portion of his father's dominions, and who was then holding his court at

Valladolid.  He called together a council of prelates, jurists, and military

men of greatest experience, to deliberate on the measures to be pursued

for restoring order in the colonies.  All agreed in regarding Pizarro's

movement in the light of an audacious rebellion; and there were few, at

first, who were not willing to employ the whole strength of government

to vindicate the honor of the Crown,--to quell the insurrection, and bring

the authors of it to punishment.2



But, however desirable this might appear, a very little reflection showed

that it was not easy to be done, if, indeed, it were practicable.  The great

distance of Peru required troops to be transported not merely across the

ocean, but over the broad extent of the great continent.  And how was

this to be effected, when the principal posts, the keys of communication

with the country, were in the hands of the rebels, while their fleet rode in

the Pacific, the mistress of its waters, cutting off all approach to the

coast?  Even if a Spanish force could be landed in Peru, what chance

would it have, unaccustomed, as it would be, to the country and the

climate, of coping with the veterans of Pizarro, trained to war in the

Indies and warmly attached to the person of their commander?  The new

levies thus sent out might become themselves infected with the spirit of

insurrection, and cast off their own allegiance.3



Nothing remained, therefore, but to try conciliatory measures.  The

government, however mortifying to its pride, must retrace its steps.  A

free grace must be extended to those who submitted, and such persuasive

arguments should be used, and such politic concessions made, as would

convince the refractory colonists that it was their interest, as well as their

duty, to return to their allegiance.



But to approach the people in their present state of excitement, and to

make those concessions without too far compromising the dignity and

permanent authority of the Crown, was a delicate matter, for the success

of which they must rely wholly on the character of the agent.  After much

deliberation, a competent person, as it was thought, was found in an

ecclesiastic, by the name of Pedro de la Gasca,--a name which, brighter

by contrast with the gloomy times in which it first appeared, still shines

with undiminished splendor after the lapse of ages.



Pedro de la Gasca was born, probably, towards the close of the fifteenth

century, in a small village in Castile named Barco de Avila.  He came,

both by father and mother's side, from an ancient and noble lineage;

ancient indeed, if, as his biographers contend, he derived his descent

from Casca, one of the conspirators against Julius Caesar!4  Having the

misfortune to lose his father early in life, he was placed by his uncle in

the famous seminary of Alcala de Henares, rounded by the great

Ximenes.  Here he made rapid proficiency in liberal studies, especially in

those connected with his profession, and at length received the degree of

Master of Theology.



The young man, however, discovered other talents than those demanded

by his sacred calling.  The war of the comunidades was then raging in the

country; and the authorities of his college showed a disposition to take

the popular side.  But Gasca, putting himself at the head of an armed

force, seized one of the gates of the city, and, with assistance from the

royal troops, secured the place to the interests of the Crown.  This early

display of loyalty was probably not lost on his vigilant sovereign.5



From Alcala, Gasca was afterwards removed to Salamanca; where he

distinguished himself by his skill in scholastic disputation, and obtained

the highest academic honors in that ancient university, the fruitful

nursery of scholarship and genius.  He was subsequently intrusted with

the management of some important affairs of an ecclesiastical nature,

and made a member of the Council of the Inquisition.



In this latter capacity he was sent to Valencia, about 1540, to examine

into certain alleged cases of heresy in that quarter of the country.  These

were involved in great obscurity; and, although Gasca had the assistance

of several eminent jurists in the investigation, it occupied him nearly two

years.  In the conduct of this difficult matter, he showed so much

penetration, and such perfect impartiality, that he was appointed by the

Cortes of Valencia to the office of visitador of that kingdom; a highly

responsible post, requiring great discretion in the person who filled it,

since it was his province to inspect the condition of the courts of justice

and of finance, throughout the land, with authority to reform abuses.  It

was proof of extraordinary consideration, that it should have been

bestowed on Gasca; since it was a departure from the established usage -

-and that in a nation most wedded to usage--to confer the office on any

but a subject of the Aragonese crown.6



Gasca executed the task assigned to him with independence and ability.

While he was thus occupied, the people of Valencia were thrown into

consternation by a meditated invasion of the French and the Turks, who,

under the redoubtable Barbarossa, menaced the coast and the

neighboring Balearic isles.  Fears were generally entertained of a rising

of the Morisco population; and the Spanish officers who had command

in that quarter, being left without the protection of a navy, despaired of

making head against the enemy.  In this season of general panic, Gasca

alone appeared calm and self-possessed.  He remonstrated with the

Spanish commanders on their unsoldierlike despondency; encouraged

them to confide in the loyalty of the Moriscos; and advised the

immediate erection of fortifications along the shores for their protection.

He was, in consequence, named one of a commission to superintend

these works, and to raise levies for defending the sea-coast; and so

faithfully was the task performed, that Barbarossa, after some ineffectual

attempts to make good his landing, was baffled at all points, and

compelled to abandon the enterprise as hopeless.  The chief credit of this

resistance must be assigned to Gasca, who superintended the

construction of the defences, and who was enabled to contribute a large

part of the requisite funds by the economical reforms he had introduced

into the administration of Valencia.7



It was at this time, the latter part of the year 1545, that the council of

Philip selected Gasca as the person most competent to undertake the

perilous mission to Peru.8  His character, indeed, seemed especially

suited to it.  His loyalty had been shown through his whole life.  With

great suavity of manners he combined the most intrepid resolution.

Though his demeanor was humble, as beseemed his calling, it was far

from abject; for he was sustained by a conscious rectitude of purpose,

that impressed respect on all with whom he had intercourse.  He was

acute in his perceptions, had a shrewd knowledge of character, and,

though bred to the cloister, possessed an acquaintance with affairs, and

even with military science, such as was to have been expected only from

one reared in courts and camps.



Without hesitation, therefore, the council unanimously recommended

him to the emperor, and requested his approbation of their proceedings.

Charles had not been an inattentive observer of Gasca's course.  His

attention had been particularly called to the able manner in which he had

conducted the judicial process against the heretics of Valencia.9  The

monarch saw, at once, that he was the man for the present emergency;

and he immediately wrote to him, with his own hand, expressing his

entire satisfaction at the appointment, and intimating his purpose to

testify his sense of his worth by preferring him to one of the principal

sees then vacant.



Gasca accepted the important mission now tendered to him without

hesitation; and, repairing to Madrid, received the instructions of the

government as to the course to be pursued.  They were expressed in the

most benign and conciliatory tone, perfectly in accordance with the

suggestions of his own benevolent temper.10  But, while he commended

the tone of the instructions, he considered the powers with which he was

to be intrusted as wholly incompetent to their object.  They were

conceived in the jealous spirit with which the Spanish government

usually limited the authority of its great colonial officers, whose distance

from home gave peculiar cause for distrust.  On every strange and

unexpected emergency, Gasca saw that he should be obliged to send

back for instructions.  This must cause delay, where promptitude was

essential to success.  The Court, moreover, as he represented to the

council, was, from its remoteness from the scene of action, utterly

incompetent to pronounce as to the expediency of the measures to be

pursued.  Some one should be sent out in whom the king could implicitly

confide, and who should be invested with powers competent to every

emergency; powers not merely to decide on what was best, but to carry

that decision into execution; and he boldly demanded that he should go

not only as the representative of the sovereign, but clothed with all the

authority of the sovereign himself.  Less than this would defeat the very

object for which he was to be sent.  "For myself," he concluded, "I ask

neither salary nor compensation of any kind.  I covet no display of state

or military array.  With my stoic and breviary I trust to do the work that

is committed to me.11  Infirm as I am in body, the repose of my own

home would have been more grateful to me than this dangerous mission;

but I will not shrink from it at the bidding of my sovereign, and if, as is

very probable, I may not be permitted again to see my native land, I

shall, at least, be cheered by the consciousness of having done my best to

serve its interests." 12



The members of the council, while they listened with admiration to the

disinterested avowal of Gasca, were astounded by the boldness of his

demands.  Not that they distrusted the purity of his motives, for these

were above suspicion.  But the powers for which he stipulated were so

far beyond those hitherto delegated to a colonial viceroy, that they felt

they had no warrant to grant them.  They even shrank from soliciting

them from the emperor, and required that Gasca himself should address

the monarch, and state precisely the grounds on which demands so

extraordinary were founded.



Gasca readily adopted the suggestion, and wrote in the most full and

explicit manner to his sovereign, who had then transferred his residence

to Flanders.  But Charles was not so tenacious, or, at least, so jealous, of

authority, as his ministers.  He had been too long in possession of it to

feel that jealousy; and, indeed, many years were not to elapse, before,

oppressed by its weight, he was to resign it altogether into the hands of

his son.  His sagacious mind, moreover, readily comprehended the

difficulties of Gasca's position.  He felt that the present extraordinary

crisis was to be met only by extraordinary measures.  He assented to the

force of his vassal's arguments, and, on the sixteenth of February, 1546,

wrote him another letter expressive of his approbation, and intimated his

willingness to grant him powers as absolute as those he had requested.



Gasca was to be styled President of the Royal Audience.  But, under this

simple title, he was placed at the head of every department in the colony,

civil, military, and judicial.  He was empowered to make new

repartimientos, and to confirm those already made.  He might declare

war, levy troops, appoint to all offices, or remove from them, at pleasure.

He might exercise the royal prerogative of pardoning offences, and was

especially authorized to grant an amnesty to all, without exception,

implicated in the present rebellion.  He was, moreover, to proclaim at

once the revocation of the odious ordinances.  These two last provisions

might be said to form the basis of all his operations.



Since ecclesiastics were not to be reached by the secular arm, and yet

were often found fomenting troubles in the colonies, Gasca was

permitted to banish from Peru such as he thought fit.  He might even

send home the viceroy, if the good of the country required it.  Agreeably

to his own suggestion, he was to receive no specified stipend; but he had

unlimited orders on the treasuries both of Panama and Peru.  He was

furnished with letters from the emperor to the principal authorities, not

only in Peru, but in Mexico and the neighboring colonies, requiring their

countenance and support; and, lastly, blank letters, bearing the royal

signature, were delivered to him, which he was to fill up at his

pleasure.13



While the grant of such unbounded powers excited the warmest

sentiments of gratitude in Gasca towards the sovereign who could repose

in him so much confidence, it seems--which is more extraordinary--not

to have raised corresponding feelings of envy in the courtiers.  They

knew well that it was not for himself that the good ecclesiastic had

solicited them.  On the contrary, some of the council were desirous that

he should be preferred to the bishopric, as already promised him, before

his departure; conceiving that he would thus go with greater authority

than as an humble ecclesiastic, and fearing, moreover, that Gasca

himself, were it omitted, might feel some natural disappointment.  But

the president hastened to remove these impressions.  "The honor would

avail me little," he said, "where I am going; and it would be manifestly

wrong to appoint me to an office in the Church, while I remain at such a

distance that I cannot discharge the duties of it.  The consciousness of

my insufficiency," he continued, "should I never return, would lie heavy

on my soul in my last moments." 14  The politic reluctance to accept the

mitre has passed into a proverb.  But there was no affectation here; and

Gasca's friends, yielding to his arguments, forbore to urge the matter

further.



The new president now went forward with his preparation.  They were

few and simple; for he was to be accompanied by a slender train of

followers, among whom the most conspicuous was Alonso de Alvarado,

the gallant officer who, as the reader may remember, long commanded

under Francisco Pizarro.  He had resided of late years at court; and now

at Gasca's request accompanied him to Peru, where his presence might

facilitate negotiations with the insurgents, while his military experience

would prove no less valuable in case of an appeal to arms.15  Some

delay necessarily occurred in getting ready his little squadron, and it was

not till the 26th of May, 1546, that the president and his suite embarked

at San Lucar for the New World.



After a prosperous voyage, and not a long one for that day, he landed,

about the middle of July, at the port of Santa Martha.  Here he received

the astounding intelligence of the battle of Ariaquito, of the defeat and

death of the viceroy, and of the manner in which Gonzalo Pizarro had

since established his absolute rule over the land.  Although these events

had occurred several months before Gasca's departure from Spain, yet,

so imperfect was the intercourse, no tidings of them had then reached

that country.



They now filled the president with great anxiety; as he reflected that the

insurgents, after so atrocious an act as the slaughter of the viceroy, might

well despair of grace, and become reckless of consequences.  He was

careful, therefore, to have it understood, that the date of his commission

was subsequent to that of the fatal battle, and that it authorized an entire

amnesty of all offences hitherto committed against the government.16



Yet, in some points of view, the death of Blasco Nunez might be

regarded as an auspicious circumstance for the settlement of the country.

Had he lived till Gasca's arrival, the latter would have been greatly

embarrassed by the necessity of acting in concert with a person so

generally detested in the colony, or by the unwelcome alternative of

sending him back to Castile.  The insurgents, moreover, would, in all

probability, be now more amenable to reason, since all personal

animosity might naturally be buried in the grave of their enemy.



The president was much embarrassed by deciding in what quarter he

should attempt to enter Peru.  Every port was in the hands of Pizarro, and

was placed under the care of his officers, with strict charge to intercept

any communications from Spain, and to detain such persons as bore a

commission from that country until his pleasure could be known

respecting them.  Gasca, at length, decided on crossing over to Nombre

de Dios, then held with a strong force by Hernan Mexia, an officer to

whose charge Gonzalo had committed this strong gate to his dominions,

as to a person on whose attachment to his cause he could confidently

rely.



Had Gasca appeared off this place in a menacing attitude, with a military

array, or, indeed, with any display of official pomp that might have

awakened distrust in the commander, he would doubtless have found it

no easy matter to effect a landing.  But Mexia saw nothing to apprehend

in the approach of a poor ecclesiastic, without an armed force, with

hardly even a retinue to support him, coming solely, as it seemed, on an

errand of mercy.  No sooner, therefore, was he acquainted with the

character of the envoy, and his mission, than he prepared to receive him

with the honors due to his rank, and marched out at the head of his

soldiers, together with a considerable body of ecclesiastics resident in the

place.  There was nothing in the person of Gasca, still less in his humble

clerical attire and modest retinue, to impress the vulgar spectator with

feelings of awe or reverence.  Indeed, the poverty-stricken aspect, as it

seemed, of himself and his followers, so different from the usual state

affected by the Indian viceroys, excited some merriment among the rude

soldiery, who did not scruple to break their coarse jests on his

appearance, in hearing of the president himself.17  "If this is the sort of

governor his Majesty sends over to us," they exclaimed, "Pizarro need

not trouble his head much about it."



Yet the president, far from being ruffled by this ribaldry, or from

showing resentment to its authors, submitted to it with the utmost

humility, and only seemed the more grateful to his own brethren, who, by

their respectful demeanor, appeared anxious to do him honor.



But, however plain and unpretending the manners of Gasca, Mexia, on

his first interview with him soon discovered that he had no common man

to deal with.  The president, after briefly explaining the nature of his

commission, told him that he had come as a messenger of peace; and that

it was on peaceful measures he relied for his success.  He then stated the

general scope of his commission, his authority to grant a free pardon to

all, without exception, who at once submitted to government, and,

finally, his purpose to proclaim the revocation of the ordinances.  The

objects of the revolution were thus attained.  To contend longer would be

manifest rebellion, and that without a motive; and he urged the

commander by every principle of loyalty and patriotism to support him

in settling the distractions of the country, and bringing it back to its

allegiance.



The candid and conciliatory language of the president, so different from

the arrogance of Blasco Nunez, and the austere demeanor of Vaca de

Castro, made a sensible impression on Mexia.  He admitted the force of

Gasca's reasoning, and flattered himself that Gonzalo Pizarro would not

be insensible to it.  Though attached to the fortunes of that leader, he was

loyal in heart, and, like most of the party, had been led by accident,

rather than by design, into rebellion; and now that so good an

opportunity occurred to do it with safety, he was not unwilling to retrace

his steps, and secure the royal favor by thus early returning to his

allegiance.  This he signified to the president, assuring him of his hearty

cooperation in the good work of reform.18



This was an important step for Gasca.  It was yet more important for him

to secure the obedience of Hinojosa, the governor of Panama, in the

harbor of which city lay Pizarro's navy, consisting of two-and-twenty

vessels.  But it was not easy to approach this officer.  He was a person of

much higher character than was usually found among the reckless

adventurers in the New World.  He was attached to the interests of

Pizarro, and the latter had requited him by placing him in command of

his armada and of Panama, the key to his territories on the Pacific.



The president first sent Mexia and Alonso de Alvarado to prepare the

way for his own coming, by advising Hinojosa of the purport of his

mission.  He soon after followed, and was received by that commander

with every show of outward respect.  But while the latter listened with

deference to the representations of Gasca, they failed to work the change

in him which they had wrought in Mexia; and he concluded by asking the

president to show him his powers, and by inquiring whether they gave

him authority to confirm Pizarro in his present post, to which he was

entitled no less by his own services than by the general voice of the

people.



This was an embarrassing question.  Such a concession would have been

altogether too humiliating to the Crown; but to have openly avowed this

at the present juncture to so stanch an adherent of Pizarro might have

precluded all further negotiation.  The president evaded the question,

therefore, by simply stating, that the time had not yet come for him to

produce his powers, but that Hinojosa might be assured they were such

as to secure an ample recompense to every loyal servant of his

country.19



Hinojosa was not satisfied; and he immediately wrote to Pizarro,

acquainting him with Gasca's arrival and with the object of his mission,

at the same time plainly intimating his own conviction that the president

had no authority to confirm him in the government.  But before the

departure of the ship, Gasca secured the services of a Dominican friar,

who had taken his passage on board for one of the towns on the coast.

This man he intrusted with manifestoes, setting forth the purport of his

visit, and proclaiming the abolition of the ordinances, with a free pardon

to all who returned to their obedience.  He wrote, also, to the prelates

and to the corporations of the different cities.  The former he requested

to cooperate with him in introducing a spirit of loyalty and subordination

among the people, while he intimated to the towns his purpose to confer

with them hereafter, in order to devise some effectual measures for the

welfare of the country.  These papers the Dominican engaged to

distribute, himself, among the principal cities of the colony; and he

faithfully kept his word, though, as it proved, at no little hazard of his

life.  The seeds thus scattered might many of them fall on barren ground.

But the greater part, the president trusted, would take root in the hearts

of the people; and he patiently waited for the harvest.



Meanwhile, though he failed to remove the scruples of Hinojosa, the

courteous manners of Gasca, and his mild, persuasive discourse, had a

visible effect on other individuals with whom he had daily intercourse.

Several of these, and among them some of the principal cavaliers in

Panama, as well as in the squadron, expressed their willingness to join

the royal cause, and aid the president in maintaining it.  Gasca profited

by their assistance to open a communication with the authorities of

Guatemala and Mexico, whom he advised of his mission, while he

admonished them to allow no intercourse to be carried on with the

insurgents on the coast of Peru.  He, at length, also prevailed on the

governor of Panama to furnish him with the means of entering into

communication with Gonzalo Pizarro himself; and a ship was despatched

to Lima, bearing a letter from Charles the Fifth, addressed to that chief,

with an epistle also from Gasca.



The emperor's communication was couched in the most condescending

and even conciliatory terms.  Far from taxing Gonzalo with rebellion, his

royal master affected to regard his conduct as in a manner imposed on

him by circumstances, especially by the obduracy of the viceroy Nunez

in denying the colonists the inalienable right of petition.  He gave no

intimation of an intent to confirm Pizarro in the government, or, indeed,

to remove him from it; but simply referred him to Gasca as one who

would acquaint him with the royal pleasure, and with whom he was to

cooperate in restoring tranquillity to the country.



Gasca's own letter was pitched on the same politic key.  He remarked,

however, that the exigencies which had hitherto determined Gonzalo's

line of conduct existed no longer.  All that had been asked was conceded.

There was nothing now to contend for; and it only remained for Pizarro

and his followers to show their loyalty and the sincerity of their

principles by obedience to the Crown.  Hitherto, the president said,

Pizarro had been in arms against the viceroy; and the people had

supported him as against a common enemy.  If he prolonged the contest,

that enemy must be his sovereign.  In such a struggle, the people would

be sure to desert him; and Gasca conjured him, by his honor as a

cavalier, and his duty as a loyal vassal, to respect the royal authority, and

not rashly provoke a contest which must prove to the world that his

conduct hitherto had been dictated less by patriotic motives than by

selfish ambition.



This letter, which was conveyed in language the most courteous and

complimentary to the subject of it, was of great length.  It was

accompanied by another much more concise, to Cepeda, the intriguing

lawyer, who, as Gasca knew, had the greatest influence over Pizarro, in

the absence of Carbajal, then employed in reaping the silver harvest from

the newly discovered mines of Potosi.20  In this epistle, Gasca affected

to defer to the cunning politician as a member of the Royal Audience,

and he conferred with him on the best manner of supplying a vacancy in

that body.  These several despatches were committed to a cavalier,

named Paniagua, a faithful adherent of the president, and one of those

who had accompanied him from Castile.  To this same emissary he also

gave manifestos and letters, like those intrusted to the Dominican, with

orders secretly to distribute them in Lima, before he quitted that

capital.21



Weeks and months rolled away, while the president still remained at

Panama, where, indeed, as his communications were jealously cut off

with Peru, he might be said to be detained as a sort of prisoner of state.

Meanwhile, both he and Hinojosa were looking with anxiety for the

arrival of some messenger from Pizarro, who should indicate the manner

in which the president's mission was to be received by that chief.  The

governor of Panama was not blind to the perilous position in which he

was himself placed, nor to the madness of provoking a contest with the

Court of Castile.  But he had a reluctance--not too often shared by the

cavaliers of Peru--to abandon the fortunes of the commander who had

reposed in him so great confidence.  Yet he trusted that this commander

would embrace the opportunity now offered, of placing himself and the

country in a state of permanent security.



Several of the cavaliers who had given in their adhesion to Gasca,

displeased by this obstinacy, as they termed it, of Hinojosa, proposed to

seize his person and then get possession of the armada.  But the president

at once rejected this offer.  His mission, he said, was one of peace, and

he would not stain it at the outset by an act of violence.  He even

respected the scruples of Hinojosa; and a cavalier of so honorable a

nature, he conceived, if once he could be gained by fair means, would be

much more likely to be true to his interests, than if overcome either by

force or fraud.  Gasca thought he might safely abide his time.  There was

policy, as well as honesty, in this; indeed, they always go together.



Meantime, persons were occasionally arriving from Lima and the

neighboring places, who gave accounts of Pizarro, varying according to

the character and situation of the parties.  Some represented him as

winning all hearts by his open temper and the politic profusion with

which, though covetous of wealth, he distributed repartimientos and

favors among his followers.  Others spoke of him as carrying matters

with a high hand, while the greatest timidity and distrust prevailed

among the citizens of Lima.  All agreed that his power rested on too

secure a basis to be shaken; and that, if the president should go to Lima,

he must either consent to become Pizarro's instrument and confirm him

in the government, or forfeit his own life.22



It was undoubtedly true, that Gonzalo, while he gave attention, as his

friends say, to the public business, found time for free indulgence in

those pleasures which wait on the soldier of fortune in his hour of

triumph.  He was the object of flattery and homage; courted even by

those who hated him.  For such as did not love the successful chieftain

had good cause to fear him; and his exploits were commemorated in

romances or ballads, as rivalling--it was not far from truth--those of the

most doughty paladins of chivalry.23



Amidst this burst of adulation, the cup of joy commended to Pizarro's

lips had one drop of bitterness in it that gave its flavor to all the rest; for,

notwithstanding his show of confidence, he looked with unceasing

anxiety to the arrival of tidings that might assure him in what light his

conduct was regarded by the government at home.  This was proved by

his jealous precautions to guard the approaches to the coast, and to

detain the persons of the royal emissaries.  He learned, therefore, with no

little uneasiness, from Hinojosa, the landing of President Gasca, and the

purport of his mission.  But his discontent was mitigated, when he

understood that the new envoy had come without military array, without

any of the ostentatious trappings of office to impose on the minds of the

vulgar, but alone, as it were, in the plain garb of an humble

missionary.24  Pizarro could not discern, that under this modest exterior

lay a moral power, stronger than his own steel-clad battalions, which,

operating silently on public opinion,--the more sure than it was silent,--

was even now undermining his strength, like a subterraneous channel

eating away the foundations of some stately edifice, that stands secure in

its pride of place!



But, although Gonzalo Pizarro could not foresee this result, he saw

enough to satisfy him that it would be safest to exclude the president

from Peru.  The tidings of his arrival, moreover, quickened his former

purpose of sending an embassy to Spain to vindicate his late

proceedings, and request the royal confirmation of his authority.  The

person placed at the head of this mission was Lorenzo de Aldana, a

cavalier of discretion as well as courage, and high in the confidence of

Pizarro, as one of his most devoted partisans.  He had occupied some

important posts under that chief, one secret of whose successes was the

sagacity he showed in the selection of his agents.



Besides Aldana and one or two cavaliers, the bishop of Lima was joined

in the commission, as likely, from his position, to have a favorable

influence on Gonzalo's fortunes at court.  Together with the despatches

for the government, the envoys were intrusted with a letter to Gasca from

the inhabitants of Lima; in which, after civilly congratulating the

president on his arrival, they announce their regret that he had come too

late.  The troubles of the country were now settled by the overthrow of

the viceroy, and the nation was reposing in quiet under the rule of

Pizarro.  An embassy, they stated, was on its way to Castile, not to solicit

pardon, for they had committed no crime,25 but to petition the emperor

to confirm their leader in the government, as the man in Peru best

entitled to it by his virtues.26  They expressed the conviction that

Gasca's presence would only serve to renew the distractions of the

country, and they darkly intimated that his attempt to land would

probably cost him his life.--The language of this singular document was

more respectful than might be inferred from its import.  It was dated the

14th of October, 1546, and was subscribed by seventy of the principal

cavaliers in the city.  It was not improbably dictated by Cepeda, whose

hand is visible in most of the intrigues of Pizarro's little court.  It is also

said, --the authority is somewhat questionable,--that Aldana received

instructions from Gonzalo secretly to offer a bribe of fifty thousand

pesos de oro to the president, to prevail on him to return to Castile; and

in case of his refusal, some darker and more effectual way was to be

devised to rid the country of his presence.27



Aldana, fortified with his despatches, sped swiftly on his voyage to

Panama.  Through him the governor learned the actual state of feeling in

the councils of Pizarro; and he listened with regret to the envoy's

conviction, that no terms would be admitted by that chief or his

companions, that did not confirm him in the possession of Peru.28



Aldana was soon admitted to an audience by the president.  It was

attended with very different results from what had followed from the

conferences with Hinojosa; for Pizarro's envoy was not armed by nature

with that stubborn panoply which had hitherto made the other proof

against all argument.  He now learned with surprise the nature of Gasca's

powers, and the extent of the royal concessions to the insurgents.  He had

embarked with Gonzalo Pizarro on a desperate venture, and he found

that it had proved successful.  The colony had nothing more, in reason,

to demand; and, though devoted in heart to his leader, he did not feel

bound by any principle of honor to take part with him, solely to gratify

his ambition, in a wild contest with the Crown that must end in inevitable

ruin.  He consequently abandoned his mission to Castile, probably never

very palatable to him, and announced his purpose to accept the pardon

proffered by government, and support the president in settling the affairs

of Peru.  He subsequently wrote, it should be added, to his former

commander in Lima, stating the course he had taken, and earnestly

recommending the latter to follow his example.



The influence of this precedent in so important a person as Aldana,

aided, doubtless, by the conviction that no change was now to be

expected in Pizarro, while delay would be fatal to himself, at length

prevailed over Hinojosa's scruples, and he intimated to Gasca his

willingness to place the fleet under his command.  The act was

performed with great pomp and ceremony.  Some of Pizarro's stanchest

partisans were previously removed from the vessels; and on the

nineteenth of November, 1546, Hinojosa and his captains resigned their

commissions into the hands of the president.  They next took the oaths of

allegiance to Castile; a free pardon for all past offences was proclaimed

by the herald from a scaffold erected in the great square of the city; and

the president, greeting them as true and loyal vassals of the Crown,

restored their several commissions to the cavaliers.  The royal standard

of Spain was then unfurled on board the squadron, and proclaimed that

this stronghold of Pizarro's power had passed away from him for ever.29



The return of their commissions to the insurgent captains was a politic

act in Gasca.  It secured the services of the ablest officers in the country,

and turned against Pizarro the very arm on which he had most leaned for

support.  Thus was this great step achieved, without force or fraud, by

Gasca's patience and judicious forecast.  He was content to bide his time;

and he now might rely with well-grounded confidence on the ultimate

success of his mission.







Book 5



Chapter 2



Gasca Assembles His Forces--Defection Of Pizarro's Followers--

He Musters His Levies--Agitation In Lima--He Abandons The City--

Gasca Sails From Panama--Bloody Battle Of Huarina



1547



No sooner was Gasca placed in possession of Panama and the fleet, than

he entered on a more decisive course of policy than he had been hitherto

allowed to pursue.  He raised levies of men, and drew together supplies

from all quarters.  He took care to discharge the arrears already due to

the soldiers, and promised liberal pay for the future; for, though mindful

that his personal charges should cost little to the Crown, he did not stint

his expenditure when the public good required it.  As the funds in the

treasury were exhausted, he obtained loans on the credit of the

government from the wealthy citizens of Panama, who, relying on his

good faith, readily made the necessary advances.  He next sent letters to

the authorities of Guatemala and Mexico, requiring their assistance in

carrying on hostilities, if necessary, against the insurgents; and he

despatched a summons, in like manner, to Benalcazar, in the provinces

north of Peru, to meet him, on his landing in that country, with his whole

available force.



The greatest enthusiasm was shown by the people of Panama in getting

the little navy in order for his intended voyage; and prelates and

commanders did not disdain to prove their loyalty by taking part in the

good work, along with the soldiers and sailors.1  Before his own

departure, however, Gasca proposed to send a small squadron of four

ships under Aldana, to cruise off the port of Lima, with instructions to

give protection to those well affected to the royal cause, and receive

them, if need be, on board his vessels.  He was also intrusted with

authenticated copies of the president's commission, to be delivered to

Gonzalo Pizarro, that the chief might feel, there was yet time to return

before the gates of mercy were closed against him.2



While these events were going on, Gasca's proclamations and letters

were doing their work in Peru.  It required but little sagacity to perceive

that the nation at large, secured in the protection of person and property,

had nothing to gain by revolution.  Interest and duty, fortunately, now lay

on the same side; and the ancient sentiment of loyalty, smothered for a

time, but not extinguished, revived in the breasts of the people.  Still this

was not manifested, at once, by any overt act; for, under a strong military

rule, men dared hardly think for themselves, much less communicate

their thoughts to one another.  But changes of public opinion, like

changes in the atmosphere that come on slowly and imperceptibly, make

themselves more and more widely felt, till, by a sort of silent sympathy,

they spread to the remotest corners of the land.  Some intimations of

such a change of sentiment at length found their way to Lima, although

all accounts of the president's mission had been jealously excluded from

that capital.  Gonzalo Pizarro himself became sensible of these

symptoms of disaffection, though almost too faint and feeble, as yet, for

the most experienced eye to descry in them the coming tempest.



Several of the president's proclamations had been forwarded to Gonzalo

by his faithful partisans; and Carbajal, who had been summoned from

Potosi, declared they were "more to be dreaded than the lances of

Castile." 3  Yet Pizarro did not, for a moment, lose his confidence in his

own strength; and with a navy like that now in Panama at his command,

he felt he might bid defiance to any enemy on his coasts.  He had implicit

confidence in the fidelity of Hinojosa.



It was at this period that Paniagua arrived off the port with Gasca's

despatches to Pizarro, consisting of the emperor's letter and his own.

They were instantly submitted by that chieftain to his trusty counsellors,

Carbajal and Cepeda, and their opinions asked as to the course to be

pursued.  It was the crisis of Pizarro's fate.



Carbajal, whose sagacious eye fully comprehended the position in which

they stood, was in favor of accepting the royal grace on the terms

proposed; and he intimated his sense of their importance by declaring,

that "he would pave the way for the bearer of them into the capital with

ingots of gold and silver." 4  Cepeda was of a different way of thinking.

He was a judge of the Royal Audience; and had been sent to Peru as the

immediate counsellor of Blasco Nunez.  But he had turned against the

viceroy, had encountered him in battle, and his garments might be said to

be yet wet with his blood!  What grace was there, then, for him?

Whatever respect might be shown to the letter of the royal provisions, in

point of fact, he must ever live under the Castilian rule a ruined man.  He

accordingly, strongly urged the rejection of Gasca's offers.  "They will

cost you your government," he said to Pizarro; "the smooth-tongued

priest is not so simple a person as you take him to be.  He is deep and

politic.5  He knows well what promises to make; and, once master of the

country, he will know, too, how to keep them."



Carbajal was not shaken by the arguments or the sneers of his

companions; and as the discussion waxed warm, Cepeda taxed his

opponent with giving counsel suggested by fears for his own safety,--a

foolish taunt, sufficiently disproved by the whole life of the doughty old

warrior, Carbajal did not insist further on his own views, however, as he

found them unwelcome to Pizarro, and contented himself with coolly

remarking, that "he had, indeed, no relish for rebellion; but he had as

long a neck for a halter, he believed, as any of his companions; and as he

could hardly expect to live much longer, at any rate, it was, after all, of

little moment to him." 6



Pizarro, spurred on by a fiery ambition that overleaped every obstacle,7

did not condescend to count the desperate chances of a contest with the

Crown.  He threw his own weight into the scale with Cepeda.  The offer

of grace was rejected; and he thus cast away the last tie which held him

to his country, and, by the act, proclaimed himself a rebel.8



It was not long after the departure of Paniagua, that Pizarro received

tidings of the defection of Aldana and Hinojosa, and of the surrender of

the fleet, on which he had expended an immense sum, as the chief

bulwark of his power.  This unwelcome intelligence was followed by

accounts of the further defection of some of the principal towns in the

north, and of the assassination of Puelles, the faithful lieutenant to whom

he had confided the government of Quito.  It was not very long, also,

before he found his authority assailed in the opposite quarter at Cuzco;

for Centeno, the loyal chieftain who, as the reader may remember, had

been driven by Carbajal to take refuge in a cave near Arequipa, had

issued from his concealment after remaining there a year, and, on

learning the arrival of Gasca, had again raised the royal standard.  Then

collecting a small body of followers, and falling on Cuzco by night, he

made himself master of that capital, defeated the garrison who held it,

and secured it for the Crown.  Marching soon after into the province of

Charcas, the bold chief allied himself with the officer who commanded

for Pizarro in La Plata; and their combined forces, to the number of a

thousand, took up a position on the borders of Lake Titicaca, where the

two cavaliers coolly waited an opportunity to take the field against their

ancient commander.



Gonzalo Pizarro, touched to the heart by the desertion of those in whom

he most confided, was stunned by the dismal tidings of his losses coming

so thick upon him.  Yet he did not waste his time in idle crimination or

complaint; but immediately set about making preparations to meet the

storm with all his characteristic energy.  He wrote, at once to such of his

captains as he believed still faithful, commanding them to be ready with

their troops to march to his assistance at the shortest notice.  He

reminded them of their obligations to him, and that their interests were

identical with his own.  The president's commission, he added, had been

made out before the news had reached Spain of the battle of Ariaquito,

and could never cover a pardon to those concerned in the death of the

viceroy.9



Pizarro was equally active in enforcing his levies in the capital, and in

putting them in the best fighting order.  He soon saw himself at the head

of a thousand men, beautifully equipped, and complete in all their

appointments; "as gallant an array," says an old writer, "though so small

in number, as ever trod the plains of Italy,"--displaying in the excellence

of their arms, their gorgeous uniforms, and the caparisons of their horses,

a magnificence that could be furnished only by the silver of Peru.10

Each company was provided with a new stand of colors, emblazoned

with its peculiar device.  Some bore the initials and arms of Pizarro, and

one or two of these were audaciously surmounted by a crown, as if to

intimate the rank to which their commander might aspire.11



Among the leaders most conspicuous on this occasion was Cepeda,

"who," in the words of a writer of his time, "had exchanged the robe of

the licentiate for the plumed casque and mailed harness of the warrior."

12  But the cavalier to whom Pizarro confided the chief care of

organizing his battalions was the veteran Carbajal, who had studied the

art of war under the best captains of Europe, and whose life of adventure

had been a practical commentary on their early lessons.  It was on his

arm that Gonzalo most leaned in the hour of danger; and well had it been

for him, if he had profiled by his counsels at an earlier period.



It gives one some idea of the luxurious accommodations of Pizarro's

forces, that he endeavored to provide each of his musketeers with a

horse.  The expenses incurred by him were enormous.  The immediate

cost of his preparations, we are told, was not less than half a million of

pesos de oro; and his pay to the cavaliers, and, indeed, to the common

soldiers, in his little army, was on an extravagant scale, nowhere to be

met with but on the silver soil of Peru.13



When his own funds were exhausted, he supplied the deficiency by fines

imposed on the rich citizens of Lima as the price of exemption from

service, by forced loans, and various other schemes of military

exaction.14  From this time, it is said, the chieftain's temper underwent a

visible change.15  He became more violent in his passions, more

impatient of control, and indulged more freely in acts of cruelty and

license.  The desperate cause in which he was involved made him

reckless of consequences.  Though naturally frank and confiding, the

frequent defection of his followers filled him with suspicion.  He knew

not in whom to confide.  Every one who showed himself indifferent to

his cause, or was suspected of being so, was dealt with as an open

enemy.  The greatest distrust prevailed in Lima.  No man dared confide

in his neighbor.  Some concealed their effects; others contrived to elude

the vigilance of the sentinels, and hid themselves in the neighboring

woods and mountains.16  No one was allowed to enter or leave the city

without a license.  All commerce, all intercourse, with other places was

cut off.  It was long since the fifth belonging to the Crown had been

remitted to Castile; as Pizarro had appropriated them for his own use.

He now took possession of the mints, broke up the royal stamps, and

issued a debased coin, emblazoned with his own cipher.17  It was the

most decisive act of sovereignty.



At this gloomy period, the lawyer Cepeda contrived a solemn farce, the

intent of which was to give a sort of legal sanction to the rebel cause in

the eyes of the populace.  He caused a process to be prepared against

Gasca, Hinojosa, and Aldana, in which they were accused of treason

against the existing government of Peru, were convicted, and condemned

to death.  This instrument he submitted to a number of jurists in the

capital, requiring their signatures.  But they had no mind thus inevitably

to implicate themselves, by affixing their names to such a paper; and

they evaded it by representing, that it would only serve to cut off all

chance, should any of the accused be so disposed, of their again

embracing the cause they had deserted.  Cepeda was the only man who

signed the document.  Carbajal treated the whole thing with ridicule.

"What is the object of your process?" said he to Cepeda.  "Its object,"

replied the latter, "is to prevent delay, that, if taken at any time, the guilty

party may be at once led to execution." "I cry you mercy," retorted

Carbajal; "I thought there must be some virtue in the instrument, that

would have killed them outright.  Let but one of these same traitors fall

into my hands, and I will march him off to execution, without waiting for

the sentence of a court, I promise you!" 18



While this paper war was going on, news was brought that Aldana's

squadron was off the port of Callao.  That commander had sailed from

Panama, the middle of February, 1547.  On his passage down the coast

he had landed at Truxillo, where the citizens welcomed him with

enthusiasm, and eagerly proclaimed their submission to the royal

authority.  He received, at the same time, messages from several of

Pizarro's officers in the interior, intimating their return to their duty, and

their readiness to support the president.  Aldana named Caxamalca as a

place of rendezvous, where they should concentrate their forces, and wait

the landing of Gasca.  He then continued his voyage towards Lima.



No sooner was Pizarro informed of his approach, than, fearful lest it

might have a disastrous effect in seducing his followers from their

fidelity, he marched them about a league out of the city, and there

encamped.  He was two leagues from the coast, and he posted a guard on

the shore to intercept all communication with the vessels.  Before leaving

the capital, Cepeda resorted to an expedient for securing the inhabitants

more firmly, as he conceived, in Pizarro's interests.  He caused the

citizens to be assembled, and made them a studied harangue, in which he

expatiated on the services of their governor, and the security which the

country had enjoyed under his rule.  He then told them that every man

was at liberty to choose for himself; to remain under the protection of

their present ruler, or, if they preferred, to transfer their allegiance to his

enemy.  He invited them to speak their minds, but required every one

who would still continue under Pizarro to take an oath of fidelity to his

cause, with the assurance, that, if any should be so false hereafter as to

violate this pledge, he should pay for it with his life.19  There was no

one found bold enough--with his head thus in the lion's mouth--to swerve

from his obedience to Pizarro; and every man took the oath prescribed,

which was administered in the most solemn and imposing form by the

licentiate.  Carbajal, as usual, made a jest of the whole proceeding.

"How long," he asked his companion, "do you think these same oaths

will stand?  The first wind that blows off the coast after we are gone will

scatter them in air!" His prediction was soon verified.



Meantime, Aldana anchored off the port, where there was no vessel of

the insurgents to molest him.  By Cepeda's advice, some four or five had

been burnt a short time before, during the absence of Carbajal, in order

to cut off all means by which the inhabitants could leave the place.  This

was deeply deplored by the veteran soldier on his return.  "It was

destroying," he said, "the guardian angels of Lima." 20  And certainly,

under such a commander, they might now have stood Pizarro in good

stead; but his star was on the wane.



The first act of Aldana was to cause the copy of Gasca's powers, with

which he had been intrusted, to be conveyed to his ancient commander,

by whom it was indignantly torn in pieces.  Aldana next contrived, by

means of his agents, to circulate among the citizens, and even the

soldiers of the camp, the president's manifestoes.  They were not long in

producing their effect.  Few had been at all aware of the real purport of

Gasca's mission, of the extent of his powers, or of the generous terms

offered by government.  They shrunk from the desperate course into

which they had been thus unwarily seduced, and they sought only in what

way they could, with least danger, extricate themselves from their

present position, and return to their allegiance.  Some escaped by night

from the camp, eluded the vigilance of the sentinels, and effected their

retreat on board the vessels.  Some were taken, and found no quarter at

the hands of Carbajal and his merciless ministers.  But, where the spirit

of disaffection was abroad, means of escape were not wanting.



As the fugitives were cut off from Lima and the neighboring coast, they

secreted themselves in the forests and mountains, and watched their

opportunity for making their way to Truxilla and other ports at a

distance; and so contagious was the example, that it not unfrequently

happened that the very soldiers sent in pursuit of the deserters joined

with them.  Among those that fled was the Licentiate Carbajal, who must

not be confounded with his military namesake.  He was the same cavalier

whose brother had been put to death in Lima by Blasco Nunez, and who

revenged himself, as we have seen, by imbruing his own hands in the

blood of the viceroy.  That a person thus implicated should trust to the

royal pardon showed that no one need despair of it; and the example

proved most disastrous to Pizarro.21



Carbajal, who made a jest of every thing, even of the misfortunes which

pinched him the sharpest, when told of the desertion of his comrades,

amused himself by humming the words of a popular ditty:--



"The wind blows the hairs off my head, mother; Two at a time, it blows

them away!" 22



But the defection of his followers made a deeper impression on Pizarro,

and he was sorely distressed as he beheld the gallant array, to which he

had so confidently looked for gaining his battles, thus melting away like

a morning mist.  Bewildered by the treachery of those in whom he had

most trusted, he knew not where to turn, nor what course to take.  It was

evident that he must leave his present dangerous quarters without loss of

time.  But whither should he direct his steps?  In the north, the great

towns had abandoned his cause, and the president was already marching

against him; while Centeno held the passes of the south, with a force

double his own.  In this emergency, he at length resolved to occupy

Arequipa, a seaport still true to him, where he might remain till he had

decided on some future course of operations.



After a painful but rapid march, Gonzalo arrived at this place, where he

was speedily joined by a reinforcement that he had detached for the

recovery of Cuzco.  But so frequent had been the desertions from both

companies,--though in Pizarro's corps these had greatly lessened since

the departure from the neighborhood of Lima,--that his whole number

did not exceed five hundred men, less than half of the force which he had

so recently mustered in the capital.  To such humble circumstances was

the man now reduced, who had so lately lorded it over the land with

unlimited sway!  Still the chief did not despond.  He had gathered new

spirit from the excitement of his march and his distance from Lima; and

he seemed to recover his former confidence, as he exclaimed,--"It is

misfortune that teaches us who are our friends.  If but ten only remain

true to me, fear not but I will again be master of Peru!" 23



No sooner had the rebel forces withdrawn from the neighborhood of

Lima, than the inhabitants of that city, little troubled, as Carbajal had

predicted, by their compulsory oaths of allegiance to Pizarro, threw open

their gates to Aldana, who took possession of this important place in the

name of the president.  That commander, meanwhile, had sailed with his

whole fleet from Panama, on the tenth of April, 1547.  The first part of

his voyage was prosperous; but he was soon perplexed by contrary

currents, and the weather became rough and tempestuous.  The violence

of the storm continuing day after day, the sea was lashed into fury, and

the fleet was tossed about on the billows, which ran mountain high, as if

emulating the wild character of the region they bounded.  The rain

descended in torrents, and the lightning was so incessant, that the

vessels, to quote the lively language of the chronicler, "seemed to be

driving through seas of flame!" 24  The hearts of the stoutest mariners

were filled with dismay.  They considered it hopeless to struggle against

the elements, and they loudly demanded to return to the continent, and

postpone the voyage till a more favorable season of the year.



But the president saw in this the ruin of his cause, as well as of the loyal

vassals who had engaged, on his landing, to support it.  "I am willing to

die," he said, "but not to return"; and, regardless of the remonstrances of

his more timid followers, he insisted on carrying as much sail as the

ships could possibly bear, at every interval of the storm.25  Meanwhile,

to divert the minds of the seamen from their present danger, Gasca

amused them by explaining some of the strange phenomena exhibited by

the ocean in the tempest, which had filled their superstitious minds with

mysterious dread.26



Signals had been given for the ships to make the best of their way, each

for itself, to the island of Gorgona.  Here they arrived, one after another,

with but a single exception, though all more or less shattered by the

weather.  The president waited only for the fury of the elements to spend

itself, when he again embarked, and, on smoother waters, crossed over to

Manta.  From this place he soon after continued his voyage to Tumbez,

and landed at that port on the thirteenth of June.  He was everywhere

received with enthusiasm, and all seemed anxious to efface the

remembrance of the past by professions of future fidelity to the Crown.

Gasca received, also, numerous letters of congratulation from cavaliers

in the interior, most of whom had formerly taken service under Pizarro.

He made courteous acknowledgments for their offers of assistance, and

commanded them to repair to Caxamalca, the general place of

rendezvous.



To this same spot he sent Hinojosa, so soon as that officer had

disembarked with the land forces from the fleet, ordering him to take

command of the levies assembled there, and then join him at Xauxa.

Here he determined to establish his headquarters.  It lay in a rich and

abundant territory, and by its central position afforded a point for acting

with greatest advantage against the enemy.



He then moved forward, at the head of a small detachment of cavalry,

along the level road on the coast towards Truxillo.  After halting for a

short time in that loyal city, he traversed the mountain range on the

southeast, and soon entered the fruitful valley of Xauxa.  There he was

presently joined by reinforcements from the north, as well as from the

principal places on the coast; and, not long after his arrival, received a

message from Centeno, informing him that he held the passes by which

Gonzalo Pizarro was preparing to make his escape from the country, and

that the insurgent chief must soon fall into his hands.



The royal camp was greatly elated by these tidings.  The war, then, was

at length terminated, and that without the president having been called

upon so much as to lift his sword against a Spaniard.  Several of his

counsellors now advised him to disband the greater part of his forces, as

burdensome and no longer necessary.  But the president was too wise to

weaken his strength before he had secured the victory.  He consented,

however, to countermand the requisition for levies from Mexico and the

adjoining colonies, as now feeling sufficiently strong in the general

loyalty of the country.  But, concentrating his forces at Xauxa, he

established his quarters in that town, as he had first intended, resolved to

await there tidings of the operations in the south.  The result was

different from what he had expected.27



Pizarro, meanwhile, whom we left at Arequipa, had decided, after much

deliberation, to evacuate Peru, and pass into Chili.  In this territory,

beyond the president's jurisdiction, he might find a safe retreat, The

fickle people, he thought, would soon weary of their new ruler; and he

would then rally in sufficient strength to resume active operations for the

recovery of his domain.  Such were the calculations of the rebel

chieftain.  But how was he to effect his object, while the passes among

the mountains, where his route lay, were held by Centeno with a force

more than double his own?  He resolved to try negotiation; for that

captain had once served under him, and had, indeed, been most active in

persuading Pizarro to take on himself the office of procurator.

Advancing, accordingly, in the direction of Lake Titicaca, in the

neighborhood of which Centeno had pitched his camp, Gonzalo

despatched an emissary to his quarters to open a negotiation.  He called

to his adversary's recollection the friendly relations that had once

subsisted between them; and reminded him of one occasion in particular,

in which he had spared his life, when convicted of a conspiracy against

himself.  He harbored no sentiments of unkindness, he said, for

Centeno's recent conduct, and had not now come to seek a quarrel with

him.  His purpose was to abandon Peru; and the only favor he had to

request of his former associate was to leave him a free passage across the

mountains.



To this communication Centeno made answer in terms as courtly as

those of Pizarro himself, that he was not unmindful of their ancient

friendship.  He was now ready to serve his former commander in any

way not inconsistent with honor, or obedience to his sovereign.  But he

was there in arms for the royal cause, and he could not swerve from his

duty.  If Pizarro would but rely on his faith and surrender himself up, he

pledged his knightly word to use all his interest with the government, to

secure as favorable terms for him and his followers as had been granted

to the rest of their countrymen.--Gonzalo listened to the smooth promises

of his ancient comrade with bitter scorn depicted in his countenance,

and, snatching the letter from his secretary, cast it away from him with

indignation.  There was nothing left but an appeal to arms.28



He at once broke up his encampment, and directed his march on the

borders of Lake Titicaca, near which lay his rival.  He resorted, however,

to stratagem, that he might still, if possible, avoid an encounter.  He sent

forward his scouts in a different direction from that which he intended to

take, and then quickened his march on Huarina.  This was a small town

situated on the southeastern extremity of Lake Titicaca, the shores of

which, the seat of the primitive civilization of the Incas, were soon to

resound with the murderous strife of their more civilized conquerors!



But Pizarro's movements had been secretly communicated to Centeno,

and that commander, accordingly, changing his ground, took up a

position not far from Huarina, on the same day on which Gonzalo

reached this place.  The videttes of the two camps came in sight of each

other that evening, and the rival forces, lying on their arms, prepared for

action on the following morning.



It was the twenty-sixth of October, 1547, when the two commanders,

having formed their troops in order of battle, advanced to the encounter

on the plains of Huarina.  The ground, defended on one side by a bold

spur of the Andes, and not far removed on the other from the waters of

Titicaca, was an open and level plain, well suited to military

manoeuvres.  It seemed as if prepared by Nature as the lists for an

encounter.



Centeno's army amounted to about a thousand men.  His cavalry

consisted of near two hundred and fifty, well equipped and mounted.

Among them were several gentlemen of family, some of whom had once

followed the banners of Pizarro; the whole forming an efficient corps, in

which rode some of the best lances of Peru.  His arquebusiers were less

numerous, not exceeding a hundred and fifty, indifferently provided with

ammunition.  The remainder, and much the larger part of Centeno's

army, consisted of spearmen, irregular levies hastily drawn together, and

possessed of little discipline.29



This corps of infantry formed the centre of his line, flanked by the

arquebusiers in two nearly equal divisions, while his cavalry were also

disposed in two bodies on the right and left wings.  Unfortunately,

Centeno had been for the past week ill of a pleurisy,--so ill, indeed, that

on the preceding day he had been bled several times.  He was now too

feeble to keep his saddle, but was carried in a litter, and when he had

seen his men formed in order, he withdrew to a distance from the field,

unable to take part in the action.  But Solano, the militant bishop of

Cuzco, who, with several of his followers, took part in the engagement,--

a circumstance, indeed, of no strange occurrence,--rode along the ranks

with the crucifix in his hand, bestowing his benediction on the soldiers,

and exhorting each man to do his duty.



Pizarro's forces were less than half of his rival's, not amounting to more

than four hundred and eighty men.  The horse did not muster above

eighty-five in all, and he posted them in a single body on the right of his

battalion.  The strength of his army lay in his arquebusiers, about three

hundred and fifty in number.  It was an admirable corps, commanded by

Carbajal, by whom it had been carefully drilled.  Considering the

excellence of its arms, and its thorough discipline, this little body of

infantry might be considered as the flower of the Peruvian soldiery, and

on it Pizarro mainly relied for the success of the day.30  The remainder

of his force, consisting of pikemen, not formidable for their numbers,

though, like the rest of the infantry, under excellent discipline, he

distributed on the left of his musketeers, so as to repel the enemy's horse.



Pizarro himself had charge of the cavalry, taking his place, as usual, in

the foremost rank.  He was superbly accoutred.  Over his shining mail he

wore a sobre-vest of slashed velvet of a rich crimson color; and he rode a

high-mettled charger, whose gaudy caparisons, with the showy livery of

his rider, made the fearless commander the most conspicuous object in

the field.



His lieutenant, Carbajal, was equipped in a very different style.  He wore

armor of proof of the most homely appearance, but strong and

serviceable; and his steel bonnet, with its closely barred visor of the

same material, protected his head from more than one desperate blow on

that day.  Over his arms he wore a surcoat of a greenish color, and he

rode an active, strong-boned jennet, which, though capable of enduring

fatigue, possessed neither grace nor beauty.  It would not have been easy

to distinguish the veteran from the most ordinary cavalier.



The two hosts arrived within six hundred paces of each other, when they

both halted.  Carbajal preferred to receive the attack of the enemy, rather

than advance further; for the ground he now occupied afforded a free

range for his musketry, unobstructed by the trees or bushes that were

sprinkled over some other parts of the field.  There was a singular

motive, in addition, for retaining his present position.  The soldiers were

encumbered, some with two, some with three, arquebuses each, being the

arms left by those who, from time to time, had deserted the camp.  This

uncommon supply of muskets, however serious an impediment on a

march, might afford great advantage to troops waiting an assault; since,

from the imperfect knowledge as well as construction of fire-arms at that

day, much time was wasted in loading them.31



Preferring, therefore, that the enemy should begin the attack, Carbajal

came to a halt, while the opposite squadron, after a short respite,

continued their advance a hundred paces farther.  Seeing that they then

remained immovable.  Carbajal detached a small party of skirmishers to

the front, in order to provoke them; but it was soon encountered by a

similar party of the enemy, and some shots were exchanged, though with

little damage to either side.  Finding this manoeuvre fail, the veteran

ordered his men to advance a few paces, still hoping to provoke his

antagonist to the charge.  This succeeded.  "We lose honor," exclaimed

Centeno's soldiers; who, with a bastard sort of chivalry, belonging to

undisciplined troops, felt it a disgrace to await an assault.  In vain their

officers called out to them to remain at their post.  Their commander was

absent, and they were urged on by the cries of a frantic friar, named

Damingo Ruiz, who, believing the Philistines were delivered into their

hands, called out,-- "Now is the time!  Onward, onward, fall on the

enemy!" 32  There needed nothing further, and the men rushed forward

in tumultuous haste, the pikemen carrying their levelled weapons so

heedlessly as to interfere with one another, and in some instances to

wound their comrades.  The musketeers, at the same time, kept up a

disorderly fire as they advanced, which, from their rapid motion and the

distance, did no execution.



Carbajal was well pleased to see his enemies thus wasting their

ammunition, Though he allowed a few muskets to be discharged, in

order to stimulate his opponents the more, he commanded the great body

of his infantry to reserve their fire till every shot could take effect.  As he

knew the tendency of marksmen to shoot above the mark, he directed his

men to aim at the girdle, or even a little below it; adding, that a shot that

fell short might still do damage, while one that passed a hair's breadth

above the head was wasted.33



The veteran's company stood calm and unmoved, as Centeno's rapidly

advanced; but when the latter had arrived within a hundred paces of their

antagonists, Carbajal gave the word to fire.  An instantaneous volley ran

along the line, and a tempest of balls was poured into the ranks of the

assailants, with such unerring aim, that more than a hundred fell, dead on

the field, while a still greater number were wounded.  Before they could

recover from their disorder, Carbajal's men, snatching up their remaining

pieces, discharged them with the like dreadful effect into the thick of the

enemy.  The confusion of the latter was now complete, Unable to sustain

the incessant shower of balls which fell on them from the scattering fire

kept up by the arquebusiers, they were seized with a panic, and fled,

scarcely making a show of further fight, from the field.



But very different was the fortune of the day in the cavalry combat.

Gonzalo Pizarro had drawn up his troop somewhat in the rear of

Carbajal's right, in order to give the latter a freer range for the play of his

musketry.  When the enemy's horse on the left galloped briskly against

him, Pizarro, still favoring Carbajal,--whose fire, moreover, inflicted

some loss on the assailants,--advanced but a few rods to receive the

charge.  Centeno's squadron, accordingly, came thundering on in full

career, and, notwithstanding the mischief sustained from their enemy's

musketry, fell with such fury on their adversaries as to overturn them,

man and horse, in the dust; "riding over their prostrate bodies," says the

historian, "as if they had been a flock of sheep!" 34  The latter, with

great difficulty recovering from the first shock, attempted to rally and

sustain the fight on more equal terms.



Yet the chief could not regain the ground he had lost.  His men were

driven back at all points.  Many were slain, many more wounded, on

both sides, and the ground was covered with the dead bodies of men and

horses.  But the loss fell much the most heavily on Pizarro's troop; and

the greater part of those who escaped with life were obliged to surrender

as prisoners.  Cepeda, who fought with the fury of despair, received a

severe cut from a sabre across the face, which disabled him and forced

him to yield.35  Pizarro, after seeing his best and bravest fall round him,

was set upon by three or four cavaliers at once.  Disentangling himself

from the melee, he put spurs to his horse, and the noble animal, bleeding

from a severe wound across the back, outstripped all his pursuers except

one, who stayed him by seizing the bridle.  It would have gone hard with

Gonzalo, but, grasping a light battle-axe, which hung by his side, he

dealt such a blow on the head of his enemy's horse that he plunged

violently, and compelled his rider to release his held.  A number of

arquebusiers, in the mean time, seeing Pizarro's distress, sprang forward

to his rescue, slew two of his assailants who had now come up with him,

and forced the others to fly in their turn.36



The rout of the cavalry was complete; and Pizarro considered the day as

lost, as he heard the enemy's trumpet sending forth the note of victory.

But the sounds had scarcely died away, when they were taken up by the

opposite side.  Centeno's infantry had been discomfited, as we have seen,

and driven off the ground.  But his cavalry on the right had charged

Carbajal's left, consisting of spearmen mingled with arquebusiers.  The

horse rode straight against this formidable phalanx.  But they were

unable to break through the dense array of pikes, held by the steady

hands of troops who stood firm and fearless on their post; while, at the

same time, the assailants were greatly annoyed by the galling fire of the

arquebusiers in the rear of the spearmen.  Finding it impracticable to

make a breach, the horsemen rode round the flanks in much disorder, and

finally joined themselves with the victorious squadron of Centeno's

cavalry in the rear.  Both parties now attempted another charge on

Carbajal's battalion.  But his men facing about with the promptness and

discipline of well-trained soldiers, the rear was converted into the front.

The same forest of spears was presented to the attack; while an incessant

discharge of balls punished the audacity of the cavaliers, who, broken

and completely dispirited by their ineffectual attempt, at length imitated

the example of the panic-struck foot, and abandoned the field.



Pizarro and a few of his comrades still fit for action followed up the

pursuit for a short distance only, as, indeed, they were in no condition

themselves, nor sufficiently strong in numbers, long to continue it.  The

victory was complete, and the insurgent chief took possession of the

deserted tents of the enemy, where an immense booty was obtained in

silver;37 and where he also found the tables spread for the refreshment

of Centeno's soldiers after their return from the field.  So confident were

they of success!  The repast now served the necessities of their

conquerors.  Such is the fortune of war!  It was, indeed, a most decisive

action; and Gonzalo Pizarro, as he rode over the field strewed with the

corpses of his enemies, was observed several times to cross himself and

exclaim,--"Jesu! What a victory!"



No less than three hundred and fifty of Centeno's followers were killed,

and the number of wounded was even greater.  More than a hundred of

these are computed to have perished from exposure during the following

night; for, although the climate in this elevated region is temperate, yet

the night winds blowing over the mountains are sharp and piercing, and

many a wounded wretch, who might have been restored by careful

treatment, was chilled by the damps, and found a stiffened corpse at

sunrise.  The victory was not purchased without a heavy loss on the part

of the conquerors, a hundred or more of whom were left on the field.

Their bodies lay thick on that part of the ground occupied by Pizarro's

cavalry, where the fight raged hottest.  In this narrow space were found,

also, the bodies of more than a hundred horses, the greater part of which,

as well as those of their riders, usually slain with them, belonged to the

victorious army.  It was the most fatal battle that had yet been fought on

the blood-stained soil of Peru.38



The glory of the day--the melancholy glory--must be referred almost

wholly to Carbajal and his valiant squadron.  The judicious arrangements

of the old warrior, with the thorough discipline and unflinching courage

of his followers, retrieved the fortunes of the fight, when it was nearly

lost by the cavalry, and secured the victory.



Carbajal, proof against all fatigue, followed up the pursuit with those of

his men that were in condition to join him.  Such of the unhappy

fugitives as fell into his hands--most of whom had been traitors to the

cause of Pizarro--were sent to instant execution.  The laurels he had won

in the field against brave men in arms, like himself, were tarnished by

cruelty towards his defenceless captives.  Their commander, Centeno,

more fortunate, made his escape.  Finding the battle lost, he quitted his

litter, threw himself upon his horse, and, notwithstanding his illness,

urged on by the dreadful doom that awaited him, if taken, he succeeded

in making his way into the neighboring sierra.  Here he vanished from

his pursuers, and, like a wounded stag, with the chase close upon his

track, he still contrived to elude it, by plunging into the depths of the

forests, till, by a circuitous route, he miraculously succeeded in effecting

his escape to Lima.  The bishop of Cuzco, who went off in a different

direction, was no less fortunate.  Happy for him that he did not fall into

the hands of the ruthless Carbajal, who, as the bishop had once been a

partisan of Pizarro, would, to judge from the little respect he usually

showed those of his cloth, have felt as little compunction in sentencing

him to the gibbet as if he had been the meanest of the common file.39



On the day following the action, Gonzalo Pizarro caused the bodies of

the soldiers, still lying side by side on the field where they had been so

lately engaged together in mortal strife, to be deposited in a common

sepulchre.  Those of higher rank--for distinctions of rank were not to be

forgotten in the grave--were removed to the church of the village of

Huarina, which gave its name to the battle.  There they were interred

with all fitting solemnity.  But in later times they were transported to the

cathedral church of La Paz, "The City of Peace," and laid under a

mausoleum erected by general subscription in that quarter.  For few there

were who had not to mourn the loss of some friend or relative on that

fatal day.



The victor now profited by his success to send detachments to Arequipa,

La Plata, and other cities in that part of the country, to raise funds and

reinforcements for the war.  His own losses were more than compensated

by the number of the vanquished party who were content to take service

under his banner.  Mustering his forces, he directed his march to Cuzco,

which capital, though occasionally seduced into a display of loyalty to

the Crown, had early manifested an attachment to his cause.



Here the inhabitants were prepared to receive him in triumph, under

arches thrown across the streets, with bands of music, and minstrelsy

commemorating his successes.  But Pizarro, with more discretion,

declined the honors of an ovation while the country remained in the

hands of his enemies.  Sending forward the main body of his troops, he

followed on foot, attended by a slender retinue of friends and citizens,

and proceeded at once to the cathedral, where thanksgivings were

offered up, and Te Deum was chanted in honor of his victory.  He then

withdrew to his residence, announcing his purpose to establish his

quarters, for the present, in the venerable capital of the Incas.40



All thoughts of a retreat into Chili were abandoned; for his recent

success had kindled new hopes in his bosom, and revived his ancient

confidence.  He trusted that it would have a similar effect on the

vacillating temper of those whose fidelity had been shaken by fears for

their own safety, and their distrust of his ability to cope with the

president.  They would now see that his star was still in the ascendant.

Without further apprehensions for the event, he resolved to remain in

Cuzco, and there quietly await the hour when a last appeal to arms

should decide which of the two was to remain master of Peru.







Book 5



Chapter 3



Dismay In Gasca's Camp--His Winter Quarters--Resumes His March--

Crosses The Apurimac--Pizarro's Conduct In Cuzco--

He Encamps Near The City--Rout Of Xaquixaguana



1547--1548



While the events recorded in the preceding chapter were passing,

President Gasca had remained at Xauxa, awaiting further tidings from

Centeno, little doubting that they would inform him of the total

discomfiture of the rebels.  Great was his dismay, therefore, on learning

the issue of the fatal conflict in Haurina,--that the royalists had been

scattered far and wide before the sword of Pizarro, while their

commander had vanished like an apparition,1 leaving the greatest

uncertainty as to his fate.



The intelligence spread general consternation among the soldiers,

proportioned to their former confidence; and they felt it was almost

hopeless to contend with a man who seemed protected by a charm that

made him invincible against the greatest odds.  The president, however

sore his disappointment, was careful to conceal it, while he endeavored

to restore the spirits of his followers.  "They had been too sanguine," he

said, "and it was in this way that Heaven rebuked their persumption.  Yet

it was but in the usual course of events that Providence, when it designed

to humble the guilty, should allow him to reach as high an elevation as

possible, that his fall might be the greater!"



But while Gasca thus strove to reassure the superstitious and the timid,

he bent his mind, with his usual energy, to repair the injury which the

cause had sustained by the defeat at Huarina.  He sent a detachment

under Alvarado to Lima, to collect such of the royalists as had fled

thither from the field of battle, and to dismantle the ships of their cannon,

and bring them to the camp.  Another body was sent to Guamanga, about

sixty leagues from Cuzco, for the similar purpose of protecting the

fugitives, and also of preventing the Indian caciques from forwarding

supplies to the insurgent army in Cuzco.  As his own forces now

amounted to considerably more than any his opponent could bring

against him, Gasca determined to break up his camp without further

delay, and march on the Inca capital.2



Quitting Xauxa, December 29, 1547, he passed through Guamanga, and

after a severe march, rendered particularly fatiguing by the inclement

state of the weather and the badness of the roads, he entered the province

of Andaguaylas.  It was a fair and fruitful country, and since the road

beyond would take him into the depths of a gloomy sierra, scarcely

passable in the winter snows, Gasca resolved to remain in his present

quarters until the severity of the season was mitigated.  As many of the

troops had already contracted diseases from exposure to the incessant

rains, he established a camp hospital; and the good president personally

visited the quarters of the sick, ministering to their wants, and winning

their hearts by his sympathy.3



Meanwhile, the royal camp was strengthened by the continual arrival of

reinforcements; for notwithstanding the shock that was caused

throughout the country by the first tidings of Pizarro's victory, a little

reflection convinced the people that the right was the strongest, and must

eventually prevail.  There came, also, with these levies, several of the

most distinguished captains in the country.  Centeno, burning to retrieve

his late disgrace, after recovering from his illness, joined the camp with

his followers from Lima.  Benalcazar, the conqueror of Quito, who, as

the reader will remember, had shared in the defeat of Blasco Nunez in

the north, came with another detachment; and was soon after followed by

Valdivia, the famous conqueror of Chili, who, having returned to Peru to

gather recruits for his expedition, had learned the state of the country,

and had thrown himself, without hesitation, into the same scale with the

president, though it brought him into collision with his old friend and

comrade, Gonzalo Pizarro.  The arrival of this last ally was greeted with

general rejoicing by the camp; for Valdivia, schooled in the Italian wars,

was esteemed the most accomplished soldier in Peru; and Gasca

complimented him by declaring "he would rather see him than a

reinforcement of eight hundred men!" 4



Besides these warlike auxiliaries, the president was attended by a train of

ecclesiastics and civilians, such as was rarely found in the martial fields

of Peru.  Among them were the bishops of Quito, Cuzco, and Lima, the

four judges of the new Audience, and a considerable number of

churchmen and monkish missionaries.5  However little they might serve

to strengthen his arm in battle, their presence gave authority and

something of a sacred character to the cause, which had their effect on

the minds of the soldiers.



The wintry season now began to give way before the mild influence of

spring, which makes itself early felt in these tropical, but from their

elevation temperate, regions; and Gasca, after nearly three months

detention in Andaguaylas, mustered his levies for the final march upon

Cuzco.6  Their whole number fell little short of two thousand,--the

largest European force yet assembled in Peru.  Nearly half were provided

with fire-arms; and infantry were more available than horse in the

mountain countries which they were to traverse.  But his cavalry was also

numerous, and he carried with him a train of eleven heavy guns.  The

equipment and discipline of the troops were good; they were well

provided with ammunition and military stores; and were led by officers

whose names were associated with the most memorable achievements in

the New World.  All who had any real interest in the weal of the country

were to be found, in short, under the president's banner, making a

striking contrast to the wild and reckless adventurers who now swelled

the ranks of Pizarro.



Gasca, who did not affect a greater knowledge of military affairs than he

really possessed, had given the charge of his forces to Hinojosa, naming

the Marshal Alvarado as second in command.  Valdivia, who came after

these dispositions had been made, accepted a colonel's commission, with

the understanding that he was to be consulted and employed in all

matters of moment.7--Having completed his arrangements, the president

broke up his camp in March, 1548, and moved upon Cuzco.



The first obstacle of his progress was the river Abancay, the bridge ever

which had been broken down by the enemy.  But as there was no force to

annoy them on the opposite bank, the army was not long in preparing a

new bridge, and throwing it across the stream, which in this place had

nothing formidable in its character.  The road now struck into the heart

of a mountain region, where woods, precipices, and ravines were

mingled together in a sort of chaotic confusion, with here and there a

green and sheltered valley, glittering like an island of verdure amidst the

wild breakers of a troubled ocean!  The bold peaks of the Andes, rising

far above the clouds, were enveloped in snow, which, descending far

down their sides, gave a piercing coldness to the winds that swept over

their surface, until men and horses were benumbed and stiffened under

their influence.  The roads, in these regions, were in some places so

narrow and broken, as to be nearly impracticable for cavalry.  The

cavaliers were compelled to dismount; and the president, with the rest,

performed the journey on foot, so hazardous, that, even in later times, it

has been no uncommon thing for the sure-footed mule to be precipitated,

with its cargo of silver, thousands of feet down the sheer sides of a

precipice.8



By these impediments of the ground, the march was so retarded, that the

troops seldom accomplished more than two leagues a day.9  Fortunately,

the distance was not great; and the president looked with more

apprehension to the passage of the Apurimac, which he was now

approaching.  This river, one of the most formidable tributaries of the

Amazon, rolls its broad waters through the gorges of the Cordilleras, that

rise up like an immense rampart of rock on either side, presenting a

natural barrier which it would be easy for an enemy to make good

against a force much superior to his own.  The bridges over this river, as

Gasca learned before his departure from Andaguaylas, had been all

destroyed by Pizarro.  The president, accordingly, had sent to explore the

banks of the stream, and determine the most eligible spot for

reestablishing communications with the opposite side.



The place selected was near the Indian village of Cotapampa, about nine

leagues from Cuzco; for the river, though rapid and turbulent from being

compressed within more narrow limits, was here less than two hundred

paces in width; a distance, however, not inconsiderable.  Directions had

been given to collect materials in large quantities in the neighborhood of

this spot as soon as possible; and at the same time, in order to perplex the

enemy and compel him to divide his forces, should he be disposed to

resist, materials in smaller quantities were assembled on three other

points of the river.  The officer stationed in the neighborhood of

Cotapampa was instructed not to begin to lay the bridge, till the arrival

of a sufficient force should accelerate the work, and insure its success.



The structure in question, it should be remembered, was one of those

suspension bridges formerly employed by the Incas, and still used in

crossing the deep and turbulent rivers of South America.  They are made

of osier withes, twisted into enormous cables, which, when stretched

across the water, are attached to heavy blocks of masonry, or, where it

will serve, to the natural rock.  Planks are laid transversely across these

cables, and a passage is thus secured, which, notwithstanding the light

and fragile appearance of the bridge, as it swings at an elevation

sometimes of several hundred feet above the abyss, affords a tolerably

safe means of conveyance for men, and even for such heavy burdens as

artillery.10



Notwithstanding the peremptory commands of Gasca, the officer

intrusted with collecting the materials for the bridge was so anxious to

have the honor of completing the work himself, that he commenced it at

once.  The president, greatly displeased at learning this, quickened his

march, in order to cover the work with his whole force.  But, while

toiling through the mountain labyrinth, tidings were brought him that a

party of the enemy had demolished the small portion of the bridge

already made, by cutting the cables on the opposite bank.  Valdivia,

accordingly, hastened forward at the head of two hundred arquebusiers,

while the main body of the army followed with as much speed as

practicable.



That officer, on reaching the spot, found that the interruption had been

caused by a small party of Pizarro's followers, not exceeding twenty in

number, assisted by a stronger body of Indians.  He at once caused

balsas, broad and clumsy barks, or rather rafts, of the country, to be

provided, and by this means passed his men over, without opposition, to

the other side of the river.  The enemy, disconcerted by the arrival of

such a force, retreated and made the best of their way to report the affair

to their commander at Cuzco.  Meanwhile, Valdivia, who saw the

Importance of every moment in the present crisis, pushed forward the

work with the greatest vigor.  Through all that night his weary troops

continued the labor, which was already well advanced, when the

president and his battalions, emerging from the passes of the Cordilleras,

presented themselves at sunrise on the opposite bank.



Little time was given for repose, as all felt assured that the success of

their enterprise hung on the short respite now given them by the

improvident enemy.  The president, with his principal officers, took part

in the labor with the common soldiers;11 and before ten o'clock in the

evening, Gasca had the satisfaction to see the bridge so well secured, that

the leading files of the army, unencumbered by their baggage, might

venture to cross it.  A short time sufficed to place several hundred men

on the other bank.  But here a new difficulty, not less formidable than

that of the river, presented itself to the troops.  The ground rose up with

an abrupt, almost precipitous, swell from the river-side, till, in the

highest peaks, it reached an elevation of several thousand feet.  This

steep ascent, though not to its full height, indeed, was now to be

surmounted.  The difficulties of the ground, broken up into fearful

chasms and water-courses, and tangled with thickets, were greatly

increased by the darkness of the night; and the soldiers, as they toiled

slowly upward, were filled with apprehension, akin to fear, from the

uncertainty whether each successive step might not bring them into an

ambuscade, for which the ground was so favorable.  More than once, the

Spaniards were thrown into a panic by false reports that the enemy were

upon them.  But Hinojosa and Valdivia were at hand to rally their men,

and cheer them on, until, at length, before dawn broke, the bold cavaliers

and their followers placed themselves on the highest point traversed by

the road, where they waited the arrival of the president.  This was not

long delayed; and in the course of the following morning, the royalists

were already in sufficient strength to bid defiance to their enemy.



The passage of the river had been effected with less loss than might have

been expected, considering the darkness of the night, and the numbers

that crowded over the aerial causeway.  Some few, indeed, fell into the

water, and were drowned; and more than sixty horses, in the attempt to

swim them across the river, were hurried down the current, and dashed

against the rocks below.12  It still required time to bring up the heavy

train of ordnance and the military wagons; and the president encamped

on the strong ground which he now occupied, to await their arrival, and

to breathe his troops after their extraordinary efforts.  In these quarters

we must leave him, to acquaint the reader with the state of things in the

insurgent army, and with the cause of its strange remissness in guarding

the passes of the Apurimac.13



From the time of Pizarro's occupation of Cuzco, he had lived in careless

luxury in the midst of his followers, like a soldier of fortune in the hour

of prosperity; enjoying the present, with as little concern for the future as

if the crown of Peru were already fixed irrevocably upon his head.  It

was otherwise with Carbajal.  He looked on the victory at Huarina as the

commencement, not the close, of the struggle for empire; and he was

indefatigable in placing his troops in the best condition for maintaining

their present advantage.  At the first streak of dawn, the veteran might be

seen mounted on his mule, with the garb and air of a common soldier,

riding about in the different quarters of the capital, sometimes

superintending the manufacture of arms, or providing military stores, and

sometimes drilling his men, for he was most careful always to maintain

the strictest discipline.14  His restless spirit seemed to find no pleasure

but in incessant action; living, as he had always done, in the turmoil of

military adventure, he had no relish for any thing unconnected with war,

and in the city saw only the materials for a well organized camp.



With these feelings, he was much dissatisfied at the course taken by his

younger leader, who now professed his intention to abide where he was,

and, when the enemy advanced, to give him battle.  Carbajal advised a

very different policy.  He had not that full confidence, it would seem, in

the loyalty of Pizarro's partisans, at least, not of those who had once

followed the banner of Centeno.  These men, some three hundred in

number, had been in a manner compelled to take service under Pizarro.

They showed no heartiness in the cause, and the veteran strongly urged

his commander to disband them at once; since it was far better to go to

battle with a few faithful followers than with a host of the false and faint-

hearted.



But Carbajal thought, also, that his leader was not sufficiently strong in

numbers to encounter his opponent, supported as he was by the best

captains of Peru.  He advised, accordingly, that he should abandon

Cuzco, carrying off all the treasure, provisions, and stores of every kind

from the city, which might, in any way, serve the necessities of the

royalists.  The latter, on their arrival, disappointed by the poverty of a

place where they had expected to find so much booty, would become

disgusted with the service.  Pizarro, meanwhile, might take refuge with

his men in the neighboring fastnesses, where, familiar with the ground, it

would be easy to elude the enemy; and if the latter persevered in the

pursuit, with numbers diminished by desertion, it would not be difficult

in the mountain passes to find an opportunity for assailing him at

advantage.--Such was the wary counsel of the old warrior.  But it was not

to the taste of his fiery commander, who preferred to risk the chances of

a battle, rather than turn his back on a foe.



Neither did Pizarro show more favor to a proposition, said to have been

made by the Licentiate Cepeda,--that he should avail himself of his late

success to enter into negotiations with Gasca.  Such advice, from the

man who had so recently resisted all overtures of the president, could

only have proceeded from a conviction, that the late victory placed

Pizarro on a vantage-ground for demanding terms far better than would

have been before conceded to him.  It may be that subsequent experience

had also led him to distrust the fidelity of Gonzalo's followers, or,

possibly, the capacity of their chief to conduct them through the present

crisis.  Whatever may have been the motives of the slippery counsellor,

Pizarro gave little heed to the suggestion, and even showed some

resentment, as the matter was pressed on him.  In every contest, with

Indian or European, whatever had been the odds, he had come off

victorious.  He was not now for the first time to despond; and he

resolved to remain in Cuzco, and hazard all on the chances of a battle.

There was something in the hazard itself captivating to his bold and

chivalrous temper.  In this, too, he was confirmed by some of the

cavaliers who had followed him through all his fortunes; reckless young

adventurers, who, like himself, would rather risk all on a single throw of

the dice, than adopt the cautious, and, as it seemed to them, timid, policy

of graver counsellors.  It was by such advisers, then, that Pizarro's future

course was to be shaped.15



Such was the state of affairs in Cuzco, when Pizarro's soldiers returned

with the tidings, that a detachment of the enemy had crossed the

Apurimac, and were busy in reestablishing the bridge.  Carbajal saw at

once the absolute necessity of maintaining this pass.  "It is my affair," he

said; "I claim to be employed on this service.  Give me but a hundred

picked men, and I will engage to defend the pass against an army, and

bring back the chaplain--the name by which the president was known in

the rebel camp---a prisoner to Cuzco." 16  "I cannot spare you, father,"

said Gonzalo, addressing him by this affectionate epithet, which he

usually applied to his aged follower,17 "I cannot spare you so far from

my own person"; and he gave the commission to Juan de Acosta, a

young cavalier warmly attached to his commander, and who had given

undoubted evidence of his valor on more than one occasion, but who, as

the event proved, was signally deficient in the qualities demanded for

so critical an undertaking as the present.  Acosta, accordingly, was

placed at the head of two hundred mounted musketeers, and, after much

wholesome counsel from Carbajal, set out on his expedition.



But he soon forgot the veteran's advice, and moved at so dull a pace over

the difficult roads, that, although the distance was not more than nine

leagues, he found, on his arrival, the bridge completed, and so large a

body of the enemy already crossed, that he was in no strength to attack

them.  Acosta did, indeed, meditate an ambuscade by night; but the

design was betrayed by a deserter, and he contented himself with

retreating to a safe distance, and sending for a further reinforcement from

Cuzco.  Three hundred men were promptly detached to his support; but

when they arrived, the enemy was already planted in full force on the

crest of the eminence.  The golden opportunity was irrecoverably lost;

and the disconsolate cavalier rode back in all haste to report the failure

of his enterprise to his commander in Cuzco.18



The only question now to be decided was as to the spot where Gonzalo

'Pizarro should give battle to his enemies.  He determined at once to

abandon the capital, and wait for his opponents in the neighboring valley

of Xaquixaguana.  It was about five leagues distant, and the reader may

remember it as the place where Francis Pizarro burned the Peruvian

general Challcuchima, on his first occupation of Cuzco.  The valley,

fenced round by the lofty rampart of the Andes, was, for the most part,

green and luxuriant, affording many picturesque points of view; and,

from the genial temperature of the climate, had been a favorite summer

residence of the Indian nobles, many of whose pleasure-houses still

dotted the sides of the mountains.  A river, or rather stream, of no great

volume, flowed through one end of this inclosure, and the neighboring

soil was so wet and miry as to have the character of a morass.



Here the rebel commander arrived, after a tedious march over roads not

easily traversed by his train of heavy wagons and artillery.  His forces

amounted in all to about nine hundred men, with some half-dozen pieces

of ordnance.  It was a well-appointed body, and under excellent

discipline, for it had been schooled by the strictest martinet in the

Peruvian service.  But it was the misfortune of Pizarro that his army was

composed, in part, at least, of men on whose attachment to his cause he

could not confidently rely.  This was a deficiency which no courage nor

skill in the leader could supply.



On entering the valley, Pizarro selected the eastern quarter of it, towards

Cuzco, as the most favorable spot for his encampment.  It was crossed by

the stream above mentioned, and he stationed his army in such a manner,

that, while one extremity of the camp rested on a natural barrier formed

by the mountain cliffs that here rose up almost perpendicularly, the other

was protected by the river.  While it was scarcely possible, therefore, to

assail his flanks, the approaches in front were so extremely narrowed by

these obstacles, that it would not be easy to overpower him by numbers

in that direction.  In the rear, his communications remained open with

Cuzco, furnishing a ready means for obtaining supplies.  Having secured

this strong position, he resolved patiently to wait the assault of the

enemy.19



Meanwhile, the royal army had been toiling up the steep sides of the

Cordilleras, until, at the close of the third day, the president had the

satisfaction to find himself surrounded by his whole force, with their

guns and military stores.  Having now sufficiently refreshed his men, he

resumed his march, and all went forward with the buoyant confidence of

bringing their quarrel with the tyrant, as Pizarro was called, to a speedy

issue.



Their advance was slow, as in the previous part of the march, for the

ground was equally embarrassing.  It was not long, however, before the

president learned that his antagonist had pitched his camp in the

neighboring valley of Xaquixaguana.  Soon afterward, two friars, sent by

Gonzalo himself, appeared in the army, for the ostensible purpose of

demanding a sight of the powers with which Gasca was intrusted.  But as

their conduct gave reason to suspect they were spies, the president

caused the holy men to be seized, and refused to allowed them to return

to Pizarro.  By an emissary of his own, whom he despatched to the rebel

chief, he renewed the assurance of pardon already given him, in case he

would lay down his arms and submit.  Such an act of generosity, at this

late hour, must be allowed to be highly creditable to Gasca, believing, as

he probably did, that the game was in his own hands.--It is a pity that the

anecdote does not rest on the best authority.20



After a march of a couple of days, the advanced guard of the royalists

came suddenly on the outposts of the insurgents, from whom they had

been concealed by a thick mist, and a slight skirmish took place between

them.  At length, on the morning of the eighth of April, the royal army,

turning the crest of the lofty range that belts round the lovely valley of

Xaquixaguana, beheld far below on the opposite side the glittering lines

of the enemy, with their white pavilions, looking like clusters of wild

fowl nestling among the cliffs of the mountains.  And still further off

might be descried a host of Indian warriors, showing gaudily in their

variegated costumes; for the natives, in this part of the country, with little

perception of their true interests, manifested great zeal in the cause of

Pizarro.



Quickening their step, the royal army now hastily descended the steep

sides of the sierra; and notwithstanding every effort of their officers, they

moved in so little order, each man picking his way as he could, that the

straggling column presented many a vulnerable point to the enemy; and

the descent would not have been accomplished without considerable

loss, had Pizarro's cannon been planted on any of the favorable positions

which the ground afforded.  But that commander, far from attempting to

check the president's approach, remained doggedly in the strong position

he had occupied, with the full confidence that his adversaries would not

hesitate to assail it, strong as it was, in the same manner as they had done

at Huarina.21



Yet he did not omit to detach a corps of arquebusiers to secure a

neighboring eminence or spur of the Cordilleras, which in the hands of

the enemy might cause some annoyance to his own camp, while it

commanded still more effectually the ground soon to be occupied by the

assailants.  But his manoeuvre was noticed by Hinojosa; and he defeated

it by sending a stronger detachment of the royal musketeers, who

repulsed the rebels, and, after a short skirmish, got possession of the

heights.  Gasca's general profited by this success to plant a small battery

of cannon on the eminence, from which, although the distance was too

great for him to do much execution, he threw some shot into the hostile

camp.  One ball, indeed, struck down two men, one of them Pizarro's

page, killing a horse, at the same time, which he held by the bridle; and

the chief instantly ordered the tents to be struck, considering that they

afforded too obvious a mark for the artillery.22



Meanwhile, the president's forces had descended into the valley, and as

they came on the plain were formed into line by their officers.  The

ground occupied by the army was somewhat lower than that of their

enemy, whose shot, as discharged, from time to time, from his batteries,

passed over their heads.  Information was now brought by a deserter, one

of Centeno's old followers, that Pizarro was getting ready for a night

attack.  The president, in consequence, commanded his whole force to be

drawn up in battle array, prepared, at any instant, to repulse the assault.

But if such were meditated by the insurgent chief, he abandoned it,--and,

as it is said, from a distrust of the fidelity of some of the troops, who,

under cover of the darkness, he feared, would go over to the opposite

side.  If this be true, he must have felt the full force of Carbajal's

admonition, when too late to profit by it.  The unfortunate commander

was in the situation of some bold, high-mettled cavalier, rushing to battle

on a war-horse whose tottering joints threaten to give way under him at

every step, and leave his rider to the mercy of his enemies!



The president's troops stood to their arms the greater part of the night,

although the air from the mountains was so keen, that it was with

difficulty they could hold their lances in their hands.23  But before the

rising sun had kindled into a glow the highest peaks of the sierra, both

camps were in motion, and busily engaged in preparations for the

combat.  The royal army was formed into two battalions of infantry, one

to attack the enemy in front, and the other, if possible, to operate on his

flank.  These battalions were protected by squadrons of horse on the

wings and in the rear, while reserves both of horse and arquebusiers were

stationed to act as occasion might require.  The dispositions were made

in so masterly a manner, as to draw forth a hearty eulogium from old

Carbajal, who exclaimed, "Surely the Devil or Valdivia must be among

them!" an undeniable compliment to the latter, since the speaker was

ignorant of that commander's presence in the camp.24



Gasca, leaving the conduct of the battle to his officers, withdrew to the

rear with his train of clergy and licentiates, the last of whom did not

share in the ambition of their rebel brother, Cepeda, to break a lance in

the field.



Gonzalo Pizarro formed his squadron in the same manner as he had done

on the plains of Huarina; except that the increased number of his horse

now enabled him to cover both flanks of his infantry.  It was still on his

fire-arms, however, that he chiefly relied.  As the ranks were formed, he

rode among them, encouraging his men to do their duty like brave

cavaliers, and true soldiers of the Conquest.  Pizarro was superbly

armed, as usual, and wore a complete suit of mail, of the finest

manufacture, which, as well as his helmet, was richly inlaid with gold.25

He rode a chestnut horse of great strength and spirit, and as he galloped

along the line, brandishing his lance, and displaying his easy

horsemanship.  he might be thought to form no bad personification of the

Genius of Chivalry.  To complete his dispositions he ordered Cepeda to

lead up the infantry for the licentiate seems to have had a larger share in

the conduct of his affairs of late, or at least in the present military

arrangements, than Carbajal.  The latter, indeed, whether from disgust at

the course taken by his leader, or from a distrust, which, it is said, he did

not affect to conceal, of the success of the present operations, disclaimed

all responsibility for them, and chose to serve rather as a private cavalier

than as a commander.26  Yet Cepeda, as the event showed, was no less

shrewd in detecting the coming ruin.



When he had received his orders from Pizarro he rode forward as if to

select the ground for his troops to occupy; and in doing so disappeared

for a few moments behind a projecting cliff.  He soon reappeared,

however, and was seen galloping at full speed across the plain.  His men

looked with astonishment, yet not distrusting his motives, till, as he

continued his course direct towards the enemy's lines, his treachery

became apparent.  Several pushed forward to overtake him, and among

them a cavalier, better mounted than Cepeda.  The latter rode a horse of

no great strength or speed, quite unfit for this critical manoeuvre of his

master.  The animal, was, moreover, encumbered by the weight of the

caparisons with which his ambitious rider had loaded him, so that, on

reaching a piece of miry ground that lay between the armies, his pace

was greatly retarded.27  Cepeda's pursuers rapidly gained on him, and

the cavalier above noticed came, at length, so near as to throw a lance at

the fugitive, which, wounding him in the thigh, pierced his horse's flank,

and they both came headlong to the ground.  It would have fared ill with

the licentiate, in this emergency, but fortunately a small party of troopers

on the other side, who had watched the chase, now galloped briskly

forward to the rescue, and, beating off his pursuers, they recovered

Cepeda from the mire, and bore him to the president's quarters.



He was received by Gasca with the greatest satisfaction,--so great, that,

according to one chronicler, he did not disdain to show it by saluting the

licentiate on the cheek.28  The anecdote is scarcely reconcilable with the

characters and relations of the parties, or with the president's subsequent

conduct.  Gasca, however, recognized the full value of his prize, and the

effect which his desertion at such a time must have on the spirits of the

rebels.  Cepeda's movement, so unexpected by his own party, was the

result of previous deliberation, as he had secretly given assurance, it is

said, to the prior of Arequipa, then in the royal camp, that, if Gonzalo

Pizarro could not be induced to accept the pardon offered him, he would

renounce his cause.29  The time selected by the crafty counsellor for

doing so was that most fatal to the interests of his commander.



The example of Cepeda was contagious.  Garcilasso de la Vega, father of

the historian, a cavalier of old family, and probably of higher

consideration than any other in Pizarro's party, put spurs to his horse, at

the same time with the licentiate, and rode over to the enemy.  Ten or a

dozen of the arquebusiers followed in the same direction, and succeeded

in placing themselves under the protection of the advanced guard of the

royalists.



Pizarro stood aghast at this desertion, in so critical a juncture, of those in

whom he had most trusted.  He was, for a moment, bewildered.  The very

ground on which he stood seemed to be crumbling beneath him.  With

this state of feeling among his soldiers, he saw that every minute of delay

was fatal.  He dared not wait for the assault, as he had intended, in his

strong position, but instantly gave the word to advance.  Gasca's general,

Hinojosa, seeing the enemy in motion, gave similar orders to his own

troops.  Instantly the skirmishers and arquebusiers on the flanks moved

rapidly forward, the artillery prepared to open their fire, and "the whole

army," says the president in his own account of the affair, "advanced

with steady step and perfect determination." 30



But before a shot was fired, a column of arquebusiers, composed chiefly

of Centeno's followers, abandoned their post, and marched directly over

to the enemy.  A squadron of horse, sent in pursuit of them, followed

their example.  The president instantly commanded his men to halt,

unwilling to spill blood unnecessarily, as the rebel host was like to fall to

pieces of itself.



Pizarro's faithful adherents were seized with a panic, as they saw

themselves and their leader thus betrayed into the enemy's hands.

Further resistance was useless.  Some threw down their arms and fled in

the direction of Cuzco.  Others sought to escape to the mountains; and

some crossed to the opposite side, and surrendered themselves prisoners,

hoping it was not too late to profit by the promises of grace.  The Indian

allies, on seeing the Spaniards falter, had been the first to go off the

ground.31



Pizarro, amidst the general wreck, found himself left with only a few

cavaliers who disdained to fly.  Stunned by the unexpected reverse of

fortune, the unhappy chief could hardly comprehend his situation.

"What remains for us?" said he to Acosta, one of those who still adhered

to him.  "Fall on the enemy, since nothing else is left," answered the non-

hearted soldier, "and die like Romans!" "Better to die like Christians,"

replied his commander; and, slowly turning his horse, he rode off in the

direction of the royal army.32



He had not proceeded far, when he was met by an officer, to whom, after

ascertaining his name and rank, Pizarro delivered up his sword, and

yielded himself prisoner.  The officer, overjoyed at his prize, conducted

him, at once, to the president's quarters.  Gasca was on horseback,

surrounded by his captains, some of whom, when they recognized the

person of the captive, had the grace to withdraw, that they might not

witness his humiliation.33  Even the best of them, with a sense of right

on their side, may have felt some touch of compunction at the thought

that their desertion had brought their benefactor to this condition.



Pizarro kept his seat in his saddle, but, as he approached, made a

respectful obeisance to the president, which the latter acknowledged by a

cold salute.  Then, addressing his prisoner in a tone of severity, Gasca

abruptly inquired,--"Why he had thrown the country into such confusion;

--raising the banner of revolt; killing the viceroy; usurping the

government; and obstinately refusing the offers of grace that had been

repeatedly made him?"



Gonzalo attempted to justify himself by referring the fate of the viceroy

to his misconduct, and his own usurpation, as it was styled, to the free

election of the people, as well as that of the Royal Audience.  "It was my

family," he said, "who conquered the country; and, as their

representative here, I felt I had a right to the government."  To this Gasca

replied, in a still severer tone, "Your brother did, indeed, conquer the

land; and for this the emperor was pleased to raise both him and you

from the dust.  He lived and died a true and loyal subject; and it only

makes your ingratitude to your sovereign the more heinous."  Then,

seeing his prisoner about to reply, the president cut short the conference,

ordering him into close confinement.  He was committed to the charge of

Centeno, who had sought the office, not from any unworthy desire to

gratify his revenge,--for he seems to have had a generous nature,--but for

the honorable purpose of ministering to the comfort of the captive.

Though held in strict custody by this officer, therefore, Pizarro was

treated with the deference due to his rank, and allowed every indulgence

by his keeper, except his freedom.34



In this general wreck of their fortunes, Francisco de Carbajal fared no

better than his chief.  As he saw the soldiers deserting their posts and

going over to the enemy, one after another, he coolly hummed the words

of his favorite old ballad,--



"The wind blows the hairs off my head, mother!"



But when he found the field nearly empty, and his stout-hearted

followers vanished like a wreath of smoke, he felt it was time to provide

for his own safety.  He knew there could be no favor for him; and,

putting spurs to his horse, he betook himself to flight with all the speed

he could make.  He crossed the stream that flowed, as already

mentioned, by the camp, but, in scaling the opposite bank, which was

steep and stony, his horse, somewhat old, and oppressed by the weight of

his rider, who was large and corpulent, lost his footing and fell with him

into the water.  Before he could extricate himself, Carbajal was seized by

some of his own followers, who hoped, by such a prize, to make their

peace with the victor, and hurried off towards the president's quarters.



The convoy was soon swelled by a number of the common file from the

royal army, some of whom had long arrears to settle with the prisoner;

and, not content with heaping reproaches and imprecations on his head,

they now threatened to proceed to acts of personal violence, which

Carbajal, far from deprecating, seemed rather to court, as the speediest

way of ridding himself of life.35  When he approached the president's

quarters, Centeno, who was near, rebuked the disorderly rabble, and

compelled them to give way.  Carbajal, on seeing this, with a respectful

air demanded to whom he was indebted for this courteous protection.  To

which his ancient comrade replied, "Do you not know me?  Diego

Centeno!" "I crave your pardon," said the veteran, sarcastically alluding

to his long flight in the Charcas, and his recent defeat at Huarina; "it is so

long since I have seen any thing but your back, that I had forgotten your

face!" 36



Among the president's suite was the martial bishop of Cuzco, who, it will

be remembered, had shared with Centeno in the disgrace of his defeat.

His brother had been taken by Carbajal, in his flight from the field, and

instantly hung up by that fierce chief, who, as we have had more than

one occasion to see, was no respecter of persons.  The bishop now

reproached him with his brother's murder, and, incensed by his cool

replies, was ungenerous enough to strike the prisoner on the face.

Carbajal made no attempt at resistance.  Nor would he return a word to

the queries put to him by Gasca; but, looking haughtily round on the

circle, maintained a contemptuous silence.  The president, seeing that

nothing further was to be gained from his captive, ordered him, together

with Acosta, and the other cavaliers who had surrendered, into strict

custody, until their fate should be decided.37



Gasca's next concern was to send an officer to Cuzco, to restrain his

partisans from committing excesses in consequence of the late victory, if

victory that could be called, where not a blow had been struck.  Every

thing belonging to the vanquished, their tents, arms, ammunition, and

military stores, became the property of the victors.  Their camp was well

victualled, furnishing a seasonable supply to the royalists, who had

nearly expended their own stock of provisions.  There was, moreover,

considerable booty in the way of plate and money; for Pizarro's men, as

was not uncommon in those turbulent times, went, many of them, to the

war with the whole of their worldly wealth, not knowing of any safe

place in which to bestow it.  An anecdote is told of one of Gasca's

soldiers, who, seeing a mule running over the field, with a large pack on

his back, seized the animal, and mounted him, having first thrown away

the burden, supposing it to contain armour, or something of little worth.

Another soldier, more shrewd, picked up the parcel, as his share of the

spoil, and found it contained several thousand gold ducats!   It was the

fortune of war.38



Thus terminated the battle, or rather rout, of Xaquixaguana.  The number

of killed and wounded--for some few perished in the pursuit-was not

great; according to most accounts, not exceeding fifteen killed on the

rebel side, and one only on that of the royalists!  and that one by the

carelessness of a comrade.39  Never was there a cheaper victory; so

bloodless a termination of a fierce and bloody rebellion!  It was gained

not so much by the strength of the victors as by the weakness of the

vanquished.  They fell to pieces of their own accord, because they had no

sure ground to stand on.  The arm, not nerved by the sense of right,

became powerless in the hour of battle.  It was better that they should

thus be overcome by moral force than by a brutal appeal to arms.  Such a

victory was more in harmony with the beneficent character of the

conqueror and of his cause.  It was the triumph of order; the best homage

to law and justice.





Book 5



Chapter 4



Execution Of Carbajal--Gonzalo Pizarro Beheaded--Spoils Of Victory-

Wise Reforms By Gasca--He Returns To Spain-

His Death And Character



1548--1550



It was now necessary to decide on the fate of the prisoners; and Alonso

de Alvarado, with the Licentiate Cianca, one of the new Royal Audience,

was instructed to prepare the process.  It did not require a long time.  The

guilt of the prisoners was too manifest, taken, as they had been, with

arms in their hands.  They were all sentenced to be executed, and their

estates were confiscated to the use of the Crown.  Gonzalo Pizarro was

to be beheaded, and Carbajal to be drawn and quartered.  No mercy was

shown to him who had shown none to others.  There was some talk of

deferring the execution till the arrival of the troops in Cuzco; but the fear

of disturbances from those friendly to Pizarro determined the president

to carry the sentence into effect the following day, on the field of battle.1



When his doom was communicated to Carbajal, he heard it with his

casual indifference.  "They can but kill me," he said, as if he had already

settled the matter in his own mind.2  During the day, many came to see

him in his confinement; some to upbraid him with his cruelties; but most,

from curiosity to see the fierce warrior who had made his name so

terrible through the land.  He showed no unwillingness to talk with them,

though it was in those sallies of caustic humor in which he usually

indulged at the expense of his hearer.  Among these visitors was a

cavalier of no note, whose life, it appears, Carbajal had formerly spared,

when in his power.  This person expressed to the prisoner his strong

desire to serve him; and as he reiterated his professions, Carbajal cut

them short by exclaiming,--"And what service can you do me?  Can you

set me free?  If you cannot do that, you can do nothing.  If I spared your

life, as you say, it was probably because I did not think it worth while to

take it."



Some piously disposed persons urged him to see a priest, if it were only

to unburden his conscience before leaving the world.  "But of what use

would that be?" asked Carbajal.  "I have nothing that lies heavy on my

conscience, unless it be, indeed, the debt of half a real to a shopkeeper in

Seville, which I forgot to pay before leaving the country!" 3



He was carried to execution on a hurdle, or rather in a basket, drawn by

two mules.  His arms were pinioned, and, as they forced his bulky body

into this miserable conveyance, he exclaimed,---"Cradles for infants, and

a cradle for the old man too, it seems!" 4  Notwithstanding the

disinclination he had manifested to a confessor, he was attended by

several ecclesiastics on his way to the gallows; and one of them

repeatedly urged him to give some token of penitence at this solemn

hour, if it were only by repeating the Pater Noster and Ave Maria.

Carbajal, to rid himself of the ghostly father's importunity, replied by

coolly repeating the words, "Pater Noster," "Ave Maria"!  He then

remained obstinately silent.  He died, as he had lived, with a jest, or

rather a scoff, upon his lips.5



Francisco de Carbajal was one of the most extraordinary characters of

these dark and turbulent times; the more extraordinary from his great

age; for, at the period of his death, he was in his eighty-fourth year;--an

age when the bodily powers, and, fortunately, the passions, are usually

blunted; when, in the witty words of the French moralist, "We flatter

ourselves we are leaving our vices, whereas it is our vices that are

leaving us." 6  But the fires of youth glowed fierce and unquenchable in

the bosom of Carbajal.



The date of his birth carries us back towards the middle of the fifteenth

century, before the times of Ferdinand and Isabella.  He was of obscure

parentage, and born, as it is said, at Arevalo.  For forty years he served in

the Italian wars, under the most illustrious captains of the day, Gonsalvo

de Cordova, Navarro, and the Colonnas.  He was an ensign at the battle

of Ravenna; witnessed the capture of Francis the First at Pavia; and

followed the banner of the ill-starred Bourbon at the sack of Rome.  He

got no gold for his share of the booty, on this occasion, but simply the

papers of a notary's office, which, Carbajal shrewdly thought, would be

worth gold to him.  And so it proved; for the notary was fain to redeem

them at a price which enabled the adventurer to cross the seas to Mexico,

and seek his fortune in the New World.  On the insurrection of the

Peruvians, he was sent to the support of Francis Pizarro, and was

rewarded by that chief with a grant of land in Cuzco.  Here he remained

for several years, busily employed in increasing his substance; for the

love of lucre was a ruling passion in his bosom.  On the arrival of Vaca

de Castro, we find him doing good service under the royal banner; and at

the breaking out of the great rebellion under Gonzalo Pizarro, he

converted his property into gold, and prepared to return to Castile.  He

seemed to have a presentiment that to remain where he was would be

fatal.  But, although he made every effort to leave Peru, he was

unsuccessful, for the viceroy had laid an embargo on the shipping.7  He

remained in the country, therefore, and took service, as we have seen,

though reluctantly, under Pizarro.  It was his destiny.



The tumultuous life on which he now entered roused all the slumbering

passions of his soul, which lay there, perhaps unconsciously to himself;

cruelty, avarice, revenge.  He found ample exercise for them in the war

with his countrymen; for civil war is proverbially the most sanguinary

and ferocious of all.  The atrocities recorded of Carbajal, in his new

career, and the number of his victims, are scarcely credible.  For the

honor of humanity, we may trust the accounts are greatly exaggerated;

but that he should have given rise to them at all is sufficient to consign

his name to infamy.8



He even took a diabolical pleasure, it is said, in amusing himself with the

sufferings of his victims, and in the hour of execution would give

utterance to frightful jests, that made them taste more keenly the

bitterness of death!  He had a sportive vein, if such it could be called,

which he freely indulged on every occasion.  Many of his sallies were

preserved by the soldiery; but they are, for the most part, of a coarse,

repulsive character, flowing from a mind familiar with the weak and

wicked side of humanity, and distrusting every other.  He had his jest for

every thing,--for the misfortunes of others, and for his own.  He looked

on life as a farce,--though he too often made it a tragedy.



Carbajal must be allowed one virtue; that of fidelity to his party.  This

made him less tolerant to perfidy in others.  He was never known to

show mercy to a renegade.  This undeviating fidelity, though to a bad

cause, may challenge something like a feeling of respect, where fidelity

was so rare.9



As a military man, Carbajal takes a high rank among the soldiers of the

New World.  He was strict, even severe, in enforcing discipline, so that

he was little loved by his followers.  Whether he had the genius for

military combinations requisite for conducting war on an extended scale

may be doubted; but in the shifts and turns of guerilla warfare he was

unrivalled.  Prompt, active, and persevering, he was insensible to danger

or fatigue, and, after days spent in the saddle, seemed to attach little

value to the luxury of a bed.10



He knew familiarly every mountain pass, and, such were the sagacity and

the resources displayed in his roving expeditions, that he was vulgarly

believed to be attended by a familiar.11  With a character so

extraordinary, with powers prolonged so far beyond the usual term of

humanity, and passions so fierce in one tottering on the verge of the

grave, it was not surprising that many fabulous stories should be eagerly

circulated respecting him, and that Carbajal should be clothed with

mysterious terrors as a sort of supernatural being,--the demon of the

Andes!



Very different were the circumstances attending the closing scene of

Gonzalo Pizarro.  At his request, no one had been allowed to visit him in

his confinement.  He was heard pacing his tent during the greater part of

the day, and when night came, having ascertained from Centeno that his

execution was to take place on the following noon, he laid himself down

to rest.  He did not sleep long, however, but soon rose, and continued to

traverse his apartment, as if buried in meditation, till dawn.  He then sent

for a confessor, and remained with him till after the hour of noon, taking

little or no refreshment.  The officers of justice became impatient; but

their eagerness was sternly rebuked by the soldiery, many of whom,

having served under Gonzalo's banner, were touched with pity for his

misfortunes.



When the chieftain came forth to execution, he showed in his dress the

same love of magnificence and display as in happier days.  Over his

doublet he wore a superb cloak of yellow velvet, stiff with gold

embroidery, while his head was protected by a cap of the same materials,

richly decorated, in like manner, with ornaments of gold.12  In this

gaudy attire he mounted his mule, and the sentence was so far relaxed

that his arms were suffered to remain unshackled.  He was escorted by a

goodly number of priests and friars, who held up the crucifix before his

eyes, while he carried in his own hand an image of the Virgin.  She had

ever been the peculiar object of Pizarro's devotion; so much so, that

those who knew him best in the hour of his prosperity were careful, when

they had a petition, to prefer it in the name of the blessed Mary.



Pizarro's lips were frequently pressed to the emblem of his divinity,

while his eyes were bent on the crucifix in apparent devotion, heedless of

the objects around him.  On reaching the scaffold, he ascended it with a

firm step, and asked leave to address a few words to the soldiery

gathered round it.  "There are many among you," said he, "who have

grown rich on my brother's bounty, and my own.  Yet, of all my riches,

nothing remains to me but the garments I have on; and even these are not

mine, but the property of the executioner.  I am without means, therefore,

to purchase a mass for the welfare of my soul; and I implore you, by the

remembrance of past benefits, to extend this charity to me when I am

gone, that it may be well with you in the hour of death."  A profound

silence reigned throughout the martial multitude, broken only by sighs

and groans, as they listened to Pizarro's request; and it was faithfully

responded to, since, after his death, masses were said in many of the

towns for the welfare of the departed chieftain.



Then, kneeling down before a crucifix placed on a table, Pizarro

remained for some minutes absorbed in prayer; after which, addressing

the soldier who was to act as the minister of justice, he calmly bade him

"do his duty with a steady hand"  He refused to have his eyes bandaged,

and, bending forward his neck, submitted it to the sword of the

executioner, who struck off the head with a single blow, so true that the

body remained for some moments in the same erect posture as in life.13

The head was taken to Lima, where it was set in a cage or frame, and

then fixed on a gibbet by the side of Carbajal's.  On it was placed a label,

bearing,-"This is the head of the traitor Gonzalo Pizarro, who rebelled

in Peru against his sovereign, and battled in the cause of tyranny and

treason against the royal standard in the valley of Xaquixaguana." 14

His large estates, including the rich mines in Potosi, were confiscated;

his mansion in Lima was razed to the ground, the place strewed with salt,

and a stone pillar set up, with an inscription interdicting any one from

building on a spot which had been profaned by the residence of a traitor.



Gonzalo's remains were not exposed to the indignities inflicted on

Carbajal's, whose quarters were hung in chains on the four great roads

leading to Cuzco.  Centeno saved Pizarro's body from being stripped, by

redeeming his costly raiment from the executioner, and in this sumptuous

shroud it was laid in the chapel of the convent of Our Lady of Mercy in

Cuzco.  It was the same spot where, side by side, lay the bloody remains

of the Almagros, father and son, who in like manner had perished by the

hand of justice, and were indebted to private charity for their burial.  All

these were now consigned "to the same grave," says the historian, with

some bitterness, "as if Peru could not afford land enough for a burial-

place to its conquerors." 15



Gonzalo Pizarro had reached only his forty-second year at the time of his

death,--being just half the space allotted to his follower Carbajal.  He

was the youngest of the remarkable family to whom Spain was indebted

for the acquisition of Peru.  He came over to the country with his brother

Francisco, on the return of the latter from his visit to Castile.  Gonzalo

was present in all the remarkable passages of the Conquest.  He

witnessed the seizure of Atahuallpa, took an active part in suppressing

the insurrection of the Incas, and especially in the reduction of Charcas.

He afterwards led the disastrous expedition to the Amazon; and, finally,

headed the memorable rebellion which ended so fatally to himself.

There are but few men whose lives abound in such wild and romantic

adventure, and, for the most part, crowned with success.  The space

which he occupies in the page of history is altogether disproportioned to

his talents.  It may be in some measure ascribed to fortune, but still more

to those showy qualities which form a sort of substitute for mental talent,

and which secured his popularity with the vulgar.



He had a brilliant exterior; excelled in all martial exercises; rode well,

fenced well, managed his lance to perfection, was a first-rate marksman

with the arquebuse, and added the accomplishment of being an excellent

draughtsman.  He was bold and chivalrous, even to temerity; courted

adventure, and was always in the front of danger.  He was a knight-

errant, in short, in the most extravagant sense of the term, and, "mounted

on his favorite charger," says one who had often seen him, "made no

more account of a squadron of Indians than of a swarm of flies."16



While thus, by his brilliant exploits and showy manners, he captivated

the imaginations of his countrymen, he won their hearts no less by his

soldier-like frankness, his trust in their fidelity,--too often abused,-and

his liberal largesses; for Pizarro, though avaricious of the property of

others, was, like the Roman conspirator, prodigal of his own.  This was

his portrait in happier days, when his heart had not been corrupted by

success; for that some change was wrought on him by his prosperity is

well attested.  His head was made giddy by his elevation; and it is proof

of a want of talent equal to his success, that he knew not how to profit by

it.  Obeying the dictates of his own rash judgment, he rejected the

warnings of his wisest counsellors, and relied with blind confidence on

his destiny.  Garcilasso imputes this to the malignant influence of the

stars.17  But the superstitious chronicler might have better explained it

by a common principle of human nature; by the presumption nourished

by success; the insanity, as the Roman, or rather Grecian, proverb calls

it, with which the gods afflict men when they design to ruin them.18



Gonzalo was without education, except such as he had picked up in the

rough school of war.  He had little even of that wisdom which springs

from natural shrewdness and insight into character.  In all this he was

inferior to his elder brothers, although he fully equalled them in

ambition.  Had he possessed a tithe of their sagacity, he would not have

madly persisted in rebellion, after the coming of the president.  Before

this period, he represented the people.  Their interests and his were

united.  He had their support, for he was contending for the redress of

their wrongs.  When these were redressed by the government, there was

nothing to contend for.  From that time, he was battling only for himself.

The people had no part nor interest in the contest.  Without a common

sympathy to bind them together, was it strange that they should fall off

from him, like leaves in winter, and leave him exposed, a bare and

sapless trunk, to the fury of the tempest?



Cepeda, more criminal than Pizarro, since he had both superior

education and intelligence, which he employed only to mislead his

commander, did not long survive him.  He had come to the country in an

office of high responsibility.  His first step was to betray the viceroy

whom he was sent to support; his next was to betray the Audience with

whom he should have acted; and lastly, he betrayed the leader whom he

most affected to serve.  His whole career was treachery to his own

government.  His life was one long perfidy.



After his surrender, several of the cavaliers, disgusted at his coldblooded

apostasy, would have persuaded Gasca to send him to execution along

with his commander; but the president refused, in consideration of the

signal service he had rendered the Crown by his defection.  He was put

under arrest, however, and sent to Castile.  There he was arraigned for

high-treason.  He made a plausible defence, and as he had friends at

court, it is not improbable he would have been acquitted; but, before the

trial was terminated, he died in prison.  It was the retributive justice not

always to be found in the affairs of this world.19



Indeed, it so happened, that several of those who had been most forward

to abandon the cause of Pizarro survived their commander but a short

time.  The gallant Centeno, and the Licentiate Carbajal, who deserted

him near Lima, and bore the royal standard on the field of

Xaquixaguana, both died within a year after Pizarro.  Hinojosa was

assassinated but two years later in La Plata; and his old comrade

Valdivia, after a series of brilliant exploits in Chili, which furnished her

most glorious theme to the epic Muse of Castile, was cut off by the

invincible warriors of Arauco.  The Manes of Pizarro were amply

avenged.



Acosta, and three or four other cavaliers who surrendered with Gonzalo,

were sent to execution on the same day with their chief; and Gasca, on

the morning following the dismal tragedy, broke up his quarters and

marched with his whole army to Cuzco, where he was received by the

politic people with the same enthusiasm which they had so recently

shown to his rival.  He found there a number of the rebel army who bad

taken refuge in the city after their late defeat, where they were

immediately placed under arrest.  Proceedings, by Gasca's command,

were instituted against them.  The principal cavaliers, to the number of

ten or twelve, were executed; others were banished or sent to the galleys.

The same rigorous decrees were passed against such as had fled and

were not yet taken; and the estates of all were confiscated.  The estates of

the rebels supplied a fund for the recompense of the loyal.20  The

execution of justice may seem to have been severe; but Gasca was

willing that the rod should fall heavily on those who had so often

rejected his proffers of grace.  Lenity was wasted on a rude, licentious

soldiery, who hardly recognized the existence of government, unless they

felt its rigor.



A new duty now devolved on the president,--that of rewarding his

faithful followers,--not less difficult, as it proved, than that of punishing

the guilty.  The applicants were numerous; since every one who had

raised a finger in behalf of the government claimed his reward.  They

urged their demands with a clamorous importunity which perplexed the

good president, and consumed every moment of his time.



Disgusted with this unprofitable state of things, Gasca resolved to rid

himself of the annoyance at once, by retiring to the valley of

Guaynarima, about twelve leagues distant from the city, and there

digesting, in quiet, a scheme of compensation, adjusted to the merits of

the parties.  He was accompanied only by his secretary, and by Loaysa,

now archbishop of Lima, a man of sense, and well acquainted with the

affairs of the country.  In this seclusion the president remained three

months, making a careful examination into the conflicting claims, and

apportioning the forfeitures among the parties according to their

respective services.  The repartimientos, it should be remarked, were

usually granted only for life, and, on the death of the incumbent, reverted

to the Crown, to be reassigned or retained at its pleasure.



When his arduous task was completed, Gasca determined to withdraw to

Lima, leaving the instrument of partition with the archbishop, to be

communicated to the army.  Notwithstanding all the care that had been

taken for an equitable adjustment, Gasca was aware that it was

impossible to satisfy the demands of a jealous and irritable soldiery,

where each man would be likely to exaggerate his own deserts, while he

underrated those of his comrades; and he did not care to expose himself

to importunities and complaints that could serve no other purpose than to

annoy him.



On his departure, the troops were called together by the archbishop in

the cathedral, to learn the contents of the schedule intrusted to him.  A

discourse was first preached by a worthy Dominican, the prior of

Arequipa, in which the reverend father expatiated on the virtue of

contentment, the duty of obedience, and the folly, as well as wickedness,

of an attempt to resist the constituted authorities,--topics, in short, which

he conceived might best conciliate the good-will and conformity of his

audience.



A letter from the president was then read from the pulpit.  It was

addressed to the officers and soldiers of the army.  The writer began with

briefly exposing the difficulties of his task, owing to the limited amount

of the gratuities, and the great number and services of the claimants.  He

had given the matter the most careful consideration, he said, and

endeavored to assign to each his share, according to his deserts, without

prejudice or partiality.  He had, no doubt, fallen into errors, but he

trusted his followers would excuse them, when they reflected that he had

done according to the best of his poor abilities; and all, he believed,

would do him the justice to acknowledge he had not been influenced by

motives of personal interest.  He bore emphatic testimony to the services

they had rendered to the good cause, and concluded with the most

affectionate wishes for their future prosperity and happiness.  The letter

was dated at Guaynarima, August 17, 1548, and bore the simple

signature of the Licentiate Gasca.21



The archbishop next read the paper containing the president's award.

The annual rent of the estates to be distributed amounted to a hundred

and thirty thousand pesos ensayados;22 a large amount, considering the

worth of money in that day,--in any other country than Peru, where

money was a drug.23



The repartimientos thus distributed varied in value from one hundred to

thirty-five hundred pesos of yearly rent; all, apparently, graduated with

the nicest precision to the merits of the parties.  The number of

pensioners was about two hundred and fifty; for the fund would not have

sufficed for general distribution, nor were the services of the greater part

deemed worthy of such a mark of consideration.24



The effect produced by the document, on men whose minds were filled

with the most indefinite expectations, was just such as had been

anticipated by the president.  It was received with a general murmur of

disapprobation.  Even those who had got more than they expected were

discontented, on comparing their condition with that of their comrades,

whom they thought still better remunerated in proportion to their deserts.

They especially inveighed against the preference shown to the old

partisans of Gonzalo Pizarro--as Hinojosa, Centeno, and Aldana-over

those who had always remained loyal to the Crown.  There was some

ground for such a preference; for none had rendered so essential services

in crushing the rebellion; and it was these services that Gasca proposed

to recompense.  To reward every man who had proved himself loyal,

simply for his loyalty, would have frittered away the donative into

fractions that would be of little value to any.25



It was in vain, however, that the archbishop, seconded by some of the

principal cavaliers, endeavored to infuse a more contented spirit into the

multitude.  They insisted that the award should be rescinded, and a new

one made on more equitable principles; threatening, moreover, that, if

this were not done by the president, they would take the redress of the

matter into their own hands.  Their discontent, fomented by some

mischievous persons who thought to find their account in it, at length

proceeded so far as to menace a mutiny; and it was not suppressed till the

commander of Cuzco sentenced one of the ringleaders to death, and

several others to banishment.  The iron soldiery of the Conquest required

an iron hand to rule them.



Meanwhile, the president had continued his journey towards Lima; and

on the way was everywhere received by the people with an enthusiasm,

the more grateful to his heart that he felt he had deserved it.  As he drew

near the capital, the loyal inhabitants prepared to give him a magnificent

reception.  The whole population came forth from the gates, led by the

authorities of the city, with Aldana as corregidor at their head.  Gasca

rode on a mule, dressed in his ecclesiastical robes.  On his right, borne

on a horse richly caparisoned, was the royal seal, in a box curiously

chased and ornamented.  A gorgeous canopy of brocade was supported

above his head by the officers of the municipality, who, in their robes of

crimson velvet, walked bareheaded by his side.  Gay troops of dancers,

clothed in fantastic dresses of gaudy-colored silk, followed the

procession, strewing flowers and chanting verses as they went, in honor

of the president.  They were designed as emblematical of the different

cities of the colony; and they bore legends or mottoes in rhyme on their

caps, intimating their loyal devotion to the Crown, and evincing much

more loyalty in their composition, it may be added, than poetical

merit.26  In this way, without beat of drum, or noise of artillery, or any

of the rude accompaniments of war, the good president made his

peaceful entry into the City of the Kings, while the air was rent with the

acclamations of the people, who hailed him as their "Father and

Deliverer, the Saviour of their country!" 27



But, however grateful was this homage to Gasca's heart, he was not a

man to waste his time in idle vanities.  He now thought only by what

means he could eradicate the seeds of disorder which shot up so readily

in this fruitful soil, and how he could place the authority of the

government on a permanent basis.  By virtue of his office, he presided

over the Royal Audience, the great judicial, and, indeed, executive

tribunal of the colony; and he gave great despatch to the business, which

had much accumulated during the late disturbances.  In the unsettled

state of property, there was abundant subject for litigation; but,

fortunately, the new Audience was composed of able, upright judges,

who labored diligently with their chief to correct the mischief caused by

the misrule of their predecessors.



Neither was Gasca unmindful of the unfortunate natives; and he occupied

himself earnestly with that difficult problem,--the best means practicable

of ameliorating their condition.  He sent a number of commissioners, as

visitors, into different parts of the country, whose business it was to

inspect the encomiendas, and ascertain the manner in which the Indians

were treated, by conversing not only with the proprietors, but with the

natives themselves.  They were also to learn the nature and extent of the

tributes paid in former times by the vassals of the Incas.28



In this way, a large amount of valuable information was obtained, which

enabled Gasca, with the aid of a council of ecclesiastics and jurists, to

digest a uniform system of taxation for the natives, lighter even than that

imposed on them by the Peruvian princes.  The president would gladly

have relieved the conquered races from the obligations of personal

service; but, on mature consideration, this was judged impracticable in

the present state of the country, since the colonists, more especially in

the tropical regions, looked to the natives for the performance of labor,

and the latter, it was found from experience, would not work at all,

unless compelled to do so.  The president, however, limited the amount

of service to be exacted with great precision, so that it was in the nature

of a moderate personal tax.  No Peruvian was to be required to change

his place of residence, from the climate to which he had been

accustomed, to another; a fruitful source of discomfort, as well as of

disease, in past times.  By these various regulations, the condition of the

natives, though not such as had been contemplated by the sanguine

philanthropy of Las Casas, was improved far more than was compatible

with the craving demands of the colonists; and all the firmness of the

Audience was required to enforce provisions so unpalatable to the latter.

Still they were enforced.  Slavery, in its most odious sense, was no

longer tolerated in Peru.  The term "slave" was not recognized as having

relation to her institutions; and the historian of the Indies makes the

proud boast,--it should have been qualified by the limitations I have

noticed, --that every Indian vassal might aspire to the rank of a

freeman.29



Besides these reforms, Gasca introduced several in the municipal

government of the cities, and others yet more important in the

management of the finances, and in the mode of keeping the accounts.

By these and other changes in the internal economy of the colony, he

placed the administration on a new basis, and greatly facilitated the way

for a more sure and orderly government by his successors.  As a final

step, to secure the repose of the country after he was gone, he detached

some of the more aspiring cavaliers on distant expeditions, trusting that

they would draw off the light and restless spirits, who might otherwise

gather together and disturb the public tranquillity; as we sometimes see

the mists which have been scattered by the genial influence of the sun

become condensed, and settle into a storm, on his departure.30



Gasca had been now more than fifteen months in Lima, and nearly three

years had elapsed since his first entrance into Peru.  In that time, he had

accomplished the great objects of his mission.  When he landed, he

found the colony in a state of anarchy, or rather organized rebellion

under a powerful and popular chief.  He came without funds or forces to

support him.  The former he procured through the credit which he

established in his good faith; the latter he won over by argument and

persuasion from the very persons to whom they had been confided by his

rival.  Thus he turned the arms of that rival against himself.  By a calm

appeal to reason he wrought a change in the hearts of the people; and,

without costing a drop of blood to a single loyal subject, he suppressed a

rebellion which had menaced Spain with the loss of the wealthiest of her

provinces.  He had punished the guilty, and in their spoils found the

means to recompense the faithful.  He had, moreover, so well husbanded

the resources of the country, that he was enabled to pay off the large loan

he had negotiated with the merchants of the colony, for the expenses of

the war, exceeding nine hundred thousand pesos de oro.31  Nay, more,

by his economy he had saved a million and a half of ducats for the

government, which for some years had received nothing from Peru; and

he now proposed to carry back this acceptable treasure to swell the royal

coffers.32  All this had been accomplished without the cost of out-fit or

salary, or any charge to the Crown except that of his own frugal

expenditure.33  The country was now in a state of tranquillity.  Gasca

felt that his work was done; and that he was free to gratify his natural

longing to return to his native land.



Before his departure, he arranged a distribution of those repartimientos

which had lapsed to the Crown during the past year by the death of the

incumbents.  Life was short in Peru; since those who lived by the sword,

if they did not die by the sword, too often fell early victims to the

hardships incident to their adventurous career.  Many were the applicants

for the new bounty of government; and, as among them were some of

those who had been discontented with the former partition, Gasca was

assailed by remonstrances, and sometimes by reproaches couched in no

very decorous or respectful language.  But they had no power to disturb

his equanimity; he patiently listened, and replied to all in the mild tone of

expostulation best calculated to turn away wrath; "by this victory over

himself," says an old writer, "acquiring more real glory, than by all his

victories over his enemies." 34



An incident occurred on the eve of his departure, touching in itself, and

honorable to the parties concerned.  The Indian caciques of the

neighboring country, mindful of the great benefits he had rendered their

people, presented him with a considerable quantity of plate in token of

their gratitude.  But Gasca refused to receive it, though in doing so he

gave much concern to the Peruvians, who feared they had unwittingly

fallen under his displeasure.



Many of the principal colonists, also, from the same wish to show their

sense of his important services, sent to him, after he had embarked, a

magnificent donative of fifty thousand gold castellanos.  "As he had

taken leave of Peru," they said, "there could be no longer any ground for

declining it."  But Gasca was as decided in his rejection of this present,

as he had been of the other.  "He had come to the country," he remarked,

"to serve the king, and to secure the blessings of peace to the inhabitants;

and now that, by the favor of Heaven, he had been permitted to

accomplish this, he would not dishonor the cause by any act that might

throw suspicion on the purity of his motives."  Notwithstanding his

refusal, the colonists contrived to secrete the sum of twenty thousand

castellanos on board his vessel, with the idea, that, once in his own

country, with his mission concluded, the president's scruples would be

removed.  Gasca did, indeed, accept the donative; for he felt that it

would be ungracious to send it back; but it was only till he could

ascertain the relatives of the donors, when he distributed it among the

most needy.35



Having now settled all his affairs, the president committed the

government, until the arrival of a viceroy, to his faithful partners of the

Royal Audience; and in January, 1550 he embarked with the royal

treasure on board of a squadron for Panama.  He was accompanied to the

shore by a numerous crowd of the inhabitants, cavaliers and common

people, persons of all ages and conditions, who followed to take their

last look of their benefactor, and watch with straining eyes the vessel that

bore him away from their land.



His voyage was prosperous, and early in March the president reached his

destined port.  He stayed there only till he could muster horses and mules

sufficient to carry the treasure across the mountains; for he knew that this

part of the country abounded in wild, predatory spirits, who would be

sorely tempted to some act of violence by a knowledge of the wealth

which he had with him.  Pushing forward, therefore, he crossed the

rugged Isthmus, and, after a painful march, arrived in safety at Nombre

de Dios.



The event justified his apprehensions.  He had been gone but three days,

when a ruffian horde, after murdering the bishop of Guatemala, broke

into Panama with the design of inflicting the same fate on the president,

and of seizing the booty.  No sooner were the tidings communicated to

Gasca, than, with his usual energy, he levied a force and prepared to

march to the relief of the invaded capital.  But Fortune--or, to speak

more correctly, Providence--favored him here, as usual; and, on the eve

of his departure, he learned that the marauders had been met by the

citizens, and discomfited with great slaughter.  Disbanding his forces,

therefore, he equipped a fleet of nineteen vessels to transport himself and

the royal treasure to Spain, where he arrived in safety, entering the

harbor of Seville after a little more than four years from the period when

he had sailed from the same port.36



Great was the sensation throughout the country caused by his arrival.

Men could hardly believe that results so momentous had been

accomplished in so short a time by a single individual,--a poor

ecclesiastic, who, unaided by government, had, by his own strength, as it

were, put down a rebellion which had so long set the arms of Spain at

defiance!



The emperor was absent in Flanders.  He was overjoyed on learning the

complete success of Gasca's mission; and not less satisfied with the

tidings of the treasure he had brought with him; for the exchequer, rarely

filled to overflowing, had been exhausted by the recent troubles in

Germany.  Charles instantly wrote to the president, requiring his

presence at court, that he might learn from his own lips the particulars of

his expedition.  Gasca, accordingly, attended by a numerous retinue of

nobles and cavaliers,--for who does not pay homage to him whom the

king delighteth to honor?--embarked at Barcelona, and, after a favorable

voyage, joined the Court in Flanders.



He was received by his royal master, who fully appreciated his services,

in a manner most grateful to his feelings; and not long afterward he was

raised to the bishopric of Palencia,--a mode of acknowledgment best

suited to his character and deserts.  Here he remained till 1561, when he

was promoted to the vacant see of Siguenza.  The rest of his days he

passed peacefully in the discharge of his episcopal functions; honored by

his sovereign, and enjoying the admiration and respect of his

countrymen.37



In his retirement, he was still consulted by the government in matters of

importance relating to the Indies.  The disturbances of that unhappy land

were renewed, though on a much smaller scale than before, soon after

the president's departure.  They were chiefly caused by discontent with

the repartimientos, and with the constancy of the Audience in enforcing

the benevolent restrictions as to the personal services of the natives.  But

these troubles subsided, after a very few years, under the wise rule of the

Mendozas,--two successive viceroys of that illustrious house which has

given so many of its sons to the service of Spain.  Under their rule, the

mild yet determined policy was pursued, of which Gasca had set the

example.  The ancient distractions of the country were permanently

healed.  With peace, prosperity returned within the borders of Peru; and

the consciousness of the beneficent results of his labors may have shed a

ray of satisfaction, as it did of glory, over the evening of the president's

life.



That life was brought to a close in November, 1567, at an age, probably,

not far from the one fixed by the sacred writer as the term of human

existence.38  He died at Valladolid, and was buried in the church of

Santa Maria Magdalena, in that city, which he had built and liberally

endowed.  His monument, surmounted by the sculptured effigy of a

priest in his sacerdotal robes, is still to be seen there, attracting the

admiration of the traveller by the beauty of its execution.  The banners

taken from Gonzalo Pizarro on the field of Xaquixaguana were

suspended over his tomb, as the trophies of his memorable mission to

Peru.39  The banners have long since mouldered into dust, with the

remains of him who slept beneath them; but the memory of his good

deeds will endure for ever.40




Gasca was plain in person, and his countenance was far from comely, He

was awkward and ill-proportioned; for his limbs were too long for his

body,--so that when he rode, he appeared to be much shorter than he

really was.41  His dress was humble, his manners simple, and there was

nothing imposing in his presence.  But, on a nearer intercourse, there was

a charm in his discourse that effaced every unfavorable impression

produced by his exterior, and won the hearts of his hearers.



The president's character may be thought to have been sufficiently

portrayed in the history already given of his life.  It presented a

combination of qualities which generally serve to neutralize each other,

but which were mixed in such proportions in him as to give it additional

strength.  He was gentle, yet resolute; by nature intrepid, yet preferring to

rely on the softer arts of policy.  He was frugal in his personal

expenditure, and economical in the public; yet caring nothing for riches

on his own account, and never stinting his bounty when the public good

required it.  He was benevolent and placable, yet could deal sternly with

the impenitent offender; lowly in his deportment, yet with a full measure

of that self-respect which springs from conscious rectitude of purpose;

modest and unpretending, yet not shrinking from the most difficult

enterprises; deferring greatly to others, yet, in the last resort, relying

mainly on himself; moving with deliberation,--patiently waiting his time;

but, when that came, bold, prompt, and decisive.



Gasca, was not a man of genius, in the vulgar sense of that term.  At

least, no one of his intellectual powers seems to have received an

extraordinary development, beyond what is found in others.  He was not

a great writer, nor a great orator, nor a great general.  He did not affect to

be either.  He committed the care of his military matters to military men;

of ecclesiastical to the clergy; and his civil and judicial concerns he

reposed on the members of the Audience.  He was not one of those little

great men who aspire to do every thing themselves, under the conviction

that nothing can be done so well by others.  But the president was a keen

judge of character.  Whatever might be the office, he selected the best

man for it.  He did more.  He assured himself of the fidelity of his agents,

presided at their deliberations; dictated a general line of policy, and thus

infused a spirit of unity into their plans, which made all move in concert

to the accomplishment of one grand result.



A distinguishing feature of his mind was his common sense,--the best

substitute for genius in a ruler who has the destinies of his fellow-men at

his disposal, and more indispensable than genius itself.  In Gasca, the

different qualities were blended in such harmony, that there was no room

for excess.  They seemed to regulate each other.  While his sympathy

with mankind taught him the nature of their wants, his reason suggested

to what extent these were capable of relief, as well as the best mode of

effecting it.  He did not waste his strength on illusory schemes of

benevolence, like Las Casas, on the one hand; nor did he countenance

the selfish policy of the colonists, on the other.  He aimed at the

practicable,--the greatest good practicable.



In accomplishing his objects, he disclaimed force equally with fraud.  He

trusted for success to his power over the convictions of his hearers; and

the source of this power was the confidence he inspired in his own

integrity.  Amidst all the calumnies of faction, no imputation was ever

cast on the integrity of Gasca.42  No wonder that a virtue so rare should

be of high price in Peru.



There are some men whose characters have been so wonderfully adapted

to the peculiar crisis in which they appeared, that they seem to have been

specially designed for it by Providence.  Such was Washington, in our

own country, and Gasca in Peru.  We can conceive of individuals with

higher qualities, at least with higher intellectual qualities, than belonged

to either of these great men.  But it was the wonderful conformity of their

characters to the exigencies of their situation, the perfect adaptation of

the means to the end, that constituted the secret of their success; that

enabled Gasca so gloriously to crush revolution, and Washington still

more gloriously to achieve it.



Gasca's conduct on his first coming to the colonies affords the best

illustration of his character.  Had he come backed by a military array, or

even clothed in the paraphernalia of authority, every heart and hand

would have been closed against him.  But the humble ecclesiastic excited

no apprehension; and his enemies were already disarmed, before he had

begun his approaches.  Had Gasca, impatient of Hinojosa's tardiness,

listened to the suggestions of those who advised his seizure, he would

have brought his cause into jeopardy by this early display of violence

But he wisely chose to win over his enemy by operating on his

conviction.



In like manner, he waited his time for making his entry into Peru.  He

suffered his communications to do their work in the minds of the people,

and was careful not to thrust in the sickle before the harvest was ripe.



In this way, wherever he went, every thing was prepared for his coming;

and when he set foot in Peru, the country was already his own.



After the dark and turbulent spirits with which we have been hitherto

occupied, it is refreshing to dwell on a character like that of Gasca.  In

the long procession which has passed in review before us, we have seen

only the mail-clad cavalier, brandishing his bloody lance, and mounted

on his war-horse, riding over the helpless natives, or battling with his

own friends and brothers; fierce, arrogant, and cruel, urged on by the lust

of gold, or the scarce more honorable love of a bastard glory.  Mingled

with these qualities, indeed, we have seen sparkles of the chivalrous and

romantic temper which belongs to the heroic age of Spain.  But, with

some honorable exceptions, it was the scum of her chivalry that resorted

to Peru, and took service under the banner of the Pizarros.  At the close

of this long array of iron warriors, we behold the poor and humble

missionary coming into the land on an errand of mercy, and everywhere

proclaiming the glad tidings of peace.  No warlike trumpet heralds his

approach, nor is his course to be tracked by the groans of the wounded

and the dying.  The means he employs are in perfect harmony with his

end.  His weapons are argument and mild persuasion.  It is the reason he

would conquer, not the body.  He wins his way by conviction, not by

violence.  It is a moral victory to which he aspires, more potent, and

happily more permanent, than that of the blood-stained conqueror.  As he

thus calmly, and imperceptibly, as it were, comes to his great results, he

may remind us of the slow, insensible manner in which Nature works out

her great changes in the material world, that are to endure when the

ravages of the hurricane are passed away and forgotten.



With the mission of Gasca terminates the history of the Conquest of

Peru.  The Conquest, indeed, strictly terminates with the suppression of

the Peruvian revolt, when the strength, if not the spirit, of the Inca race

was crushed for ever.  The reader, however, might feel a natural curiosity

to follow to its close the fate of the remarkable family who achieved the

Conquest.  Nor would the story of the invasion itself be complete without

some account of the civil wars which grew out of it; which serve,

moreover, as a moral commentary on preceding events, by showing that

the indulgence of fierce, unbridled passions is sure to recoil, sooner or

later, even in this life, on the heads of the guilty.



It is true, indeed, that the troubles of the country were renewed on the

departure of Gasca.  The waters had been too fearfully agitated to be

stilled, at once, into a calm; but they gradually subsided, under the

temperate rule of his successors, who wisely profited by his policy and

example.  Thus the influence of the good president remained after he was

withdrawn from the scene of his labors; and Peru, hitherto so distracted,

continued to enjoy as large a share of repose as any portion of the

colonial empire of Spain.  With the benevolent mission of Gasca, then,

the historian of the Conquest may be permitted to terminate his labors, -

with feelings not unlike those of the traveller who, having long journeyed

among the dreary forests and dangerous defiles of the mountains, at

length emerges on some pleasant landscape smiling in tranquillity and

peace.



Augustin de Zarate--a highly respectable authority, frequently cited in

the later portion of this work--was Contador de Mercedes, Comptroller

of Accounts, for Castile.  This office he filled for fifteen years; after

which he was sent by the government to Peru to examine into the state of

the colonial finances, which had been greatly deranged by the recent

troubles, and to bring them, if possible, into order.



Zarate went out accordingly in the train of the viceroy Blasco Nunez,

and found himself, through the passions of his imprudent leader,

entangled, soon after his arrival, in the inextricable meshes of civil

discord.  In the struggle which ensued, he remained with the Royal

Audience; and we find him in Lima, on the approach of Gonzalo Pizarro

to that capital, when Zarate was deputed by the judges to wait on the

insurgent chief, and require him to disband his troops and withdraw to

his own estates.  The historian executed the mission, for which he seems

to have had little relish, and which certainly was not without danger.

From this period, we rarely hear of him in the troubled scenes that

ensued.  He probably took no further part in affairs than was absolutely

forced on him by circumstances; but the unfavorable bearing of his

remarks on Gonzalo Pizarro intimates, that, however he may have been

discontented with the conduct of the viceroy, he did not countenance, for

a moment, the criminal ambition of his rival.  The times were certainly

unpropitious to the execution of the financial reforms for which Zarate

had come to Peru.  But he showed so much real devotion to the interests

of the Crown, that the emperor, on his return, signified his satisfaction by

making him Superintendent of the Finances in Flanders.



Soon after his arrival in Peru, he seems to have conceived the idea of

making his countrymen at home acquainted with the stirring events

passing in the colony, which, moreover, afforded some striking passages

for the study of the historian.  Although he collected notes and diaries, as

he tells us, for this purpose, he did not dare to avail himself of them till

his return to Castile.  "For to have begun the history in Peru," he says,

"would have alone been enough to put my life in jeopardy; since a

certain commander, named Francisco de Carbajal, threatened to take

vengeance on any one who should be so rash as to attempt the relation of

his exploits, ---far less deserving, as they were, to be placed on record,

than to be consigned to eternal oblivion."  In this same commander, the

reader will readily recognize the veteran lieutenant of Gonzalo Pizarro.



On his return home, Zarate set about the compilation of his work.  His

first purpose was to confine it to the events that followed the arrival of

Blasco Nunez; but he soon found, that, to make these intelligible, he

must trace the stream of history higher up towards its sources.  He

accordingly enlarged his plan, and, beginning with the discovery of Peru,

gave an entire view of the conquest and subsequent occupation of the

country, bringing the narrative down to the close of Gasca's mission.  For

the earlier portion of the story, he relied on the accounts of persons who

took a leading part in the events.  He disposes more summarily of this

portion than of that in which he himself was both a spectator and an

actor; where his testimony, considering the advantages his position gave

him for information, is of the highest value.



Alcedo in his Biblioteca Americana, MS., speaks of Zarate's work as

"containing much that is good, but as not entitled to the praise of

exactness."  He wrote under the influence of party heat, which

necessarily operates to warp the fairest mind somewhat from its natural

bent.  For this we must make allowance, in perusing accounts of

conflicting parties.  But there is no intention, apparently, to turn the truth

aside in support of his own cause; and his access to the best sources of

knowledge often supplies us with particulars not within the reach of

other chroniclers.  His narrative is seasoned, moreover, with sensible

reflections and passing comments, that open gleams of light into the dark

passages of that eventful period.  Yet the style of the author can make

but moderate pretensions to the praise of elegance or exactness; while

the sentences run into that tedious, interminable length which belongs to

the garrulous compositions of the regular thoroughbred chronicler of the

olden time.



The personalities, necessarily incident, more or less, to such a work, led

its author to shrink from publication, at least during his life.  By the

jealous spirit of the Castilian cavalier, "censure," he says, "however

light, is regarded with indignation, and even praise is rarely dealt out in a

measure satisfactory to the subject of it."  And he expresses his

conviction that those do wisely, who allow their accounts of their own

times to repose in the quiet security of manuscript, till the generation that

is to be affected by them has passed away.  His own manuscript,

however, was submitted to the emperor; and it received such

commendation from this royal authority, that Zarate, plucking up a more

courageous spirit, consented to give it to the press.  It accordingly

appeared at Antwerp, in 1555, in octavo; and a second edition was

printed, in folio, at Seville, in 1577.  It has since been incorporated in

Barcia's valuable collection; and, whatever indignation or displeasure it

may have excited among contemporaries, who smarted under the author's

censure, or felt themselves defrauded of their legitimate guerdon,

Zarate's work has taken a permanent rank among the most respectable

authorities for a history of the time.



The name of Zarate naturally suggests that of Fernandez, for both were

laborers in the same field of history.  Diego Fernandez de Palencia, or

Palentino, as he is usually called, from the place of his birth, came over

to Peru, and served as a private in the royal army raised to quell the

insurrections that broke out after Gasca's return to Castile.  Amidst his

military occupations, he found leisure to collect materials for a history of

the period, to which he was further urged by the viceroy, Mendoza,

Marques de Canete, who bestowed on him, as he tells us, the post of

Chronicler of Peru.  This mark of confidence in his literary capacity

intimates higher attainments in Fernandez than might be inferred from

the humble station that he occupied.  With the fruits of his researches the

soldier-chronicler returned to Spain, and, after a time, completed his

narrative of the insurrection of Giron.



The manuscript was seen by the President of the Council of the Indies,

and he was so much pleased with its execution, that he urged the author

to write the account, in like manner, of Gonzalo Pizarro's rebellion, and

of the administration of Gasca.  The historian was further stimulated, as

he mentions in his dedication to Philip the Second, by the promise of a

guerdon from that monarch, on the completion of his labors; a very

proper, as well as politic, promise, but which inevitably suggests the idea

of an influence not altogether favorable to severe historic impartiality.

Nor will such an inference be found altogether at variance with truth; for

while the narrative of Fernandez studiously exhibits the royal cause in

the most favorable aspect to the reader, it does scanty justice to the

claims of the opposite party.  It would not be meet, indeed, that an

apology for rebellion should be found in the pages of a royal pensioner;

but there are always mitigating circumstances, which, however we may

condemn the guilt, may serve to lessen our indignation towards the

guilty.  These circumstances are not to be found in the pages of

Fernandez.  It is unfortunate for the historian of such events, that it is so

difficult to find one disposed to do even justice to the claims of the

unsuccessful rebel.  Yet the Inca Garcilasso has not shrunk from this, in

the case of Gonzalo Pizarro; and even Gomara, though living under the

shadow, or rather in the sunshine, of the Court, has occasionally ventured

a generous protest in his behalf.



The countenance thus afforded to Fernandez from the highest quarter

opened to him the best fountains of intelligence,--at least, on the

government side of the quarrel.  Besides personal communication with

the royalist leaders, he had access to their correspondence, diaries, and

official documents.  He industriously profiled by his opportunities; and

his narrative, taking up the story of the rebellion from its birth, continues

it to its final extinction, and the end of Gasca's administration.  Thus the

First Part of his work, as it was now called, was brought down to the

commencement of the Second, and the whole presented a complete

picture of the distractions of the nation, till a new order of things was

introduced, and tranquillity was permanently established throughout the

country.



The diction is sufficiently plain, not aspiring to rhetorical beauties

beyond the reach of its author, and out of keeping with the simple

character of a chronicle, The sentences are arranged with more art than

in most of the unwieldy compositions of the time; and, while there is no

attempt at erudition or philosophic speculation, the current of events

flows on in an orderly manner, tolerably prolix, it is true, but leaving a

clear and intelligible impression on the mind of the reader.  No history of

that period compares with it in the copiousness of its details; and it has

accordingly been resorted to by later compilers, as an inexhaustible

reservoir for the supply of their own pages; a circumstance that may be

thought of itself to bear no slight testimony to the general fidelity, as well

as fulness, of the narrative.--The Chronicle of Fernandez, thus arranged

in two parts, under the general title of Historia del Peru, was given to the

world in the author's lifetime, at Seville, in 1571 in one volume, folio,

being the edition used in the preparation of this work.











End 