





History Of The Conquest Of Peru



by William Hickling Prescott









Preface



The most brilliant passages in the history of Spanish adventure in the

New World are undoubtedly afforded by the conquests of Mexico and

Peru--the two states which combined with the largest extent of empire a

refined social polity, and considerable progress in the arts of civilization.

Indeed, so prominently do they stand out on the great canvas of history,

that the name of the one, notwithstanding the contrast they exhibit in

their respective institutions, most naturally suggests that of the other; and

when I sent to Spain to collect materials for an account of the Conquest

of Mexico, I included in my researches those relating to the Conquest of

Peru.



The larger part of the documents, in both cases, was obtained from the

same great repository,--the archives of the Royal Academy of History at

Madrid; a body specially intrusted with the preservation of whatever may

serve to illustrate the Spanish colonial annals.  The richest portion of its

collection is probably that furnished by the papers of Munoz.  This

eminent scholar, historiographer of the Indies, employed nearly fifty

years of his life in amassing materials for a history of Spanish discovery

and conquest in America.  For this, as he acted under the authority of the

government, every facility was afforded him; and public offices and

private depositories, in all the principal cities of the empire, both at home

and throughout the wide extent of its colonial possessions, were freely

opened to his inspection.  The result was a magnificent collection of

manuscripts, many of which he patiently transscribed with his own hand.

But he did not live to reap the fruits of his persevering industry.  The

first volume, relative to the voyages of Columbus, were scarcely finished

when he died; and his manuscripts, at least that portion of them which

have reference to Mexico and Peru, were destined to serve the uses of

another, an inhabitant of that New World to which they related.



Another scholar, to whose literary stores I am largely indebted, is Don

Martin Fernandez de Navarrette, late Director of the Royal Academy of

History.  Through the greater part of his long life he was employed in

assembling original documents to illustrate the colonial annals.  Many of

these have been incorporated in his great work, "Coleccion de los Viages

y Descubrimientos," which, although far from being completed after the

original plan of its author, is of inestimable service to the historian.  In

following down the track of discovery, Navarrete turned aside from the

conquests of Mexico and Peru, to exhibit the voyages of his countrymen

in the Indian seas.  His manuscripts, relating to the two former countries,

he courteously allowed to be copied for me.  Some of them have since

appeared in print, under the auspices of his learned coadjutors, Salva and

Baranda, associated with him in the Academy; but the documents placed

in my hands form a most important contribution to my materials for the

present history.



The death of this illustrious man, which occurred some time after the

present work was begun, has left a void in his country not easy to be

filled; for he was zealously devoted to letters, and few have done more to

extend the knowledge of her colonial history.  Far from an exclusive

solicitude for his own literary projects, he was ever ready to extend his

sympathy and assistance to those of others.  His reputation as a scholar

was enhanced by the higher qualities which he possessed as a man,--by

his benevolence, his simplicity of manners, and unsullied moral worth.

My own obligations to him are large; for from the publication of my first

historical work, down to the last week of his life, I have constantly

received proofs from him of his hearty and most efficient interest in the

prosecution of my historical labors; and I now the more willingly pay

this well-merited tribute to his deserts, that it must be exempt from all

suspicion of flattery.



In the list of those to whom I have been indebted for materials, I must,

also, include the name of M. Ternaux-Compans, so well known by his

faithful and elegant French versions of the Munoz manuscripts; and that

of my friend Don Pascual de Gayangos, who, under the modest dress of

translation, has furnished a most acute and learned commentary on

Spanish Arabian history,--securing for himself the foremost rank in that

difficult department of letters, which has been illumined by the labors of

a Masdeu, a Casiri, and a Conde.



To the materials derived from these sources, I have added some

manuscripts of an important character from the library of the Escurial.

These, which chiefly relate to the ancient institutions of Peru, formed

part of the splendid collection of Lord Kingsborough, which has

unfortunately shared the lot of most literary collections, and been

dispersed since the death of its noble author.  For these I am indebted to

that industrious bibliographer, Mr. O. Rich, now resident in London.

Lastly, I must not omit to mention my obligations, in another way, to my

friend Charles Folsom, Esq., the learned librarian of the Boston

Athenaeum; whose minute acquaintance with the grammatical structure

and the true idiom of our English tongue has enabled me to correct many

inaccuracies into which I had fallen in the composition both of this and

of my former works.



From these different sources I have accumulated a large amount of

manuscripts, of the most various character, and from the most authentic

sources; royal grants and ordinances, instructions of the Court, letters of

the Emperor to the great colonial officers, municipal records, personal

diaries and memoranda, and a mass of private correspondence of the

principal actors in this turbulent drama.  Perhaps it was the turbulent

state of the country which led to a more frequent correspondence

between the government at home and the colonial officers.  But,

whatever be the cause, the collection of manuscript materials in reference

to Peru is fuller and more complete than that which relates to Mexico; so

that there is scarcely a nook or corner so obscure, in the path of the

adventurer, that some light has not been thrown on it by the written

correspondence of the period.  The historian has rather had occasion to

complain of the embarras des richesses; for, in the multiplicity of

contradictory testimony, it is not always easy to detect the truth, as the

multiplicity of cross-lights is apt to dazzle and bewilder the eye of the

spectator.



The present History has been conducted on the same general plan with

that of the Conquest of Mexico.  In an Introductory Book, I have

endeavored to portray the institutions of the Incas, that the reader may be

acquainted with the character and condition of that extraordinary race,

before he enters on the story of their subjugation.  The remaining books

are occupied with the narrative of the Conquest.  And here, the subject, it

must be allowed, notwithstanding the opportunities it presents for the

display of character, strange, romantic incident, and picturesque scenery,

does not afford so obvious advantages to the historian, as the Conquest

of Mexico.  Indeed, few subjects can present a parallel with that, for the

purposes either of the historian or the poet.  The natural development of

the story, there, is precisely what would be prescribed by the severest

rules of art.  The conquest of the country is the great end always in the

view of the reader.  From the first landing of the Spaniards on the soil,

their subsequent adventures, their battles and negotiations, their ruinous

retreat, their rally and final siege, all tend to this grand result, till the

long series is closed by the downfall of the capital.  In the march of

events, all moves steadily forward to this consummation.  It is a

magnificent epic, in which the unity of interest is complete.



In the "Conquest of Peru," the action, so far as it is founded on the

subversion of the Incas, terminates long before the close of the narrative.

The remaining portion is taken up with the fierce feuds of the

Conquerors, which would seem, from their very nature, to be incapable

of being gathered round a central point of interest.  To secure this, we

must look beyond the immediate overthrow of the Indian empire.  The

conquest of the natives is but the first step, to be followed by the

conquest of the Spaniards,--the rebel Spaniards, themselves,--till the

supremacy of the Crown is permanently established over the country.  It

is not till this period, that the acquisition of this Transatlantic empire can

be said to be completed; and, by fixing the eye on this remoter point, the

successive steps of the narrative will be found leading to one great result,

and that unity of interest preserved which is scarcely less essential to

historic than dramatic composition.  How far this has been effected, in

the present work, must be left to the judgment of the reader.



No history of the conquest of Peru, founded on original documents, and

aspiring to the credit of a classic composition, like the "Conquest of

Mexico" by Solis, has been attempted, as far as I am aware, by the

Spaniards.  The English possess one of high value, from the pen of

Robertson, whose masterly sketch occupies its due space in his great

work on America.  It has been my object to exhibit this same story, in all

its romantic details; not merely to portray the characteristic features of

the Conquest, but to fill up the outline with the coloring of life, so as to

present a minute and faithful picture of the times.  For this purpose, I

have, in the composition of the work, availed myself freely of my

manuscript materials, allowed the actors to speak as much as possible for

themselves, and especially made frequent use of their letters; for

nowhere is the heart more likely to disclose itself, than in the freedom of

private correspondence.  I have made liberal extracts from these

authorities in the notes, both to sustain the text, and to put in a printed

form those productions of the eminent captains and statesmen of the

time, which are not very accessible to Spaniards themselves.



M. Amedee Pichot, in the Preface to the French translation of the

"Conquest of Mexico," infers from the plan of the composition, that I

must have carefully studied the writings of his countryman, M. de

Barante.  The acute critic does me but justice in supposing me familiar

with the principles of that writer's historical theory, so ably developed in

the Preface to his "Ducs de Bourgogne." And I have had occasion to

admire the skilful manner in which he illustrates this theory himself, by

constructing out of the rude materials of a distant time a monument of

genius that transports us at once into the midst of the Feudal Ages,-and

this without the incongruity which usually attaches to a modernantique.

In like manner, I have attempted to seize the characteristic expression of

a distant age, and to exhibit it in the freshness of life.  But in an essential

particular, I have deviated from the plan of the French historian.  I have

suffered the scaffolding to remain after the building has been completed.

In other words, I have shown to the reader the steps of the process by

which I have come to my conclusions.  Instead of requiring him to take

my version of the story on trust, I have endeavored to give him a reason

for my faith.  By copious citations from the original authorities, and by

such critical notices of them as would explain to him the influences to

which they were subjected, I have endeavored to put him in a position

for judging for himself, and thus for revising, and, if need be, reversing,

the judgments of the historian.  He will, at any rate, by this means, be

enabled to estimate the difficulty of arriving at truth amidst the conflict

of testimony; and he will learn to place little reliance on those writers

who pronounce on the mysterious past with what Fontenelle calls "a

frightful degree of certainty,"--a spirit the most opposite to that of the

true philosophy of history.



Yet it must be admitted, that the chronicler who records the events of an

earlier age has some obvious advantages in the store of manuscript

materials at his command,--the statements of friends, rivals, and enemies,

furnishing a wholesome counterpoise to each other; and also, in the

general course of events, as they actually occurred, affording the best

commentary on the true motives of the parties.  The actor, engaged in the

heat of the strife, finds his view bounded by the circle around him and

his vision blinded by the smoke and dust of the conflict: while the

spectator, whose eye ranges over the ground from a more distant and

elevated point, though the individual objects may lose somewhat of their

vividness, takes in at a glance all the operations of the field.  Paradoxical

as it may appear, truth rounded on contemporary testimony would seem,

after all, as likely to be attained by the writer of a later day, as by

contemporaries themselves.



Before closing these remarks, I may be permitted to add a few of a

personal nature.  In several foreign notices of my writings, the author has

been said to be blind; and more than once I have had the credit of having

lost my sight in the composition of my first history.  When I have met

with such erroneous accounts, I have hastened to correct them.  But the

present occasion affords me the best means of doing so; and I am the

more desirous of this, as I fear some of my own remarks, in the Prefaces

to my former histories, have led to the mistake.



While at the University, I received an injury in one of my eyes, which

deprived me of the sight of it.  The other, soon after, was attacked by

inflammation so severely, that, for some time, I lost the sight of that also;

and though it was subsequently restored, the organ was so much

disordered as to remain permanently debilitated, while twice in my life,

since, I have been deprived of the use of it for all purposes of reading

and writing, for several years together.  It was during one of these

periods that I received from Madrid the materials for the "History of

Ferdinand and Isabella," and in my disabled condition, with my

Transatlantic treasures lying around me, I was like one pining from

hunger in the midst of abundance.  In this state, I resolved to make the

ear, if possible, do the work of the eye.  I procured the services of a

secretary, who read to me the various authorities; and in time I became

so far familiar with the sounds of the different foreign languages (to

some of which, indeed, I had been previously accustomed by a residence

abroad), that I could comprehend his reading without much difficulty.

As the reader proceeded, I dictated copious notes; and, when these had

swelled to a considerable amount, they were read to me repeatedly, till I

had mastered their contents sufficiently for the purposes of composition.

The same notes furnished an easy means of reference to sustain the text.



Still another difficulty occurred, in the mechanical labor of writing,

which I found a severe trial to the eye.  This was remedied by means of a

writing-case, such as is used by the blind, which enabled me to commit

my thoughts to paper without the aid of sight, serving me equally well in

the dark as in the light.  The characters thus formed made a near

approach to hieroglyphics; but my secretary became expert in the art of

deciphering, and a fair copy--with a liberal allowance for unavoidable

blunders--was transcribed for the 'use of the printer.  I have described the

process with more minuteness, as some curiosity has been repeatedly

expressed in reference to my modus operandi under my privations, and

the knowledge of it may be of some assistance to others in similar

circumstances.



Though I was encouraged by the sensible progress of my work, it was

necessarily slow.  But in time the tendency to inflammation diminished,

and the strength of the eye was confirmed more and more.  It was at

length so far restored, that I could read for several hours of the day

though my labors in this way necessarily terminated with the daylight.

Nor could I ever dispense with the services of a secretary, or with the

writing-case; for, contrary to the usual experience, I have found writing a

severer trial to the eye than reading,--a remark, however, which does not

apply to the reading of manuscript; and to enable myself therefore, to

revise my composition more carefully, I caused a copy of the "History of

Ferdinand and Isabella" to be printed for my own inspection, before it

was sent to the press for publication.  Such as I have described was the

improved state of my health during the preparation of the "Conquest of

Mexico"; and, satisfied with being raised so nearly to a level with the

rest of my species, I scarcely envied the superior good fortune of those

who could prolong their studies into the evening, and the later hours of

the night.



But a change has again taken place during the last two years.  The sight

of my eye has become gradually dimmed, while the sensibility of the

nerve has been so far increased, that for several weeks of the last year I

have not opened a volume, and through the whole time I have not had the

use of it, on an average, for more than an hour a day.  Nor can I cheer

myself with the delusive expectation, that, impaired as the organ has

become, from having been tasked, probably, beyond its strength, it can

ever renew its youth, or be of much service to me hereafter in my literary

researches.  Whether I shall have the heart to enter, as I had proposed, on

a new and more extensive field of historical labor, with these

impediments, I cannot say.  Perhaps long habit, and a natural desire to

follow up the career which I have so long pursued, may make this, in a

manner, necessary, as my past experience has already proved that it is

practicable.



From this statement--too long, I fear, for his patience--the reader, who

feels any curiosity about the matter, will understand the real extent of my

embarrassments in my historical pursuits.  That they have not been very

light will be readily admitted, when it is considered that I have had but a

limited use of my eye, in its best state, and that much of the time I have

been debarred from the use of it altogether.  Yet the difficulties I have

had to contend with are very far inferior to those which fall to the lot of a

blind man.  I know of no historian, now alive, who can claim the glory of

having overcome such obstacles, but the author of "La Conquete de

l'Angleterre par les Normands"; who, to use his own touching and

beautiful language, "has made himself the friend of darkness"; and who,

to a profound philosophy that requires no light but that from within,

unites a capacity for extensive and various research, that might well

demand the severest application of the student.



The remarks into which I have been led at such length will, I trust, not be

set down by the reader to an unworthy egotism, but to their true source, a

desire to correct a misapprehension to which I may have unintentionally

given rise myself, and which has gained me the credit with some--far

from grateful to my feelings, since undeserved--of having surmounted

the incalculable obstacles which lie in the path of the blind man.



Boston, April 2, 1847.
