





Jerusalem Delivered



by Torquato Tasso






FIRST BOOK



THE ARGUMENT.

God sends his angel to Tortosa down,

Godfrey unites the Christian Peers and Knights;

And all the Lords and Princes of renown

Choose him their Duke, to rule the wares and fights.

He mustereth all his host, whose number known,

He sends them to the fort that Sion hights;

The aged tyrant Juda's land that guides,

In fear and trouble, to resist provides.





I

The sacred armies, and the godly knight,

That the great sepulchre of Christ did free,

I sing; much wrought his valor and foresight,

And in that glorious war much suffered he;

In vain 'gainst him did Hell oppose her might,

In vain the Turks and Morians armed be:

His soldiers wild, to brawls and mutinies prest,

Reduced he to peace, so Heaven him blest.



II

O heavenly Muse, that not with fading bays

Deckest thy brow by the Heliconian spring,

But sittest crowned with stars' immortal rays

In Heaven, where legions of bright angels sing;

Inspire life in my wit, my thoughts upraise,

My verse ennoble, and forgive the thing,

If fictions light I mix with truth divine,

And fill these lines with other praise than thine.



III

Thither thou know'st the world is best inclined

Where luring Parnass most his sweet imparts,

And truth conveyed in verse of gentle kind

To read perhaps will move the dullest hearts:

So we, if children young diseased we find,

Anoint with sweets the vessel's foremost parts

To make them taste the potions sharp we give;

They drink deceived, and so deceived, they live.



IV

Ye noble Princes, that protect and save

The Pilgrim Muses, and their ship defend

From rock of Ignorance and Error's wave,

Your gracious eyes upon this labor bend:

To you these tales of love and conquest brave

I dedicate, to you this work I send:

My Muse hereafter shall perhaps unfold

Your fights, your battles, and your combats bold.



V

For if the Christian Princes ever strive

To win fair Greece out of the tyrants' hands,

And those usurping Ismaelites deprive

Of woful Thrace, which now captived stands,

You must from realms and seas the Turks forth drive,

As Godfrey chased them from Juda's lands,

And in this legend, all that glorious deed,

Read, whilst you arm you; arm you, whilst you read.



VI

Six years were run since first in martial guise

The Christian Lords warraid the eastern land;

Nice by assault, and Antioch by surprise,

Both fair, both rich, both won, both conquered stand,

And this defended they in noblest wise

'Gainst Persian knights and many a valiant band;

Tortosa won, lest winter might them shend,

They drew to holds, and coming spring attend.



VII

The sullen season now was come and gone,

That forced them late cease from their noble war,

When God Almighty form his lofty throne,

Set in those parts of Heaven that purest are

(As far above the clear stars every one,

As it is hence up to the highest star),

Looked down, and all at once this world beheld,

Each land, each city, country, town and field.



VIII

All things he viewed, at last in Syria stayed

Upon the Christian Lords his gracious eye,

That wondrous look wherewith he oft surveyed

Men's secret thoughts that most concealed lie

He cast on puissant Godfrey, that assayed

To drive the Turks from Sion's bulwarks high,

And, full of zeal and faith, esteemed light

All worldly honor, empire, treasure, might:

IX

In Baldwin next he spied another thought,

Whom spirits proud to vain ambition move:

Tancred he saw his life's joy set at naught,

So woe-begone was he with pains of love:

Boemond the conquered folk of Antioch brought,

The gentle yoke of Christian rule to prove:

He taught them laws, statutes and customs new,

Arts, crafts, obedience, and religion true;



X

And with such care his busy work he plied,

That to naught else his acting thoughts he bent:

In young Rinaldo fierce desires he spied,

And noble heart of rest impatient;

To wealth or sovereign power he naught applied

His wits, but all to virtue excellent;

Patterns and rules of skill, and courage bold,

He took from Guelpho, and his fathers old.



XI

Thus when the Lord discovered had, and seen

The hidden secrets of each worthy's breast,

Out of the hierarchies of angels sheen

The gentle Gabriel called he from the rest,

'Twixt God and souls of men that righteous been

Ambassador is he, forever blest,

The just commands of Heaven's Eternal King,

'Twixt skies and earth, he up and down doth bring.



XII

To whom the Lord thus spake: "Godfredo find,

And in my name ask him, why doth he rest?

Why be his arms to ease and peace resigned?

Why frees he not Jerusalem distrest?

His peers to counsel call, each baser mind

Let him stir up; for, chieftain of the rest

I choose him here, the earth shall him allow,

His fellows late shall be his subjects now."



XIII


This said, the angel swift himself prepared

To execute the charge imposed aright,

In form of airy members fair imbared,

His spirits pure were subject to our sight,

Like to a man in show and shape he fared,

But full of heavenly majesty and might,

A stripling seemed he thrive five winters old,

And radiant beams adorned his locks of gold.



XIV

Of silver wings he took a shining pair,

Fringed with gold, unwearied, nimble, swift;

With these he parts the winds, the clouds, the air,

And over seas and earth himself doth lift,

Thus clad he cut the spheres and circles fair,

And the pure skies with sacred feathers clift;

On Libanon at first his foot he set,

And shook his wings with rory May dews wet.



XV

Then to Tortosa's confines swiftly sped

The sacred messenger, with headlong flight;

Above the eastern wave appeared red

The rising sun, yet scantly half in sight;

Godfrey e'en then his morn-devotions said,

As was his custom, when with Titan bright

Appeared the angel in his shape divine,

Whose glory far obscured Phoebus' shine.



XVI

"Godfrey," quoth he, "behold the season fit

To war, for which thou waited hast so long,

Now serves the time, if thou o'erslip not it,

To free Jerusalem from thrall and wrong:

Thou with thy Lords in council quickly sit;

Comfort the feeble, and confirm the strong,

The Lord of Hosts their general doth make thee,

And for their chieftain they shall gladly take thee.



XVII

"I, messenger from everlasting Jove,

In his great name thus his behests do tell;

Oh, what sure hope of conquest ought thee move,

What zeal, what love should in thy bosom dwell!"

This said, he vanished to those seats above,

In height and clearness which the rest excel,

Down fell the Duke, his joints dissolved asunder,

Blind with the light, and strucken dead with wonder.



XVIII

But when recovered, he considered more,

The man, his manner, and his message said;

If erst he wished, now he longed sore

To end that war, whereof he Lord was made;

Nor swelled his breast with uncouth pride therefore,

That Heaven on him above this charge had laid,

But, for his great Creator would the same,

His will increased: so fire augmenteth flame.



XIX

The captains called forthwith from every tent,

Unto the rendezvous he them invites;

Letter on letter, post on post he sent,

Entreatance fair with counsel he unites,

All, what a noble courage could augment,

The sleeping spark of valor what incites,

He used, that all their thoughts to honor raised,

Some praised, some paid, some counselled, all pleased.



XX

The captains, soldiers, all, save Boemond, came,

And pitched their tents, some in the fields without,

Some of green boughs their slender cabins frame,

Some lodged were Tortosa's streets about,

Of all the host the chief of worth and name

Assembled been, a senate grave and stout;

Then Godfrey, after silence kept a space,

Lift up his voice, and spake with princely grace:



XXI

"Warriors, whom God himself elected hath

His worship true in Sion to restore,

And still preserved from danger, harm and scath,

By many a sea and many an unknown shore,

You have subjected lately to his faith

Some provinces rebellious long before:

And after conquests great, have in the same

Erected trophies to his cross and name.



XXII

"But not for this our homes we first forsook,

And from our native soil have marched so far:

Nor us to dangerous seas have we betook,

Exposed to hazard of so far sought war,

Of glory vain to gain an idle smook,

And lands possess that wild and barbarous are:

That for our conquests were too mean a prey,

To shed our bloods, to work our souls' decay.



XXIII

"But this the scope was of our former thought, --

Of Sion's fort to scale the noble wall,

The Christian folk from bondage to have brought,

Wherein, alas, they long have lived thrall,

In Palestine an empire to have wrought,

Where godliness might reign perpetual,

And none be left, that pilgrims might denay

To see Christ's tomb, and promised vows to pay.



XXIV

"What to this hour successively is done

Was full of peril, to our honor small,

Naught to our first designment, if we shun

The purposed end, or here lie fixed all.

What boots it us there wares to have begun,

Or Europe raised to make proud Asia thrall,

If our beginnings have this ending known,

Not kingdoms raised, but armies overthrown?



XXV

"Not as we list erect we empires new

On frail foundations laid in earthly mould,

Where of our faith and country be but few

Among the thousands stout of Pagans bold,

Where naught behoves us trust to Greece untrue,

And Western aid we far removed behold:

Who buildeth thus, methinks, so buildeth he,

As if his work should his sepulchre be.



XXVI

"Turks, Persians conquered, Antiochia won,

Be glorious acts, and full of glorious praise,

By Heaven's mere grace, not by our prowess done:

Those conquests were achieved by wondrous ways,

If now from that directed course we run

The God of Battles thus before us lays,

His loving kindness shall we lose, I doubt,

And be a byword to the lands about.



XXVII

"Let not these blessings then sent from above

Abused be, or split in profane wise,

But let the issue correspondent prove

To good beginnings of each enterprise;

The gentle season might our courage move,

Now every passage plain and open lies:

What lets us then the great Jerusalem

With valiant squadrons round about to hem?



XXVIII

"Lords, I protest, and hearken all to it,

Ye times and ages, future, present, past,

Hear all ye blessed in the heavens that sit,

The time for this achievement hasteneth fast:

The longer rest worse will the season fit,

Our sureties shall with doubt be overcast.

If we forslow the siege I well foresee

From Egypt will the Pagans succored be."



XXIX

This said, the hermit Peter rose and spake,

Who sate in counsel those great Lords among:

"At my request this war was undertake,

In private cell, who erst lived closed long,

What Godfrey wills, of that no question make,

There cast no doubts where truth is plain and strong,

Your acts, I trust, will correspond his speech,

Yet one thing more I would you gladly teach.



XXX

"These strifes, unless I far mistake the thing,

And discords raised oft in disordered sort,

Your disobedience and ill managing

Of actions lost, for want of due support,

Refer I justly to a further spring,

Spring of sedition, strife, oppression, tort,

I mean commanding power to sundry given,

In thought, opinion, worth, estate, uneven.



XXXI

"Where divers Lords divided empire hold,

Where causes be by gifts, not justice tried,

Where offices be falsely bought and sold,

Needs must the lordship there from virtue slide.

Of friendly parts one body then uphold,

Create one head, the rest to rule and guide:

To one the regal power and sceptre give,

That henceforth may your King and Sovereign live."



XXXII

And therewith stayed his speech.  O gracious Muse,

What kindling motions in their breasts do fry?

With grace divine the hermit's talk infuse,

That in their hearts his words may fructify;

By this a virtuous concord they did choose,

And all contentions then began to die;

The Princes with the multitude agree,

That Godfrey ruler of those wars should be.



XXXIII

This power they gave him, by his princely right,

All to command, to judge all, good and ill,

Laws to impose to lands subdued by might,

To maken war both when and where he will,

To hold in due subjection every wight,

Their valors to be guided by his skill;

This done, Report displays her tell-tale wings,

And to each ear the news and tidings brings.



XXXIV

She told the soldiers, who allowed him meet

And well deserving of that sovereign place.

Their first salutes and acclamations sweet

Received he, with love and gentle grace;

After their reverence done with kind regreet

Requited was, with mild and cheerful face,

He bids his armies should the following day

On those fair plains their standards proud display.



XXXV

The golden sun rose from the silver wave,

And with his beams enamelled every green,

When  up arose each warrior bold and brave,

Glistering in filed steel and armor sheen,

With jolly plumes their crests adorned they have,

And all tofore their chieftain mustered been:

He from a mountain cast his curious sight

On every footman and on every knight.



XXXVI

My mind, Time's enemy, Oblivion's foe,

Disposer true of each noteworthy thing,

Oh, let thy virtuous might avail me so,

That I each troop and captain great may sing,

That in this glorious war did famous grow,

Forgot till now by Time's evil handling:

This work, derived from my treasures dear,

Let all times hearken, never age outwear.

XXXVII

The French came foremost battailous and bold,

Late led by Hugo, brother to their King,

From France the isle that rivers four infold

With rolling streams descending from their spring,

But Hugo dead, the lily fair of gold,

Their wonted ensign they tofore them bring,

Under Clotharius great, a captain good,

And hardy knight ysprong of princes' blood.



XXXVIII

A thousand were they in strong armors clad,

Next whom there marched forth another band,

That number, nature, and instruction had,

Like them to fight far off or charge at hand,

All valiant Normans by Lord Robert lad,

The native Duke of that renowned land,

Two bishops next their standards proud upbare,

Called Reverend William, and Good Ademare.



XXXIX

Their jolly notes they chanted loud and clear

On merry mornings at the mass divine,

And horrid helms high on their heads they bear

When their fierce courage they to war incline:

The first four hundred horsemen gathered near

To Orange town, and lands that it confine:

But Ademare the Poggian youth brought out,

In number like, in hard assays as stout.



XL

Baldwin, his ensign fair, did next dispread

Among his Bulloigners of noble fame,

His brother gave him all his troops to lead,

When he commander of the field became;

The Count Carinto did him straight succeed,

Grave in advice, well skilled in Mars his game,

Four hundred brought he, but so many thrice

Led Baldwin, clad in gilden arms of price.



XLI

Guelpho next them the land and place possest,

Whose fortunes good with his great acts agree,

By his Italian sire, fro the house of Est,

Well could he bring his noble pedigree,

A German born with rich possessions blest,

A worthy branch sprung from the Guelphian tree.

'Twixt Rhene and Danubie the land contained

He ruled, where Swaves and Rhetians whilom reigned.



XLII

His mother's heritage was this and right,

To which he added more by conquest got,

From thence approved men of passing might

He brought, that death or danger feared not:

It was their wont in feasts to spend the night,

And pass cold days in baths and houses hot.

Five thousand late, of which now scantly are

The third part left, such is the chance of war.



XLIII

The nation then with crisped locks and fair,

That dwell between the seas and Arden Wood,

Where Mosel streams and Rhene the meadows wear,

A battel soil for grain, for pasture good,

Their islanders with them, who oft repair

Their earthen bulwarks 'gainst the ocean flood,

The flood, elsewhere that ships and barks devours,

But there drowns cities, countries, towns and towers;



XLIV

Both in one troop, and but a thousand all,

Under another Robert fierce they run.

Then the English squadron, soldiers stout and tall,

By William led, their sovereign's younger son,

These archers be, and with them come withal,

A people near the Northern Pole that wone,

Whom Ireland sent from loughs and forests hoar,

Divided far by sea from Europe's shore.



XLV

Tancredi next, nor 'mongst them all was one,

Rinald except, a prince of greater might,

With majesty his noble countenance shone,

High were his thoughts, his heart was bold in fight,

No shameful vice his worth had overgone,

His fault was love, by unadvised sight,

Bred in the dangers of adventurous arms,

And nursed with griefs, with sorrows, woes, and harms.



XLVI

Fame tells, that on that ever-blessed day,

When Christian swords with Persian blood were dyed,

The furious Prince Tancredi from that fray

His coward foes chased through forests wide,

Till tired with the fight, the heat, the way,

He sought some place to rest his wearied side,

And drew him near a silver stream that played

Among wild herbs under the greenwood shade.



XLVII

A Pagan damsel there unwares he met,

In shining steel, all save her visage fair,

Her hair unbound she made a wanton net,

To catch sweet breathing from the cooling air.

On her at gaze his longing looks he set,

Sight, wonder; wonder, love; love bred his care;

O love, o wonder; love new born, new bred,

Now groan, now armed, this champion captive led.



XLVIII

Her helm the virgin donned, and but some wight

She feared might come to aid him as they fought,

Her courage earned to have assailed the knight;

Yet thence she fled, uncompanied, unsought,

And left her image in his heart ypight;

Her sweet idea wandered through his thought,

Her shape, her gesture, and her place in mind

He kept, and blew love's fire with that wind.



XLIX

Well might you read his sickness in his eyes,

Their banks were full, their tide was at the flow,

His help far off, his hurt within him lies,

His hopes unstrung, his cares were fit to mow;

Eight hundred horse (from Champain came) he guies,

Champain a land where wealth, ease, pleasure, grow,

Rich Nature's pomp and pride, the Tirrhene main

There woos the hills, hills woo the valleys plain.



L

Two hundred Greeks came next, in fight well tried,

Not surely armed in steel or iron strong,

But each a glaive had pendant by his side,

Their bows and quivers at their shoulders hung,

Their horses well inured to chase and ride,

In diet spare, untired with labor long;

Ready to charge, and to retire at will,

Though broken, scattered, fled, they skirmish still;



LI

Tatine their guide, and except Tatine, none

Of all the Greeks went with the Christian host;

O sin, O shame, O Greece accurst alone!

Did not this fatal war affront thy coast?

Yet safest thou an idle looker-on,

And glad attendest which side won or lost:

Now if thou be a bondslave vile become,

No wrong is that, but God's most righteous doom.



LII

In order last, but first in worth and fame,

Unfeared in fight, untired with hurt or wound,

The noble squadron of adventurers came,

Terrors to all that tread on Asian ground:

Cease Orpheus of thy Minois, Arthur shame

To boast of Lancelot, or thy table round:

For these whom antique times with laurel drest,

These far exceed them, thee, and all the rest.



LIII

Dudon of Consa was their guide and lord,

And for of worth and birth alike they been,

They chose him captain, by their free accord,

For he most acts had done, most battles seen;

Grave was the man in years, in looks, in word,

His locks were gray, yet was his courage green,

Of worth and might the noble badge he bore,

Old scars of grievous wounds received of yore.

LIV

After came Eustace, well esteemed man

For Godfrey's sake his brother, and his own;

The King of Norway's heir Gernando than,

Proud of his father's title, sceptre, crown;

Roger of Balnavill, and Engerlan,

For hardy knights approved were and known;

Besides were numbered in that warlike train

Rambald, Gentonio, and the Gerrards twain.



LV

Ubaldo then, and puissant Rosimond,

Of Lancaster the heir, in rank succeed;

Let none forget Obizo of Tuscain land,

Well worthy praise for many a worthy deed;

Nor those three brethren, Lombards fierce and yond,

Achilles, Sforza, and stern Palamede;

Nor Otton's shield he conquered in those stowres,

In which a snake a naked child devours.



LVI

Guascher and Raiphe in valor like there was.

The one and other Guido, famous both,

Germer and Eberard to overpass,

In foul oblivion would my Muse be loth,

With his Gildippes dear, Edward alas,

A loving pair, to war among them go'th

In bond of virtuous love together tied,

Together served they, and together died.



LVII

In school of love are all things taught we see,

There learned this maid of arms the ireful guise,

Still by his side a faithful guard went she,

One true-love knot their lives together ties,

No would to one alone could dangerous be,

But each the smart of other's anguish tries,

If one were hurt, the other felt the sore,

She lost her blood, he spent his life therefore.



LVIII

But these and all, Rinaldo far exceeds,

Star of his sphere, the diamond of this ring,

The nest where courage with sweet mercy breeds:

A comet worthy each eye's wondering,

His years are fewer than his noble deeds,

His fruit is ripe soon as his blossoms spring,

Armed, a Mars, might coyest Venus move,

And if disarmed, then God himself of Love.



LIX

Sophia by Adige's flowery bank him bore,

Sophia the fair, spouse to Bertoldo great,

Fit mother for that pearl, and before

The tender imp was weaned from the teat,

The Princess Maud him took, in Virtue's lore

She brought him up fit for each worthy feat,

Till of these wares the golden trump he hears,

That soundeth glory, fame, praise in his ears.



LX

And then, though scantly three times five years old,

He fled alone, by many an unknown coast,

O'er Aegean Seas by many a Greekish hold,

Till he arrived at the Christian host;

A noble flight, adventurous, brave, and bold,

Whereon a valiant prince might justly boast,

Three years he served in field, when scant begin

Few golden hairs to deck his ivory chin.



LXI

The horsemen past, their void-left stations fill

The bands on foot, and Reymond them beforn,

Of Tholouse lord, from lands near Piraene Hill

By Garound streams and salt sea billows worn,

Four thousand foot he brought, well armed, and skill

Had they all pains and travels to have borne,

Stout men of arms and with their guide of power

Like Troy's old town defenced with Ilion's tower.



LXII

Next Stephen of Amboise did five thousand lead,

The men he prest from Tours and Blois but late,

To hard assays unfit, unsure at need,

Yet armed to point in well-attempted plate,

The land did like itself the people breed,

The soil is gentle, smooth, soft, delicate;

Boldly they charge, but soon retire for doubt,

Like fire of straw, soon kindled, soon burnt out.



LXIII

The third Alcasto marched, and with him

The boaster brought six thousand Switzers bold,

Audacious were their looks, their faces grim,

Strong castles on the Alpine clifts they hold,

Their shares and coulters broke, to armors trim

They change that metal, cast in warlike mould,

And with this band late herds and flocks that guide,

Now kings and realms he threatened and defied.



LXIV

The glorious standard last to Heaven they sprad,

With Peter's keys ennobled and his crown,

With it seven thousand stout Camillo had,

Embattailed in walls of iron brown:

In this adventure and occasion, glad

So to revive the Romans' old renown,

Or prove at least to all of wiser thought,

Their hearts were fertile land although unwrought.

LXV

But now was passed every regiment,

Each band, each troop, each person worth regard

When Godfrey with his lords to counsel went,

And thus the Duke his princely will declared:

"I will when day next clears the firmament,

Our ready host in haste be all prepared,

Closely to march to Sion's noble wall,

Unseen, unheard, or undescried at all.



LXVI

"Prepare you then for travel strong and light,

Fierce to the combat, glad to victory."

And with that word and warning soon was dight,

Each soldier, longing for near coming glory,

Impatient be they of the morning bright,

Of honor so them pricked the memory:

But yet their chieftain had conceived a fear

Within his heart, but kept it secret there.



LXVII

For he by faithful spial was assured,

That Egypt's King was forward on his way,

And to arrive at Gaza old procured,


A fort that on the Syrian frontiers lay,

Nor thinks he that a man to wars inured

Will aught forslow, or in his journey stay,

For well he knew him for a dangerous foe:

An herald called he then, and spake him so:



LXVIII

"A pinnace take thee swift as shaft from bow,

And speed thee, Henry, to the Greekish main,

There should arrive, as I by letters know

From one that never aught reports in vain,

A valiant youth in whom all virtues flow,

To help us this great conquest to obtain,

The Prince of Danes he is, and brings to war

A troop with him from under the Arctic star.



LXIX

"And for I doubt the Greekish monarch sly

Will use with him some of his wonted craft,

To stay his passage, or divert awry

Elsewhere his forces, his first journey laft,

My herald good and messenger well try,

See that these succors be not us beraft,

But send him thence with such convenient speed

As with his honor stands and with our need.



LXX

"Return not thou, but Legier stay behind,

And move the Greekish Prince to send us aid,

Tell him his kingly promise doth him bind

To give us succors, by his covenant made."

This said, and thus instruct, his letters signed

The trusty herald took, nor longer stayed,

But sped him thence to done his Lord's behest,

And thus the Duke reduced his thoughts to rest.

LXXI

Aurora bright her crystal gates unbarred,

And bridegroom-like forth stept the glorious sun,

When trumpets loud and clarions shrill were heard,

And every one to rouse him fierce begun,

Sweet music to each heart for war prepared,

The soldiers glad by heaps to harness run;

So if with drought endangered be their grain,

Poor ploughmen joy when thunders promise rain.



LXXII

Some shirts of mail, some coats of plate put on,

Some donned a cuirass, some a corslet bright,

And halbert some, and some a habergeon,

So every one in arms was quickly dight,

His wonted guide each soldier tends upon,

Loose in the wind waved their banners light,

Their standard royal toward Heaven they spread,

The cross triumphant on the Pagans dead.



LXXIII

Meanwhile the car that bears the lightning brand

Upon the eastern hill was mounted high,

And smote the glistering armies as they stand,

With quivering beams which dazed the wondering eye,

That Phaeton-like it fired sea and land,

The sparkles seemed up to the skies to fly,

The horses' neigh and clattering armors' sound

Pursue the echo over dale and down.



LXXIV

Their general did with due care provide

To save his men from ambush and from train,

Some troops of horse that lightly armed ride

He sent to scour the woods and forests main,

His pioneers their busy work applied

To even the paths and make the highways plain,

They filled the pits, and smoothed the rougher ground,

And opened every strait they closed found.



LXXV

They meet no forces gathered by their foe,

No towers defenced with rampire, moat, or wall,

No stream, no wood, no mountain could forslow

Their hasty pace, or stop their march at all;

So when his banks the prince of rivers, Po,

Doth overswell, he breaks with hideous fall

The mossy rocks and trees o'ergrown with age,

Nor aught withstands his fury and his rage.



LXXVI

The King of Tripoli in every hold

Shut up his men, munition and his treasure,

The straggling troops sometimes assail he would,

Save that he durst not move them to displeasure;

He stayed their rage with presents, gifts and gold,

And led them through his land at ease and leisure,

To keep his realm in peace and rest he chose,

With what conditions Godfrey list impose.



LXXVII

Those of Mount Seir, that neighboreth by east

The Holy City, faithful folk each one,

Down from the hill descended most and least,

And to the Christian Duke by heaps they gone,

And welcome him and his with joy and feast;

On him they smile, on him they gaze alone,

And were his guides, as faithful from that day

As Hesperus, that leads the sun his way.



LXXVIII

Along the sands his armies safe they guide

By ways secure, to them well known before,

Upon the tumbling billows fraughted ride

The armed ships, coasting along the shore,

Which for the camp might every day provide

To bring munition good and victuals store:

The isles of Greece sent in provision meet,

And store of wine from Scios came and Crete.



LXXIX

Great Neptune grieved underneath the load

Of ships, hulks, galleys, barks and brigantines,

In all the mid-earth seas was left no road

Wherein the Pagan his bold sails untwines,

Spread was the huge Armado, wide and broad,

From Venice, Genes, and towns which them confines,

From Holland, England, France and Sicil sent,

And all for Juda ready bound and bent.



LXXX

All these together were combined, and knit

With surest bonds of love and friendship strong,

Together sailed they fraught with all things fit

To service done by land that might belong,

And when occasion served disbarked it,

Then sailed the Asian coasts and isles along;

Thither with speed their hasty course they plied,

Where Christ the Lord for our offences died.



LXXXI

The brazen trump of iron-winged fame,

That mingleth faithful troth with forged lies,

Foretold the heathen how the Christians came,

How thitherward the conquering army hies,

Of every knight it sounds the worth and name,

Each troop, each band, each squadron it descries,

And threat'neth death to those, fire, sword and slaughter,

Who held captived Israel's fairest daughter.



LXXXII

The fear of ill exceeds the evil we fear,

For so our present harms still most annoy us,

Each mind is prest and open every ear

To hear new tidings though they no way joy us,

This secret rumor whispered everywhere

About the town, these Christians will destroy us,

The aged king his coming evil that knew,

Did cursed thoughts in his false heart renew.



LXXXIII

This aged prince ycleped Aladine,

Ruled in care, new sovereign of this state,

A tyrant erst, but now his fell engine

His graver are did somewhat mitigate,

He heard the western lords would undermine

His city's wall, and lay his towers prostrate,

To former fear he adds a new-come doubt,

Treason he fears within, and force without.



LXXXIV

For nations twain inhabit there and dwell

Of sundry faith together in that town,

The lesser part on Christ believed well,

On Termagent the more and on Mahown,

But when this king had made this conquest fell,

And brought that region subject to his crown,

Of burdens all he set the Paynims large,

And on poor Christians laid the double charge.



LXXXV

His native wrath revived with this new thought,

With age and years that weakened was of yore,

Such madness in his cruel bosom wrought,

That now than ever blood he thirsteth more?

So stings a snake that to the fire is brought,

Which harmless lay benumbed with cold before,

A lion so his rage renewed hath,

Though fame before, if he be moved to wrath.



LXXXVI

"I see," quoth he, "some expectation vain,

In these false Christians, and some new content,

Our common loss they trust will be their gain,

They laugh, we weep; they joy while we lament;

And more, perchance, by treason or by train,

To murder us they secretly consent,

Or otherwise to work us harm and woe,

To ope the gates, and so let in our foe.



LXXXVII

"But lest they should effect their cursed will,

Let us destroy this serpent on his nest;

Both young and old, let us this people kill,

The tender infants at their mothers' breast,

Their houses burn, their holy temples fill

With bodies slain of those that loved them best,

And on that tomb they hold so much in price,

Let's offer up their priests in sacrifice."



LXXXVIII

Thus thought the tyrant in his traitorous mind,

But durst not follow what he had decreed,

Yet if the innocents some mercy find,

From cowardice, not truth, did that proceed,

His noble foes durst not his craven kind

Exasperate by such a bloody deed.

For if he need, what grace could then be got,

If thus of peace he broke or loosed the knot?



LXXXIX

His villain heart his cursed rage restrained,

To other thoughts he bent his fierce desire,

The suburbs first flat with the earth he plained,

And burnt their buildings with devouring fire,

Loth was the wretch the Frenchman should have gained

Or help or ease, by finding aught entire,

Cedron, Bethsaida, and each watering else

Empoisoned he, both fountains, springs, and wells.



XC

So wary wise this child of darkness was;

The city's self he strongly fortifies,

Three sides by site it well defenced has,

That's only weak that to the northward lies;

With mighty bars of long enduring brass,

The steel-bound doors and iron gates he ties,

And, lastly, legions armed well provides

Of subjects born, and hired aid besides.

