





CHAPTER IV - EPILOGUE TO "AN INLAND VOYAGE"







THE country where they journeyed, that green, breezy valley of the 

Loing, is one very attractive to cheerful and solitary people.  The 

weather was superb; all night it thundered and lightened, and the 

rain fell in sheets; by day, the heavens were cloudless, the sun 

fervent, the air vigorous and pure.  They walked separate:  the 

Cigarette plodding behind with some philosophy, the lean Arethusa 

posting on ahead.  Thus each enjoyed his own reflections by the 

way; each had perhaps time to tire of them before he met his 

comrade at the designated inn; and the pleasures of society and 

solitude combined to fill the day.  The Arethusa carried in his 

knapsack the works of Charles of Orleans, and employed some of the 

hours of travel in the concoction of English roundels.  In this 

path, he must thus have preceded Mr. Lang, Mr. Dobson, Mr. Henley, 

and all contemporary roundeleers; but for good reasons, he will be 

the last to publish the result.  The Cigarette walked burthened 

with a volume of Michelet.  And both these books, it will be seen, 

played a part in the subsequent adventure.



The Arethusa was unwisely dressed.  He is no precisian in attire; 

but by all accounts, he was never so ill-inspired as on that tramp; 

having set forth indeed, upon a moment's notice, from the most 

unfashionable spot in Europe, Barbizon.  On his head he wore a 

smoking-cap of Indian work, the gold lace pitifully frayed and 

tarnished.  A flannel shirt of an agreeable dark hue, which the 

satirical called black; a light tweed coat made by a good English 

tailor; ready-made cheap linen trousers and leathern gaiters 

completed his array.  In person, he is exceptionally lean; and his 

face is not, like those of happier mortals, a certificate.  For 

years he could not pass a frontier or visit a bank without 

suspicion; the police everywhere, but in his native city, looked 

askance upon him; and (though I am sure it will not be credited) he 

is actually denied admittance to the casino of Monte Carlo.  If you 

will imagine him, dressed as above, stooping under his knapsack, 

walking nearly five miles an hour with the folds of the ready-made 

trousers fluttering about his spindle shanks, and still looking 

eagerly round him as if in terror of pursuit - the figure, when 

realised, is far from reassuring.  When Villon journeyed (perhaps 

by the same pleasant valley) to his exile at Roussillon, I wonder 

if he had not something of the same appearance.  Something of the 

same preoccupation he had beyond a doubt, for he too must have 

tinkered verses as he walked, with more success than his successor.  

And if he had anything like the same inspiring weather, the same 

nights of uproar, men in armour rolling and resounding down the 

stairs of heaven, the rain hissing on the village streets, the wild 

bull's-eye of the storm flashing all night long into the bare inn-

chamber - the same sweet return of day, the same unfathomable blue 

of noon, the same high-coloured, halcyon eves - and above all, if 

he had anything like as good a comrade, anything like as keen a 

relish for what he saw, and what he ate, and the rivers that he 

bathed in, and the rubbish that he wrote, I would exchange estates 

to-day with the poor exile, and count myself a gainer.



But there was another point of similarity between the two journeys, 

for which the Arethusa was to pay dear:  both were gone upon in 

days of incomplete security.  It was not long after the Franco-

Prussian war.  Swiftly as men forget, that country-side was still 

alive with tales of uhlans, and outlying sentries, and hairbreadth 

'scapes from the ignominious cord, and pleasant momentary 

friendships between invader and invaded.  A year, at the most two 

years later, you might have tramped all that country over and not 

heard one anecdote.  And a year or two later, you would - if you 

were a rather ill-looking young man in nondescript array - have 

gone your rounds in greater safety; for along with more interesting 

matter, the Prussian spy would have somewhat faded from men's 

imaginations.



For all that, our voyager had got beyond Chateau Renard before he 

was conscious of arousing wonder.  On the road between that place 

and Chatillon-sur-Loing, however, he encountered a rural postman; 

they fell together in talk, and spoke of a variety of subjects; but 

through one and all, the postman was still visibly preoccupied, and 

his eyes were faithful to the Arethusa's knapsack.  At last, with 

mysterious roguishness, he inquired what it contained, and on being 

answered, shook his head with kindly incredulity.  "NON," said he, 

"NON, VOUS AVEZ DES PORTRAITS."  And then with a languishing 

appeal, "VOYONS, show me the portraits!"  It was some little while 

before the Arethusa, with a shout of laughter, recognised his 

drift.  By portraits he meant indecent photographs; and in the 

Arethusa, an austere and rising author, he thought to have 

identified a pornographic colporteur.  When countryfolk in France 

have made up their minds as to a person's calling, argument is 

fruitless.  Along all the rest of the way, the postman piped and 

fluted meltingly to get a sight of the collection; now he would 

upbraid, now he would reason - "VOYONS, I will tell nobody"; then 

he tried corruption, and insisted on paying for a glass of wine; 

and, at last when their ways separated - "NON," said he, "CE N'EST 

PAS BIEN DE VOTRE PART.  O NON, CE N'EST PAS BIEN."  And shaking 

his head with quite a sentimental sense of injury, he departed 

unrefreshed.



On certain little difficulties encountered by the Arethusa at 

Chatillon-sur-Loing, I have not space to dwell; another Chatillon, 

of grislier memory, looms too near at hand.  But the next day, in a 

certain hamlet called La Jussiere, he stopped to drink a glass of 

syrup in a very poor, bare drinking shop.  The hostess, a comely 

woman, suckling a child, examined the traveller with kindly and 

pitying eyes.  "You are not of this department?" she asked.  The 

Arethusa told her he was English.  "Ah!" she said, surprised.  "We 

have no English.  We have many Italians, however, and they do very 

well; they do not complain of the people of hereabouts.  An 

Englishman may do very well also; it will be something new."  Here 

was a dark saying, over which the Arethusa pondered as he drank his 

grenadine; but when he rose and asked what was to pay, the light 

came upon him in a flash.  "O, POUR VOUS," replied the landlady,  

"a halfpenny!"  POUR VOUS?  By heaven, she took him for a beggar!  

He paid his halfpenny, feeling that it were ungracious to correct 

her.  But when he was forth again upon the road, he became vexed in 

spirit.  The conscience is no gentleman, he is a rabbinical fellow; 

and his conscience told him he had stolen the syrup.



That night the travellers slept in Gien; the next day they passed 

the river and set forth (severally, as their custom was) on a short 

stage through the green plain upon the Berry side, to Chatillon-

sur-Loire.  It was the first day of the shooting; and the air rang 

with the report of firearms and the admiring cries of sportsmen.  

Overhead the birds were in consternation, wheeling in clouds, 

settling and re-arising.  And yet with all this bustle on either 

hand, the road itself lay solitary.  The Arethusa smoked a pipe 

beside a milestone, and I remember he laid down very exactly all he 

was to do at Chatillon:  how he was to enjoy a cold plunge, to 

change his shirt, and to await the Cigarette's arrival, in sublime 

inaction, by the margin of the Loire.  Fired by these ideas, he 

pushed the more rapidly forward, and came, early in the afternoon 

and in a breathing heat, to the entering-in of that ill-fated town.  

Childe Roland to the dark tower came.



A polite gendarme threw his shadow on the path.



"MONSIEUR EST VOYAGEUR?" he asked.



And the Arethusa, strong in his innocence, forgetful of his vile 

attire, replied - I had almost said with gaiety:  "So it would 

appear."



 "His papers are in order?" said the gendarme.  And when the 

Arethusa, with a slight change of voice, admitted he had none, he 

was informed (politely enough) that he must appear before the 

Commissary.



The Commissary sat at a table in his bedroom, stripped to the shirt 

and trousers, but still copiously perspiring; and when he turned 

upon the prisoner a large meaningless countenance, that was (like 

Bardolph's) "all whelks and bubuckles," the dullest might have been 

prepared for grief.  Here was a stupid man, sleepy with the heat 

and fretful at the interruption, whom neither appeal nor argument 

could reach.



THE COMMISSARY.  You have no papers?



THE ARETHUSA.  Not here.



THE COMMISSARY.  Why?



THE ARETHUSA.  I have left them behind in my valise.



THE COMMISSARY.  You know, however, that it is forbidden to 

circulate without papers?



THE ARETHUSA.  Pardon me:  I am convinced of the contrary.  I am 

here on my rights as an English subject by international treaty.



THE COMMISSARY (WITH SCORN).  You call yourself an Englishman?



THE ARETHUSA.  I do.



THE COMMISSARY.  Humph. - What is your trade?



THE ARETHUSA.  I am a Scotch advocate.



THE COMMISSARY (WITH SINGULAR ANNOYANCE).  A Scotch advocate!  Do 

you then pretend to support yourself by that in this department?



The Arethusa modestly disclaimed the pretension.  The Commissary 

had scored a point.



THE COMMISSARY.  Why, then, do you travel?



THE ARETHUSA.  I travel for pleasure.



THE COMMISSARY (POINTING TO THE KNAPSACK, AND WITH SUBLIME 

INCREDULITY).  AVEC CA?  VOYEZ-VOUS, JE SUIS UN HOMME INTELLIGENT!  

(With that?  Look here, I am a person of intelligence!)



The culprit remaining silent under this home thrust, the Commissary 

relished his triumph for a while, and then demanded (like the 

postman, but with what different expectations!) to see the contents 

of the knapsack.  And here the Arethusa, not yet sufficiently awake 

to his position, fell into a grave mistake.  There was little or no 

furniture in the room except the Commissary's chair and table; and 

to facilitate matters, the Arethusa (with all the innocence on 

earth) leant the knapsack on a corner of the bed.  The Commissary 

fairly bounded from his seat; his face and neck flushed past 

purple, almost into blue; and he screamed to lay the desecrating 

object on the floor.



The knapsack proved to contain a change of shirts, of shoes, of 

socks, and of linen trousers, a small dressing-case, a piece of 

soap in one of the shoes, two volumes of the COLLECTION JANNET 

lettered POESIES DE CHARLES D'ORLEANS, a map, and a version book 

containing divers notes in prose and the remarkable English 

roundels of the voyager, still to this day unpublished:  the 

Commissary of Chatillon is the only living man who has clapped an 

eye on these artistic trifles.  He turned the assortment over with 

a contumelious finger; it was plain from his daintiness that he 

regarded the Arethusa and all his belongings as the very temple of 

infection.  Still there was nothing suspicious about the map, 

nothing really criminal except the roundels; as for Charles of 

Orleans, to the ignorant mind of the prisoner, he seemed as good as 

a certificate; and it was supposed the farce was nearly over.



The inquisitor resumed his seat.



THE COMMISSARY (AFTER A PAUSE).  EH BIEN, JE VAIS VOUS DIRE CE QUE 

VOUS ETES.  VOUS ETES ALLEMAND ET VOUS VENEZ CHANTER A LA FOIRE.  

(Well, then, I will tell you what you are.  You are a German and 

have come to sing at the fair.)



THE ARETHUSA.  Would you like to hear me sing?  I believe I could 

convince you of the contrary.



THE COMMISSARY.  PAS DE PLAISANTERIE, MONSIEUR!



THE ARETHUSA.  Well, sir, oblige me at least by looking at this 

book.  Here, I open it with my eyes shut.  Read one of these songs 

- read this one - and tell me, you who are a man of intelligence, 

if it would be possible to sing it at a fair?



THE COMMISSARY (CRITICALLY).  MAIS OUI.  TRES BIEN.



THE ARETHUSA.  COMMENT, MONSIEUR!  What!  But do you not observe it 

is antique.  It is difficult to understand, even for you and me; 

but for the audience at a fair, it would be meaningless.



THE COMMISSARY (TAKING A PEN).  ENFIN, IL FAUI EN FINIR.  What is 

your name?



THE ARETHUSA (SPEAKING WITH THE SWALLOWING VIVACITY OF THE 

ENGLISH).  Robert-Louis-Stev'ns'n.



THE COMMISSARY (AGHAST).  HE!  QUOI?



THE ARETHUSA (PERCEIVING AND IMPROVING HIS ADVANTAGE).  Rob'rt-

Lou's-Stev'ns'n.



THE COMMISSARY (AFTER SEVERAL CONFLICTS WITH HIS PEN).  EH BIEN, IL 

FAUT SE PASSER DU NOM.  CA NE S'ECRIT PAS.  (Well, we must do 

without the name:  it is unspellable.)



The above is a rough summary of this momentous conversation, in 

which I have been chiefly careful to preserve the plums of the 

Commissary; but the remainder of the scene, perhaps because of his 

rising anger, has left but little definite in the memory of the 

Arethusa.  The Commissary was not, I think, a practised literary 

man; no sooner, at least, had he taken pen in hand and embarked on 

the composition of the PROCES-VERBAL, than he became distinctly 

more uncivil and began to show a predilection for that simplest of 

all forms of repartee:  "You lie!"  Several times the Arethusa let 

it pass, and then suddenly flared up, refused to accept more 

insults or to answer further questions, defied the Commissary to do 

his worst, and promised him, if he did, that he should bitterly 

repent it.  Perhaps if he had worn this proud front from the first, 

instead of beginning with a sense of entertainment and then going 

on to argue, the thing might have turned otherwise; for even at 

this eleventh hour the Commissary was visibly staggered.  But it 

was too late; he had been challenged the PROCES-VERBAL was begun; 

and he again squared his elbows over his writing, and the Arethusa 

was led forth a prisoner.



A step or two down the hot road stood the gendarmerie.  Thither was 

our unfortunate conducted, and there he was bidden to empty forth 

the contents of his pockets.  A handkerchief, a pen, a pencil, a 

pipe and tobacco, matches, and some ten francs of change:  that was 

all.  Not a file, not a cipher, not a scrap of writing whether to 

identify or to condemn.  The very gendarme was appalled before such 

destitution.



"I regret," he said, "that I arrested you, for I see that you are 

no VOYOU."  And he promised him every indulgence.



The Arethusa, thus encouraged, asked for his pipe.  That he was 

told was impossible, but if he chewed, he might have some tobacco.  

He did not chew, however, and asked instead to have his 

handkerchief.



"NON," said the gendarme.  "NOUS AVONS EU DES HISTOIRES DE GENS QUI 

SE SONT PENDUS."  (No, we have had histories of people who hanged 

themselves.)



"What," cried the Arethusa.  "And is it for that you refuse me my 

handkerchief?  But see how much more easily I could hang myself in 

my trousers!"



The man was struck by the novelty of the idea; but he stuck to his 

colours, and only continued to repeat vague offers of service.



"At least," said the Arethusa, "be sure that you arrest my comrade; 

he will follow me ere long on the same road, and you can tell him 

by the sack upon his shoulders."



This promised, the prisoner was led round into the back court of 

the building, a cellar door was opened, he was motioned down the 

stair, and bolts grated and chains clanged behind his descending 

person.



The philosophic and still more the imaginative mind is apt to 

suppose itself prepared for any mortal accident.  Prison, among 

other ills, was one that had been often faced by the undaunted 

Arethusa.  Even as he went down the stairs, he was telling himself 

that here was a famous occasion for a roundel, and that like the 

committed linnets of the tuneful cavalier, he too would make his 

prison musical.  I will tell the truth at once:  the roundel was 

never written, or it should be printed in this place, to raise a 

smile.  Two reasons interfered:  the first moral, the second 

physical.



It is one of the curiosities of human nature, that although all men 

are liars, they can none of them bear to be told so of themselves.  

To get and take the lie with equanimity is a stretch beyond the 

stoic; and the Arethusa, who had been surfeited upon that insult, 

was blazing inwardly with a white heat of smothered wrath.  But the 

physical had also its part.  The cellar in which he was confined 

was some feet underground, and it was only lighted by an unglazed, 

narrow aperture high up in the wall and smothered in the leaves of 

a green vine.  The walls were of naked masonry, the floor of bare 

earth; by way of furniture there was an earthenware basin, a water-

jug, and a wooden bedstead with a blue-gray cloak for bedding.  To 

be taken from the hot air of a summer's afternoon, the 

reverberation of the road and the stir of rapid exercise, and 

plunged into the gloom and damp of this receptacle for vagabonds, 

struck an instant chill upon the Arethusa's blood.  Now see in how 

small a matter a hardship may consist:  the floor was exceedingly 

uneven underfoot, with the very spade-marks, I suppose, of the 

labourers who dug the foundations of the barrack; and what with the 

poor twilight and the irregular surface, walking was impossible.  

The caged author resisted for a good while; but the chill of the 

place struck deeper and deeper; and at length, with such reluctance 

as you may fancy, he was driven to climb upon the bed and wrap 

himself in the public covering.  There, then, he lay upon the verge 

of shivering, plunged in semi-darkness, wound in a garment whose 

touch he dreaded like the plague, and (in a spirit far removed from 

resignation) telling the roll of the insults he had just received.  

These are not circumstances favourable to the muse.



Meantime (to look at the upper surface where the sun was still 

shining and the guns of sportsmen were still noisy through the 

tufted plain) the Cigarette was drawing near at his more 

philosophic pace.  In those days of liberty and health he was the 

constant partner of the Arethusa, and had ample opportunity to 

share in that gentleman's disfavour with the police.  Many a bitter 

bowl had he partaken of with that disastrous comrade.  He was 

himself a man born to float easily through life, his face and 

manner artfully recommending him to all.  There was but one 

suspicious circumstance he could not carry off, and that was his 

companion.  He will not readily forget the Commissary in what is 

ironically called the free town of Frankfort-on-the-Main ; nor the 

Franco-Belgian frontier; nor the inn at La Fere; last, but not 

least, he is pretty certain to remember Chatillon-sur-Loire.



At the town entry, the gendarme culled him like a wayside flower; 

and a moment later, two persons, in a high state of surprise, were 

confronted in the Commissary's office.  For if the Cigarette was 

surprised to be arrested, the Commissary was no less taken aback by 

the appearance and appointments of his captive.  Here was a man 

about whom there could be no mistake:  a man of an unquestionable 

and unassailable manner, in apple-pie order, dressed not with 

neatness merely but elegance, ready with his passport, at a word, 

and well supplied with money:  a man the Commissary would have 

doffed his hat to on chance upon the highway; and this BEAU 

CAVALIER unblushingly claimed the Arethusa for his comrade!  The 

conclusion of the interview was foregone; of its humours, I 

remember only one.  "Baronet?" demanded the magistrate, glancing up 

from the passport.  "ALORS, MONSIEUR, VOUS ETES LE FIRS D'UN 

BARON?"  And when the Cigarette (his one mistake throughout the 

interview) denied the soft impeachment, "ALORS," from the 

Commissary, "CE N'EST PAS VOTRE PASSEPORT!"  But these were 

ineffectual thunders; he never dreamed of laying hands upon the 

Cigarette; presently he fell into a mood of unrestrained 

admiration, gloating over the contents of the knapsack, commanding 

our friend's tailor.  Ah, what an honoured guest was the Commissary 

entertaining! what suitable clothes he wore for the warm weather! 

what beautiful maps, what an attractive work of history he carried 

in his knapsack!  You are to understand there was now but one point 

of difference between them:  what was to be done with the Arethusa? 

the Cigarette demanding his release, the Commissary still claiming 

him as the dungeon's own.  Now it chanced that the Cigarette had 

passed some years of his life in Egypt, where he had made 

acquaintance with two very bad things, cholera morbus and pashas; 

and in the eye of the Commissary, as he fingered the volume of 

Michelet, it seemed to our traveller there was something Turkish.  

I pass over this lightly; it is highly possible there was some 

misunderstanding, highly possible that the Commissary (charmed with 

his visitor) supposed the attraction to be mutual and took for an 

act of growing friendship what the Cigarette himself regarded as a 

bribe.  And at any rate, was there ever a bribe more singular than 

an odd volume of Michelet's history?  The work was promised him for 

the morrow, before our departure; and presently after, either 

because he had his price, or to show that he was not the man to be 

behind in friendly offices - "EH BIEN," he said, "JE SUPPOSE QU'IL 

FAUT LAHER VOIRE CAMARADE."  And he tore up that feast of humour, 

the unfinished PROCES-VERBAL.  Ah, if he had only torn up instead 

the Arethusa's roundels!  There were many works burnt at 

Alexandria, there are many treasured in the British Museum, that I 

could better spare than the PROCES-VERBAL of Chatillon.  Poor 

bubuckled Commissary!  I begin to be sorry that he never had his 

Michelet:  perceiving in him fine human traits, a broad-based 

stupidity, a gusto in his magisterial functions, a taste for 

letters, a ready admiration for the admirable.  And if he did not 

admire the Arethusa, he was not alone in that.



To the imprisoned one, shivering under the public covering, there 

came suddenly a noise of bolts and chains.  He sprang to his feet, 

ready to welcome a companion in calamity; and instead of that, the 

door was flung wide, the friendly gendarme appeared above in the 

strong daylight, and with a magnificent gesture (being probably a 

student of the drama) - "VOUS ETES LIBRE!" he said.  None too soon 

for the Arethusa.  I doubt if he had been half-an-hour imprisoned; 

but by the watch in a man's brain (which was the only watch he 

carried) he should have been eight times longer; and he passed 

forth with ecstasy up the cellar stairs into the healing warmth of 

the afternoon sun; and the breath of the earth came as sweet as a 

cow's into his nostril; and he heard again (and could have laughed 

for pleasure) the concord of delicate noises that we call the hum 

of life.



And here it might be thought that my history ended; but not so, 

this was an act-drop and not the curtain.  Upon what followed in 

front of the barrack, since there was a lady in the case, I scruple 

to expatiate.  The wife of the Marechal-des-logis was a handsome 

woman, and yet the Arethusa was not sorry to be gone from her 

society.  Something of her image, cool as a peach on that hot 

afternoon, still lingers in his memory:  yet more of her 

conversation.  "You have there a very fine parlour," said the poor 

gentleman. - "Ah," said Madame la Marechale (des-logis), "you are 

very well acquainted with such parlours!"  And you should have seen 

with what a hard and scornful eye she measured the vagabond before 

her!  I do not think he ever hated the Commissary; but before that 

interview was at an end, he hated Madame la Marechale.  His passion 

(as I am led to understand by one who was present) stood confessed 

in a burning eye, a pale cheek, and a trembling utterance; Madame 

meanwhile tasting the joys of the matador, goading him with barbed 

words and staring him coldly down.



It was certainly good to be away from this lady, and better still 

to sit down to an excellent dinner in the inn.  Here, too, the 

despised travellers scraped acquaintance with their next neighbour, 

a gentleman of these parts, returned from the day's sport, who had 

the good taste to find pleasure in their society.  The dinner at an 

end, the gentleman proposed the acquaintance should be ripened in 

the cafe.



The cafe was crowded with sportsmen conclamantly explaining to each 

other and the world the smallness of their bags.  About the centre 

of the room, the Cigarette and the Arethusa sat with their new 

acquaintance; a trio very well pleased, for the travellers (after 

their late experience) were greedy of consideration, and their 

sportsman rejoiced in a pair of patient listeners.  Suddenly the 

glass door flew open with a crash; the Marechal-des-logis appeared 

in the interval, gorgeously belted and befrogged, entered without 

salutation, strode up the room with a clang of spurs and weapons, 

and disappeared through a door at the far end.  Close at his heels 

followed the Arethusa's gendarme of the afternoon, imitating, with 

a nice shade of difference, the imperial bearing of his chief; 

only, as he passed, he struck lightly with his open hand on the 

shoulder of his late captive, and with that ringing, dramatic 

utterance of which he had the secret - "SUIVEZ!" said he.



The arrest of the members, the oath of the Tennis Court, the 

signing of the declaration of independence, Mark Antony's oration, 

all the brave scenes of history, I conceive as having been not 

unlike that evening in the cafe at Chatillon.  Terror breathed upon 

the assembly.  A moment later, when the Arethusa had followed his 

recaptors into the farther part of the house, the Cigarette found 

himself alone with his coffee in a ring of empty chairs and tables, 

all the lusty sportsmen huddled into corners, all their clamorous 

voices hushed in whispering, all their eyes shooting at him 

furtively as at a leper.



And the Arethusa?  Well, he had a long, sometimes a trying, 

interview in the back kitchen.  The Marechal-des-logis, who was a 

very handsome man, and I believe both intelligent and honest, had 

no clear opinion on the case.  He thought the Commissary had done 

wrong, but he did not wish to get his subordinates into trouble; 

and he proposed this, that, and the other, to all of which the 

Arethusa (with a growing sense of his position) demurred.



"In short," suggested the Arethusa, "you want to wash your hands of 

further responsibility?  Well, then, let me go to Paris."



The Marechal-des-logis looked at his watch.



"You may leave," said he, "by the ten o'clock train for Paris."



And at noon the next day the travellers were telling their 

misadventure in the dining-room at Siron's.

