





CHAPTER V - THE GOOD HOPE (continued)







The pier was not far distant from the house in which Joanna lay; it

now only remained to get the men on shore, to surround the house

with a strong party, burst in the door and carry off the captive.

They might then regard themselves as done with the Good Hope; it

had placed them on the rear of their enemies; and the retreat,

whether they should succeed or fail in the main enterprise, would

be directed with a greater measure of hope in the direction of the

forest and my Lord Foxham's reserve.



To get the men on shore, however, was no easy task; many had been

sick, all were pierced with cold; the promiscuity and disorder on

board had shaken their discipline; the movement of the ship and the

darkness of the night had cowed their spirits.  They made a rush

upon the pier; my lord, with his sword drawn on his own retainers,

must throw himself in front; and this impulse of rabblement was not

restrained without a certain clamour of voices, highly to be

regretted in the case.



When some degree of order had been restored, Dick, with a few

chosen men, set forth in advance.  The darkness on shore, by

contrast with the flashing of the surf, appeared before him like a

solid body; and the howling and whistling of the gale drowned any

lesser noise.



He had scarce reached the end of the pier, however, when there fell

a lull of the wind; and in this he seemed to hear on shore the

hollow footing of horses and the clash of arms.  Checking his

immediate followers, he passed forward a step or two alone, even

setting foot upon the down; and here he made sure he could detect

the shape of men and horses moving.  A strong discouragement

assailed him.  If their enemies were really on the watch, if they

had beleaguered the shoreward end of the pier, he and Lord Foxham

were taken in a posture of very poor defence, the sea behind, the

men jostled in the dark upon a narrow causeway.  He gave a cautious

whistle, the signal previously agreed upon.



It proved to be a signal far more than he desired.  Instantly there

fell, through the black night, a shower of arrows sent at a

venture; and so close were the men huddled on the pier that more

than one was hit, and the arrows were answered with cries of both

fear and pain.  In this first discharge, Lord Foxham was struck

down; Hawksley had him carried on board again at once; and his men,

during the brief remainder of the skirmish, fought (when they

fought at all) without guidance.  That was perhaps the chief cause

of the disaster which made haste to follow.



At the shore end of the pier, for perhaps a minute, Dick held his

own with a handful; one or two were wounded upon either side; steel

crossed steel; nor had there been the least signal of advantage,

when in the twinkling of an eye the tide turned against the party

from the ship.  Someone cried out that all was lost; the men were

in the very humour to lend an ear to a discomfortable counsel; the

cry was taken up.  "On board, lads, for your lives!" cried another.

A third, with the true instinct of the coward, raised that

inevitable report on all retreats:  "We are betrayed!"  And in a

moment the whole mass of men went surging and jostling backward

down the pier, turning their defenceless backs on their pursuers

and piercing the night with craven outcry.



One coward thrust off the ship's stern, while another still held

her by the bows.  The fugitives leaped, screaming, and were hauled

on board, or fell back and perished in the sea.  Some were cut down

upon the pier by the pursuers.  Many were injured on the ship's

deck in the blind haste and terror of the moment, one man leaping

upon another, and a third on both.  At last, and whether by design

or accident, the bows of the Good Hope were liberated; and the

ever-ready Lawless, who had maintained his place at the helm

through all the hurly-burly by sheer strength of body and a liberal

use of the cold steel, instantly clapped her on the proper tack.

The ship began to move once more forward on the stormy sea, its

scuppers running blood, its deck heaped with fallen men, sprawling

and struggling in the dark.



Thereupon, Lawless sheathed his dagger, and turning to his next

neighbour, "I have left my mark on them, gossip," said he, "the

yelping, coward hounds."



Now, while they were all leaping and struggling for their lives,

the men had not appeared to observe the rough shoves and cutting

stabs with which Lawless had held his post in the confusion.  But

perhaps they had already begun to understand somewhat more clearly,

or perhaps another ear had overheard, the helmsman's speech.



Panic-stricken troops recover slowly, and men who have just

disgraced themselves by cowardice, as if to wipe out the memory of

their fault, will sometimes run straight into the opposite extreme

of insubordination.  So it was now; and the same men who had thrown

away their weapons and been hauled, feet foremost, into the Good

Hope, began to cry out upon their leaders, and demand that someone

should be punished.



This growing ill-feeling turned upon Lawless.



In order to get a proper offing, the old outlaw had put the head of

the Good Hope to seaward.



"What!" bawled one of the grumblers, "he carrieth us to seaward!"



"'Tis sooth," cried another.  "Nay, we are betrayed for sure."



And they all began to cry out in chorus that they were betrayed,

and in shrill tones and with abominable oaths bade Lawless go

about-ship and bring them speedily ashore.  Lawless, grinding his

teeth, continued in silence to steer the true course, guiding the

Good Hope among the formidable billows.  To their empty terrors, as

to their dishonourable threats, between drink and dignity he

scorned to make reply.  The malcontents drew together a little

abaft the mast, and it was plain they were like barnyard cocks,

"crowing for courage."  Presently they would be fit for any

extremity of injustice or ingratitude.  Dick began to mount by the

ladder, eager to interpose; but one of the outlaws, who was also

something of a seaman, got beforehand.



"Lads," he began, "y' are right wooden heads, I think.  For to get

back, by the mass, we must have an offing, must we not?  And this

old Lawless - "



Someone struck the speaker on the mouth, and the next moment, as a

fire springs among dry straw, he was felled upon the deck, trampled

under the feet, and despatched by the daggers of his cowardly

companions.  At this the wrath of Lawless rose and broke.



"Steer yourselves," he bellowed, with a curse; and, careless of the

result, he left the helm.



The Good Hope was, at that moment, trembling on the summit of a

swell.  She subsided, with sickening velocity, upon the farther

side.  A wave, like a great black bulwark, hove immediately in

front of her; and, with a staggering blow, she plunged headforemost

through that liquid hill.  The green water passed right over her

from stem to stern, as high as a man's knees; the sprays ran higher

than the mast; and she rose again upon the other side, with an

appalling, tremulous indecision, like a beast that has been deadly

wounded.



Six or seven of the malcontents had been carried bodily overboard;

and as for the remainder, when they found their tongues again, it

was to bellow to the saints and wail upon Lawless to come back and

take the tiller.



Nor did Lawless wait to be twice bidden.  The terrible result of

his fling of just resentment sobered him completely.  He knew,

better than any one on board, how nearly the Good Hope had gone

bodily down below their feet; and he could tell, by the laziness

with which she met the sea, that the peril was by no means over.



Dick, who had been thrown down by the concussion and half drowned,

rose wading to his knees in the swamped well of the stern, and

crept to the old helmsman's side.



"Lawless," he said, "we do all depend on you; y' are a brave,

steady man, indeed, and crafty in the management of ships; I shall

put three sure men to watch upon your safety."



"Bootless, my master, bootless," said the steersman, peering

forward through the dark.  "We come every moment somewhat clearer

of these sandbanks; with every moment, then, the sea packeth upon

us heavier, and for all these whimperers, they will presently be on

their backs.  For, my master, 'tis a right mystery, but true, there

never yet was a bad man that was a good shipman.  None but the

honest and the bold can endure me this tossing of a ship."



"Nay, Lawless," said Dick, laughing, "that is a right shipman's

byword, and hath no more of sense than the whistle of the wind.

But, prithee, how go we?  Do we lie well?  Are we in good case?"



"Master Shelton," replied Lawless, "I have been a Grey Friar - I

praise fortune - an archer, a thief, and a shipman.  Of all these

coats, I had the best fancy to die in the Grey Friar's, as ye may

readily conceive, and the least fancy to die in John Shipman's

tarry jacket; and that for two excellent good reasons:  first, that

the death might take a man suddenly; and second, for the horror of

that great, salt smother and welter under my foot here" - and

Lawless stamped with his foot.  "Howbeit," he went on, "an I die

not a sailor's death, and that this night, I shall owe a tall

candle to our Lady."



"Is it so?" asked Dick.



"It is right so," replied the outlaw.  "Do ye not feel how heavy

and dull she moves upon the waves?  Do ye not hear the water

washing in her hold?  She will scarce mind the rudder even now.

Bide till she has settled a bit lower; and she will either go down

below your boots like a stone image, or drive ashore here, under

our lee, and come all to pieces like a twist of string."



"Ye speak with a good courage," returned Dick.  "Ye are not then

appalled?"



"Why, master," answered Lawless, "if ever a man had an ill crew to

come to port with, it is I - a renegade friar, a thief, and all the

rest on't.  Well, ye may wonder, but I keep a good hope in my

wallet; and if that I be to drown, I will drown with a bright eye,

Master Shelton, and a steady hand."



Dick returned no answer; but he was surprised to find the old

vagabond of so resolute a temper, and fearing some fresh violence

or treachery, set forth upon his quest for three sure men.  The

great bulk of the men had now deserted the deck, which was

continually wetted with the flying sprays, and where they lay

exposed to the shrewdness of the winter wind.  They had gathered,

instead, into the hold of the merchandise, among the butts of wine,

and lighted by two swinging lanterns.



Here a few kept up the form of revelry, and toasted each other deep

in Arblaster's Gascony wine.  But as the Good Hope continued to

tear through the smoking waves, and toss her stem and stern

alternately high in air and deep into white foam, the number of

these jolly companions diminished with every moment and with every

lurch.  Many sat apart, tending their hurts, but the majority were

already prostrated with sickness, and lay moaning in the bilge.



Greensheve, Cuckow, and a young fellow of Lord Foxham's whom Dick

had already remarked for his intelligence and spirit, were still,

however, both fit to understand and willing to obey.  These Dick

set, as a body-guard, about the person of the steersman, and then,

with a last look at the black sky and sea, he turned and went below

into the cabin, whither Lord Foxham had been carried by his

servants.

