





INTRODUCTION





Phillips Brooks once told the boys at Exeter that in reading

biography three men meet one another in close intimacy--the subject

of the biography, the author, and the reader.  Of the three the

most interesting is, of course, the man about whom the book is

written.  The most privileged is the reader, who is thus allowed to

live familiarly with an eminent man.  Least regarded of the three

is the author.  It is his part to introduce the others, and to

develop between them an acquaintance, perhaps a friendship, while

he, though ever busy and solicitous, withdraws into the background.



Some think that Boswell, in his Life of Johnson, did not

sufficiently realize his duty of self-effacement.  He is too much

in evidence, too bustling, too anxious that his own opinion, though

comparatively unimportant, should get a hearing.  In general,

Boswell's faults are easily noticed, and have been too much talked

about.  He was morbid, restless, self-conscious, vain, insinuating;

and, poor fellow, he died a drunkard.  But the essential Boswell,

the skilful and devoted artist, is almost unrecognized.  As the

creator of the Life of Johnson he is almost as much effaced as is

Homer in the Odyssey.  He is indeed so closely concealed that the

reader suspects no art at all.  Boswell's performance looks easy

enough--merely the more or less coherent stringing together of a

mass of memoranda.  Nevertheless it was rare and difficult, as is

the highest achievement in art.  Boswell is primarily the artist,

and he has created one of the great masterpieces of the world.*  He

created nothing else, though his head was continually filling

itself with literary schemes that came to nought.  But into his

Life of Johnson he poured all his artistic energies, as Milton

poured his into Paradise Lost, and Vergil his into the Aneid.





* Here I include his Journal of a Tour of the Hebrides as

essentially a part of the Life.  The Journal of a Tour in Corsica

is but a propaedeutic study.





First, Boswell had the industry and the devotion to his task of an

artist.  Twenty years and more he labored in collecting his

material.  He speaks frankly of his methods.  He recorded the talk

of Johnson and his associates partly by a rough shorthand of his

own, partly by an exceptional memory, which he carefully trained

for this very purpose.  'O for shorthand to take this down!' said

he to Mrs. Thrale as they listened to Johnson; and she replied:

'You'll carry it all in your head; a long head is as good as

shorthand.'  Miss Hannah More recalls a gay meeting at the

Garricks', in Johnson's absence, when Boswell was bold enough to

match his skill with no other than Garrick himself in an imitation

of Johnson.  Though Garrick was more successful in his Johnsonian

recitation of poetry, Boswell won in reproducing his familiar

conversation.  He lost no time in perfecting his notes both mental

and stenographic, and sat up many a night followed by a day of

headache, to write them in final form, that none of the freshness

and glow might fade.  The sheer labor of this process, not to

mention the difficulty, can be measured only by one who attempts a

similar feat.  Let him try to report the best conversation of a

lively evening, following its course, preserving its point,

differentiating sharply the traits of the participants, keeping the

style, idiom, and exact words of each.  Let him reject all parts of

it, however diverting, of which the charm and force will evaporate

with the occasion, and retain only that which will be as amusing,

significant, and lively as ever at the end of one hundred, or, for

all that we can see, one thousand years.  He will then, in some

measure, realize the difficulty of Boswell's performance.  When his

work appeared Boswell himself said: 'The stretch of mind and prompt

assiduity by which so many conversations are preserved, I myself,

at some distance of time, contemplate with wonder.'



He was indefatigable in hunting up and consulting all who had known

parts or aspects of Johnson's life which to him were inaccessible.

He mentions all told more than fifty names of men and women whom he

consulted for information, to which number many others should be

added of those who gave him nothing that he could use.  'I have

sometimes been obliged to run half over London, in order to fix a

date correctly.'  He agonized over his work with the true devotion

of an artist: 'You cannot imagine,' he says, 'what labor, what

perplexity, what vexation I have endured in arranging a prodigious

multiplicity of materials, in supplying omissions, in searching for

papers buried in different masses, and all this besides the

exertion of composing and polishing.'  He despairs of making his

picture vivid or full enough, and of ever realizing his

preconception of his masterpiece.



Boswell's devotion to his work appears in even more extraordinary

ways.  Throughout he repeatedly offers himself as a victim to

illustrate his great friend's wit, ill-humor, wisdom, affection, or

goodness.  He never spares himself, except now and then to assume a

somewhat diaphanous anonymity.  Without regard for his own dignity,

he exhibits himself as humiliated, or drunken, or hypochondriac, or

inquisitive, or resorting to petty subterfuge--anything for the

accomplishment of his one main purpose.  'Nay, Sir,' said Johnson,

'it was not the wine that made your head ache, but the sense that I

put into it.'  'What, Sir,' asks the hapless Boswell, 'will sense

make the head ache?'  'Yes, Sir, when it is not used to it.'



Boswell is also the artist in his regard for truth.  In him it was

a passion.  Again and again he insists upon his authenticity.  He

developed an infallible gust and unerring relish of what was

genuinely Johnsonian in speech, writing, or action; and his own

account leads to the inference that he discarded, as worthless,

masses of diverting material which would have tempted a less

scrupulous writer beyond resistance.  'I observed to him,' said

Boswell, 'that there were very few of his friends so accurate as

that I could venture to put down in writing what they told me as

his sayings.'  The faithfulness of his portrait, even to the

minutest details, is his unremitting care, and he subjects all

contributed material to the sternest criticism.



Industry and love of truth alone will not make the artist.  With

only these Boswell might have been merely a tireless transcriber.

But he had besides a keen sense of artistic values.  This appears

partly in the unity of his vast work.  Though it was years in the

making, though the details that demanded his attention were

countless, yet they all centre consistently in one figure, and are

so focused upon it, that one can hardly open the book at random to

a line which has not its direct bearing upon the one subject of the

work.  Nor is the unity of the book that of an undeviating

narrative in chronological order of one man's life; it grows rather

out of a single dominating personality exhibited in all the

vicissitudes of a manifold career.  Boswell often speaks of his

work as a painting, a portrait, and of single incidents as pictures

or scenes in a drama.  His eye is keen for contrasts, for

picturesque moments, for dramatic action.  While it is always the

same Johnson whom he makes the central figure, he studies to shift

the background, the interlocutors, the light and shade, in search

of new revelations and effects.  He presents a succession of many

scenes, exquisitely wrought, of Johnson amid widely various

settings of Eighteenth-Century England.  And subject and setting

are so closely allied that each borrows charm and emphasis from the

other.  Let the devoted reader of Boswell ask himself what glamor

would fade from the church of St. Clement Danes, from the Mitre,

from Fleet Street, the Oxford coach, and Lichfield, if the burly

figure were withdrawn from them; or what charm and illumination, of

the man himself would have been lost apart from these settings.  It

is the unseen hand of the artist Boswell that has wrought them

inseparably into this reciprocal effect.



The single scenes and pictures which Boswell has given us will all

of them bear close scrutiny for their precision, their economy of

means, their lifelikeness, their artistic effect.  None was wrought

more beautifully, nor more ardently, than that of Johnson's

interview with the King.  First we see the plain massive figure of

the scholar amid the elegant comfort of Buckingham House.  He is

intent on his book before the fire.  Then the approach of the King,

lighted on his way by Mr. Barnard with candles caught from a table;

their entrance by a private door, with Johnson's unconscious

absorption, his sudden surprise, his starting up, his dignity, the

King's ease with him, their conversation, in which the King

courteously draws from Johnson knowledge of that in which Johnson

is expert, Johnson's manly bearing and voice throughout--all is set

forth with the unadorned vividness and permanent effect which seem

artless enough, but which are characteristic of only the greatest

art.



Boswell's Life of Johnson is further a masterpiece of art in that

it exerts the vigorous energy of a masterpiece, an abundance of

what, for want of a better word, we call personality.  It is

Boswell's confessed endeavor to add this quality to the others,

because he perceived that it was an essential quality of Johnson

himself, and he more than once laments his inability to transmit

the full force and vitality of his original.  Besides artistic

perception and skill it required in him admiration and enthusiasm

to seize this characteristic and impart it to his work.  His

admiration he confesses unashamed: 'I said I worshipped him . . . I

cannot help worshipping him, he is so much superior to other men.'

He studied his subject intensely.  'During all the course of my

long intimacy with him, my respectful attention never abated.'

Upon such intensity and such ardor and enthusiasm depend the energy

and animation of his portrait.



But it exhibits other personal qualities than these, which, if less

often remarked, are at any rate unconsciously enjoyed.  Boswell had

great social charm.  His friends are agreed upon his liveliness and

good nature.  Johnson called him 'clubbable,' 'the best traveling

companion in the world,' 'one Scotchman who is cheerful,' 'a man

whom everybody likes,' 'a man who I believe never left a house

without leaving a wish for his return.'  His vivacity, his love of

fun, his passion for good company and friendship, his sympathy, his

amiability, which made him acceptable everywhere, have mingled

throughout with his own handiwork, and cause it to radiate a kind

of genial warmth.  This geniality it may be which has attracted so

many readers to the book.  They find themselves in good company, in

a comfortable, pleasant place, agreeably stimulated with wit and

fun, and cheered with friendliness.  They are loth to leave it, and

would ever enter it again.  This rare charm the book owes in large

measure to its creator.





The alliance of author with subject in Boswell's Johnson is one of

the happiest and most sympathetic the world has known.  So close is

it that one cannot easily discern what great qualities the work

owes to each.  While it surely derives more of its excellence than

is commonly remarked from the art of Boswell, its greatness after

all is ultimately that of its subject.  The noble qualities of

Johnson have been well discerned by Carlyle, and his obvious

peculiarities and prejudices somewhat magnified and distorted in

Macaulay's brilliant refractions.  One quality only shall I dwell

upon, though that may be the sum of all the rest.  Johnson had a

supreme capacity for human relationship.  In him this capacity

amounted to genius.



In all respects he was of great stature.  His contemporaries called

him a colossus, the literary Goliath, the Giant, the great Cham of

literature, a tremendous companion.  His frame was majestic; he

strode when he walked, and his physical strength and courage were

heroic.  His mode of speaking was 'very impressive,' his utterance

'deliberate and strong.'  His conversation was compared to 'an

antique statue, where every vein and muscle is distinct and bold.'

From boyhood throughout his life his companions naturally deferred

to him, and he dominated them without effort.  But what overcame

the harshness of this autocracy, and made it reasonable, was the

largeness of a nature that loved men and was ever hungry for

knowledge of them.  'Sir,' said he, 'I look upon every day lost in

which I do not make a new acquaintance.'  And again: 'Why, Sir, I

am a man of the world.  I live in the world, and I take, in some

degree, the color of the world as it moves along.'  Thus he was a

part of all that he met, a central figure in his time, with whose

opinion one must reckon in considering any important matter of his

day.



His love of London is but a part of his hunger for men.  'The

happiness of London is not to be conceived but by those who have

been in it.'  'Why, Sir, you find no man at all intellectual who is

willing to leave London: No, Sir, when a man is tired of London, he

is tired of life; for there is in London all that life can afford.'

As he loved London, so he loved a tavern for its sociability.

'Sir, there is nothing which has yet been contrived by man, by

which so much happiness is produced as by a good tavern.'  'A

tavern chair is the throne of human felicity.'



Personal words are often upon his lips, such as 'love' and 'hate,'

and vast is the number, range, and variety of people who at one

time or another had been in some degree personally related with

him, from Bet Flint and his black servant Francis, to the adored

Duchess of Devonshire and the King himself.  To no one who passed a

word with him was he personally indifferent.  Even fools received

his personal attention.  Said one: 'But I don't understand you,

Sir.'  'Sir, I have found you an argument.  I am not obliged to

find you an understanding.'  'Sir, you are irascible,' said

Boswell; 'you have no patience with folly or absurdity.'



But it is in Johnson's capacity for friendship that his greatness

is specially revealed.  'Keep your friendships in good repair.'  As

the old friends disappeared, new ones came to him.  For Johnson

seems never to have sought out friends.  He was not a common

'mixer.'  He stooped to no devices for the sake of popularity.  He

pours only scorn upon the lack of mind and conviction which is

necessary to him who is everybody's friend.



His friendships included all classes and all ages.  He was a great

favorite with children, and knew how to meet them, from little

four-months-old Veronica Boswell to his godchild Jane Langton.

'Sir,' said he, 'I love the acquaintance of young people, . . .

young men have more virtue than old men; they have more generous

sentiments in every respect.'  At sixty-eight he said: 'I value

myself upon this, that there is nothing of the old man in my

conversation.'  Upon women of all classes and ages he exerts

without trying a charm the consciousness of which would have turned

any head less constant than his own, and with their fulsome

adoration he was pleased none the less for perceiving its real

value.



But the most important of his friendships developed between him and

such men of genius as Boswell, David Garrick, Oliver Goldsmith, Sir

Joshua Reynolds, and Edmund Burke.  Johnson's genius left no fit

testimony of itself from his own hand.  With all the greatness of

his mind he had no talent in sufficient measure by which fully to

express himself.  He had no ear for music and no eye for painting,

and the finest qualities in the creations of Goldsmith were lost

upon him.  But his genius found its talents in others, and through

the talents of his personal friends expressed itself as it were by

proxy.  They rubbed their minds upon his, and he set in motion for

them ideas which they might use.  But the intelligence of genius is

profounder and more personal than mere ideas.  It has within it

something energic, expansive, propulsive from mind to mind,

perennial, yet steady and controlled; and it was with such force

that Johnson's almost superhuman personality inspired the art of

his friends.  Of this they were in some degree aware.  Reynolds

confessed that Johnson formed his mind, and 'brushed from it a

great deal of rubbish.'  Gibbon called Johnson 'Reynolds' oracle.'

In one of his Discourses Sir Joshua, mindful no doubt of his own

experience, recommends that young artists seek the companionship of

such a man merely as a tonic to their art.  Boswell often testifies

to the stimulating effect of Johnson's presence.  Once he speaks of

'an animating blaze of eloquence, which roused every intellectual

power in me to the highest pitch'; and again of the 'full glow' of

Johnson's conversation, in which he felt himself 'elevated as if

brought into another state of being.'  He says that all members of

Johnson's 'school' 'are distinguished for a love of truth and

accuracy which they would not have possessed in the same degree if

they had not been acquainted with Johnson.'  He quotes Johnson at

length and repeatedly as the author of his own large conception of

biography.  He was Goldsmith's 'great master,' Garrick feared his

criticism, and one cannot but recognize the power of Johnson's

personality in the increasing intelligence and consistency of

Garrick's interpretations, in the growing vigor and firmness of

Goldsmith's stroke, in the charm, finality, and exuberant life of

Sir Joshua's portraits; and above all in the skill, truth,

brilliance, and lifelike spontaneity of Boswell's art.  It is in

such works as these that we shall find the real Johnson, and

through them that he will exert the force of his personality upon

us.





Biography is the literature of realized personality, of life as it

has been lived, of actual achievements or shortcomings, of success

or failure; it is not imaginary and embellished, not what might be

or might have been, not reduced to prescribed or artificial forms,

but it is the unvarnished story of that which was delightful,

disappointing, possible, or impossible, in a life spent in this

world.



In this sense it is peculiarly the literature of truth and

authenticity.  Elements of imagination and speculation must enter

into all other forms of literature, and as purely creative forms

they may rank superior to biography; but in each case it will be

found that their authenticity, their right to our attention and

credence, ultimately rests upon the biographical element which is

basic in them, that is, upon what they have derived by observation

and experience from a human life seriously lived.  Biography

contains this element in its purity.  For this reason it is more

authentic than other kinds of literature, and more relevant.  The

thing that most concerns me, the individual, whether I will or no,

is the management of myself in this world.  The fundamental and

essential conditions of life are the same in any age, however the

adventitious circumstances may change.  The beginning and the end

are the same, the average length the same, the problems and the

prize the same.  How, then, have others managed, both those who

failed and those who succeeded, or those, in far greatest number,

who did both?  Let me know their ambitions, their odds, their

handicaps, obstacles, weaknesses, and struggles, how they finally

fared, and what they had to say about it.  Let me know a great

variety of such instances that I may mark their disagreements, but

more especially their agreement about it.  How did they play the

game?  How did they fight the fight that I am to fight, and how in

any case did they lose or win?  To these questions biography gives

the direct answer.  Such is its importance over other literature.

For such reasons, doubtless, Johnson 'loved' it most.  For such

reasons the book which has been most cherished and revered for

well-nigh two thousand years is a biography.



Biography, then, is the chief text-book in the art of living, and

preeminent in its kind is the Life of Johnson.  Here is the

instance of a man who was born into a life stripped of all ornament

and artificiality.  His equipment in mind and stature was Olympian,

but the odds against him were proportionate to his powers.  Without

fear or complaint, without boast or noise, he fairly joined issue

with the world and overcame it.  He scorned circumstance, and laid

bare the unvarying realities of the contest.  He was ever the sworn

enemy of speciousness, of nonsense, of idle and insincere

speculation, of the mind that does not take seriously the duty of

making itself up, of neglect in the gravest consideration of life.

He insisted upon the rights and dignity of the individual man, and

at the same time upon the vital necessity to him of reverence and

submission, and no man ever more beautifully illustrated their

interdependence, and their exquisite combination in a noble nature.



Boswell's Johnson is consistently and primarily the life of one

man.  Incidentally it is more, for through it one is carried from

his own present limitations into a spacious and genial world.  The

reader there meets a vast number of people, men, women, children,

nay even animals, from George the Third down to the cat Hodge.  By

the author's magic each is alive, and the reader mingles with them

as with his acquaintances.  It is a varied world, and includes the

smoky and swarming courts and highways of London, its stately

drawing-rooms, its cheerful inns, its shops and markets, and beyond

is the highroad which we travel in lumbering coach or speeding

postchaise to venerable Oxford with its polite and leisurely dons,

or to the staunch little cathedral city of Lichfield, welcoming

back its famous son to dinner and tea, or to the seat of a country

squire, or ducal castle, or village tavern, or the grim but

hospitable feudal life of the Hebrides.  And wherever we go with

Johnson there is the lively traffic in ideas, lending vitality and

significance to everything about him.



A part of education and culture is the extension of one's narrow

range of living to include wider possibilities or actualities, such

as may be gathered from other fields of thought, other times, other

men; in short, to use a Johnsonian phrase, it is 'multiplicity of

consciousness.'  There is no book more effective through long

familiarity to such extension and such multiplication than

Boswell's Life of Johnson.  It adds a new world to one's own, it

increases one's acquaintance among people who think, it gives

intimate companionship with a great and friendly man.



The Life of Johnson is not a book on first acquaintance to be read

through from the first page to the end.  'No, Sir, do YOU read

books through?' asked Johnson.  His way is probably the best one of

undertaking this book.  Open at random, read here and there,

forward and back, wholly according to inclination; follow the

practice of Johnson and all good readers, of 'tearing the heart'

out of it.  In this way you most readily come within the reach of

its charm and power.  Then, not content with a part, seek the

unabridged whole, and grow into the infinite possibilities of it.



But the supreme end of education, we are told, is expert

discernment in all things--the power to tell the good from the bad,

the genuine from the counterfeit, and to prefer the good and the

genuine to the bad and the counterfeit.  This is the supreme end of

the talk of Socrates, and it is the supreme end of the talk of

Johnson.  'My dear friend,' said he, 'clear your mind of cant; . . .

don't THINK foolishly.'  The effect of long companionship with

Boswell's Johnson is just this.  As Sir Joshua said, 'it brushes

away the rubbish'; it clears the mind of cant; it instills the

habit of singling out the essential thing; it imparts discernment.

Thus, through his friendship with Boswell, Johnson will realize his

wish, still to be teaching as the years increase.

