




( Part Four )



Talking of the great difficulty of obtaining authentick information

for biography, Johnson told us, 'When I was a young fellow I wanted

to write the Life of Dryden, and in order to get materials, I

applied to the only two persons then alive who had seen him; these

were old Swinney, and old Cibber.  Swinney's information was no

more than this, "That at Will's coffee-house Dryden had a

particular chair for himself, which was set by the fire in winter,

and was then called his winter-chair; and that it was carried out

for him to the balcony in summer, and was then called his summer-

chair."  Cibber could tell no more but "That he remembered him a

decent old man, arbiter of critical disputes at Will's."  You are

to consider that Cibber was then at a great distance from Dryden,

had perhaps one leg only in the room, and durst not draw in the

other.'  BOSWELL.  'Yet Cibber was a man of observation?'  JOHNSON.

'I think not.'  BOSWELL.  'You will allow his Apology to be well

done.'  JOHNSON.  'Very well done, to be sure, Sir.  That book is a

striking proof of the justice of Pope's remark:





    "Each might his several province well command,

     Would all but stoop to what they understand."'





BOSWELL.  'And his plays are good.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes; but that was

his trade; l'esprit du corps: he had been all his life among

players and play-writers.  I wondered that he had so little to say

in conversation, for he had kept the best company, and learnt all

that can be got by the ear.  He abused Pindar to me, and then

shewed me an Ode of his own, with an absurd couplet, making a

linnet soar on an eagle's wing.  I told him that when the ancients

made a simile, they always made it like something real.'



Mr. Wilkes remarked, that 'among all the bold flights of

Shakspeare's imagination, the boldest was making Birnamwood march

to Dunsinane; creating a wood where there never was a shrub; a wood

in Scotland! ha! ha! ha!'  And he also observed, that 'the clannish

slavery of the Highlands of Scotland was the single exception to

Milton's remark of "The Mountain Nymph, sweet Liberty," being

worshipped in all hilly countries.'--'When I was at Inverary (said

he,) on a visit to my old friend, Archibald, Duke of Argyle, his

dependents congratulated me on being such a favourite of his Grace.

I said, "It is then, gentlemen, truely lucky for me; for if I had

displeased the Duke, and he had wished it, there is not a Campbell

among you but would have been ready to bring John Wilkes's head to

him in a charger.  It would have been only





    "Off with his head!  So much for Aylesbury."





I was then member for Aylesbury.'



Mr. Arthur Lee mentioned some Scotch who had taken possession of a

barren part of America, and wondered why they should choose it.

JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, all barrenness is comparative.  The SCOTCH

would not know it to be barren.'  BOSWELL.  'Come, come, he is

flattering the English.  You have now been in Scotland, Sir, and

say if you did not see meat and drink enough there.'  JOHNSON.

'Why yes, Sir; meat and drink enough to give the enhabitants

sufficient strength to run away from home.'  All these quick and

lively sallies were said sportively, quite in jest, and with a

smile, which showed that he meant only wit.  Upon this topick he

and Mr. Wilkes could perfectly assimilate; here was a bond of union

between them, and I was conscious that as both of them had visited

Caledonia, both were fully satisfied of the strange narrow

ignorance of those who imagine that it is a land of famine.  But

they amused themselves with persevering in the old jokes.  When I

claimed a superiority for Scotland over England in one respect,

that no man can be arrested there for a debt merely because another

swears it against him; but there must first be the judgement of a

court of law ascertaining its justice; and that a seizure of the

person, before judgement is obtained, can take place only, if his

creditor should swear that he is about to fly from the country, or,

as it is technically expressed, is in meditatione fugoe:  WILKES.

'That, I should think, may be safely sworn of all the Scotch

nation.'  JOHNSON. (to Mr. Wilkes,) 'You must know, Sir, I lately

took my friend Boswell and shewed him genuine civilised life in an

English provincial town.  I turned him loose at Lichfield, my

native city, that he might see for once real civility: for you know

he lives among savages in Scotland, and among rakes in London.'

WILKES.  'Except when he is with grave, sober, decent people like

you and me.'  JOHNSON. (smiling,) 'And we ashamed of him.'



They were quite frank and easy.  Johnson told the story of his

asking Mrs. Macaulay to allow her footman to sit down with them, to

prove the ridiculousness of the argument for the equality of

mankind; and he said to me afterwards, with a nod of satisfaction,

'You saw Mr. Wilkes acquiesced.'  Wilkes talked with all imaginable

freedom of the ludicrous title given to the Attorney-General,

Diabolus Regis; adding, 'I have reason to know something about that

officer; for I was prosecuted for a libel.'  Johnson, who many

people would have supposed must have been furiously angry at

hearing this talked of so lightly, said not a word.  He was now,

INDEED, 'a good-humoured fellow.'



After dinner we had an accession of Mrs. Knowles, the Quaker lady,

well known for her various talents, and of Mr. Alderman Lee.

Amidst some patriotick groans, somebody (I think the Alderman)

said, 'Poor old England is lost.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, it is not so

much to be lamented that Old England is lost, as that the Scotch

have found it.'  WILKES.  'Had Lord Bute governed Scotland only, I

should not have taken the trouble to write his eulogy, and dedicate

Mortimer to him.'



Mr. Wilkes held a candle to shew a fine print of a beautiful female

figure which hung in the room, and pointed out the elegant contour

of the bosom with the finger of an arch connoisseur.  He

afterwards, in a conversation with me, waggishly insisted, that all

the time Johnson shewed visible signs of a fervent admiration of

the corresponding charms of the fair Quaker.



This record, though by no means so perfect as I could wish, will

serve to give a notion of a very curious interview, which was not

only pleasing at the time, but had the agreeable and benignant

effect of reconciling any animosity, and sweetening any acidity,

which in the various bustle of political contest, had been produced

in the minds of two men, who though widely different, had so many

things in common--classical learning, modern literature, wit, and

humour, and ready repartee--that it would have been much to be

regretted if they had been for ever at a distance from each other.



Mr. Burke gave me much credit for this successful NEGOCIATION; and

pleasantly said, that 'there was nothing to equal it in the whole

history of the Corps Diplomatique.'



I attended Dr. Johnson home, and had the satisfaction to hear him

tell Mrs. Williams how much he had been pleased with Mr. Wilkes's

company, and what an agreeable day he had passed.



I talked a good deal to him of the celebrated Margaret Caroline

Rudd, whom I had visited, induced by the fame of her talents,

address, and irresistible power of fascination.  To a lady who

disapproved of my visiting her, he said on a former occasion, 'Nay,

Madam, Boswell is in the right; I should have visited her myself,

were it not that they have now a trick of putting every thing into

the news-papers.'  This evening he exclaimed, 'I envy him his

acquaintance with Mrs. Rudd.'



On the evening of the next day I took leave of him, being to set

out for Scotland.  I thanked him with great warmth for all his

kindness.  'Sir, (said he,) you are very welcome.  Nobody repays it

with more.



The following letters concerning an Epitaph which he wrote for the

monument of Dr. Goldsmith, in Westminster-Abbey, afford at once a

proof of his unaffected modesty, his carelessness as to his own

writings, and of the great respect which he entertained for the

taste and judgement of the excellent and eminent person to whom

they are addressed:





TO SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.



DEAR SIR,--I have been kept away from you, I know not well how, and

of these vexatious hindrances I know not when there will be an end.

I therefore send you the poor dear Doctor's epitaph.  Read it first

yourself; and if you then think it right, shew it to the Club.  I

am, you know, willing to be corrected.  If you think any thing much

amiss, keep it to yourself, till we come together.  I have sent two

copies, but prefer the card.  The dates must be settled by Dr.

Percy.  I am, Sir, your most humble servant,



'May 16, 1776.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'






It was, I think, after I had left London this year, that this

Epitaph gave occasion to a Remonstrance to the MONARCH OF

LITERATURE, for an account of which I am indebted to Sir William

Forbes, of Pitsligo.



That my readers may have the subject more fully and clearly before

them, I shall first insert the Epitaph.





            OLIVARII GOLDSMITH,



        Poetae, Physici, Historici,

       Qui nullum fere scribendi genus

               Non tetigit,

       Nullum quod tetiqit non ornavit:

          Sive risus essent movendi,

               Sive lacrymae,

     Affectuum potens at lenis dominator:

    Ingenio sublimis, vividus, versatilis,

     Oratione grandis, nitidus, venustus:

       Hoc monumento memoriam coluit

               Sodalium amor,

               Amicorum fides,

             Lectorum veneratio.

    Natus in Hibernia Forniae Longfordiensis,

          In loco cui nomen Pallas,

            Nov. XXIX. MDCCXXXI;

         Eblanae literis institutus;

               Obiit Londini,

            April IV, MDCCLXXIV.'





Sir William Forbes writes to me thus:--



'I enclose the Round Robin.  This jeu d'esprit took its rise one

day at dinner at our friend Sir Joshua Reynolds's.  All the company

present, except myself, were friends and acquaintance of Dr.

Goldsmith.  The Epitaph, written for him by Dr. Johnson, became the

subject of conversation, and various emendations were suggested,

which it was agreed should be submitted to the Doctor's

consideration.  But the question was, who should have the courage

to propose them to him?  At last it was hinted, that there could be

no way so good as that of a Round Robin, as the sailors call it,

which they make use of when they enter into a conspiracy, so as not

to let it be known who puts his name first or last to the paper.

This proposition was instantly assented to; and Dr. Barnard, Dean

of Derry, now Bishop of Killaloe, drew up an address to Dr. Johnson

on the occasion, replete with wit and humour, but which it was

feared the Doctor might think treated the subject with too much

levity.  Mr. Burke then proposed the address as it stands in the

paper in writing, to which I had the honour to officiate as clerk.



'Sir Joshua agreed to carry it to Dr. Johnson, who received it with

much good humour,* and desired Sir Joshua to tell the gentlemen,

that he would alter the Epitaph in any manner they pleased, as to

the sense of it; but he would never consent to disgrace the walls

of Westminster Abbey with an English inscription.





* He however, upon seeing Dr. Warton's name to the suggestion, that

the Epitaph should be in English, observed to Sir Joshua, 'I wonder

that Joe Warton, a scholar by profession, should be such a fool.'

He said too, 'I should have thought Mund Burke would have had more

sense.'  Mr. Langton, who was one of the company at Sir Joshua's,

like a sturdy scholar, resolutely refused to sign the Round Robin.

The Epitaph is engraved upon Dr. Goldsmith's monument without any

alteration.  At another time, when somebody endeavoured to argue in

favour of its being in English, Johnson said, 'The language of the

country of which a learned man was a native, is not the language

fit for his epitaph, which should be in ancient and permanent

language.  Consider, Sir; how you should feel, were you to find at

Rotterdam an epitaph upon Erasmus IN DUTCH!'--BOSWELL.





'I consider this Round Robin as a species of literary curiosity

worth preserving, as it marks, in a certain degree, Dr. Johnson's

character.'



Sir William Forbes's observation is very just.  The anecdote now

related proves, in the strongest manner, the reverence and awe with

which Johnson was regarded, by some of the most eminent men of his

time, in various departments, and even by such of them as lived

most with him; while it also confirms what I have again and again

inculcated, that he was by no means of that ferocious and irascible

character which has been ignorantly imagined.



This hasty composition is also to be remarked as one of a thousand

instances which evince the extraordinary promptitude of Mr. Burke;

who while he is equal to the greatest things, can adorn the least;

can, with equal facility, embrace the vast and complicated

speculations of politicks, or the ingenious topicks of literary

investigation.





'DR. JOHNSON TO MRS. BOSWELL.



'MADAM,--You must not think me uncivil in omitting to answer the

letter with which you favoured me some time ago.  I imagined it to

have been written without Mr. Boswell's knowledge, and therefore

supposed the answer to require, what I could not find, a private

conveyance.



'The difference with Lord Auchinleck is now over; and since young

Alexander has appeared, I hope no more difficulties will arise

among you; for I sincerely wish you all happy.  Do not teach the

young ones to dislike me, as you dislike me yourself; but let me at

least have Veronica's kindness, because she is my acquaintance.



'You will now have Mr. Boswell home; it is well that you have him;

he has led a wild life.  I have taken him to Lichfield, and he has

followed Mr. Thrale to Bath.  Pray take care of him, and tame him.

The only thing in which I have the honour to agree with you is, in

loving him; and while we are so much of a mind in a matter of so

much importance, our other quarrels will, I hope, produce no great

bitterness.  I am, Madam, your most humble servant,



'May 16, 1776.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





I select from his private register the following passage:



'July 25, 1776.  O God, who hast ordained that whatever is to be

desired should be sought by labour, and who, by thy blessing,

bringest honest labour to good effect, look with mercy upon my

studies and endeavours.  Grant me, O LORD, to design only what is

lawful and right; and afford me calmness of mind, and steadiness of

purpose, that I may so do thy will in this short life, as to obtain

happiness in the world to come, for the sake of JESUS CHRIST our

Lord.  Amen.'



It appears from a note subjoined, that this was composed when he

'purposed to apply vigorously to study, particularly of the Greek

and Italian tongues.'



Such a purpose, so expressed, at the age of sixty-seven, is

admirable and encouraging; and it must impress all the thinking

part of my readers with a consolatory confidence in habitual

devotion, when they see a man of such enlarged intellectual powers

as Johnson, thus in the genuine earnestness of secrecy, imploring

the aid of that Supreme Being, 'from whom cometh down every good

and every perfect gift.'





1777: AETAT. 68.]--In 1777, it appears from his Prayers and

Meditations, that Johnson suffered much from a state of mind

'unsettled and perplexed,' and from that constitutional gloom,

which, together with his extreme humility and anxiety with regard

to his religious state, made him contemplate himself through too

dark and unfavourable a medium.  It may be said of him, that he

'saw GOD in clouds.'  Certain we may be of his injustice to himself

in the following lamentable paragraph, which it is painful to think

came from the contrite heart of this great man, to whose labours

the world is so much indebted: 'When I survey my past life, I

discover nothing but a barren waste of time with some disorders of

body, and disturbances of the mind, very near to madness, which I

hope He that made me will suffer to extenuate many faults, and

excuse many deficiencies.'  But we find his devotions in this year

eminently fervent; and we are comforted by observing intervals of

quiet, composure, and gladness.



On Easter-day we find the following emphatick prayer:



'Almighty and most merciful Father, who seest all our miseries, and

knowest all our necessities, look down upon me, and pity me.

Defend me from the violent incursion [incursions] of evil thoughts,

and enable me to form and keep such resolutions as may conduce to

the discharge of the duties which thy providence shall appoint me;

and so help me, by thy Holy Spirit, that my heart may surely there

be fixed, where true joys are to be found, and that I may serve

thee with pure affection and a cheerful mind.  Have mercy upon me,

O GOD, have mercy upon me; years and infirmities oppress me,

terrour and anxiety beset me.  Have mercy upon me, my Creator and

my Judge.  [In all dangers protect me.]  In all perplexities

relieve and free me; and so help me by thy Holy Spirit, that I may

now so commemorate the death of thy Son our Saviour JESUS CHRIST,

as that when this short and painful life shall have an end, I may,

for his sake, be received to everlasting happiness.  Amen.'





'SIR ALEXANDER DICK TO DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON.



'Prestonfield, Feb. 17, 1777.



'SIR, I had yesterday the honour of receiving your book of your

Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland, which you was so good

as to send me, by the hands of our mutual friend, Mr. Boswell, of

Auchinleck; for which I return you my most hearty thanks; and after

carefully reading it over again, shall deposit in my little

collection of choice books, next our worthy friend's Journey to

Corsica.  As there are many things to admire in both performances,

I have often wished that no Travels or Journeys should be published

but those undertaken by persons of integrity and capacity to judge

well, and describe faithfully, and in good language, the situation,

condition, and manners of the countries past through.  Indeed our

country of Scotland, in spite of the union of the crowns, is still

in most places so devoid of clothing, or cover from hedges and

plantations, that it was well you gave your readers a sound

Monitoire with respect to that circumstance.  The truths you have

told, and the purity of the language in which they are expressed,

as your Journey is universally read, may, and already appear to

have a very good effect.  For a man of my acquaintance, who has the

largest nursery for trees and hedges in this country, tells me,

that of late the demand upon him for these articles is doubled, and

sometimes tripled.  I have, therefore, listed Dr. Samuel Johnson in

some of my memorandums of the principal planters and favourers of

the enclosures, under a name which I took the liberty to invent

from the Greek, Papadendrion.  Lord Auchinleck and some few more

are of the list.  I am told that one gentleman in the shire of

Aberdeen, viz. Sir Archibald Grant, has planted above fifty

millions of trees on a piece of very wild ground at Monimusk: I

must enquire if he has fenced them well, before he enters my list;

for, that is the soul of enclosing.  I began myself to plant a

little, our ground being too valuable for much, and that is now

fifty years ago; and the trees, now in my seventy-fourth year, I

look up to with reverence, and shew them to my eldest son now in

his fifteenth year, and they are full the height of my country-

house here, where I had the pleasure of receiving you, and hope

again to have that satisfaction with our mutual friend, Mr.

Boswell.  I shall always continue, with the truest esteem, dear

Doctor, your much obliged, and obedient humble servant,



'ALEXANDER DICK.'





'To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.



'DEAR SIR,--It is so long since I heard any thing from you, that I

am not easy about it; write something to me next post.  When you

sent your last letter, every thing seemed to be mending; I hope

nothing has lately grown worse.  I suppose young Alexander

continues to thrive, and Veronica is now very pretty company.  I do

not suppose the lady is yet reconciled to me, yet let her know that

I love her very well, and value her very much. . . .



'Poor Beauclerk still continues very ill.  Langton lives on as he

used to do.  His children are very pretty, and, I think, his lady

loses her Scotch.  Paoli I never see.



'I have been so distressed by difficulty of breathing, that I lost,

as was computed, six-and-thirty ounces of blood in a few days.  I

am better, but not well. . . .



'Mrs. Williams sends her compliments, and promises that when you

come hither, she will accommodate you as well as ever she can in

the old room.  She wishes to know whether you sent her book to Sir

Alexander Gordon.



'My dear Boswell, do not neglect to write to me; for your kindness

is one of the pleasures of my life, which I should be sorry to

lose.  I am, Sir, your humble servant,



'February 18, 1777.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





'To DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON.



'Glasgow, April 24, 1777.



'MY DEAR SIR, . . .  My wife has made marmalade of oranges for you.

I left her and my daughters and Alexander all well yesterday.  I

have taught Veronica to speak of you thus;--Dr. JohnSON, not

JohnSTON.  I remain, my dear Sir, your most affectionate, and

obliged humble servant,



'JAMES BOSWELL.'





'TO JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.



'DEAR SIR, . . .  Tell Mrs. Boswell that I shall taste her

marmalade cautiously at first.  Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes.

Beware, says the Italian proverb, of a reconciled enemy.  But when

I find it does me no harm, I shall then receive it and be thankful

for it, as a pledge of firm, and, I hope, of unalterable kindness.

She is, after all, a dear, dear lady. . . .



'I am, dear Sir, your most affectionate humble servant,



'May 3, 1777.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





'TO JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.



'Southill, Sept. 26, 1777.



'DEAR SIR, You will find by this letter, that I am still in the

same calm retreat, from the noise and bustle of London, as when I

wrote to you last.  I am happy to find you had such an agreeable

meeting with your old friend Dr. Johnson; I have no doubt your

stock is much increased by the interview; few men, nay I may say,

scarcely any man, has got that fund of knowledge and entertainment

as Dr. Johnson in conversation.  When he opens freely, every one is

attentive to what he says, and cannot fail of improvement as well

as pleasure.



'The edition of The Poets, now printing, will do honour to the

English press; and a concise account of the life of each authour,

by Dr. Johnson, will be a very valuable addition, and stamp the

reputation of this edition superiour to any thing that is gone

before.  The first cause that gave rise to this undertaking, I

believe, was owing to the little trifling edition of The Poets,

printing by the Martins, at Edinburgh, and to be sold by Bell, in

London.  Upon examining the volumes which were printed, the type

was found so extremely small, that many persons could not read

them; not only this inconvenience attended it, but the inaccuracy

of the press was very conspicuous.  These reasons, as well as the

idea of an invasion of what we call our Literary Property, induced

the London Booksellers to print an elegant and accurate edition of

all the English Poets of reputation, from Chaucer to the present

time.



'Accordingly a select number of the most respectable booksellers

met on the occasion; and, on consulting together, agreed, that all

the proprietors of copy-right in the various Poets should be

summoned together; and when their opinions were given, to proceed

immediately on the business.  Accordingly a meeting was held,

consisting of about forty of the most respectable booksellers of

London, when it was agreed that an elegant and uniform edition of

The English Poets should be immediately printed, with a concise

account of the life of each authour, by Dr. Samuel Johnson; and

that three persons should be deputed to wait upon Dr. Johnson, to

solicit him to undertake the Lives, viz., T. Davies, Strahan, and

Cadell.  The Doctor very politely undertook it, and seemed

exceedingly pleased with the proposal.  As to the terms, it was

left entirely to the Doctor to name his own: he mentioned two

hundred guineas:* it was immediately agreed to; and a farther

compliment, I believe, will be made him.  A committee was likewise

appointed to engage the best engravers, viz., Bartolozzi, Sherwin,

Hall, etc.  Likewise another committee for giving directions about

the paper, printing, etc., so that the whole will be conducted with

spirit, and in the best manner, with respect to authourship,

editorship, engravings, etc., etc.  My brother will give you a list

of the Poets we mean to give, many of which are within the time of

the Act of Queen Anne, which Martin and Bell cannot give, as they

have no property in them; the proprietors are almost all the

booksellers in London, of consequence.  I am, dear Sir, ever

your's,



'EDWARD DILLY.'





* Johnson's moderation in demanding so small a sum is

extraordinary.  Had he asked one thousand, or even fifteen hundred

guineas, the booksellers, who knew the value of his name, would

doubtless have readily given it.  They have probably got five

thousand guineas by this work in the course of twenty-five years.--

MALONE.





A circumstance which could not fail to be very pleasing to Johnson

occurred this year.  The Tragedy of Sir Thomas Overbury, written by

his early companion in London, Richard Savage, was brought out with

alterations at Drury-lane theatre.  The Prologue to it was written

by Mr. Richard Brinsley Sheridan; in which, after describing very

pathetically the wretchedness of





    'Ill-fated Savage, at whose birth was giv'n

     No parent but the Muse, no friend but Heav'n:'





he introduced an elegant compliment to Johnson on his Dictionary,

that wonderful performance which cannot be too often or too highly

praised; of which Mr. Harris, in his Philological Inquiries, justly

and liberally observes: 'Such is its merit, that our language does

not possess a more copious, learned, and valuable work.'  The

concluding lines of this Prologue were these:--





    'So pleads the tale that gives to future times

     The son's misfortunes and the parent's crimes;

     There shall his fame (if own'd to-night) survive,

     Fix'd by THE HAND THAT BIDS OUR LANGUAGE LIVE.'





Mr. Sheridan here at once did honour to his taste and to his

liberality of sentiment, by shewing that he was not prejudiced from

the unlucky difference which had taken place between his worthy

father and Dr. Johnson.  I have already mentioned, that Johnson was

very desirous of reconciliation with old Mr. Sheridan.  It will,

therefore, not seem at all surprizing that he was zealous in

acknowledging the brilliant merit of his son.  While it had as yet

been displayed only in the drama, Johnson proposed him as a member

of THE LITERARY CLUB, observing, that 'He who has written the two

best comedies of his age, is surely a considerable man.'  And he

had, accordingly, the honour to be elected; for an honour it

undoubtedly must be allowed to be, when it is considered of whom

that society consists, and that a single black ball excludes a

candidate.



On the 23rd of June, I again wrote to Dr. Johnson, enclosing a

ship-master's receipt for a jar of orange-marmalade, and a large

packet of Lord Hailes's Annals of Scotland.





'DR. JOHNSON TO MRS. BOSWELL.



'MADAM,--Though I am well enough pleased with the taste of

sweetmeats, very little of the pleasure which I received at the

arrival of your jar of marmalade arose from eating it.  I received

it as a token of friendship, as a proof of reconciliation, things

much sweeter than sweetmeats, and upon this consideration I return

you, dear Madam, my sincerest thanks.  By having your kindness I

think I have a double security for the continuance of Mr.

Boswell's, which it is not to be expected that any man can long

keep, when the influence of a lady so highly and so justly valued

operates against him.  Mr. Boswell will tell you that I was always

faithful to your interest, and always endeavoured to exalt you in

his estimation.  You must now do the same for me.  We must all help

one another, and you must now consider me, as, dear Madam, your

most obliged, and most humble servant,



'July 22, 1777.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





'To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.



'DEAR SIR,--I am this day come to Ashbourne, and have only to tell

you, that Dr. Taylor says you shall be welcome to him, and you know

how welcome you will be to me.  Make haste to let me know when you

may be expected.



'Make my compliments to Mrs. Boswell, and tell her, I hope we shall

be at variance no more.  I am, dear Sir, your most humble servant,



'August 30, 1777.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





On Sunday evening, Sept. 14, I arrived at Ashbourne, and drove

directly up to Dr. Taylor's door.  Dr. Johnson and he appeared

before I had got out of the post-chaise, and welcomed me cordially.



I told them that I had travelled all the preceding night, and gone

to bed at Leek in Staffordshire; and that when I rose to go to

church in the afternoon, I was informed there had been an

earthquake, of which, it seems, the shock had been felt in some

degree at Ashbourne.  JOHNSON.  'Sir it will be much exaggerated in

popular talk: for, in the first place, the common people do not

accurately adapt their thoughts to the objects; nor, secondly, do

they accurately adapt their words to their thoughts: they do not

mean to lie; but, taking no pains to be exact, they give you very

false accounts.  A great part of their language is proverbial.  If

anything rocks at all, they say it rocks like a cradle; and in this

way they go on.



The subject of grief for the loss of relations and friends being

introduced, I observed that it was strange to consider how soon it

in general wears away.  Dr. Taylor mentioned a gentleman of the

neighbourhood as the only instance he had ever known of a person

who had endeavoured to RETAIN grief.  He told Dr. Taylor, that

after his Lady's death, which affected him deeply, he RESOLVED that

the grief, which he cherished with a kind of sacred fondness,

should be lasting; but that he found he could not keep it long.

JOHNSON.  'All grief for what cannot in the course of nature be

helped, soon wears away; in some sooner, indeed, in some later; but

it never continues very long, unless where there is madness, such

as will make a man have pride so fixed in his mind, as to imagine

himself a King; or any other passion in an unreasonable way: for

all unnecessary grief is unwise, and therefore will not be long

retained by a sound mind.  If, indeed, the cause of our grief is

occasioned by our own misconduct, if grief is mingled with remorse

of conscience, it should be lasting.'  BOSWELL.  'But, Sir, we do

not approve of a man who very soon forgets the loss of a wife or a

friend.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, we disapprove of him, not because he soon

forgets his grief, for the sooner it is forgotten the better, but

because we suppose, that if he forgets his wife or his friend soon,

he has not had much affection for them.'



I was somewhat disappointed in finding that the edition of The

English Poets, for which he was to write Prefaces and Lives, was

not an undertaking directed by him: but that he was to furnish a

Preface and Life to any poet the booksellers pleased.  I asked him

if he would do this to any dunce's works, if they should ask him.

JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir, and SAY he was a dunce.'  My friend seemed now

not much to relish talking of this edition.



After breakfast,* Johnson carried me to see the garden belonging to

the school of Ashbourne, which is very prettily formed upon a bank,

rising gradually behind the house.  The Reverend Mr. Langley, the

head-master, accompanied us.





* Next morning.--ED.





We had with us at dinner several of Dr. Taylor's neighbours, good

civil gentlemen, who seemed to understand Dr. Johnson very well,

and not to consider him in the light that a certain person did, who

being struck, or rather stunned by his voice and manner, when he

was afterwards asked what he thought of him, answered.  'He's a

tremendous companion.'



Johnson told me, that 'Taylor was a very sensible acute man, and

had a strong mind; that he had great activity in some respects, and

yet such a sort of indolence, that if you should put a pebble upon

his chimney-piece, you would find it there, in the same state, a

year afterwards.'



And here is the proper place to give an account of Johnson's humane

and zealous interference in behalf of the Reverend Dr. William

Dodd, formerly Prebendary of Brecon, and chaplain in ordinary to

his Majesty; celebrated as a very popular preacher, an encourager

of charitable institutions, and authour of a variety of works,

chiefly theological.  Having unhappily contracted expensive habits

of living, partly occasioned by licentiousness of manners, he in an

evil hour, when pressed by want of money, and dreading an exposure

of his circumstances, forged a bond of which he attempted to avail

himself to support his credit, flattering himself with hopes that

he might be able to repay its amount without being detected.  The

person, whose name he thus rashly and criminally presumed to

falsify, was the Earl of Chesterfield, to whom he had been tutor,

and who, he perhaps, in the warmth of his feelings, flattered

himself would have generously paid the money in case of an alarm

being taken, rather than suffer him to fall a victim to the

dreadful consequences of violating the law against forgery, the

most dangerous crime in a commercial country; but the unfortunate

divine had the mortification to find that he was mistaken.  His

noble pupil appeared against him, and he was capitally convicted.



Johnson told me that Dr. Dodd was very little acquainted with him,

having been but once in his company, many years previous to this

period (which was precisely the state of my own acquaintance with

Dodd); but in his distress he bethought himself of Johnson's

persuasive power of writing, if haply it might avail to obtain for

him the Royal Mercy.  He did not apply to him directly, but,

extraordinary as it may seem, through the late Countess of

Harrington, who wrote a letter to Johnson, asking him to employ his

pen in favour of Dodd.  Mr. Allen, the printer, who was Johnson's

landlord and next neighbour in Bolt-court, and for whom he had much

kindness, was one of Dodd's friends, of whom to the credit of

humanity be it recorded, that he had many who did not desert him,

even after his infringement of the law had reduced him to the state

of a man under sentence of death.  Mr. Allen told me that he

carried Lady Harrington's letter to Johnson, that Johnson read it

walking up and down his chamber, and seemed much agitated, after

which he said, 'I will do what I can;'--and certainly he did make

extraordinary exertions.



He this evening, as he had obligingly promised in one of his

letters, put into my hands the whole series of his writings upon

this melancholy occasion.



Dr. Johnson wrote in the first place, Dr. Dodd's Speech to the

Recorder of London, at the Old-Bailey, when sentence of death was

about to be pronounced upon him.



He wrote also The Convict's Address to his unhappy Brethren, a

sermon delivered by Dr. Dodd, in the chapel of Newgate.



The other pieces mentioned by Johnson in the above-mentioned

collection, are two letters, one to the Lord Chancellor Bathurst,

(not Lord North, as is erroneously supposed,) and one to Lord

Mansfield;--A Petition from Dr. Dodd to the King;--A Petition from

Mrs. Dodd to the Queen;--Observations of some length inserted in

the news-papers, on occasion of Earl Percy's having presented to

his Majesty a petition for mercy to Dodd, signed by twenty thousand

people, but all in vain.  He told me that he had also written a

petition from the city of London; 'but (said he, with a significant

smile) they MENDED it.'



The last of these articles which Johnson wrote is Dr. Dodd's last

solemn Declaration, which he left with the sheriff at the place of

execution.



I found a letter to Dr. Johnson from Dr. Dodd, May 23, 1777, in

which The Convict's Address seems clearly to be meant.



'I am so penetrated, my ever dear Sir, with a sense of your extreme

benevolence towards me, that I cannot find words equal to the

sentiments of my heart. . . .'



On Sunday, June 22, he writes, begging Dr. Johnson's assistance in

framing a supplicatory letter to his Majesty.



This letter was brought to Dr. Johnson when in church.  He stooped

down and read it, and wrote, when he went home, the following

letter for Dr. Dodd to the King:



'SIR,--May it not offend your Majesty, that the most miserable of

men applies himself to your clemency, as his last hope and his last

refuge; that your mercy is most earnestly and humbly implored by a

clergyman, whom your Laws and Judges have condemned to the horrour

and ignominy of a publick execution. . . .'



Subjoined to it was written as follows:--





'TO DR. DODD.



'SIR,--I most seriously enjoin you not to let it be at all known

that I have written this letter, and to return the copy to Mr.

Allen in a cover to me.  I hope I need not tell you, that I wish it

success.--But do not indulge hope.--Tell nobody.'



It happened luckily that Mr. Allen was pitched on to assist in this

melancholy office, for he was a great friend of Mr. Akerman, the

keeper of Newgate.  Dr. Johnson never went to see Dr. Dodd.  He

said to me, 'it would have done HIM more harm, than good to Dodd,

who once expressed a desire to see him, but not earnestly.'



All applications for the Royal Mercy having failed, Dr. Dodd

prepared himself for death; and, with a warmth of gratitude, wrote

to Dr. Johnson as follows:--



'June 25, Midnight.



'Accept, thou GREAT and GOOD heart, my earnest and fervent thanks

and prayers for all thy benevolent and kind efforts in my behalf--

Oh! Dr. Johnson! as I sought your knowledge at an early hour in

life, would to heaven I had cultivated the love and acquaintance of

so excellent a man!--I pray GOD most sincerely to bless you with

the highest transports--the infelt satisfaction of HUMANE and

benevolent exertions!--And admitted, as I trust I shall be, to the

realms of bliss before you, I shall hail YOUR arrival there with

transports, and rejoice to acknowledge that you was my Comforter,

my Advocate and my FRIEND!  GOD BE EVER WITH YOU!'





Dr. Johnson lastly wrote to Dr. Dodd this solemn and soothing

letter:--





'TO THE REVEREND DR. DODD.



'DEAR SIR,--That which is appointed to all men is now coming upon

you.  Outward circumstances, the eyes and the thoughts of men, are

below the notice of an immortal being about to stand the trial for

eternity, before the Supreme Judge of heaven and earth.  Be

comforted: your crime, morally or religiously considered, has no

very deep dye of turpitude.  It corrupted no man's principles; it

attacked no man's life.  It involved only a temporary and reparable

injury.  Of this, and of all other sins, you are earnestly to

repent; and may GOD, who knoweth our frailty, and desireth not our

death, accept your repentance, for the sake of his SON JESUS CHRIST

our Lord.



'In requital of those well-intended offices which you are pleased

so emphatically to acknowledge, let me beg that you make in your

devotions one petition for my eternal welfare.  I am, dear Sir,

your affectionate servant,



'June 26, 1777.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





Under the copy of this letter I found written, in Johnson's own

hand, 'Next day, June 27, he was executed.'



Tuesday, September 16, Dr. Johnson having mentioned to me the

extraordinary size and price of some cattle reared by Dr. Taylor, I

rode out with our host, surveyed his farm, and was shown one cow

which he had sold for a hundred and twenty guineas, and another for

which he had been offered a hundred and thirty.  Taylor thus

described to me his old schoolfellow and friend, Johnson: 'He is a

man of a very clear head, great power of words, and a very gay

imagination; but there is no disputing with him.  He will not hear

you, and having a louder voice than you, must roar you down.'



In the evening, the Reverend Mr. Seward, of Lichfield, who was

passing through Ashbourne in his way home, drank tea with us.

Johnson described him thus:--'Sir, his ambition is to be a fine

talker; so he goes to Buxton, and such places, where he may find

companies to listen to him.  And, Sir, he is a valetudinarian, one

of those who are always mending themselves.  I do not know a more

disagreeable character than a valetudinarian, who thinks he may do

any thing that is for his ease, and indulges himself in the

grossest freedoms: Sir, he brings himself to the state of a hog in

a stye.'



Dr. Taylor's nose happening to bleed, he said, it was because he

had omitted to have himself blooded four days after a quarter of a

year's interval.  Dr. Johnson, who was a great dabbler in physick,

disapproved much of periodical bleeding.  'For (said he,) you

accustom yourself to an evacuation which Nature cannot perform of

herself, and therefore she cannot help you, should you, from

forgetfulness or any other cause, omit it; so you may be suddenly

suffocated.  You may accustom yourself to other periodical

evacuations, because should you omit them, Nature can supply the

omission; but Nature cannot open a vein to blood you.'--'I do not

like to take an emetick, (said Taylor,) for fear of breaking some

small vessels.'--'Poh! (said Johnson,) if you have so many things

that will break, you had better break your neck at once, and

there's an end on't.  You will break no small vessels:' (blowing

with high derision.)



The horrour of death which I had always observed in Dr. Johnson,

appeared strong to-night.  I ventured to tell him, that I had been,

for moments in my life, not afraid of death; therefore I could

suppose another man in that state of mind for a considerable space

of time.  He said, 'he never had a moment in which death was not

terrible to him.'  He added, that it had been observed, that scarce

any man dies in publick, but with apparent resolution; from that

desire of praise which never quits us.  I said, Dr. Dodd seemed to

be willing to die, and full of hopes of happiness.  'Sir, (said

he,) Dr. Dodd would have given both his hands and both his legs to

have lived.  The better a man is, the more afraid he is of death,

having a clearer view of infinite purity.'  He owned, that our

being in an unhappy uncertainty as to our salvation, was

mysterious; and said, 'Ah! we must wait till we are in another

state of being, to have many things explained to us.'  Even the

powerful mind of Johnson seemed foiled by futurity.



On Wednesday, September 17, Dr. Butter, physician at Derby, drank

tea with us; and it was settled that Dr. Johnson and I should go on

Friday and dine with him.  Johnson said, 'I'm glad of this.'  He

seemed weary of the uniformity of life at Dr. Taylor's.



Talking of biography, I said, in writing a life, a man's

peculiarities should be mentioned, because they mark his character.

JOHNSON.  'Sir, there is no doubt as to peculiarities: the question

is, whether a man's vices should be mentioned; for instance,

whether it should be mentioned that Addison and Parnell drank too

freely: for people will probably more easily indulge in drinking

from knowing this; so that more ill may be done by the example,

than good by telling the whole truth.'  Here was an instance of his

varying from himself in talk; for when Lord Hailes and he sat one

morning calmly conversing in my house at Edinburgh, I well remember

that Dr. Johnson maintained, that 'If a man is to write A

Panegyrick, he may keep vices out of sight; but if he professes to

write A Life, he must represent it really as it was:' and when I

objected to the danger of telling that Parnell drank to excess, he

said, that 'it would produce an instructive caution to avoid

drinking, when it was seen, that even the learning and genius of

Parnell could be debased by it.'  And in the Hebrides he

maintained, as appears from my Journal, that a man's intimate

friend should mention his faults, if he writes his life.



Thursday, September 18.  Last night Dr. Johnson had proposed that

the crystal lustre, or chandelier, in Dr. Taylor's large room,

should be lighted up some time or other.  Taylor said, it should be

lighted up next night.  'That will do very well, (said I,) for it

is Dr. Johnson's birth-day.'  When we were in the Isle of Sky,

Johnson had desired me not to mention his birth-day.  He did not

seem pleased at this time that I mentioned it, and said (somewhat

sternly,) 'he would not have the lustre lighted the next day.'



Some ladies, who had been present yesterday when I mentioned his

birth-day, came to dinner to-day, and plagued him unintentionally,

by wishing him joy.  I know not why he disliked having his birth-

day mentioned, unless it were that it reminded him of his

approaching nearer to death, of which he had a constant dread.



I mentioned to him a friend of mine who was formerly gloomy from

low spirits, and much distressed by the fear of death, but was now

uniformly placid, and contemplated his dissolution without any

perturbation.  'Sir, (said Johnson,) this is only a disordered

imagination taking a different turn.'



He observed, that a gentleman of eminence in literature had got

into a bad style of poetry of late.  'He puts (said he,) a very

common thing in a strange dress till he does not know it himself,

and thinks other people do not know it.'  BOSWELL.  'That is owing

to his being so much versant in old English poetry.'  JOHNSON.

'What is that to the purpose, Sir?  If I say a man is drunk, and

you tell me it is owing to his taking much drink, the matter is not

mended.  No, Sir, ------ has taken to an odd mode.  For example,

he'd write thus:





    "Hermit hoar, in solemn cell,

       Wearing out life's evening gray."





Gray evening is common enough; but evening gray he'd think fine.--

Stay;--we'll make out the stanza:





    "Hermit hoar, in solemn cell,

       Wearing out life's evening gray;

     Smite thy bosom, sage, and tell,

       What is bliss? and which the way?"'





BOSWELL.  'But why smite his bosom, Sir?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, to shew

he was in earnest,' (smiling.)--He at an after period added the

following stanza:





    'Thus I spoke; and speaking sigh'd;

       --Scarce repress'd the starting tear;--

     When the smiling sage reply'd--

       --Come, my lad, and drink some beer.'





I cannot help thinking the first stanza very good solemn poetry, as

also the three first lines of the second.  Its last line is an

excellent burlesque surprise on gloomy sentimental enquirers.  And,

perhaps, the advice is as good as can be given to a low-spirited

dissatisfied being:--'Don't trouble your head with sickly thinking:

take a cup, and be merry.'



Friday, September 19, after breakfast Dr. Johnson and I set out in

Dr. Taylor's chaise to go to Derby.  The day was fine, and we

resolved to go by Keddlestone, the seat of Lord Scarsdale, that I

might see his Lordship's fine house.  I was struck with the

magnificence of the building; and the extensive park, with the

finest verdure, covered with deer, and cattle, and sheep, delighted

me.  The number of old oaks, of an immense size, filled me with a

sort of respectful admiration: for one of them sixty pounds was

offered.  The excellent smooth gravel roads; the large piece of

water formed by his Lordship from some small brooks, with a

handsome barge upon it; the venerable Gothick church, now the

family chapel, just by the house; in short, the grand group of

objects agitated and distended my mind in a most agreeable manner.

'One should think (said I,) that the proprietor of all this MUST be

happy.'--'Nay, Sir, (said Johnson,) all this excludes but one evil--

poverty.'



Our names were sent up, and a well-drest elderly housekeeper, a

most distinct articulator, shewed us the house; which I need not

describe, as there is an account of it published in Adam's Works in

Architecture.  Dr. Johnson thought better of it to-day than when he

saw it before; for he had lately attacked it violently, saying, 'It

would do excellently for a town-hall.  The large room with the

pillars (said he,) would do for the Judges to sit in at the

assizes; the circular room for a jury-chamber; and the room above

for prisoners.'  Still he thought the large room ill lighted, and

of no use but for dancing in; and the bed-chambers but indifferent

rooms; and that the immense sum which it cost was injudiciously

laid out.  Dr. Taylor had put him in mind of his APPEARING pleased

with the house.  'But (said he,) that was when Lord Scarsdale was

present.  Politeness obliges us to appear pleased with a man's

works when he is present.  No man will be so ill bred as to

question you.  You may therefore pay compliments without saying

what is not true.  I should say to Lord Scarsdale of his large

room, "My Lord, this is the most COSTLY room that I ever saw;"

which is true.'



Dr. Manningham, physician in London, who was visiting at Lord

Scarsdale's, accompanyed us through many of the rooms, and soon

afterwards my Lord himself, to whom Dr. Johnson was known,

appeared, and did the honours of the house.  We talked of Mr.

Langton.  Johnson, with a warm vehemence of affectionate regard,

exclaimed, 'The earth does not bear a worthier man than Bennet

Langton.'  We saw a good many fine pictures, which I think are

described in one of Young's Tours.  There is a printed catalogue of

them which the housekeeper put into my hand; I should like to view

them at leisure.  I was much struck with Daniel interpreting

Nebuchadnezzar's dream by Rembrandt.  We were shown a pretty large

library.  In his Lordship's dressing-room lay Johnson's small

Dictionary: he shewed it to me, with some eagerness, saying,

'Look'ye!  Quae terra nostri non plena laboris.'  He observed,

also, Goldsmith's Animated Nature; and said, 'Here's our friend!

The poor Doctor would have been happy to hear of this.'



In our way, Johnson strongly expressed his love of driving fast in

a post-chaise.  'If (said he,) I had no duties, and no reference to

futurity, I would spend my life in driving briskly in a post-chaise

with a pretty woman; but she should be one who could understand me,

and would add something to the conversation.'  I observed, that we

were this day to stop just where the Highland army did in 1745.

JOHNSON.  'It was a noble attempt.'  BOSWELL.  'I wish we could

have an authentick history of it.'  JOHNSON.  'If you were not an

idle dog you might write it, by collecting from every body what

they can tell, and putting down your authorities.'  BOSWELL.  'But

I could not have the advantage of it in my life-time.'  JOHNSON.

'You might have the satisfaction of its fame, by printing it in

Holland; and as to profit, consider how long it was before writing

came to be considered in a pecuniary view.  Baretti says, he is the

first man that ever received copy-money in Italy.'  I said that I

would endeavour to do what Dr. Johnson suggested and I thought that

I might write so as to venture to publish my History of the Civil

War in Great-Britain in 1745 and 1746, without being obliged to go

to a foreign press.



When we arrived at Derby, Dr. Butter accompanied us to see the

manufactory of china there.  I admired the ingenuity and delicate

art with which a man fashioned clay into a cup, a saucer, or a tea-

pot, while a boy turned round a wheel to give the mass rotundity.

I thought this as excellent in its species of power, as making good

verses in ITS species.  Yet I had no respect for this potter.

Neither, indeed, has a man of any extent of thinking for a mere

verse-maker, in whose numbers, however perfect, there is no poetry,

no mind.  The china was beautiful, but Dr. Johnson justly observed

it was too dear; for that he could have vessels of silver, of the

same size, as cheap as what were here made of porcelain.



I felt a pleasure in walking about Derby such as I always have in

walking about any town to which I am not accustomed.  There is an

immediate sensation of novelty; and one speculates on the way in

which life is passed in it, which, although there is a sameness

every where upon the whole, is yet minutely diversified.  The

minute diversities in every thing are wonderful.  Talking of

shaving the other night at Dr. Taylor's, Dr. Johnson said, 'Sir, of

a thousand shavers, two do not shave so much alike as not to be

distinguished.'  I thought this not possible, till he specified so

many of the varieties in shaving;--holding the razor more or less

perpendicular;--drawing long or short strokes;--beginning at the

upper part of the face, or the under;--at the right side or the

left side.  Indeed, when one considers what variety of sounds can

be uttered by the windpipe, in the compass of a very small

aperture, we may he convinced how many degrees of difference there

may be in the application of a razor.



We dined with Dr. Butter, whose lady is daughter of my cousin Sir

John Douglas, whose grandson is now presumptive heir of the noble

family of Queensberry.  Johnson and he had a good deal of medical

conversation.  Johnson said, he had somewhere or other given an

account of Dr. Nichols's discourse De Animia Medica.  He told us

'that whatever a man's distemper was, Dr. Nichols would not attend

him as a physician, if his mind was not at ease; for he believed

that no medicines would have any influence.  He once attended a man

in trade, upon whom he found none of the medicines he prescribed

had any effect: he asked the man's wife privately whether his

affairs were not in a bad way?  She said no.  He continued his

attendance some time, still without success.  At length the man's

wife told him, she had discovered that her husband's affairs WERE

in a bad way.  When Goldsmith was dying, Dr. Turton said to him,

"Your pulse is in greater disorder than it should be, from the

degree of fever which you have: is your mind at ease?"  Goldsmith

answered it was not.'



Dr. Johnson told us at tea, that when some of Dr. Dodd's pious

friends were trying to console him by saying that he was going to

leave 'a wretched world,' he had honesty enough not to join in the

cant:--'No, no, (said he,) it has been a very agreeable world to

me.'  Johnson added, 'I respect Dodd for thus speaking the truth;

for, to be sure, he had for several years enjoyed a life of great

voluptuousness.



He told us, that Dodd's city friends stood by him so, that a

thousand pounds were ready to be given to the gaoler, if he would

let him escape.  He added, that he knew a friend of Dodd's, who

walked about Newgate for some time on the evening before the day of

his execution, with five hundred pounds in his pocket, ready to be

paid to any of the turnkeys who could get him out: but it was too

late; for he was watched with much circumspection.  He said, Dodd's

friends had an image of him made of wax, which was to have been

left in his place; and he believed it was carried into the prison.



Johnson disapproved of Dr. Dodd's leaving the world persuaded that

The Convict's Address to his unhappy Brethren was of his own

writing.  'But, Sir, (said I,) you contributed to the deception;

for when Mr. Seward expressed a doubt to you that it was not Dodd's

own, because it had a great deal more force of mind in it than any

thing known to be his, you answered,--"Why should you think so?

Depend upon it, Sir, when a man knows he is to be hanged in a

fortnight, it concentrates his mind wonderfully."'  JOHNSON.  Sir,

as Dodd got it from me to pass as his own, while that could do him

any good, there was an IMPLIED PROMISE that I should not own it.

To own it, therefore, would have been telling a lie, with the

addition of breach of promise, which was worse than simply telling

a lie to make it be believed it was Dodd's.  Besides, Sir, I did

not DIRECTLY tell a lie: I left the matter uncertain.  Perhaps I

thought that Seward would not believe it the less to be mine for

what I said; but I would not put it in his power to say I had owned

it.'



He said, 'Goldsmith was a plant that flowered late.  There appeared

nothing remarkable about him when he was young; though when he had

got high in fame, one of his friends began to recollect something

of his being distinguished at College.  Goldsmith in the same

manner recollected more of that friend's early years, as he grew a

greater man.'



I mentioned that Lord Monboddo told me, he awaked every morning at

four, and then for his health got up and walked in his room naked,

with the window open, which he called taking an air bath; after

which he went to bed again, and slept two hours more.  Johnson, who

was always ready to beat down any thing that seemed to be exhibited

with disproportionate importance, thus observed: 'I suppose, Sir,

there is no more in it than this, he awakes at four, and cannot

sleep till he chills himself, and makes the warmth of the bed a

grateful sensation.'



I talked of the difficulty of rising in the morning.  Dr. Johnson

told me, 'that the learned Mrs. Carter, at that period when she was

eager in study, did not awake as early as she wished, and she

therefore had a contrivance, that, at a certain hour, her chamber-

light should burn a string to which a heavy weight was suspended,

which then fell with a strong sudden noise: this roused her from

sleep, and then she had no difficulty in getting up.'  But I said

THAT was my difficulty; and wished there could be some medicine

invented which would make one rise without pain, which I never did,

unless after lying in bed a very long time.



Johnson advised me to-night not to REFINE in the education of my

children.  'Life (said he,) will not bear refinement: you must do

as other people do.'



As we drove back to Ashbourne, Dr. Johnson recommended to me, as he

had often done, to drink water only: 'For (said he,) you are then

sure not to get drunk; whereas if you drink wine you are never

sure.'  I said, drinking wine was a pleasure which I was unwilling

to give up, 'Why, Sir, (said he,) there is no doubt that not to

drink wine is a great deduction from life; but it may be

necessary.'  He however owned, that in his opinion a free use of

wine did not shorten life; and said, he would not give less for the

life of a certain Scotch Lord (whom he named) celebrated for hard

drinking, than for that of a sober man.  'But stay, (said he, with

his usual intelligence, and accuracy of enquiry,) does it take much

wine to make him drunk?'  I answered, 'a great deal either of wine

or strong punch.'--'Then (said he,) that is the worse.'  I presume

to illustrate my friend's observation thus: 'A fortress which soon

surrenders has its walls less shattered than when a long and

obstinate resistance is made.'



I ventured to mention a person who was as violent a Scotsman as he

was an Englishman; and literally had the same contempt for an

Englishman compared with a Scotsman, that he had for a Scotsman

compared with an Englishman; and that he would say of Dr. Johnson,

'Damned rascal! to talk as he does of the Scotch.'  This seemed,

for a moment, 'to give him pause.'  It, perhaps, presented his

extreme prejudice against the Scotch in a point of view somewhat

new to him, by the effect of CONTRAST.



By the time when we returned to Ashbourne, Dr. Taylor was gone to

bed.  Johnson and I sat up a long time by ourselves.



On Saturday, September 20, after breakfast, when Taylor was gone

out to his farm, Dr. Johnson and I had a serious conversation by

ourselves on melancholy and madness.



We entered seriously upon a question of much importance to me,

which Johnson was pleased to consider with friendly attention.  I

had long complained to him that I felt myself discontented in

Scotland, as too narrow a sphere, and that I wished to make my

chief residence in London, the great scene of ambition,

instruction, and amusement: a scene, which was to me, comparatively

speaking, a heaven upon earth.  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, I never knew

any one who had such a GUST for London as you have: and I cannot

blame you for your wish to live there: yet, Sir, were I in your

father's place, I should not consent to your settling there; for I

have the old feudal notions, and I should be afraid that Auchinleck

would be deserted, as you would soon find it more desirable to have

a country-seat in a better climate.'



I suggested a doubt, that if I were to reside in London, the

exquisite zest with which I relished it in occasional visits might

go off, and I might grow tired of it.  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, you

find no man, at all intellectual, who is willing to leave London.

No, Sir, when a man is tired of London, he is tired of life; for

there is in London all that life can afford.'



He said, 'A country gentleman should bring his lady to visit London

as soon as he can, that they may have agreeable topicks for

conversation when they are by themselves.'



We talked of employment being absolutely necessary to preserve the

mind from wearying and growing fretful, especially in those who

have a tendency to melancholy; and I mentioned to him a saying

which somebody had related of an American savage, who, when an

European was expatiating on all the advantages of money, put this

question: 'Will it purchase OCCUPATION?'  JOHNSON.  'Depend upon

it, Sir, this saying is too refined for a savage.  And, Sir, money

WILL purchase occupation; it will purchase all the conveniences of

life; it will purchase variety of company; it will purchase all

sorts of entertainment.'



I talked to him of Forster's Voyage to the South Seas, which

pleased me; but I found he did not like it.  'Sir, (said he,) there

is a great affectation of fine writing in it.'  BOSWELL.  'But he

carries you along with him.'  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir; he does not carry

ME along with him: he leaves me behind him: or rather, indeed, he

sets me before him; for he makes me turn over many leaves at a

time.'



On Sunday, September 21, we went to the church of Ashbourne, which

is one of the largest and most luminous that I have seen in any

town of the same size.  I felt great satisfaction in considering

that I was supported in my fondness for solemn publick worship by

the general concurrence and munificence of mankind.



Johnson and Taylor were so different from each other, that I

wondered at their preserving an intimacy.  Their having been at

school and college together, might, in some degree, account for

this; but Sir Joshua Reynolds has furnished me with a stronger

reason; for Johnson mentioned to him, that he had been told by

Taylor he was to be his heir.  I shall not take upon me to

animadvert upon this; but certain it is, that Johnson paid great

attention to Taylor.  He now, however, said to me, 'Sir, I love

him; but I do not love him more; my regard for him does not

increase.  As it is said in the Apocrypha, "his talk is of

bullocks:" I do not suppose he is very fond of my company.  His

habits are by no means sufficiently clerical: this he knows that I

see; and no man likes to live under the eye of perpetual

disapprobation.'



I have no doubt that a good many sermons were composed for Taylor

by Johnson.  At this time I found, upon his table, a part of one

which he had newly begun to write: and Concio pro Tayloro appears

in one of his diaries.  When to these circumstances we add the

internal evidence from the power of thinking and style, in the

collection which the Reverend Mr. Hayes has published, with the

SIGNIFICANT title of 'Sermons LEFT FOR PUBLICATION by the Reverend

John Taylor, LL.D.,' our conviction will be complete.



I, however, would not have it thought, that Dr. Taylor, though he

could not write like Johnson, (as, indeed, who could?) did not

sometimes compose sermons as good as those which we generally have

from very respectable divines.  He shewed me one with notes on the

margin in Johnson's handwriting; and I was present when he read

another to Johnson, that he might have his opinion of it, and

Johnson said it was 'very well.'  These, we may be sure, were not

Johnson's; for he was above little arts, or tricks of deception.



I mentioned to Johnson a respectable person of a very strong mind,

who had little of that tenderness which is common to human nature;

as an instance of which, when I suggested to him that he should

invite his son, who had been settled ten years in foreign parts, to

come home and pay him a visit, his answer was, 'No, no, let him

mind his business.  JOHNSON.  'I do not agree with him, Sir, in

this.  Getting money is not all a man's business: to cultivate

kindness is a valuable part of the business of life.'



In the evening, Johnson, being in very good spirits, entertained us

with several characteristical portraits.  I regret that any of them

escaped my retention and diligence.  I found, from experience, that

to collect my friend's conversation so as to exhibit it with any

degree of its original flavour, it was necessary to write it down

without delay.  To record his sayings, after some distance of time,

was like preserving or pickling long-kept and faded fruits, or

other vegetables, which, when in that state, have little or nothing

of their taste when fresh.



I shall present my readers with a series of what I gathered this

evening from the Johnsonian garden.



'Did we not hear so much said of Jack Wilkes, we should think more

highly of his conversation.  Jack has great variety of talk, Jack

is a scholar, and Jack has the manners of a gentleman.  But after

hearing his name sounded from pole to pole, as the phoenix of

convivial felicity, we are disappointed in his company.  He has

always been AT ME: but I would do Jack a kindness, rather than not.

The contest is now over.'



'Colley Cibber once consulted me as to one of his birthday Odes, a

long time before it was wanted.  I objected very freely to several

passages.  Cibber lost patience, and would not read his Ode to an

end.  When we had done with criticism, we walked over to

Richardson's, the authour of Clarissa and I wondered to find

Richardson displeased that I "did not treat Cibber with more

RESPECT."  Now, Sir, to talk of RESPECT for a PLAYER!' (smiling

disdainfully.)  BOSWELL.  'There, Sir, you are always heretical:

you never will allow merit to a player.'  JOHNSON.  'Merit, Sir!

what merit?  Do you respect a rope-dancer, or a ballad-singer?'

BOSWELL.  'No, Sir: but we respect a great player, as a man who can

conceive lofty sentiments, and can express them gracefully.'

JOHNSON.  'What, Sir, a fellow who claps a hump on his back, and a

lump on his leg, and cries "I am Richard the Third"?  Nay, Sir, a

ballad-singer is a higher man, for he does two things; he repeats

and he sings: there is both recitation and musick in his

performance: the player only recites.'  BOSWELL.  'My dear Sir! you

may turn anything into ridicule.  I allow, that a player of farce

is not entitled to respect; he does a little thing: but he who can

represent exalted characters, and touch the noblest passions, has

very respectable powers; and mankind have agreed in admiring great

talents for the stage.  We must consider, too, that a great player

does what very few are capable to do: his art is a very rare

faculty.  WHO can repeat Hamlet's soliloquy, "To be, or not to be,"

as Garrick does it?'  JOHNSON.  'Any body may.  Jemmy, there (a boy

about eight years old, who was in the room,) will do it as well in

a week.'  BOSWELL.  'No, no, Sir: and as a proof of the merit of

great acting, and of the value which mankind set upon it, Garrick

has got a hundred thousand pounds.'  JOHNSON.  'Is getting a

hundred thousand pounds a proof of excellence?  That has been done

by a scoundrel commissary.'



This was most fallacious reasoning.  I was SURE, for once, that I

had the best side of the argument.  I boldly maintained the just

distinction between a tragedian and a mere theatrical droll;

between those who rouse our terrour and pity, and those who only

make us laugh.  'If (said I,) Betterton and Foote were to walk into

this room, you would respect Betterton much more than Foote.'

JOHNSON.  'If Betterton were to walk into this room with Foote,

Foote would soon drive him out of it.  Foote, Sir, quatenus Foote,

has powers superiour to them all.'



On Monday, September 22, when at breakfast, I unguardedly said to

Dr. Johnson, 'I wish I saw you and Mrs. Macaulay together.'  He

grew very angry; and, after a pause, while a cloud gathered on his

brow, he burst out, 'No, Sir; you would not see us quarrel, to make

you sport.  Don't you know that it is very uncivil to PIT two

people against one another?'  Then, checking himself, and wishing

to be more gentle, he added, 'I do not say you should be hanged or

drowned for this; but it IS very uncivil.'  Dr. Taylor thought him

in the wrong, and spoke to him privately of it; but I afterwards

acknowledged to Johnson that I was to blame, for I candidly owned,

that I meant to express a desire to see a contest between Mrs.

Macaulay and him; but then I knew how the contest would end; so

that I was to see him triumph.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, you cannot be sure

how a contest will end; and no man has a right to engage two people

in a dispute by which their passions may be inflamed, and they may

part with bitter resentment against each other.  I would sooner

keep company with a man from whom I must guard my pockets, than

with a man who contrives to bring me into a dispute with somebody

that he may hear it.  This is the great fault of ------,(naming one

of our friends,) endeavouring to introduce a subject upon which he

knows two people in the company differ.'  BOSWELL.  'But he told

me, Sir, he does it for instruction.'  JOHNSON.  'Whatever the

motive be, Sir, the man who does so, does very wrong.  He has no

more right to instruct himself at such risk, than he has to make

two people fight a duel, that he may learn how to defend himself.'



He found great fault with a gentleman of our acquaintance for

keeping a bad table.  'Sir, (said he,) when a man is invited to

dinner, he is disappointed if he does not get something good.  I

advised Mrs. Thrale, who has no card-parties at her house, to give

sweet-meats, and such good things, in an evening, as are not

commonly given, and she would find company enough come to her; for

every body loves to have things which please the palate put in

their way, without trouble or preparation.'  Such was his attention

to the minutiae of life and manners.



Mr. Burke's Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol, on the affairs of

America, being mentioned, Johnson censured the composition much,

and he ridiculed the definition of a free government, viz. 'For any

practical purpose, it is what the people think so.'--'I will let

the King of France govern me on those conditions, (said he,) for it

is to be governed just as I please.'  And when Dr. Taylor talked of

a girl being sent to a parish workhouse, and asked how much she

could be obliged to work, 'Why, (said Johnson,) as much as is

reasonable: and what is that? as much as SHE THINKS reasonable.'



Dr. Johnson obligingly proposed to carry me to see Islam, a

romantick scene, now belonging to a family of the name of Port, but

formerly the seat of the Congreves.  I suppose it is well described

in some of the Tours.  Johnson described it distinctly and vividly,

at which I could not but express to him my wonder; because, though

my eyes, as he observed, were better than his, I could not by any

means equal him in representing visible objects.  I said, the

difference between us in this respect was as that between a man who

has a bad instrument, but plays well on it, and a man who has a

good instrument, on which he can play very imperfectly.



I recollect a very fine amphitheatre, surrounded with hills covered

with woods, and walks neatly formed along the side of a rocky

steep, on the quarter next the house with recesses under

projections of rock, overshadowed with trees; in one of which

recesses, we were told, Congreve wrote his Old Bachelor.  We viewed

a remarkable natural curiosity at Islam; two rivers bursting near

each other from the rock, not from immediate springs, but after

having run for many miles under ground.  Plott, in his History of

Staffordshire, gives an account of this curiosity; but Johnson

would not believe it, though we had the attestation of the

gardener, who said, he had put in corks, where the river Manyfold

sinks into the ground, and had catched them in a net, placed before

one of the openings where the water bursts out.  Indeed, such

subterraneous courses of water are found in various parts of our

globe.



Talking of Dr. Johnson's unwillingness to believe extraordinary

things I ventured to say, 'Sir, you come near Hume's argument

against miracles, "That it is more probable witnesses should lie,

or be mistaken, than that they should happen."  JOHNSON.  'Why,

Sir, Hume, taking the proposition simply, is right.  But the

Christian revelation is not proved by the miracles alone, but as

connected with prophecies, and with the doctrines in confirmation

of which the miracles were wrought.'



In the evening, a gentleman-farmer, who was on a visit at Dr.

Taylor's, attempted to dispute with Johnson in favour of Mungo

Campbell, who shot Alexander, Earl of Eglintoune, upon his having

fallen, when retreating from his Lordship, who he believed was

about to seize his gun, as he had threatened to do.  He said, he

should have done just as Campbell did.  JOHNSON.  'Whoever would do

as Campbell did, deserves to be hanged; not that I could, as a

juryman, have found him legally guilty of murder; but I am glad

they found means to convict him.'  The gentleman-farmer said, 'A

poor man has as much honour as a rich man; and Campbell had THAT to

defend.'  Johnson exclaimed, 'A poor man has no honour.'  The

English yeoman, not dismayed, proceeded: 'Lord Eglintoune was a

damned fool to run on upon Campbell, after being warned that

Campbell would shoot him if he did.'  Johnson, who could not bear

any thing like swearing, angrily replied, "He was NOT a DAMNED

fool: he only thought too well of Campbell.  He did not believe

Campbell would be such a DAMNED scoundrel, as to do so DAMNED a

thing.'  His emphasis on DAMNED, accompanied with frowning looks,

reproved his opponent's want of decorum in HIS presence.



During this interview at Ashbourne, Johnson seemed to be more

uniformly social, cheerful, and alert, than I had almost ever seen

him.  He was prompt on great occasions and on small.  Taylor, who

praised every thing of his own to excess; in short, 'whose geese

were all swans,' as the proverb says, expatiated on the excellence

of his bull-dog, which, he told us, was 'perfectly well shaped.'

Johnson, after examining the animal attentively, thus repressed the

vain-glory of our host:--'No, Sir, he is NOT well shaped; for there

is not the quick transition from the thickness of the fore-part, to

the TENUITY--the thin part--behind,--which a bull-dog ought to

have.'  This TENUITY was the only HARD WORD that I heard him use

during this interview, and it will be observed, he instantly put

another expression in its place.  Taylor said, a small bull-dog was

as good as a large one.  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir; for, in proportion to

his size, he has strength: and your argument would prove, that a

good bull-dog may be as small as a mouse.'  It was amazing how he

entered with perspicuity and keenness upon every thing that

occurred in conversation.  Most men, whom I know, would no more

think of discussing a question about a bull-dog, than of attacking

a bull.



I cannot allow any fragment whatever that floats in my memory

concerning the great subject of this work to be lost.  Though a

small particular may appear trifling to some, it will be relished

by others; while every little spark adds something to the general

blaze: and to please the true, candid, warm admirers of Johnson,

and in any degree increase the splendour of his reputation, I bid

defiance to the shafts of ridicule, or even of malignity.  Showers

of them have been discharged at my Journal of a Tour to the

Hebrides; yet it still sails unhurt along the stream of time, and,

as an attendant upon Johnson,





    'Pursues the triumph, and partakes the gale.'





One morning after breakfast, when the sun shone bright, we walked

out together, and 'pored' for some time with placid indolence upon

an artificial water-fall, which Dr. Taylor had made by building a

strong dyke of stone across the river behind the garden.  It was

now somewhat obstructed by branches of trees and other rubbish,

which had come down the river, and settled close to it.  Johnson,

partly from a desire to see it play more freely, and partly from

that inclination to activity which will animate, at times, the most

inert and sluggish mortal, took a long pole which was lying on a

bank, and pushed down several parcels of this wreck with painful

assiduity, while I stood quietly by, wondering to behold the sage

thus curiously employed, and smiling with an humorous satisfaction

each time when he carried his point.  He worked till he was quite

out of breath; and having found a large dead cat so heavy that he

could not move it after several efforts, 'Come,' said he, (throwing

down the pole,) 'YOU shall take it now;' which I accordingly did,

and being a fresh man, soon made the cat tumble over the cascade.

This may be laughed at as too trifling to record; but it is a small

characteristick trait in the Flemish picture which I give of my

friend, and in which, therefore I mark the most minute particulars.

And let it be remembered, that Aesop at play is one of the

instructive apologues of antiquity.



Talking of Rochester's Poems, he said, he had given them to Mr.

Steevens to castrate for the edition of the poets, to which he was

to write Prefaces.  Dr. Taylor (the only time I ever heard him say

any thing witty) observed, that if Rochester had been castrated

himself, his exceptionable poems would not have been written.'  I

asked if Burnet had not given a good Life of Rochester.  JOHNSON.

'We have a good Death: there is not much Life.'  I asked whether

Prior's Poems were to be printed entire: Johnson said they were.  I

mentioned Lord Hailes's censure of Prior, in his Preface to a

collection of Sacred Poems, by various hands, published by him at

Edinburgh a great many years ago, where he mentions, 'those impure

tales which will be the eternal opprobrium of their ingenious

authour.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, Lord Hailes has forgot.  There is

nothing in Prior that will excite to lewdness.  If Lord Hailes

thinks there is, he must be more combustible than other people.'  I

instanced the tale of Paulo Purganti and his Wife.  JOHNSON.  Sir,

there is nothing there, but that his wife wanted to be kissed when

poor Paulo was out of pocket.  No, Sir, Prior is a lady's book.  No

lady is ashamed to have it standing in her library.'



The hypochondriack disorder being mentioned, Dr. Johnson did not

think it so common as I supposed.  'Dr. Taylor (said he,) is the

same one day as another.  Burke and Reynolds are the same;

Beauclerk, except when in pain, is the same.  I am not so myself;

but this I do not mention commonly.'



Dr. Johnson advised me to-day, to have as many books about me as I

could; that I might read upon any subject upon which I had a desire

for instruction at the time.  'What you read THEN (said he,) you

will remember; but if you have not a book immediately ready, and

the subject moulds in your mind, it is a chance if you again have a

desire to study it.'  He added, 'If a man never has an eager desire

for instruction, he should prescribe a task for himself.  But it is

better when a man reads from immediate inclination.'



He repeated a good many lines of Horace's Odes, while we were in

the chaise.  I remember particularly the Ode Eheu fugaces.



He told me that Bacon was a favourite authour with him; but he had

never read his works till he was compiling the English Dictionary,

in which, he said, I might see Bacon very often quoted.  Mr. Seward

recollects his having mentioned, that a Dictionary of the English

Language might be compiled from Bacon's writings alone, and that he

had once an intention of giving an edition of Bacon, at least of

his English works, and writing the Life of that great man.  Had he

executed this intention, there can be no doubt that he would have

done it in a most masterly manner.



Wishing to be satisfied what degree of truth there was in a story

which a friend of Johnson's and mine had told me to his

disadvantage, I mentioned it to him in direct terms; and it was to

this effect: that a gentleman who had lived in great intimacy with

him, shewn him much kindness, and even relieved him from a

spunging-house, having afterwards fallen into bad circumstances,

was one day, when Johnson was at dinner with him, seized for debt,

and carried to prison; that Johnson sat still undisturbed, and went

on eating and drinking; upon which the gentleman's sister, who was

present, could not suppress her indignation: 'What, Sir, (said

she,) are you so unfeeling, as not even to offer to go to my

brother in his distress; you who have been so much obliged to him?'

And that Johnson answered, 'Madam, I owe him no obligation; what he

did for me he would have done for a dog.'



Johnson assured me, that the story was absolutely false: but like a

man conscious of being in the right, and desirous of completely

vindicating himself from such a charge, he did not arrogantly rest

on a mere denial, and on his general character, but proceeded

thus:--'Sir, I was very intimate with that gentleman, and was once

relieved by him from an arrest; but I never was present when he was

arrested, never knew that he was arrested, and I believe he never

was in difficulties after the time when he relieved me.  I loved

him much; yet, in talking of his general character, I may have

said, though I do not remember that I ever did say so, that as his

generosity proceeded from no principle, but was a part of his

profusion, he would do for a dog what he would do for a friend: but

I never applied this remark to any particular instance, and

certainly not to his kindness to me.  If a profuse man, who does

not value his money, and gives a large sum to a whore, gives half

as much, or an equally large sum to relieve a friend, it cannot be

esteemed as virtue.  This was all that I could say of that

gentleman; and, if said at all, it must have been said after his

death.  Sir, I would have gone to the world's end to relieve him.

The remark about the dog, if made by me, was such a sally as might

escape one when painting a man highly.'



On Tuesday, September 23, Johnson was remarkably cordial to me.  It

being necessary for me to return to Scotland soon, I had fixed on

the next day for my setting out, and I felt a tender concern at the

thought of parting with him.  He had, at this time, frankly

communicated to me many particulars, which are inserted in this

work in their proper places; and once, when I happened to mention

that the expence of my jaunt would come to much more than I had

computed, he said, 'Why, Sir, if the expence were to be an

inconvenience, you would have reason to regret it: but, if you have

had the money to spend, I know not that you could have purchased as

much pleasure with it in any other way.'



I perceived that he pronounced the word heard, as if spelt with a

double e, heerd, instead of sounding it herd, as is most usually

done.  He said, his reason was, that if it was pronounced herd,

there would be a single exception from the English pronunciation of

the syllable ear, and he thought it better not to have that

exception.



In the evening our gentleman-farmer, and two others, entertained

themselves and the company with a great number of tunes on the

fiddle.  Johnson desired to have 'Let ambition fire thy mind,'

played over again, and appeared to give a patient attention to it;

though he owned to me that he was very insensible to the power of

musick.  I told him, that it affected me to such a degree, as often

to agitate my nerves painfully, producing in my mind alternate

sensations of pathetick dejection, so that I was ready to shed

tears; and of daring resolution, so that I was inclined to rush

into the thickest part of the battle.  'Sir, (said he,) I should

never hear it, if it made me such a fool.'



This evening, while some of the tunes of ordinary composition were

played with no great skill, my frame was agitated, and I was

conscious of a generous attachment to Dr. Johnson, as my preceptor

and friend, mixed with an affectionate regret that he was an old

man, whom I should probably lose in a short time.  I thought I

could defend him at the point of my sword.  My reverence and

affection for him were in full glow.  I said to him, 'My dear Sir,

we must meet every year, if you don't quarrel with me.'  JOHNSON.

'Nay, Sir, you are more likely to quarrel with me, than I with you.

My regard for you is greater almost than I have words to express;

but I do not choose to be always repeating it; write it down in the

first leaf of your pocket-book, and never doubt of it again.'



I talked to him of misery being 'the doom of man' in this life, as

displayed in his Vanity of Human Wishes.  Yet I observed that

things were done upon the supposition of happiness; grand houses

were built, fine gardens were made, splendid places of publick

amusement were contrived, and crowded with company.  JOHNSON.

'Alas, Sir, these are all only struggles for happiness.  When I

first entered Ranelagh, it gave an expansion and gay sensation to

my mind, such as I never experienced any where else.  But, as

Xerxes wept when he viewed his immense army, and considered that

not one of that great multitude would be alive a hundred years

afterwards, so it went to my heart to consider that there was not

one in all that brilliant circle, that was not afraid to go home

and think; but that the thoughts of each individual there, would be

distressing when alone.'



I suggested, that being in love, and flattered with hopes of

success; or having some favourite scheme in view for the next day,

might prevent that wretchedness of which we had been talking.

JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, it may sometimes be so as you suppose; but my

conclusion is in general but too true.'



While Johnson and I stood in calm conference by ourselves in Dr.

Taylor's garden, at a pretty late hour in a serene autumn night,

looking up to the heavens, I directed the discourse to the subject

of a future state.  My friend was in a placid and most benignant

frame.  'Sir, (said he,) I do not imagine that all things will be

made clear to us immediately after death, but that the ways of

Providence will be explained to us very gradually.'  He talked to

me upon this aweful and delicate question in a gentle tone, and as

if afraid to be decisive.



After supper I accompanied him to his apartment, and at my request

he dictated to me an argument in favour of the negro who was then

claiming his liberty, in an action in the Court of Session in

Scotland.  He had always been very zealous against slavery in every

form, in which I, with all deference, thought that he discovered 'a

zeal without knowledge.'  Upon one occasion, when in company with

some very grave men at Oxford, his toast was, 'Here's to the next

insurrection of the negroes in the West Indies.'  His violent

prejudice against our West Indian and American settlers appeared

whenever there was an opportunity.  Towards the conclusion of his

Taxation no Tyranny, he says, 'how is it that we hear the loudest

YELPS for liberty among the drivers of negroes?'



When I said now to Johnson, that I was afraid I kept him too late

up.  'No, Sir, (said he,) I don't care though I sit all night with

you.'  This was an animated speech from a man in his sixty-ninth

year.



Had I been as attentive not to displease him as I ought to have

been, I know not but this vigil might have been fulfilled; but I

unluckily entered upon the controversy concerning the right of

Great-Britain to tax America, and attempted to argue in favour of

our fellow-subjects on the other side of the Atlantick.  I insisted

that America might be very well governed, and made to yield

sufficient revenue by the means of INFLUENCE, as exemplified in

Ireland, while the people might be pleased with the imagination of

their participating of the British constitution, by having a body

of representatives, without whose consent money could not be

exacted from them.  Johnson could not bear my thus opposing his

avowed opinion, which he had exerted himself with an extreme degree

of heat to enforce; and the violent agitation into which he was

thrown, while answering, or rather reprimanding me, alarmed me so,

that I heartily repented of my having unthinkingly introduced the

subject.  I myself, however, grew warm, and the change was great,

from the calm state of philosophical discussion in which we had a

little before been pleasingly employed.



We were fatigued by the contest, which was produced by my want of

caution; and he was not then in the humour to slide into easy and

cheerful talk.  It therefore so happened, that we were after an

hour or two very willing to separate and go to bed.



On Wednesday, September 24, I went into Dr. Johnson's room before

he got up, and finding that the storm of the preceding night was

quite laid, I sat down upon his bed-side, and he talked with as

much readiness and good-humour as ever.  He recommended to me to

plant a considerable part of a large moorish farm which I had

purchased, and he made several calculations of the expence and

profit: for he delighted in exercising his mind on the science of

numbers.  He pressed upon me the importance of planting at the

first in a very sufficient manner, quoting the saying 'In bello non

licet bis errare:' and adding, 'this is equally true in planting.'



I spoke with gratitude of Dr. Taylor's hospitality; and, as

evidence that it was not on account of his good table alone that

Johnson visited him often, I mentioned a little anecdote which had

escaped my friend's recollection, and at hearing which repeated, he

smiled.  One evening, when I was sitting with him, Frank delivered

this message: 'Sir, Dr. Taylor sends his compliments to you, and

begs you will dine with him to-morrow.  He has got a hare.'--'My

compliments (said Johnson,) and I'll dine with him--hare or

rabbit.'



After breakfast I departed, and pursued my journey northwards.  I

took my post-chaise from the Green Man, a very good inn at

Ashbourne, the mistress of which, a mighty civil gentlewoman,

courtseying very low, presented me with an engraving of the sign of

her house; to which she had subjoined, in her own hand-writing, an

address in such singular simplicity of style, that I have preserved

it pasted upon one of the boards of my original Journal at this

time, and shall here insert it for the amusement of my readers:--



'M. KILLINGLEY's duty waits upon Mr. Boswell, is exceedingly

obliged to him for this favour; whenever he comes this way, hopes

for a continuance of the same.  Would Mr. Boswell name the house to

his extensive acquaintance, it would be a singular favour conferr'd

on one who has it not in her power to make any other return but her

most grateful thanks, and sincerest prayers for his happiness in

time, and in a blessed eternity.--Tuesday morn.'



I cannot omit a curious circumstance which occurred at Edensor-inn,

close by Chatsworth, to survey the magnificence of which I had gone

a considerable way out of my road to Scotland.  The inn was then

kept by a very jolly landlord, whose name, I think, was Malton.  He

happened to mention that 'the celebrated Dr. Johnson had been in

his house.'  I inquired WHO this Dr. Johnson was, that I might hear

mine host's notion of him.  'Sir, (said he,) Johnson, the great

writer; ODDITY, as they call him.  He's the greatest writer in

England; he writes for the ministry; he has a correspondence

abroad, and lets them know what's going on.'



My friend, who had a thorough dependance upon the authenticity of

my relation without any EMBELLISHMENT, as FALSEHOOD or FICTION is

too gently called, laughed a good deal at this representation of

himself.



On Wednesday, March 18,* I arrived in London, and was informed by

good Mr. Francis that his master was better, and was gone to Mr.

Thrale's at Streatham, to which place I wrote to him, begging to

know when he would be in town.  He was not expected for some time;

but next day having called on Dr. Taylor, in Dean's-yard,

Westminster, I found him there, and was told he had come to town

for a few hours.  He met me with his usual kindness, but instantly

returned to the writing of something on which he was employed when

I came in, and on which he seemed much intent.  Finding him thus

engaged, I made my visit very short.





* 1778.





On Friday, March 20, I found him at his own house, sitting with

Mrs. Williams, and was informed that the room formerly allotted to

me was now appropriated to a charitable purpose; Mrs. Desmoulins,

and I think her daughter, and a Miss Carmichael, being all lodged

in it.  Such was his humanity, and such his generosity, that Mrs.

Desmoulins herself told me, he allowed her half-a-guinea a week.

Let it be remembered, that this was above a twelfth part of his

pension.



His liberality, indeed, was at all periods of his life very

remarkable.  Mr. Howard, of Lichfield, at whose father's house

Johnson had in his early years been kindly received, told me, that

when he was a boy at the Charter-House, his father wrote to him to

go and pay a visit to Mr. Samuel Johnson, which he accordingly did,

and found him in an upper room, of poor appearance.  Johnson

received him with much courteousness, and talked a great deal to

him, as to a school-boy, of the course of his education, and other

particulars.  When he afterwards came to know and understand the

high character of this great man, he recollected his condescension

with wonder.  He added, that when he was going away, Mr. Johnson

presented him with half-a-guinea; and this, said Mr. Howard, was at

a time when he probably had not another.



We retired from Mrs. Williams to another room.  Tom Davies soon

after joined us.  He had now unfortunately failed in his

circumstances, and was much indebted to Dr. Johnson's kindness for

obtaining for him many alleviations of his distress.  After he went

away, Johnson blamed his folly in quitting the stage, by which he

and his wife got five hundred pounds a year.  I said, I believed it

was owing to Churchill's attack upon him,





    'He mouths a sentence, as curs mouth a bone.'





JOHNSON.  'I believe so too, Sir.  But what a man is he, who is to

be driven from the stage by a line?  Another line would have driven

him from his shop.'



He returned next day to Streatham, to Mr. Thrale's; where, as Mr.

Strahan once complained to me, 'he was in a great measure absorbed

from the society of his old friends.'  I was kept in London by

business, and wrote to him on the 27th, that a separation from him

for a week, when we were so near, was equal to a separation for a

year, when we were at four hundred miles distance.  I went to

Streatham on Monday, March 30.  Before he appeared, Mrs. Thrale

made a very characteristical remark:--'I do not know for certain

what will please Dr. Johnson: but I know for certain that it will

displease him to praise any thing, even what he likes,

extravagantly.'



At dinner he laughed at querulous declamations against the age, on

account of luxury,--increase of London,--scarcity of provisions,--

and other such topicks.  'Houses (said he,) will be built till

rents fall: and corn is more plentiful now than ever it was.'



I had before dinner repeated a ridiculous story told me by an old

man who had been a passenger with me in the stage-coach to-day.

Mrs. Thrale, having taken occasion to allude to it in talking to

me, called it 'The story told you by the old WOMAN.'--'Now, Madam,

(said I,) give me leave to catch you in the fact; it was not an old

WOMAN, but an old MAN, whom I mentioned as having told me this.'  I

presumed to take an opportunity, in presence of Johnson, of shewing

this lively lady how ready she was, unintentionally, to deviate

from exact authenticity of narration.



Next morning, while we were at breakfast, Johnson gave a very

earnest recommendation of what he himself practised with the utmost

conscientiousness: I mean a strict attention to truth, even in the

most minute particulars.  'Accustom your children (said he,)

constantly to this; if a thing happened at one window, and they,

when relating it, say that it happened at another, do not let it

pass, but instantly check them; you do not know where deviation

from truth will end.'  BOSWELL.  'It may come to the door: and when

once an account is at all varied in one circumstance, it may by

degrees be varied so as to be totally different from what really

happened.'  Our lively hostess, whose fancy was impatient of the

rein, fidgeted at this, and ventured to say, 'Nay, this is too

much.  If Mr. Johnson should forbid me to drink tea, I would

comply, as I should feel the restraint only twice a day; but little

variations in narrative must happen a thousand times a day, if one

is not perpetually watching.'  JOHNSON.  'Well, Madam, and you

OUGHT to be perpetually watching.  It is more from carelessness

about truth than from intentional lying, that there is so much

falsehood in the world.'



He was indeed so much impressed with the prevalence of falsehood,

voluntary or unintentional, that I never knew any person who upon

hearing an extraordinary circumstance told, discovered more of the

incredulus odi.  He would say, with a significant look and decisive

tone, 'It is not so.  Do not tell this again.'  He inculcated upon

all his friends the importance of perpetual vigilance against the

slightest degrees of falsehood; the effect of which, as Sir Joshua

Reynolds observed to me, has been, that all who were of his SCHOOL

are distinguished for a love of truth and accuracy, which they

would not have possessed in the same degree, if they had not been

acquainted with Johnson.



Talking of ghosts, he said, 'It is wonderful that five thousand

years have now elapsed since the creation of the world, and still

it is undecided whether or not there has ever been an instance of

the spirit of any person appearing after death.  All argument is

against it; but all belief is for it.'



He said, 'John Wesley's conversation is good, but he is never at

leisure.  He is always obliged to go at a certain hour.  This is

very disagreeable to a man who loves to fold his legs and have out

his talk, as I do.'



On Friday, April 3, I dined with him in London, in a company* where

were present several eminent men, whom I shall not name, but

distinguish their parts in the conversation by different letters.





* The Club.  Hill identifies E. as Burke and J. as Sir Joshua

Reynolds.--ED.





E.  'We hear prodigious complaints at present of emigration.  I am

convinced that emigration makes a country more populous.'  J.

'That sounds very much like a paradox.'  E.  'Exportation of men,

like exportation of all other commodities, makes more be produced.'

JOHNSON.  'But there would be more people were there not

emigration, provided there were food for more.'  E.  'No; leave a

few breeders, and you'll have more people than if there were no

emigration.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, it is plain there will be more

people, if there are more breeders.  Thirty cows in good pasture

will produce more calves than ten cows, provided they have good

bulls.'  E.  'There are bulls enough in Ireland.'  JOHNSON.

(smiling,) 'So, Sir, I should think from your argument.'



E.  'I believe, in any body of men in England, I should have been

in the Minority; I have always been in the Minority.'  P.  'The

House of Commons resembles a private company.  How seldom is any

man convinced by another's argument; passion and pride rise against

it.'  R.  'What would be the consequence, if a Minister, sure of a

majority in the House of Commons, should resolve that there should

be no speaking at all upon his side.'  E.  'He must soon go out.

That has been tried; but it was found it would not do.' . . . .



JOHNSON.  'I have been reading Thicknesse's Travels, which I think

are entertaining.'  BOSWELL.  'What, Sir, a good book?'  JOHNSON.

'Yes, Sir, to read once; I do not say you are to make a study of

it, and digest it; and I believe it to be a true book in his

intention.'



E.  'From the experience which I have had,--and I have had a great

deal,--I have learnt to think BETTER of mankind.'  JOHNSON.  'From

my experience I have found them worse in commercial dealings, more

disposed to cheat, than I had any notion of; but more disposed to

do one another good than I had conceived.'  J.  'Less just and more

beneficent.'  JOHNSON.  'And really it is wonderful, considering

how much attention is necessary for men to take care of themselves,

and ward off immediate evils which press upon them, it is wonderful

how much they do for others.  As it is said of the greatest liar,

that he tells more truth than falsehood; so it may be said of the

worst man, that he does more good than evil.'  BOSWELL.  'Perhaps

from experience men may be found HAPPIER than we suppose.'

JOHNSON.  'No, Sir; the more we enquire, we shall find men the less

happy.'



E.  'I understand the hogshead of claret, which this society was

favoured with by our friend the Dean, is nearly out; I think he

should be written to, to send another of the same kind.  Let the

request be made with a happy ambiguity of expression, so that we

may have the chance of his sending IT also as a present.'  JOHNSON.

'I am willing to offer my services as secretary on this occasion.'

P.  'As many as are for Dr. Johnson being secretary hold up your

hands.--Carried unanimously.'  BOSWELL.  'He will be our Dictator.'

JOHNSON.  'No, the company is to dictate to me.  I am only to write

for wine; and I am quite disinterested, as I drink none; I shall

not be suspected of having forged the application.  I am no more

than humble SCRIBE.'  E.  'Then you shall PREscribe.'  BOSWELL.

'Very well.  The first play of words to-day.'  J.  'No, no; the

BULLS in Ireland.'  JOHNSON.  'Were I your Dictator you should have

no wine.  It would be my business cavere ne quid detrimenti

Respublica caperet, and wine is dangerous.  Rome was ruined by

luxury,' (smiling.)  E.  'If you allow no wine as Dictator, you

shall not have me for your master of horse.'



On Saturday, April 4, I drank tea with Johnson at Dr. Taylor's,

where he had dined.



He was very silent this evening; and read in a variety of books:

suddenly throwing down one, and taking up another.



He talked of going to Streatham that night.  TAYLOR.  'You'll be

robbed if you do: or you must shoot a highwayman.  Now I would

rather be robbed than do that; I would not shoot a highwayman.'

JOHNSON.  'But I would rather shoot him in the instant when he is

attempting to rob me, than afterwards swear against him at the Old-

Bailey, to take away his life, after he has robbed me.  I am surer

I am right in the one case than in the other.  I may be mistaken as

to the man, when I swear: I cannot be mistaken, if I shoot him in

the act.  Besides, we feel less reluctance to take away a man's

life, when we are heated by the injury, than to do it at a distance

of time by an oath, after we have cooled.'  BOSWELL.  'So, Sir, you

would rather act from the motive of private passion, than that of

publick advantage.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, when I shoot the

highwayman I act from both.'  BOSWELL.  'Very well, very well--

There is no catching him.'  JOHNSON.  'At the same time one does

not know what to say.  For perhaps one may, a year after, hang

himself from uneasiness for having shot a man.  Few minds are fit

to be trusted with so great a thing.'  BOSWELL.  'Then, Sir, you

would not shoot him?'  JOHNSON.  'But I might be vexed afterwards

for that too.'



Thrale's carriage not having come for him, as he expected, I

accompanied him some part of the way home to his own house.  I told

him, that I had talked of him to Mr. Dunning a few days before, and

had said, that in his company we did not so much interchange

conversation, as listen to him; and that Dunning observed, upon

this, 'One is always willing to listen to Dr. Johnson:' to which I

answered, 'That is a great deal from you, Sir.'--'Yes, Sir, (said

Johnson,) a great deal indeed.  Here is a man willing to listen, to

whom the world is listening all the rest of the year.'  BOSWELL.

'I think, Sir, it is right to tell one man of such a handsome

thing, which has been said of him by another.  It tends to increase

benevolence.'  JOHNSON.  'Undoubtedly it is right, Sir.'



On Tuesday, April 7, I breakfasted with him at his house.  He said,

'nobody was content.'  I mentioned to him a respectable person in

Scotland whom he knew; and I asserted, that I really believed he

was always content.  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir, he is not content with the

present; he has always some new scheme, some new plantation,

something which is future.  You know he was not content as a

widower; for he married again.'  BOSWELL.  'But he is not

restless.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, he is only locally at rest.  A chymist

is locally at rest; but his mind is hard at work.  This gentleman

has done with external exertions.  It is too late for him to engage

in distant projects.'  BOSWELL.  'He seems to amuse himself quite

well; to have his attention fixed, and his tranquillity preserved

by very small matters.  I have tried this; but it would not do with

me.'  JOHNSON.  (laughing,) 'No, Sir; it must be born with a man to

be contented to take up with little things.  Women have a great

advantage that they may take up with little things, without

disgracing themselves: a man cannot, except with fiddling.  Had I

learnt to fiddle, I should have done nothing else.'  BOSWELL.

'Pray, Sir, did you ever play on any musical instrument?'  JOHNSON.

'No, Sir.  I once bought me a flagelet; but I never made out a

tune.'  BOSWELL.  'A flagelet, Sir!--so small an instrument?  I

should have liked to hear you play on the violoncello.  THAT should

have been YOUR instrument.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, I might as well have

played on the violoncello as another; but I should have done

nothing else.  No, Sir; a man would never undertake great things,

could he be amused with small.  I once tried knotting.  Dempster's

sister undertook to teach me; but I could not learn it.'  BOSWELL.

'So, Sir; it will be related in pompous narrative, "Once for his

amusement he tried knotting; nor did this Hercules disdain the

distaff."'  JOHNSON.  'Knitting of stockings is a good amusement.

As a freeman of Aberdeen I should be a knitter of stockings.'  He

asked me to go down with him and dine at Mr. Thrale's at Streatham,

to which I agreed.  I had lent him An Account of Scotland, in 1702,

written by a man of various enquiry, an English chaplain to a

regiment stationed there.  JOHNSON.  'It is sad stuff, Sir,

miserably written, as books in general then were.  There is now an

elegance of style universally diffused.  No man now writes so ill

as Martin's Account of the Hebrides is written.  A man could not

write so ill, if he should try.  Set a merchant's clerk now to

write, and he'll do better.'



He talked to me with serious concern of a certain female friend's

'laxity of narration, and inattention to truth.'--'I am as much

vexed (said he,) at the ease with which she hears it mentioned to

her, as at the thing itself.  I told her, "Madam, you are contented

to hear every day said to you, what the highest of mankind have

died for, rather than bear."--You know, Sir, the highest of mankind

have died rather than bear to be told they had uttered a falsehood.

Do talk to her of it: I am weary.'



BOSWELL.  'Was not Dr. John Campbell a very inaccurate man in his

narrative, Sir?  He once told me, that he drank thirteen bottles of

port at a sitting.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, I do not know that

Campbell ever lied with pen and ink; but you could not entirely

depend on any thing he told you in conversation: if there was fact

mixed with it.  However, I loved Campbell: he was a solid orthodox

man: he had a reverence for religion.  Though defective in

practice, he was religious in principle; and he did nothing grossly

wrong that I have heard.'



Talking of drinking wine, he said, 'I did not leave off wine,

because I could not bear it; I have drunk three bottles of port

without being the worse for it.  University College has witnessed

this.'  BOSWELL.  'Why, then, Sir, did you leave it off?'  JOHNSON.

'Why, Sir, because it is so much better for a man to be sure that

he is never to be intoxicated, never to lose the power over

himself.  I shall not begin to drink wine again, till I grow old,

and want it.'  BOSWELL.  'I think, Sir, you once said to me, that

not to drink wine was a great deduction from life.'  JOHNSON.  'It

is a diminution of pleasure, to be sure; but I do not say a

diminution of happiness.  There is more happiness in being

rational.'  BOSWELL.  'But if we could have pleasure always, should

not we be happy?  The greatest part of men would compound for

pleasure.'  JOHNSON.  'Supposing we could have pleasure always, an

intellectual man would not compound for it.  The greatest part of

men would compound, because the greatest part of men are gross.'



I mentioned to him that I had become very weary in a company where

I heard not a single intellectual sentence, except that 'a man who

had been settled ten years in Minorca was become a much inferiour

man to what he was in London, because a man's mind grows narrow in

a narrow place.'  JOHNSON.  'A man's mind grows narrow in a narrow

place, whose mind is enlarged only because he has lived in a large

place: but what is got by books and thinking is preserved in a

narrow place as well as in a large place.  A man cannot know modes

of life as well in Minorca as in London; but he may study

mathematicks as well in Minorca.'  BOSWELL.  'I don't know, Sir: if

you had remained ten years in the Isle of Col, you would not have

been the man that you now are.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir, if I had been

there from fifteen to twenty-five; but not if from twenty-five to

thirty-five.'  BOSWELL.  'I own, Sir, the spirits which I have in

London make me do every thing with more readiness and vigour.  I

can talk twice as much in London as any where else.'



Of Goldsmith he said, 'He was not an agreeable companion, for he

talked always for fame.  A man who does so never can be pleasing.

The man who talks to unburthen his mind is the man to delight you.

An eminent friend of ours is not so agreeable as the variety of his

knowledge would otherwise make him, because he talks partly from

ostentation.'



Soon after our arrival at Thrale's, I heard one of the maids

calling eagerly on another, to go to Dr. Johnson.  I wondered what

this could mean.  I afterwards learnt, that it was to give her a

Bible, which he had brought from London as a present to her.



He was for a considerable time occupied in reading Memoires de

Fontenelle, leaning and swinging upon the low gate into the court,

without his hat.



At dinner, Mrs. Thrale expressed a wish to go and see Scotland.

JOHNSON.  'Seeing Scotland, Madam, is only seeing a worse England.

It is seeing the flower gradually fade away to the naked stalk.

Seeing the Hebrides, indeed, is seeing quite a different scene.'



On Thursday, April 9, I dined with him at Sir Joshua Reynolds's,

with the Bishop of St. Asaph, (Dr. Shipley,) Mr. Allan Ramsay, Mr.

Gibbon, Mr. Cambridge, and Mr. Langton.



Goldsmith being mentioned, Johnson observed, that it was long

before his merit came to be acknowledged.  That he once complained

to him, in ludicrous terms of distress, 'Whenever I write any

thing, the publick MAKE A POINT to know nothing about it:' but that

his Traveller brought him into high reputation.  LANGTON.  'There

is not one bad line in that poem; not one of Dryden's careless

verses.  SIR JOSHUA.  'I was glad to hear Charles Fox say, it was

one of the finest poems in the English language.'  LANGTON.  'Why

was you glad?  You surely had no doubt of this before.'  JOHNSON.

'No; the merit of The Traveller is so well established, that Mr.

Fox's praise cannot augment it, nor his censure diminish it.'  SIR

JOSHUA.  'But his friends may suspect they had too great a

partiality for him.'  JOHNSON.  Nay, Sir, the partiality of his

friends was always against him.  It was with difficulty we could

give him a hearing.  Goldsmith had no settled notions upon any

subject; so he talked always at random.  It seemed to be his

intention to blurt out whatever was in his mind, and see what would

become of it.  He was angry too, when catched in an absurdity; but

it did not prevent him from falling into another the next minute.

I remember Chamier, after talking with him for some time, said,

"Well, I do believe he wrote this poem himself: and, let me tell

you, that is believing a great deal."  Chamier once asked him, what

he meant by slow, the last word in the first line of The Traveller,





    "Remote, unfriended, melancholy, slow."





Did he mean tardiness of locomotion?  Goldsmith, who would say

something without consideration, answered, "Yes."  I was sitting

by, and said, "No, Sir; you do not mean tardiness of locomotion;

you mean, that sluggishness of mind which comes upon a man in

solitude."  Chamier believed then that I had written the line as

much as if he had seen me write it.  Goldsmith, however, was a man,

who, whatever he wrote, did it better than any other man could do.

He deserved a place in Westminster-Abbey, and every year he lived,

would have deserved it better.  He had, indeed, been at no pains to

fill his mind with knowledge.  He transplanted it from one place to

another; and it did not settle in his mind; so he could not tell

what was in his own books.'



We talked of living in the country.  JOHNSON.  'No wise man will go

to live in the country, unless he has something to do which can be

better done in the country.  For instance: if he is to shut himself

up for a year to study a science, it is better to look out to the

fields, than to an opposite wall.  Then, if a man walks out in the

country, there is nobody to keep him from walking in again: but if

a man walks out in London, he is not sure when he shall walk in

again.  A great city is, to be sure, the school for studying life;

and "The proper study of mankind is man," as Pope observes.'

BOSWELL.  'I fancy London is the best place for society; though I

have heard that the very first society of Paris is still beyond any

thing that we have here.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, I question if in Paris

such a company as is sitting round this table could be got together

in less than half a year.  They talk in France of the felicity of

men and women living together: the truth is, that there the men are

not higher than the women, they know no more than the women do, and

they are not held down in their conversation by the presence of

women.'



We talked of old age.  Johnson (now in his seventieth year,) said,

'It is a man's own fault, it is from want of use, if his mind grows

torpid in old age.'  The Bishop asked, if an old man does not lose

faster than he gets.  JOHNSON.  'I think not, my Lord, if he exerts

himself.'  One of the company rashly observed, that he thought it

was happy for an old man that insensibility comes upon him.

JOHNSON.  (with a noble elevation and disdain,) 'No, Sir, I should

never be happy by being less rational.'  BISHOP OF ST. ASAPH.

'Your wish then, Sir, is [Greek text omitted].'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, my

Lord.'



This season there was a whimsical fashion in the newspapers of

applying Shakspeare's words to describe living persons well known

in the world; which was done under the title of Modern Characters

from Shakspeare; many of which were admirably adapted.  The fancy

took so much, that they were afterwards collected into a pamphlet.

Somebody said to Johnson, across the table, that he had not been in

those characters.  'Yes (said he,) I have.  I should have been

sorry to be left out.'  He then repeated what had been applied to

him,





    'I must borrow GARAGANTUA'S mouth.'





Miss Reynolds not perceiving at once the meaning of this, he was

obliged to explain it to her, which had something of an aukward and

ludicrous effect.  'Why, Madam, it has a reference to me, as using

big words, which require the mouth of a giant to pronounce them.

Garagantua is the name of a giant in Rabelais.'  BOSWELL.  'But,

Sir, there is another amongst them for you:





    "He would not flatter Neptune for his trident,

     Or Jove for his power to thunder."'





JOHNSON.  'There is nothing marked in that.  No, Sir, Garagantua is

the best.'  Notwithstanding this ease and good humour, when I, a

little while afterwards, repeated his sarcasm on Kenrick, which was

received with applause, he asked, 'WHO said that?' and on my

suddenly answering, Garagantua, he looked serious, which was a

sufficient indication that he did not wish it to be kept up.



When we went to the drawing-room there was a rich assemblage.

Besides the company who had been at dinner, there were Mr. Garrick,

Mr. Harris of Salisbury, Dr. Percy, Dr. Burney, Honourable Mrs.

Cholmondeley, Miss Hannah More, &c. &c.



After wandering about in a kind of pleasing distraction for some

time, I got into a corner, with Johnson, Garrick, and Harris.

GARRICK.  (to Harris,) 'Pray, Sir, have you read Potter's

Aeschylus?'  HARRIS.  'Yes; and think it pretty.'  GARRICK.  (to

Johnson,) 'And what think you, Sir, of it?'  JOHNSON.  'I thought

what I read of it VERBIAGE: but upon Mr. Harris's recommendation, I

will read a play.  (To Mr. Harris,) Don't prescribe two.'  Mr.

Harris suggested one, I do not remember which.  JOHNSON.  'We must

try its effect as an English poem; that is the way to judge of the

merit of a translation.  Translations are, in general, for people

who cannot read the original.'  I mentioned the vulgar saying, that

Pope's Homer was not a good representation of the original.

JOHNSON.  'Sir, it is the greatest work of the kind that has ever

been produced.'  BOSWELL.  'The truth is, it is impossible

perfectly to translate poetry.  In a different language it may be

the same tune, but it has not the same tone.  Homer plays it on a

bassoon; Pope on a flagelet.'  HARRIS.  'I think Heroick poetry is

best in blank verse; yet it appears that rhyme is essential to

English poetry, from our deficiency in metrical quantities.  In my

opinion, the chief excellence of our language is numerous prose.'

JOHNSON.  'Sir William Temple was the first writer who gave cadence

to English prose.  Before his time they were careless of

arrangement, and did not mind whether a sentence ended with an

important word or an insignificant word, or with what part of

speech it was concluded.'



GARRICK.  'Of all the translations that ever were attempted, I

think Elphinston's Martial the most extraordinary.  He consulted me

upon it, who am a little of an epigrammatist myself, you know.  I

told him freely, "You don't seem to have that turn."  I asked him

if he was serious; and finding he was, I advised him against

publishing.  Why, his translation is more difficult to understand

than the original.  I thought him a man of some talents; but he

seems crazy in this.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, you have done what I had not

courage to do.  But he did not ask my advice, and I did not force

it upon him, to make him angry with me.'  GARRICK.  'But as a

friend, Sir--.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, such a friend as I am with him--

no.'  GARRICK.  'But if you see a friend going to tumble over a

precipice?'  JOHNSON.  'That is an extravagant case, Sir.  You are

sure a friend will thank you for hindering him from tumbling over a

precipice; but, in the other case, I should hurt his vanity, and do

him no good.  He would not take my advice.  His brother-in-law,

Strahan, sent him a subscription of fifty pounds, and said he would

send him fifty more, if he would not publish.'  GARRICK.  'What!

eh! is Strahan a good judge of an Epigram?  Is not he rather an

OBTUSE man, eh?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, he may not be a judge of an

Epigram: but you see he is a judge of what is not an Epigram.'

BOSWELL.  'It is easy for you, Mr. Garrick, to talk to an authour

as you talked to Elphinston; you, who have been so long the manager

of a theatre, rejecting the plays of poor authours.  You are an old

Judge, who have often pronounced sentence of death.  You are a

practiced surgeon, who have often amputated limbs; and though this

may have been for the good of your patients, they cannot like you.

Those who have undergone a dreadful operation, are not very fond of

seeing the operator again.'  GARRICK.  'Yes, I know enough of that.

There was a reverend gentleman, (Mr. Hawkins,) who wrote a tragedy,

the SIEGE of something, which I refused.'  HARRIS.  'So, the siege

was raised.'  JOHNSON.  'Ay, he came to me and complained; and told

me, that Garrick said his play was wrong in the CONCOCTION.  Now,

what is the concoction of a play?'  (Here Garrick started, and

twisted himself, and seemed sorely vexed; for Johnson told me, he

believed the story was true.)  GARRICK.  'I--I--I--said FIRST

concoction.'  JOHNSON.  (smiling,) 'Well, he left out FIRST.  And

Rich, he said, refused him IN FALSE ENGLISH: he could shew it under

his hand.'  GARRICK.  'He wrote to me in violent wrath, for having

refused his play: "Sir, this is growing a very serious and terrible

affair.  I am resolved to publish my play.  I will appeal to the

world; and how will your judgement appear?"  I answered, "Sir,

notwithstanding all the seriousness, and all the terrours, I have

no objection to your publishing your play; and as you live at a

great distance, (Devonshire, I believe,) if you will send it to me,

I will convey it to the press."  I never heard more of it, ha! ha!

ha!'



On Friday, April 10, I found Johnson at home in the morning.  We

resumed the conversation of yesterday.  He put me in mind of some

of it which had escaped my memory, and enabled me to record it more

perfectly than I otherwise could have done.  He was much pleased

with my paying so great attention to his recommendation in 1763,

the period when our acquaintance began, that I should keep a

journal; and I could perceive he was secretly pleased to find so

much of the fruit of his mind preserved; and as he had been used to

imagine and say that he always laboured when he said a good thing--

it delighted him, on a review, to find that his conversation teemed

with point and imagery.



I said to him, 'You were yesterday, Sir, in remarkably good humour:

but there was nothing to offend you, nothing to produce irritation

or violence.  There was no bold offender.  There was not one

capital conviction.  It was a maiden assize.  You had on your white

gloves.'



He found fault with our friend Langton for having been too silent.

'Sir, (said I,) you will recollect, that he very properly took up

Sir Joshua for being glad that Charles Fox had praised Goldsmith's

Traveller, and you joined him.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir, I knocked Fox

on the head, without ceremony.  Reynolds is too much under Fox and

Burke at present.  He is under the Fox star and the Irish

constellation.  He is always under some planet.'  BOSWELL.  'There

is no Fox star.'  JOHNSON.  'But there is a dog star.'  BOSWELL.

'They say, indeed, a fox and a dog are the same animal.'



We dined together with Mr. Scott (now Sir William Scott his

Majesty's Advocate General,) at his chambers in the Temple, nobody

else there.  The company being small, Johnson was not in such

spirits as he had been the preceding day, and for a considerable

time little was said.



Talking of fame, for which there is so great a desire, I observed

how little there is of it in reality, compared with the other

objects of human attention.  'Let every man recollect, and he will

be sensible how small a part of his time is employed in talking or

thinking of Shakspeare, Voltaire, or any of the most celebrated men

that have ever lived, or are now supposed to occupy the attention

and admiration of the world.  Let this be extracted and compressed;

into what a narrow space will it go!'  I then slily introduced Mr.

Garrick's fame, and his assuming the airs of a great man.  JOHNSON.

'Sir, it is wonderful how LITTLE Garrick assumes.  No, Sir, Garrick

fortunam reverenter habet.  Consider, Sir: celebrated men, such as

you have mentioned, have had their applause at a distance; but

Garrick had it dashed in his face, sounded in his ears, and went

home every night with the plaudits of a thousand in his CRANIUM.

Then, Sir, Garrick did not FIND, but MADE his way to the tables,

the levees, and almost the bed-chambers of the great.  Then, Sir,

Garrick had under him a numerous body of people; who, from fear of

his power, and hopes of his favour, and admiration of his talents,

were constantly submissive to him.  And here is a man who has

advanced the dignity of his profession.  Garrick has made a player

a higher character.'  SCOTT.  'And he is a very sprightly writer

too.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir; and all this supported by great wealth

of his own acquisition.  If all this had happened to me, I should

have had a couple of fellows with long poles walking before me, to

knock down every body that stood in the way.  Consider, if all this

had happened to Cibber or Quin, they'd have jumped over the moon--

Yet Garrick speaks to US.' (smiling.)  BOSWELL.  'And Garrick is a

very good man, a charitable man.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, a liberal man.

He has given away more money than any man in England.  There may be

a little vanity mixed; but he has shewn, that money is not his

first object.'  BOSWELL.  'Yet Foote used to say of him, that he

walked out with an intention to do a generous action; but, turning

the corner of a street, he met with the ghost of a half-penny,

which frightened him.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, that is very true,

too; for I never knew a man of whom it could be said with less

certainty to-day, what he will do to-morrow, than Garrick; it

depends so much on his humour at the time.'  SCOTT.  'I am glad to

hear of his liberality.  He has been represented as very saving.'

JOHNSON.  'With his domestick saving we have nothing to do.  I

remember drinking tea with him long ago, when Peg Woffington made

it, and he grumbled at her for making it too strong.*  He had then

begun to feel money in his purse, and did not know when he should

have enough of it.'





* When Johnson told this little anecdote to Sir Joshua Reynolds, he

mentioned a circumstance which he omitted to-day:--'Why, (said

Garrick,) it is as red as blood.'--BOSWELL.





We talked of war.  JOHNSON.  'Every man thinks meanly of himself

for not having been a soldier, or not having been at sea.'

BOSWELL.  'Lord Mansfield does not.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, if Lord

Mansfield were in a company of General Officers and Admirals who

have been in service, he would shrink; he'd wish to creep under the

table.'  BOSWELL.  'No; he'd think he could TRY them all.'

JOHNSON.  'Yes, if he could catch them: but they'd try him much

sooner.  No, Sir; were Socrates and Charles the Twelfth of Sweden

both present in any company, and Socrates to say, "Follow me, and

hear a lecture on philosophy;" and Charles, laying his hand on his

sword, to say, "Follow me, and dethrone the Czar;" a man would be

ashamed to follow Socrates.  Sir, the impression is universal; yet

it is strange.'



He talked of Mr. Charles Fox, of whose abilities he thought highly,

but observed, that he did not talk much at our CLUB.  I have heard

Mr. Gibbon remark, 'that Mr. Fox could not be afraid of Dr.

Johnson; yet he certainly was very shy of saying any thing in Dr.

Johnson's presence.'



He expressed great indignation at the imposture of the Cock-lane

Ghost, and related, with much satisfaction, how he had assisted in

detecting the cheat, and had published an account of it in the

news-papers.  Upon this subject I incautiously offended him, by

pressing him with too many questions, and he shewed his

displeasure.  I apologised, saying that 'I asked questions in order

to be instructed and entertained; I repaired eagerly to the

fountain; but that the moment he gave me a hint, the moment he put

a lock upon the well, I desisted.'--'But, Sir, (said he), that is

forcing one to do a disagreeable thing:' and he continued to rate

me.  'Nay, Sir, (said I,) when you have put a lock upon the well,

so that I can no longer drink, do not make the fountain of your wit

play upon me and wet me.'



He sometimes could not bear being teazed with questions.  I was

once present when a gentleman asked so many as, 'What did you do,

Sir?'  'What did you say, Sir?' that he at last grew enraged, and

said, 'I will not be put to the QUESTION.  Don't you consider, Sir,

that these are not the manners of a gentleman?  I will not be

baited with WHAT, and WHY; what is this? what is that? why is a

cow's tail long? why is a fox's tail bushy?'  The gentleman, who

was a good deal out of countenance, said, 'Why, Sir, you are so

good, that I venture to trouble you.'  Johnson.  'Sir, my being so

GOOD is no reason why you should be so ILL.'



He talked with an uncommon animation of travelling into distant

countries; that the mind was enlarged by it, and that an

acquisition of dignity of character was derived from it.  He

expressed a particular enthusiasm with respect to visiting the wall

of China.  I catched it for the moment, and said I really believed

I should go and see the wall of China had I not children, of whom

it was my duty to take care.  'Sir, (said he,) by doing so, you

would do what would be of importance in raising your children to

eminence.  There would be a lustre reflected upon them from your

spirit and curiosity.  They would be at all times regarded as the

children of a man who had gone to view the wall of China.  I am

serious, Sir.'



When we had left Mr. Scott's, he said 'Will you go home with me?'

'Sir, (said I,) it is late; but I'll go with you for three

minutes.'  JOHNSON.  'Or four.'  We went to Mrs. Williams's room,

where we found Mr. Allen the printer, who was the landlord of his

house in Bolt-court, a worthy, obliging man, and his very old

acquaintance; and what was exceedingly amusing, though he was of a

very diminutive size, he used, even in Johnson's presence, to

imitate the stately periods and slow and solemn utterance of the

great man.--I this evening boasted, that although I did not write

what is called stenography, or short-hand, in appropriated

characters devised for the purpose, I had a method of my own of

writing half words, and leaving out some altogether so as yet to

keep the substance and language of any discourse which I had heard

so much in view, that I could give it very completely soon after I

had taken it down.



On Sunday, April 12, I found him at home before dinner.  He and I,

and Mrs. Williams, went to dine with the Reverend Dr. Percy.



And here I shall record a scene of too much heat between Dr.

Johnson and Dr. Percy, which I should have suppressed, were it not

that it gave occasion to display the truely tender and benevolent

heart of Johnson, who, as soon as he found a friend was at all hurt

by any thing which he had 'said in his wrath,' was not only prompt

and desirous to be reconciled, but exerted himself to make ample

reparation.



Books of Travels having been mentioned, Johnson praised Pennant

very highly, as he did at Dunvegan, in the Isle of Sky.  Dr. Percy,

knowing himself to be the heir male of the ancient Percies, and

having the warmest and most dutiful attachment to the noble House

of Northumberland, could not sit quietly and hear a man praised,

who had spoken disrespectfully of Alnwick-Castle and the Duke's

pleasure grounds, especially as he thought meanly of his travels.

He therefore opposed Johnson eagerly.  JOHNSON.  'Pennant in what

he has said of Alnwick, has done what he intended; he has made you

very angry.'  PERCY.  'He has said the garden is TRIM, which is

representing it like a citizen's parterre, when the truth is, there

is a very large extent of fine turf and gravel walks.'  JOHNSON.

'According to your own account, Sir, Pennant is right.  It IS trim.

Here is grass cut close, and gravel rolled smooth.  Is not that

trim?  The extent is nothing against that; a mile may be as trim as

a square yard.  Your extent puts me in mind of the citizen's

enlarged dinner, two pieces of roast-beef, and two puddings.  There

is no variety, no mind exerted in laying out the ground, no trees.'

PERCY.  'He pretends to give the natural history of Northumberland,

and yet takes no notice of the immense number of trees planted

there of late.'  JOHNSON.  'That, Sir, has nothing to do with the

NATURAL history; that is CIVIL history.  A man who gives the

natural history of the oak, is not to tell how many oaks have been

planted in this place or that.  A man who gives the natural history

of the cow, is not to tell how many cows are milked at Islington.

The animal is the same, whether milked in the Park or at

Islington.'  PERCY.  'Pennant does not describe well; a carrier who

goes along the side of Loch-lomond would describe it better.'

JOHNSON.  'I think he describes very well.'  PERCY.  'I travelled

after him.'  JOHNSON.  'And I travelled after him.'  PERCY.  'But,

my good friend, you are short-sighted, and do not see so well as I

do.'  I wondered at Dr. Percy's venturing thus.  Dr. Johnson said

nothing at the time; but inflammable particles were collecting for

a cloud to burst.  In a little while Dr. Percy said something more

in disparagement of Pennant.  JOHNSON.  (pointedly,) 'This is the

resentment of a narrow mind, because he did not find every thing in

Northumberland.'  PERCY.  (feeling the stroke,) 'Sir, you may be as

rude as you please.'  JOHNSON.  'Hold, Sir!  Don't talk of

rudeness; remember, Sir, you told me (puffing hard with passion

struggling for a vent,) I was shortsighted.  We have done with

civility.  We are to be as rude as we please.'  PERCY.  'Upon my

honour, Sir, I did not mean to be uncivil.'  JOHNSON.  'I cannot

say so, Sir; for I DID mean to be uncivil, thinking YOU had been

uncivil.'  Dr. Percy rose, ran up to him, and taking him by the

hand, assured him affectionately that his meaning had been

misunderstood; upon which a reconciliation instantly took place.

JOHNSON.  'My dear Sir, I am willing you shall HANG Pennant.'

PERCY.  (resuming the former subject,) 'Pennant complains that the

helmet is not hung out to invite to the hall of hospitality.  Now I

never heard that it was a custom to hang out a HELMET.'  JOHNSON.

'Hang him up, hang him up.'  BOSWELL.  (humouring the joke,) 'Hang

out his skull instead of a helmet, and you may drink ale out of it

in your hall of Odin, as he is your enemy; that will be truly

ancient.  THERE will be Northern Antiquities.'  JOHNSON.  'He's a

WHIG, Sir; a SAD DOG.  (smiling at his own violent expressions,

merely for political difference of opinion.)  But he's the best

traveller I ever read; he observes more things than any one else

does.'



On Monday, April 13, I dined with Johnson at Mr. Langton's, where

were Dr. Porteus, then Bishop of Chester, now of London, and Dr.

Stinton.  He was at first in a very silent mood.  Before dinner he

said nothing but 'Pretty baby,' to one of the children.  Langton

said very well to me afterwards, that he could repeat Johnson's

conversation before dinner, as Johnson had said that he could

repeat a complete chapter of The Natural History of Iceland, from

the Danish of Horrebow, the whole of which was exactly thus:--





'CHAP. LXXII.  Concerning snakes.



'There are no snakes to be met with throughout the whole island.'





Mr. Topham Beauclerk came in the evening, and he and Dr. Johnson

and I staid to supper.  It was mentioned that Dr. Dodd had once

wished to be a member of THE LITERARY CLUB.  JOHNSON.  'I should be

sorry if any of our Club were hanged.  I will not say but some of

them deserve it.'  BEAUCLERK.  (supposing this to be aimed at

persons for whom he had at that time a wonderful fancy, which,

however, did not last long,) was irritated, and eagerly said, 'You,

Sir, have a friend, (naming him) who deserves to be hanged; for he

speaks behind their backs against those with whom he lives on the

best terms, and attacks them in the newspapers.  HE certainly ought

to be KICKED.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, we all do this in some degree,

"Veniam petimus damusque vicissim."  To be sure it may be done so

much, that a man may deserve to be kicked.'  BEAUCLERK.  'He is

very malignant.'  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir; he is not malignant.  He is

mischievous, if you will.  He would do no man an essential injury;

he may, indeed, love to make sport of people by vexing their

vanity.  I, however, once knew an old gentleman who was absolutely

malignant.  He really wished evil to others, and rejoiced at it.'

BOSWELL.  'The gentleman, Mr. Beauclerk, against whom you are so

violent, is, I know, a man of good principles.'  BEAUCLERK.  'Then

he does not wear them out in practice.'



Dr. Johnson, who, as I have observed before, delighted in

discrimination of character, and having a masterly knowledge of

human nature, was willing to take men as they are, imperfect and

with a mixture of good and bad qualities, I suppose though he had

said enough in defence of his friend, of whose merits,

notwithstanding his exceptional points, he had a just value; and

added no more on the subject.



On Wednesday, April 15, I dined with Dr. Johnson at Mr. Dilly's,

and was in high spirits, for I had been a good part of the morning

with Mr. Orme, the able and eloquent historian of Hindostan, who

expressed a great admiration of Johnson.  'I do not care (said he,)

on what subject Johnson talks; but I love better to hear him talk

than any body.  He either gives you new thoughts, or a new

colouring.  It is a shame to the nation that he has not been more

liberally rewarded.  Had I been George the Third, and thought as he

did about America, I would have given Johnson three hundred a year

for his Taxation no Tyranny alone.'  I repeated this, and Johnson

was much pleased with such praise from such a man as Orme.



At Mr. Dilly's to-day were Mrs. Knowles, the ingenious Quaker lady,

Miss Seward, the poetess of Lichfield, the Reverend Dr. Mayo, and

the Rev. Mr. Beresford, Tutor to the Duke of Bedford.  Before

dinner Dr. Johnson seized upon Mr. Charles Sheridan's Account of

the late Revolution in Sweden, and seemed to read it ravenously, as

if he devoured it, which was to all appearance his method of

studying.  'He knows how to read better than any one (said Mrs.

Knowles;) he gets at the substance of a book directly; he tears out

the heart of it.'  He kept it wrapt up in the tablecloth in his lap

during the time of dinner, from an avidity to have one

entertainment in readiness when he should have finished another;

resembling (if I may use so coarse a simile) a dog who holds a bone

in his paws in reserve, while he eats something else which has been

thrown to him.



The subject of cookery having been very naturally introduced at a

table where Johnson, who boasted of the niceness of his palate,

owned that 'he always found a good dinner,' he said, 'I could write

a better book of cookery than has ever yet been written; it should

be a book upon philosophical principles.  Pharmacy is now made much

more simple.  Cookery may be made so too.  A prescription which is

now compounded of five ingredients, had formerly fifty in it.  So

in cookery, if the nature of the ingredients be well known, much

fewer will do.  Then as you cannot make bad meat good, I would tell

what is the best butcher's meat, the best beef, the best pieces;

how to choose young fowls; the proper seasons of different

vegetables; and then how to roast and boil, and compound.'  DILLY.

'Mrs. Glasse's Cookery, which is the best, was written by Dr. Hill.

Half the TRADE know this.'  JOHNSON.  'Well, Sir.  This shews how

much better the subject of cookery may be treated by a philosopher.

I doubt if the book be written by Dr. Hill; for, in Mrs. Glasse's

Cookery, which I have looked into, salt-petre and sal-prunella are

spoken of as different substances whereas sal-prunella is only

salt-petre burnt on charcoal; and Hill could not be ignorant of

this.  However, as the greatest part of such a book is made by

transcription, this mistake may have been carelessly adopted.  But

you shall see what a Book of Cookery I shall make!  I shall agree

with Mr. Dilly for the copy-right.'  Miss SEWARD.  'That would be

Hercules with the distaff indeed.'  JOHNSON.  'No, Madam.  Women

can spin very well; but they cannot make a good book of Cookery.'



Mrs. Knowles affected to complain that men had much more liberty

allowed them than women.  JOHNSON.  'Why, Madam, women have all the

liberty they should wish to have.  We have all the labour and the

danger, and the women all the advantage.  We go to sea, we build

houses, we do everything, in short, to pay our court to the women.'

MRS. KNOWLES.  'The Doctor reasons very wittily, but not

convincingly.  Now, take the instance of building; the mason's

wife, if she is ever seen in liquor, is ruined; the mason may get

himself drunk as often as he pleases, with little loss of

character; nay, may let his wife and children starve.'  JOHNSON.

'Madam, you must consider, if the mason does get himself drunk, and

let his wife and children starve, the parish will oblige him to

find security for their maintenance.  We have different modes of

restraining evil.  Stocks for the men, a ducking-stool for women,

and a pound for beasts.  If we require more perfection from women

than from ourselves, it is doing them honour.  And women have not

the same temptations that we have: they may always live in virtuous

company; men must mix in the world indiscriminately.  If a woman

has no inclination to do what is wrong being secured from it is no

restraint to her.  I am at liberty to walk into the Thames; but if

I were to try it, my friends would restrain me in Bedlam, and I

should be obliged to them.'  MRS. KNOWLES.  'Still, Doctor, I

cannot help thinking it a hardship that more indulgence is allowed

to men than to women.  It gives a superiority to men, to which I do

not see how they are entitled.'  JOHNSON.  'It is plain, Madam, one

or other must have the superiority.  As Shakspeare says, "If two

men ride on a horse, one must ride behind."'  DILLY.  'I suppose,

Sir, Mrs. Knowles would have them to ride in panniers, one on each

side.'  JOHNSON.  'Then, Sir, the horse would throw them both.'

MRS. KNOWLES.  'Well, I hope that in another world the sexes will

be equal.'  BOSWELL.  'That is being too ambitious, Madam.  WE

might as well desire to be equal with the angels.  We shall all, I

hope, be happy in a future state, but we must not expect to be all

happy in the same degree.  It is enough if we be happy according to

our several capacities.  A worthy carman will get to heaven as well

as Sir Isaac Newton.  Yet, though equally good, they will not have

the same degrees of happiness.'  JOHNSON.  'Probably not.'



Dr. Mayo having asked Johnson's opinion of Soame Jenyns's View of

the Internal Evidence of the Christian Religion;--JOHNSON.  'I

think it a pretty book; not very theological indeed; and there

seems to be an affectation of ease and carelessness, as if it were

not suitable to his character to be very serious about the matter.'

BOSWELL.  'He may have intended this to introduce his book the

better among genteel people, who might be unwilling to read too

grave a treatise.  There is a general levity in the age.  We have

physicians now with bag-wigs; may we not have airy divines, at

least somewhat less solemn in their appearance than they used to

be?'  JOHNSON.  'Jenyns might mean as you say.'  BOSWELL.  'YOU

should like his book, Mrs. Knowles, as it maintains, as you FRIENDS

do, that courage is not a Christian virtue.'  MRS. KNOWLES.  'Yes,

indeed, I like him there; but I cannot agree with him, that

friendship is not a Christian virtue.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Madam,

strictly speaking, he is right.  All friendship is preferring the

interest of a friend, to the neglect, or, perhaps, against the

interest of others; so that an old Greek said, "He that has FRIENDS

has NO FRIEND."  Now Christianity recommends universal benevolence,

to consider all men as our brethren, which is contrary to the

virtue of friendship, as described by the ancient philosophers.

Surely, Madam, your sect must approve of this; for, you call all

men FRIENDS.'  MRS. KNOWLES.  'We are commanded to do good to all

men, "but especially to them who are of the household of Faith."'

JOHNSON.  'Well, Madam.  The household of Faith is wide enough.'

MRS. KNOWLES.  'But, Doctor, our Saviour had twelve Apostles, yet

there was ONE whom he LOVED.  John was called "the disciple whom

JESUS loved."'  JOHNSON.  (with eyes sparkling benignantly,) 'Very

well, indeed, Madam.  You have said very well.'  BOSWELL.  'A fine

application.  Pray, Sir, had you ever thought of it?'  JOHNSON.  'I

had not, Sir.'



From this pleasing subject, he, I know not how or why, made a

sudden transition to one upon which he was a violent aggressor; for

he said, 'I am willing to love all mankind, EXCEPT AN AMERICAN:'

and his inflammable corruption bursting into horrid fire, he

'breathed out threatenings and slaughter;' calling them, Rascals--

Robbers--Pirates;' and exclaiming, he'd 'burn and destroy them.'

Miss Seward, looking to him with mild but steady astonishment,

said, 'Sir, this is an instance that we are always most violent

against those whom we have injured.'  He was irritated still more

by this delicate and keen reproach; and roared out another

tremendous volley, which one might fancy could be heard across the

Atlantick.  During this tempest I sat in great uneasiness,

lamenting his heat of temper; till, by degrees, I diverted his

attention to other topicks.



Talking of Miss ------, a literary lady, he said, 'I was obliged to

speak to Miss Reynolds, to let her know that I desired she would

not flatter me so much.'  Somebody now observed, 'She flatters

Garrick.'  JOHNSON.  'She is in the right to flatter Garrick.  She

is in the right for two reasons; first, because she has the world

with her, who have been praising Garrick these thirty years; and

secondly, because she is rewarded for it by Garrick.  Why should

she flatter ME?  I can do nothing for her.  Let her carry her

praise to a better market.  (Then turning to Mrs. Knowles.)  You,

Madam, have been flattering me all the evening; I wish you would

give Boswell a little now.  If you knew his merit as well as I do,

you would say a great deal; he is the best travelling companion in

the world.'



Somebody mentioned the Reverend Mr. Mason's prosecution of Mr.

Murray, the bookseller, for having inserted in a collection of

Gray's Poems, only fifty lines, of which Mr. Mason had still the

exclusive property, under the statute of Queen Anne; and that Mr.

Mason had persevered, notwithstanding his being requested to name

his own terms of compensation.  Johnson signified his displeasure

at Mr. Mason's conduct very strongly; but added, by way of shewing

that he was not surprized at it, 'Mason's a Whig.'  MRS. KNOWLES.

(not hearing distinctly,) 'What! a Prig, Sir?'  JOHNSON.  'Worse,

Madam; a Whig!  But he is both.'



Of John Wesley, he said, 'He can talk well on any subject.'

BOSWELL.  'Pray, Sir, what has he made of his story of a ghost?'

JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, he believes it; but not on sufficient

authority.  He did not take time enough to examine the girl.  It

was at Newcastle, where the ghost was said to have appeared to a

young woman several times, mentioning something about the right to

an old house, advising application to be made to an attorney, which

was done; and, at the same time, saying the attorneys would do

nothing, which proved to be the fact.  "This (says John,) is a

proof that a ghost knows our thoughts."  Now (laughing,) it is not

necessary to know our thoughts, to tell that an attorney will

sometimes do nothing.  Charles Wesley, who is a more stationary

man, does not believe the story.  I am sorry that John did not take

more pains to inquire into the evidence for it.'  MISS SEWARD,

(with an incredulous smile,) 'What, Sir! about a ghost?'  JOHNSON.

(with solemn vehemence,) 'Yes, Madam: this is a question which,

after five thousand years, is yet undecided; a question, whether in

theology or philosophy, one of the most important that can come

before the human understanding.'



Mrs. Knowles mentioned, as a proselyte to Quakerism, Miss ------, a

young lady well known to Dr. Johnson, for whom he had shewn much

affection; while she ever had, and still retained, a great respect

for him.  Mrs. Knowles at the same time took an opportunity of

letting him know 'that the amiable young creature was sorry at

finding that he was offended at her leaving the Church of England

and embracing a simpler faith;' and, in the gentlest and most

persuasive manner, solicited his kind indulgence for what was

sincerely a matter of conscience.  JOHNSON.  (frowning very

angrily,) 'Madam, she is an odious wench.  She could not have any

proper conviction that it was her duty to change her religion,

which is the most important of all subjects, and should be studied

with all care, and with all the helps we can get.  She knew no more

of the Church which she left, and that which she embraced, than she

did of the difference between the Copernican and Ptolemaick

systems.'  MRS. KNOWLES.  'She had the New Testament before her.'

JOHNSON.  'Madam, she could not understand the New Testament, the

most difficult book in the world, for which the study of a life is

required.'  MRS. KNOWLES.  'It is clear as to essentials.'

JOHNSON.  'But not as to controversial points.  The heathens were

easily converted, because they had nothing to give up; but we ought

not, without very strong conviction indeed, to desert the religion

in which we have been educated.  That is the religion given you,

the religion in which it may be said Providence has placed you.  If

you live conscientiously in that religion, you may be safe.  But

errour is dangerous indeed, if you err when you choose a religion

for yourself.'  MRS. KNOWLES.  'Must we then go by implicit faith?'

JOHNSON.  'Why, Madam, the greatest part of our knowledge is

implicit faith; and as to religion, have we heard all that a

disciple of Confucius, all that a Mahometan, can say for himself?'

He then rose again into passion, and attacked the young proselyte

in the severest terms of reproach, so that both the ladies seemed

to be much shocked.



We remained together till it was pretty late.  Notwithstanding

occasional explosions of violence, we were all delighted upon the

whole with Johnson.  I compared him at this time to a warm West-

Indian climate, where you have a bright sun, quick vegetation,

luxuriant foliage, luscious fruits; but where the same heat

sometimes produces thunder, lightning, earthquakes, in a terrible

degree.



April 17, being Good Friday, I waited on Johnson, as usual.  I

observed at breakfast that although it was a part of his abstemious

discipline on this most solemn fast, to take no milk in his tea,

yet when Mrs. Desmoulins inadvertently poured it in, he did not

reject it.  I talked of the strange indecision of mind, and

imbecility in the common occurrences of life, which we may observe

in some people.  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, I am in the habit of getting

others to do things for me.'  BOSWELL.  'What, Sir! have you that

weakness?'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir.  But I always think afterwards I

should have done better for myself.'



I expressed some inclination to publish an account of my Travels

upon the continent of Europe, for which I had a variety of

materials collected.  JOHNSON.  'I do not say, Sir, you may not

publish your travels; but I give you my opinion, that you would

lessen yourself by it.  What can you tell of countries so well

known as those upon the continent of Europe, which you have

visited?'  BOSWELL.  'But I can give an entertaining narrative,

with many incidents, anecdotes, jeux d'esprit, and remarks, so as

to make very pleasant reading.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, most modern

travellers in Europe who have published their travels, have been

laughed at: I would not have you added to the number.  The world is

now not contented to be merely entertained by a traveller's

narrative; they want to learn something.  Now some of my friends

asked me, why I did not give some account of my travels in France.

The reason is plain; intelligent readers had seen more of France

than I had.  YOU might have liked my travels in France, and THE

CLUB might have liked them; but, upon the whole, there would have

been more ridicule than good produced by them.'  BOSWELL.  'I

cannot agree with you, Sir.  People would like to read what you say

of any thing.  Suppose a face has been painted by fifty painters

before; still we love to see it done by Sir Joshua.'  JOHNSON.

'True, Sir, but Sir Joshua cannot paint a face when he has not time

to look on it.'  BOSWELL.  'Sir, a sketch of any sort by him is

valuable.  And, Sir, to talk to you in your own style (raising my

voice, and shaking my head,) you SHOULD have given us your travels

in France.  I am SURE I am right, and THERE'S AN END ON'T.'



I said to him that it was certainly true, as my friend Dempster had

observed in his letter to me upon the subject, that a great part of

what was in his Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland had been

in his mind before he left London.  JOHNSON.  'Why yes, Sir, the

topicks were; and books of travels will be good in proportion to

what a man has previously in his mind; his knowing what to observe;

his power of contrasting one mode of life with another.  As the

Spanish proverb says, "He, who would bring home the wealth of the

Indies, must carry the wealth of the Indies with him."  So it is in

travelling; a man must carry knowledge with him, if he would bring

home knowledge.'  BOSWELL.  'The proverb, I suppose, Sir, means, he

must carry a large stock with him to trade with.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes,

Sir.'



It was a delightful day: as we walked to St. Clement's church, I

again remarked that Fleet-street was the most cheerful scene in the

world.  'Fleet-street (said I,) is in my mind more delightful than

Tempe.'  JOHNSON.  'Ay, Sir; but let it be compared with Mull.'



There was a very numerous congregation to-day at St. Clement's

church, which Dr. Johnson said he observed with pleasure.



And now I am to give a pretty full account of one of the most

curious incidents in Johnson's life, of which he himself has made

the following minute on this day: 'In my return from church, I was

accosted by Edwards, an old fellow-collegian, who had not seen me

since 1729.  He knew me, and asked if I remembered one Edwards; I

did not at first recollect the name, but gradually as we walked

along, recovered it, and told him a conversation that had passed at

an ale-house between us.  My purpose is to continue our

acquaintance.'



It was in Butcher-row that this meeting happened.  Mr. Edwards, who

was a decent-looking elderly man in grey clothes, and a wig of many

curls, accosted Johnson with familiar confidence, knowing who he

was, while Johnson returned his salutation with a courteous

formality, as to a stranger.  But as soon as Edwards had brought to

his recollection their having been at Pembroke-College together

nine-and-forty years ago, he seemed much pleased, asked where he

lived, and said he should be glad to see him in Bolt-court.

EDWARDS.  'Ah, Sir! we are old men now.'  JOHNSON.  (who never

liked to think of being old,) 'Don't let us discourage one

another.'  EDWARDS.  'Why, Doctor, you look stout and hearty, I am

happy to see you so; for the news-papers told us you were very

ill.'  JOHNSON.  'Ay, Sir, they are always telling lies of US OLD

FELLOWS.'



Wishing to be present at more of so singular a conversation as that

between two fellow-collegians, who had lived forty years in London

without ever having chanced to meet, I whispered to Mr. Edwards

that Dr. Johnson was going home, and that he had better accompany

him now.  So Edwards walked along with us, I eagerly assisting to

keep up the conversation.  Mr. Edwards informed Dr. Johnson that he

had practised long as a solicitor in Chancery, but that he now

lived in the country upon a little farm, about sixty acres, just by

Stevenage in Hertfordshire, and that he came to London (to

Barnard's Inn, No. 6), generally twice a week.  Johnson appearing

to me in a reverie, Mr. Edwards addressed himself to me, and

expatiated on the pleasure of living in the country.  BOSWELL.  'I

have no notion of this, Sir.  What you have to entertain you, is, I

think, exhausted in half an hour.'  EDWARDS.  'What? don't you love

to have hope realized?  I see my grass, and my corn, and my trees

growing.  Now, for instance, I am curious to see if this frost has

not nipped my fruit-trees.'  JOHNSON.  (who we did not imagine was

attending,) 'You find, Sir, you have fears as well as hopes.'--So

well did he see the whole, when another saw but the half of a

subject.



When we got to Dr. Johnson's house, and were seated in his library,

the dialogue went on admirably.  EDWARDS.  'Sir, I remember you

would not let us say PRODIGIOUS at College.  For even then, Sir,

(turning to me,) he was delicate in language, and we all feared

him.'*  JOHNSON.  (to Edwards,) 'From your having practised the law

long, Sir, I presume you must be rich.'  EDWARDS.  'No, Sir; I got

a good deal of money; but I had a number of poor relations to whom

I gave a great part of it.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, you have been rich in

the most valuable sense of the word.'  EDWARDS.  'But I shall not

die rich.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, sure, Sir, it is better to LIVE rich

than to DIE rich.'  EDWARDS.  'I wish I had continued at College.'

JOHNSON.  'Why do you wish that, Sir?'  EDWARDS.  'Because I think

I should have had a much easier life than mine has been.  I should

have been a parson, and had a good living, like Bloxam and several

others, and lived comfortably.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, the life of a

parson, of a conscientious clergyman, is not easy.  I have always

considered a clergyman as the father of a larger family than he is

able to maintain.  I would rather have Chancery suits upon my hands

than the cure of souls.  No, Sir, I do not envy a clergyman's life

as an easy life, nor do I envy the clergyman who makes it an easy

life.'  Here taking himself up all of a sudden, he exclaimed, 'O!

Mr. Edwards!  I'll convince you that I recollect you.  Do you

remember our drinking together at an alehouse near Pembroke gate?

At that time, you told me of the Eton boy, who, when verses on our

SAVIOUR'S turning water into wine were prescribed as an exercise,

brought up a single line, which was highly admired,--





    "Vidit et erubuit lympha pudica DEUM,"





and I told you of another fine line in Camden's Remains, an eulogy

upon one of our Kings, who was succeeded by his son, a prince of

equal merit:--





    "Mira cano, Sol occubuit, nox nulla secuta est."'





* Johnson said to me afterwards, 'Sir, they respected me for my

literature: and yet it was not great but by comparison.  Sir, it is

amazing how little literature there is in the world.'--BOSWELL





EDWARDS.  'You are a philosopher, Dr. Johnson.  I have tried too in

my time to be a philosopher; but, I don't know how, cheerfulness

was always breaking in.'--Mr. Burke, Sir Joshua Reynolds, Mr.

Courtenay, Mr. Malone, and, indeed, all the eminent men to whom I

have mentioned this, have thought it an exquisite trait of

character.  The truth is, that philosophy, like religion, is too

generally supposed to be hard and severe, at least so grave as to

exclude all gaiety.



EDWARDS.  'I have been twice married, Doctor.  You, I suppose, have

never known what it was to have a wife.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, I have

known what it was to have a wife, and (in a solemn, tender,

faultering tone) I have known what it was to LOSE A WIFE.--It had

almost broke my heart.'



EDWARDS.  'How do you live, Sir?  For my part, I must have my

regular meals, and a glass of good wine.  I find I require it.'

JOHNSON.  'I now drink no wine, Sir.  Early in life I drank wine:

for many years I drank none.  I then for some years drank a great

deal.'  EDWARDS.  'Some hogs-heads, I warrant you.'  JOHNSON.  'I

then had a severe illness, and left it off, and I have never begun

it again.  I never felt any difference upon myself from eating one

thing rather than another, nor from one kind of weather rather than

another.  There are people, I believe, who feel a difference; but I

am not one of them.  And as to regular meals, I have fasted from

the Sunday's dinner to the Tuesday's dinner, without any

inconvenience.  I believe it is best to eat just as one is hungry:

but a man who is in business, or a man who has a family, must have

stated meals.  I am a straggler.  I may leave this town and go to

Grand Cairo, without being missed here or observed there.'

EDWARDS.  'Don't you eat supper, Sir?'  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir.'

EDWARDS.  'For my part, now, I consider supper as a turnpike

through which one must pass, in order to get to bed.'



JOHNSON.  'You are a lawyer, Mr. Edwards.  Lawyers know life

practically.  A bookish man should always have them to converse

with.  They have what he wants.'  EDWARDS.  'I am grown old: I am

sixty-five.'  JOHNSON.  'I shall be sixty-eight next birth-day.

Come, Sir, drink water, and put in for a hundred.'



This interview confirmed my opinion of Johnson's most humane and

benevolent heart.  His cordial and placid behaviour to an old

fellow-collegian, a man so different from himself; and his telling

him that he would go down to his farm and visit him, showed a

kindness of disposition very rare at an advanced age.  He observed,

'how wonderful it was that they had both been in London forty

years, without having ever once met, and both walkers in the street

too!'  Mr. Edwards, when going away, again recurred to his

consciousness of senility, and looking full in Johnson's face, said

to him, 'You'll find in Dr. Young,





    "O my coevals! remnants of yourselves."'





Johnson did not relish this at all; but shook his head with

impatience.  Edwards walked off, seemingly highly pleased with the

honour of having been thus noticed by Dr. Johnson.  When he was

gone, I said to Johnson, I thought him but a weak man.  JOHNSON.

'Why, yes, Sir.  Here is a man who has passed through life without

experience: yet I would rather have him with me than a more

sensible man who will not talk readily.  This man is always willing

to say what he has to say.'  Yet Dr. Johnson had himself by no

means that willingness which he praised so much, and I think so

justly; for who has not felt the painful effect of the dreary void,

when there is a total silence in a company, for any length of time;

or, which is as bad, or perhaps worse, when the conversation is

with difficulty kept up by a perpetual effort?



Johnson once observed to me, 'Tom Tyers described me the best:

"Sir, (said he,) you are like a ghost: you never speak till you are

spoken to."'



The gentleman whom he thus familiarly mentioned was Mr. Thomas

Tyers, son of Mr. Jonathan Tyers, the founder of that excellent

place of publick amusement, Vauxhall Gardens, which must ever be an

estate to its proprietor, as it is peculiarly adapted to the taste

of the English nation; there being a mixture of curious show,--gay

exhibition, musick, vocal and instrumental, not too refined for the

general ear;--for all which only a shilling is paid; and, though

last, not least, good eating and drinking for those who choose to

purchase that regale.  Mr. Thomas Tyers was bred to the law; but

having a handsome fortune, vivacity of temper, and eccentricity of

mind, he could not confine himself to the regularity of practice.

He therefore ran about the world with a pleasant carelessness,

amusing everybody by his desultory conversation.  He abounded in

anecdote, but was not sufficiently attentive to accuracy.  I

therefore cannot venture to avail myself much of a biographical

sketch of Johnson which he published, being one among the various

persons ambitious of appending their names to that of my

illustrious friend.  That sketch is, however, an entertaining

little collection of fragments.  Those which he published of Pope

and Addison are of higher merit; but his fame must chiefly rest

upon his Political Conferences, in which he introduces several

eminent persons delivering their sentiments in the way of dialogue,

and discovers a considerable share of learning, various knowledge,

and discernment of character.  This much may I be allowed to say of

a man who was exceedingly obliging to me, and who lived with Dr.

Johnson in as easy a manner as almost any of his very numerous

acquaintance.



Mr. Edwards had said to me aside, that Dr. Johnson should have been

of a profession.  I repeated the remark to Johnson that I might

have his own thoughts on the subject.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, it WOULD

have been better that I had been of a profession.  I ought to have

been a lawyer.'  BOSWELL.  'I do not think, Sir, it would have been

better, for we should not have had the English Dictionary.'

JOHNSON.  'But you would have had Reports.'  BOSWELL.  'Ay; but

there would not have been another, who could have written the

Dictionary.  There have been many very good Judges.  Suppose you

had been Lord Chancellor; you would have delivered opinions with

more extent of mind, and in a more ornamented manner, than perhaps

any Chancellor ever did, or ever will do.  But, I believe, causes

have been as judiciously decided as you could have done.'  JOHNSON.

'Yes, Sir.  Property has been as well settled.'



Johnson, however, had a noble ambition floating in his mind, and

had, undoubtedly, often speculated on the possibility of his

supereminent powers being rewarded in this great and liberal

country by the highest honours of the state.  Sir William Scott

informs me, that upon the death of the late Lord Lichfield, who was

Chancellor of the University of Oxford, he said to Johnson, 'What a

pity it is, Sir, that you did not follow the profession of the law.

You might have been Lord Chancellor of Great Britain, and attained

to the dignity of the peerage; and now that the title of Lichfleld,

your native city, is extinct, you might have had it.'  Johnson,

upon this, seemed much agitated; and, in an angry tone, exclaimed,

'Why will you vex me by suggesting this, when it is too late?'



But he did not repine at the prosperity of others.  The late Dr.

Thomas Leland, told Mr. Courtenay, that when Mr. Edmund Burke

shewed Johnson his fine house and lands near Beaconsfield, Johnson

coolly said, 'Non equidem invideo; miror magis.'*





* I am not entirely without suspicion that Johnson may have felt a

little momentary envy; for no man loved the good things of this

life better than he did and he could not but be conscious that he

deserved a much larger share of them, than he ever had.--BOSWELL.





Yet no man had a higher notion of the dignity of literature than

Johnson, or was more determined in maintaining the respect which he

justly considered as due to it.  Of this, besides the general tenor

of his conduct in society, some characteristical instances may be

mentioned.



He told Sir Joshua Reynolds, that once when he dined in a numerous

company of booksellers, where the room being small, the head of the

table, at which he sat, was almost close to the fire, he persevered

in suffering a great deal of inconvenience from the heat, rather

than quit his place, and let one of them sit above him.



Goldsmith, in his diverting simplicity, complained one day, in a

mixed company, of Lord Camden.  'I met him (said he,) at Lord

Clare's house in the country, and he took no more notice of me than

if I had been an ordinary man.  The company having laughed

heartily, Johnson stood forth in defence of his friend.  'Nay,

Gentlemen, (said he,) Dr. Goldsmith is in the right.  A nobleman

ought to have made up to such a man as Goldsmith; and I think it is

much against Lord Camden that he neglected him.'



Nor could he patiently endure to hear that such respect as he

thought due only to higher intellectual qualities, should be

bestowed on men of slighter, though perhaps more amusing talents.

I told him, that one morning, when I went to breakfast with

Garrick, who was very vain of his intimacy with Lord Camden, he

accosted me thus:--'Pray now, did you--did you meet a little lawyer

turning the corner, eh?'--'No, Sir, (said I).  Pray what do you

mean by the question?'--'Why, (replied Garrick, with an affected

indifference, yet as if standing on tip-toe,) Lord Camden has this

moment left me.  We have had a long walk together.'  JOHNSON.

'Well, Sir, Garrick talked very properly.  Lord Camden WAS A LITTLE

LAWYER to be associating so familiarly with a player.'



Sir Joshua Reynolds observed, with great truth, that Johnson

considered Garrick to be as it were his PROPERTY.  He would allow

no man either to blame or to praise Garrick in his presence,

without contradicting him.



Having fallen into a very serious frame of mind, in which mutual

expressions of kindness passed between us, such as would be thought

too vain in me to repeat, I talked with regret of the sad

inevitable certainty that one of us must survive the other.

JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir, that is an affecting consideration.  I

remember Swift, in one of his letters to Pope, says, "I intend to

come over, that we may meet once more; and when we must part, it is

what happens to all human beings."'  BOSWELL.  'The hope that we

shall see our departed friends again must support the mind.'

JOHNSON.  'Why yes, Sir.'  BOSWELL.  'There is a strange

unwillingness to part with life, independent of serious fears as to

futurity.  A reverend friend of ours (naming him) tells me, that he

feels an uneasiness at the thoughts of leaving his house, his

study, his books.'  JOHNSON.  'This is foolish in *****.  A man

need not be uneasy on these grounds; for, as he will retain his

consciousness, he may say with the philosopher, Omnia mea mecum

porto.'  BOSWELL.  'True, Sir: we may carry our books in our heads;

but still there is something painful in the thought of leaving for

ever what has given us pleasure.  I remember, many years ago, when

my imagination was warm, and I happened to be in a melancholy mood,

it distressed me to think of going into a state of being in which

Shakspeare's poetry did not exist.  A lady whom I then much

admired, a very amiable woman, humoured my fancy, and relieved me

by saying, "The first thing you will meet in the other world, will

be an elegant copy of Shakspeare's works presented to you."'  Dr.

Johnson smiled benignantly at this, and did not appear to

disapprove of the notion.



We went to St. Clement's church again in the afternoon, and then

returned and drank tea and coffee in Mrs. Williams's room; Mrs.

Desmoulins doing the honours of the tea-table.  I observed that he

would not even look at a proof-sheet of his Life of Waller on Good-

Friday.



On Saturday, April 14, I drank tea with him.  He praised the late

Mr. Duncombe, of Canterbury, as a pleasing man.  'He used to come

to me: I did not seek much after HIM.  Indeed I never sought much

after any body.'  BOSWELL.  'Lord Orrery, I suppose.'  JOHNSON.

'No, Sir; I never went to him but when he sent for me.'  BOSWELL.

'Richardson?'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir.  But I sought after George

Psalmanazar the most.  I used to go and sit with him at an alehouse

in the city.'



I am happy to mention another instance which I discovered of his

SEEKING AFTER a man of merit.  Soon after the Honourable Daines

Barrington had published his excellent Observations on the

Statutes, Johnson waited on that worthy and learned gentleman; and,

having told him his name, courteously said, 'I have read your book,

Sir, with great pleasure, and wish to be better known to you.'

Thus began an acquaintance, which was continued with mutual regard

as long as Johnson lived.



Talking of a recent seditious delinquent, he said, 'They should set

him in the pillory, that he may be punished in a way that would

disgrace him.'  I observed, that the pillory does not always

disgrace.  And I mentioned an instance of a gentleman who I thought

was not dishonoured by it.  JOHNSON.  'Ay, but he was, Sir.  He

could not mouth and strut as he used to do, after having been

there.  People are not willing to ask a man to their tables who has

stood in the pillory.'



Johnson attacked the Americans with intemperate vehemence of abuse.

I said something in their favour; and added, that I was always

sorry when he talked on that subject.  This, it seems, exasperated

him; though he said nothing at the time.  The cloud was charged

with sulphureous vapour, which was afterwards to burst in thunder.--

We talked of a gentleman who was running out his fortune in

London; and I said, 'We must get him out of it.  All his friends

must quarrel with him, and that will soon drive him away.'

JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir; we'll send YOU to him.  If your company does

not drive a man out of his house, nothing will.'  This was a

horrible shock, for which there was no visible cause.  I afterwards

asked him why he had said so harsh a thing.  JOHNSON.  Because,

Sir, you made me angry about the Americans.'  BOSWELL.  'But why

did you not take your revenge directly?'  JOHNSON. (smiling,)

'Because, Sir, I had nothing ready.  A man cannot strike till he

has his weapons.'  This was a candid and pleasant confession.



He shewed me to-night his drawing-room, very genteelly fitted up;

and said, 'Mrs. Thrale sneered when I talked of my having asked you

and your lady to live at my house.  I was obliged to tell her, that

you would be in as respectable a situation in my house as in hers.

Sir, the insolence of wealth will creep out.'  BOSWELL.  'She has a

little both of the insolence of wealth, and the conceit of parts.'

JOHNSON.  'The insolence of wealth is a wretched thing; but the

conceit of parts has some foundation.  To be sure it should not be.

But who is without it?'  BOSWELL.  'Yourself, Sir.'  JOHNSON.

'Why, I play no tricks: I lay no traps.'  BOSWELL.  'No, Sir.  You

are six feet high, and you only do not stoop.'



We talked of the numbers of people that sometimes have composed the

household of great families.  I mentioned that there were a hundred

in the family of the present Earl of Eglintoune's father.  Dr.

Johnson seeming to doubt it, I began to enumerate.  'Let us see: my

Lord and my Lady two.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, if you are to count by

twos, you may be long enough.'  BOSWELL.  'Well, but now I add two

sons and seven daughters, and a servant for each, that will make

twenty; so we have the fifth part already.'  JOHNSON.  'Very true.

You get at twenty pretty readily; but you will not so easily get

further on.  We grow to five feet pretty readily; but it is not so

easy to grow to seven.'



On Monday, April 20, I found him at home in the morning.  We talked

of a gentleman who we apprehended was gradually involving his

circumstances by bad management.  JOHNSON.  'Wasting a fortune is

evaporation by a thousand imperceptible means.  If it were a

stream, they'd stop it.  You must speak to him.  It is really

miserable.  Were he a gamester, it could be said he had hopes of

winning.  Were he a bankrupt in trade, he might have grown rich;

but he has neither spirit to spend nor resolution to spare.  He

does not spend fast enough to have pleasure from it.  He has the

crime of prodigality, and the wretchedness of parsimony.  If a man

is killed in a duel, he is killed as many a one has been killed;

but it is a sad thing for a man to lie down and die; to bleed to

death, because he has not fortitude enough to sear the wound, or

even to stitch it up.'  I cannot but pause a moment to admire the

fecundity of fancy, and choice of language, which in this instance,

and, indeed, on almost all occasions, he displayed.  It was well

observed by Dr. Percy, now Bishop of Dromore, 'The conversation of

Johnson is strong and clear, and may be compared to an antique

statue, where every vein and muscle is distinct and bold.  Ordinary

conversation resembles an inferiour cast.'



On Saturday, April 25, I dined with him at Sir Joshua Reynolds's,

with the learned Dr. Musgrave, Counsellor Leland of Ireland, son to

the historian, Mrs. Cholmondeley, and some more ladies.



'Demosthenes Taylor, as he was called, (that is, the Editor of

Demosthenes) was the most silent man, the merest statue of a man

that I have ever seen.  I once dined in company with him, and all

he said during the whole time was no more than Richard.  How a man

should say only Richard, it is not easy to imagine.  But it was

thus: Dr. Douglas was talking of Dr. Zachary Grey, and ascribing to

him something that was written by Dr. Richard Grey.  So, to correct

him, Taylor said, (imitating his affected sententious emphasis and

nod,) "RICHARD."'



Mrs. Cholmondeley, in a high flow of spirits, exhibited some lively

sallies of hyperbolical compliment to Johnson, with whom she had

been long acquainted, and was very easy.  He was quick in catching

the MANNER of the moment, and answered her somewhat in the style of

the hero of a romance, 'Madam, you crown me with unfading laurels.'



We talked of a lady's verses on Ireland.  MISS REYNOLDS.  'Have you

seen them, Sir?'  JOHNSON.  'No, Madam.  I have seen a translation

from Horace, by one of her daughters.  She shewed it me.'  MISS

REYNOLDS.  'And how was it, Sir?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, very well for a

young Miss's verses;--that is to say, compared with excellence,

nothing; but, very well, for the person who wrote them.  I am vexed

at being shewn verses in that manner.'  MISS REYNOLDS.  'But if

they should be good, why not give them hearty praise?'  JOHNSON.

'Why, Madam, because I have not then got the better of my bad

humour from having been shown them.  You must consider, Madam;

beforehand they may be bad, as well as good.  Nobody has a right to

put another under such a difficulty, that he must either hurt the

person by telling the truth, or hurt himself by telling what is not

true.'  BOSWELL.  'A man often shews his writings to people of

eminence, to obtain from them, either from their good-nature, or

from their not being able to tell the truth firmly, a commendation,

of which he may afterwards avail himself.'  JOHNSON.  'Very true,

Sir.  Therefore the man, who is asked by an authour, what he thinks

of his work, is put to the torture, and is not obliged to speak the

truth; so that what he says is not considered as his opinion; yet

he has said it, and cannot retract it; and this authour, when

mankind are hunting him with a cannister at his tail, can say, "I

would not have published, had not Johnson, or Reynolds, or

Musgrave, or some other good judge, commended the work."  Yet I

consider it as a very difficult question in conscience, whether one

should advise a man not to publish a work, if profit be his object;

for the man may say, "Had it not been for you, I should have had

the money."  Now you cannot be sure; for you have only your own

opinion, and the publick may think very differently.'  SIR JOSHUA

REYNOLDS.  'You must upon such an occasion have two judgements; one

as to the real value of the work, the other as to what may please

the general taste at the time.'  JOHNSON.  'But you can be SURE of

neither; and therefore I should scruple much to give a suppressive

vote.  Both Goldsmith's comedies were once refused; his first by

Garrick, his second by Colman, who was prevailed on at last by much

solicitation, nay, a kind of force, to bring it on.  His Vicar of

Wakefield I myself did not think would have had much success.  It

was written and sold to a bookseller before his Traveller; but

published after; so little expectation had the bookseller from it.

Had it been sold after the Traveller he might have had twice as

much money for it, though sixty guineas was no mean price.  The

bookseller had the advantage of Goldsmith's reputation from The

Traveller in the sale, though Goldsmith had it not in selling the

copy.'  SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.  'The Beggar's Opera affords a proof

how strangely people will differ in opinion about a literary

performance.  Burke thinks it has no merit.'  JOHNSON.  'It was

refused by one of the houses; but I should have thought it would

succeed, not from any great excellence in the writing, but from the

novelty, and the general spirit and gaiety of the piece, which

keeps the audience always attentive, and dismisses them in good

humour.'



We went to the drawing-room, where was a considerable increase of

company.  Several of us got round Dr. Johnson, and complained that

he would not give us an exact catalogue of his works, that there

might be a complete edition.  He smiled, and evaded our entreaties.

That he intended to do it, I have no doubt, because I have heard

him say so; and I have in my possession an imperfect list, fairly

written out, which he entitles Historia Studiorum.  I once got from

one of his friends a list, which there was pretty good reason to

suppose was accurate, for it was written down in his presence by

this friend, who enumerated each article aloud, and had some of

them mentioned to him by Mr. Levett, in concert with whom it was

made out; and Johnson, who heard all this, did not contradict it.

But when I shewed a copy of this list to him, and mentioned the

evidence for its exactness, he laughed, and said, 'I was willing to

let them go on as they pleased, and never interfered.'  Upon which

I read it to him, article by article, and got him positively to own

or refuse; and then, having obtained certainty so far, I got some

other articles confirmed by him directly; and afterwards, from time

to time, made additions under his sanction.



The conversation having turned on Bon-Mots, be quoted, from one of

the Ana, an exquisite instance of flattery in a maid of honour in

France, who being asked by the Queen what o'clock it was, answered,

'What your Majesty pleases.'  He admitted that Mr. Burke's

classical pun upon Mr. Wilkes's being carried on the shoulders of

the mob,--





    '-------------Numerisque fertur

     Lege solutus,'





was admirable; and though he was strangely unwilling to allow to

that extraordinary man the talent of wit, he also laughed with

approbation at another of his playful conceits; which was, that

'Horace has in one line given a description of a good desirable

manour:--





    "Est modus in rebus, sunt certi denique fines;"





that is to say, a modus as to the tithes and certain fines.'



He observed, 'A man cannot with propriety speak of himself, except

he relates simple facts; as, "I was at Richmond:" or what depends

on mensuration; as, "I am six feet high."  He is sure he has been

at Richmond; he is sure he is six feet high: but he cannot be sure

he is wise, or that he has any other excellence.  Then, all censure

of a man's self is oblique praise.  It is in order to shew how much

he can spare.  It has all the invidiousness of self-praise, and all

the reproach of falsehood.'



On Tuesday, April 28, he was engaged to dine at General Paoli's,

where, as I have already observed, I was still entertained in

elegant hospitality, and with all the ease and comfort of a home.

I called on him, and accompanied him in a hackney-coach.  We

stopped first at the bottom of Hedgelane, into which he went to

leave a letter, 'with good news for a poor man in distress,' as he

told me.  I did not question him particularly as to this.  He

himself often resembled Lady Bolingbroke's Lively description of

Pope; that 'he was un politique aux choux et aux raves.'  He would

say, 'I dine to-day in Grosvenor-square;' this might be with a

Duke: or, perhaps, 'I dine to-day at the other end of the town:'

or, 'A gentleman of great eminence called on me yesterday.'  He

loved thus to keep things floating in conjecture: Omne ignotum pro

magnifico est.  I believe I ventured to dissipate the cloud, to

unveil the mystery, more freely and frequently than any of his

friends.  We stopped again at Wirgman's, the well-known toy-shop,

in St. James's-street, at the corner of St. James's-place, to which

he had been directed, but not clearly, for he searched about some

time, and could not find it at first; and said, 'To direct one only

to a corner shop is TOYING with one.'  I suppose he meant this as a

play upon the word toy: it was the first time that I knew him stoop

to such sport.  After he had been some time in the shop, he sent

for me to come out of the coach, and help him to choose a pair of

silver buckles, as those he had were too small.  Probably this

alteration in dress had been suggested by Mrs. Thrale, by

associating with whom, his external appearance was much improved.

He got better cloaths; and the dark colour, from which he never

deviated, was enlivened by metal buttons.  His wigs, too, were much

better; and during their travels in France, he was furnished with a

Paris-made wig, of handsome construction.  This choosing of silver

buckles was a negociation: 'Sir, (said he,) I will not have the

ridiculous large ones now in fashion; and I will give no more than

a guinea for a pair.'  Such were the PRINCIPLES of the business;

and, after some examination, he was fitted.  As we drove along, I

found him in a talking humour, of which I availed myself.  BOSWELL.

'I was this morning in Ridley's shop, Sir; and was told, that the

collection called Johnsoniana has sold very much.'  JOHNSON.  'Yet

the Journey to the Hebrides has not had a great sale.'  BOSWELL.

'That is strange.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir; for in that book I have

told the world a great deal that they did not know before.'



BOSWELL.  'I drank chocolate, Sir, this morning with Mr. Eld; and,

to my no small surprize, found him to be a Staffordshire Whig, a

being which I did not believe had existed.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, there

are rascals in all countries.'  BOSWELL.  'Eld said, a Tory was a

creature generated between a non-juring parson and one's

grandmother.'  JOHNSON.  'And I have always said, the first Whig

was the Devil.'  BOSWELL.  'He certainly was, Sir.  The Devil was

impatient of subordination; he was the first who resisted power:--





    "Better to reign in Hell, than serve in Heaven."'





At General Paoli's were Sir Joshua Reynolds, Mr. Langton, Marchese

Gherardi of Lombardy, and Mr. John Spottiswoode the younger, of

Spottiswoode, the solicitor.



We talked of drinking wine.  JOHNSON.  'I require wine only when I

am alone.  I have then often wished for it, and often taken it.'

SPOTTISWOODE.  'What, by way of a companion, Sir?'  JOHNSON.  'To

get rid of myself, to send myself away.  Wine gives great pleasure;

and every pleasure is of itself a good.  It is a good, unless

counterbalanced by evil.  A man may have a strong reason not to

drink wine; and that may be greater than the pleasure.  Wine makes

a man better pleased with himself.  I do not say that it makes him

more pleasing to others.  Sometimes it does.  But the danger is,

that while a man grows better pleased with himself, he may be

growing less pleasing to others.  Wine gives a man nothing.  It

neither gives him knowledge nor wit; it only animates a man, and

enables him to bring out what a dread of the company had repressed.

It only puts in motion what has been locked up in frost.  But this

may be good, or it may be bad.'  SPOTTISWOODE.  'So, Sir, wine is a

key which opens a box; but this box may be either full or empty.'

JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, conversation is the key: wine is a pick-lock,

which forces open the box and injures it.  A man should cultivate

his mind so as to have that confidence and readiness without wine,

which wine gives.'  BOSWELL.  'The great difficulty of resisting

wine is from benevolence.  For instance, a good worthy man asks you

to taste his wine, which he has had twenty years in his cellar.'

JOHNSON.  'Sir, all this notion about benevolence arises from a

man's imagining himself to be of more importance to others, than he

really is.  They don't care a farthing whether he drinks wine or

not.'  SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.  'Yes, they do for the time.'  JOHNSON.

'For the time!--If they care this minute, they forget it the next.

And as for the good worthy man; how do you know he is good and

worthy?  No good and worthy man will insist upon another man's

drinking wine.  As to the wine twenty years in the cellar,--of ten

men, three say this, merely because they must say something;--three

are telling a lie, when they say they have had the wine twenty

years;--three would rather save the wine;--one, perhaps, cares.  I

allow it is something to please one's company: and people are

always pleased with those who partake pleasure with them.  But

after a man has brought himself to relinquish the great personal

pleasure which arises from drinking wine, any other consideration

is a trifle.  To please others by drinking wine, is something only,

if there be nothing against it.  I should, however, be sorry to

offend worthy men:--





    "Curst be the verse, how well so e'er it flow,

     That tends to make one worthy man my foe."'





BOSWELL.  'Curst be the SPRING, the WATER.'  JOHNSON.  'But let us

consider what a sad thing it would be, if we were obliged to drink

or do any thing else that may happen to be agreeable to the company

where we are.'  LANGTON.  'By the same rule you must join with a

gang of cut-purses.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir: but yet we must do

justice to wine; we must allow it the power it possesses.  To make

a man pleased with himself, let me tell you, is doing a very great

thing;





    "Si patriae volumus, si Nobis vivere cari."'





I was at this time myself a water-drinker, upon trial, by Johnson's

recommendation.  JOHNSON.  'Boswell is a bolder combatant than Sir

Joshua: he argues for wine without the help of wine; but Sir Joshua

with it.'  SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.  'But to please one's company is a

strong motive.'  JOHNSON.  (who, from drinking only water, supposed

every body who drank wine to be elevated,) 'I won't argue any more

with you, Sir.  You are too far gone.'  SIR JOSHUA.  'I should have

thought so indeed, Sir, had I made such a speech as you have now

done.'  JOHNSON.  (drawing himself in, and, I really thought

blushing,) 'Nay, don't be angry.  I did not mean to offend you.'

SIR JOSHUA.  'At first the taste of wine was disagreeable to me;

but I brought myself to drink it, that I might be like other

people.  The pleasure of drinking wine is so connected with

pleasing your company, that altogether there is something of social

goodness in it.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, this is only saying the same

thing over again.'  SIR JOSHUA.  'No, this is new.'  JOHNSON.  'You

put it in new words, but it is an old thought.  This is one of the

disadvantages of wine.  It makes a man mistake words for thoughts.'

BOSWELL.  'I think it is a new thought; at least, it is in a new

ATTITUDE.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, it is only in a new coat; or an

old coat with a new facing.  (Then laughing heartily,) It is the

old dog in a new doublet.--An extraordinary instance however may

occur where a man's patron will do nothing for him, unless he will

drink: THERE may be a good reason for drinking.'



I mentioned a nobleman, who I believed was really uneasy if his

company would not drink hard.  JOHNSON.  'That is from having had

people about him whom he has been accustomed to command.'  BOSWELL.

'Supposing I should be tete-a-tete with him at table.'  JOHNSON.

'Sir, there is no more reason for your drinking with HIM, than his

being sober with YOU.'  BOSWELL.  'Why, that is true; for it would

do him less hurt to be sober, than it would do me to get drunk.'

JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir; and from what I have heard of him, one would

not wish to sacrifice himself to such a man.  If he must always

have somebody to drink with him, he should buy a slave, and then he

would be sure to have it.  They who submit to drink as another

pleases, make themselves his slaves.'  Boswell.  'But, Sir, you

will surely make allowance for the duty of hospitality.  A

gentleman who loves drinking, comes to visit me.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir,

a man knows whom he visits; he comes to the table of a sober man.'

BOSWELL.  'But, Sir, you and I should not have been so well

received in the Highlands and Hebrides, if I had not drunk with our

worthy friends.  Had I drunk water only as you did, they would not

have been so cordial.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir William Temple mentions that

in his travels through the Netherlands he had two or three

gentlemen with him; and when a bumper was necessary, he put it on

THEM.  Were I to travel again through the islands, I would have Sir

Joshua with me to take the bumpers.'  BOSWELL.  'But, Sir, let me

put a case.  Suppose Sir Joshua should take a jaunt into Scotland;

he does me the honour to pay me a visit at my house in the country;

I am overjoyed at seeing him; we are quite by ourselves, shall I

unsociably and churlishly let him sit drinking by himself?  No, no,

my dear Sir Joshua, you shall not be treated so, I WILL take a

bottle with you.'



On Wednesday, April 29, I dined with him at Mr. Allan Ramsay's,

where were Lord Binning, Dr. Robertson the historian, Sir Joshua

Reynolds, and the Honourable Mrs. Boscawen, widow of the Admiral,

and mother of the present Viscount Falmouth; of whom, if it be not

presumptuous in me to praise her, I would say, that her manners are

the most agreeable, and her conversation the best, of any lady with

whom I ever had the happiness to be acquainted.  Before Johnson

came we talked a good deal of him; Ramsay said he had always found

him a very polite man, and that he treated him with great respect,

which he did very sincerely.  I said I worshipped him.  ROBERTSON.

'But some of you spoil him; you should not worship him; you should

worship no man.'  BOSWELL.  'I cannot help worshipping him, he is

so much superiour to other men.'  ROBERTSON.  In criticism, and in

wit in conversation, he is no doubt very excellent; but in other

respects he is not above other men; he will believe any thing, and

will strenuously defend the most minute circumstance connected with

the Church of England.'  BOSWELL.  'Believe me, Doctor, you are

much mistaken as to this; for when you talk with him calmly in

private, he is very liberal in his way of thinking.'  ROBERTSON.

'He and I have been always very gracious; the first time I met him

was one evening at Strahan's, when he had just had an unlucky

altercation with Adam Smith, to whom he had been so rough, that

Strahan, after Smith was gone, had remonstrated with him, and told

him that I was coming soon, and that he was uneasy to think that he

might behave in the same manner to me.  "No, no, Sir, (said

Johnson,) I warrant you Robertson and I shall do very well."

Accordingly he was gentle and good-humoured, and courteous with me

the whole evening; and he has been so upon every occasion that we

have met since.  I have often said (laughing,) that I have been in

a great measure indebted to Smith for my good reception.'  BOSWELL.

'His power of reasoning is very strong, and he has a peculiar art

of drawing characters, which is as rare as good portrait painting.'

SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.  'He is undoubtedly admirable in this; but, in

order to mark the characters which he draws, he overcharges them,

and gives people more than they really have, whether of good or

bad.'



No sooner did he, of whom we had been thus talking so easily,

arrive, than we were all as quiet as a school upon the entrance of

the head-master; and were very soon set down to a table covered

with such variety of good things, as contributed not a little to

dispose him to be pleased.



RAMSAY.  'I am old enough to have been a contemporary of Pope.  His

poetry was highly admired in his life-time, more a great deal than

after his death.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, it has not been less admired

since his death; no authours ever had so much fame in their own

life-time as Pope and Voltaire; and Pope's poetry has been as much

admired since his death as during his life; it has only not been as

much talked of, but that is owing to its being now more distant,

and people having other writings to talk of.  Virgil is less talked

of than Pope, and Homer is less talked of than Virgil; but they are

not less admired.  We must read what the world reads at the moment.

It has been maintained that this superfoetation, this teeming of

the press in modern times, is prejudicial to good literature,

because it obliges us to read so much of what is of inferiour

value, in order to be in the fashion; so that better works are

neglected for want of time, because a man will have more

gratification of his vanity in conversation, from having read

modern books, than from having read the best works of antiquity.

But it must be considered, that we have now more knowledge

generally diffused; all our ladies read now, which is a great

extension.  Modern writers are the moons of literature; they shine

with reflected light, with light borrowed from the ancients.

Greece appears to me to be the fountain of knowledge; Rome of

elegance.'  RAMSAY.  'I suppose Homer's Iliad to be a collection of

pieces which had been written before his time.  I should like to

see a translation of it in poetical prose like the book of Ruth or

Job.'  ROBERTSON.  'Would you, Dr. Johnson, who are master of the

English language, but try your hand upon a part of it.'  JOHNSON.

'Sir, you could not read it without the pleasure of verse.



Dr. Robertson expatiated on the character of a certain nobleman;

that he was one of the strongest-minded men that ever lived; that

he would sit in company quite sluggish, while there was nothing to

call forth his intellectual vigour; but the moment that any

important subject was started, for instance, how this country is to

be defended against a French invasion, he would rouse himself, and

shew his extraordinary talents with the most powerful ability and

animation.  JOHNSON.  'Yet this man cut his own throat.  The true

strong and sound mind is the mind that can embrace equally great

things and small.  Now I am told the King of Prussia will say to a

servant, "Bring me a bottle of such a wine, which came in such a

year; it lies in such a corner of the cellars."  I would have a man

great in great things, and elegant in little things.'  He said to

me afterwards, when we were by ourselves, 'Robertson was in a

mighty romantick humour, he talked of one whom he did not know; but

I DOWNED him with the King of Prussia.'  'Yes, Sir, (said I,) you

threw a BOTTLE at his head.'



An ingenious gentleman was mentioned, concerning whom both

Robertson and Ramsay agreed that he had a constant firmness of

mind; for after a laborious day, and amidst a multiplicity of cares

and anxieties, he would sit down with his sisters and he quite

cheerful and good-humoured.  Such a disposition, it was observed,

was a happy gift of nature.  JOHNSON.  'I do not think so; a man

has from nature a certain portion of mind; the use he makes of it

depends upon his own free will.  That a man has always the same

firmness of mind I do not say; because every man feels his mind

less firm at one time than another; but I think a man's being in a

good or bad humour depends upon his will.'  I, however, could not

help thinking that a man's humour is often uncontroulable by his

will.



Next day, Thursday, April 30, I found him at home by himself.

JOHNSON.  'Well, Sir, Ramsay gave us a splendid dinner.  I love

Ramsay.  You will not find a man in whose conversation there is

more instruction, more information, and more elegance, than in

Ramsay's.'  BOSWELL.  'What I admire in Ramsay, is his continuing

to be so young.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, yes, Sir, it is to be admired.  I

value myself upon this, that there is nothing of the old man in my

conversation.  I am now sixty-eight, and I have no more of it than

at twenty-eight.'  BOSWELL.  'But, Sir, would not you wish to know

old age?  He who is never an old man, does not know the whole of

human life; for old age is one of the divisions of it.'  JOHNSON.

'Nay, Sir, what talk is this?'  BOSWELL.  'I mean, Sir, the

Sphinx's description of it;--morning, noon, and night.  I would

know night, as well as morning and noon.'  JOHNSON.  'What, Sir,

would you know what it is to feel the evils of old age?  Would you

have the gout?  Would you have decrepitude?'--Seeing him heated, I

would not argue any farther; but I was confident that I was in the

right.  I would, in due time, be a Nestor, an elder of the people;

and there SHOULD be some difference between the conversation of

twenty-eight and sixty-eight.  A grave picture should not be gay.

There is a serene, solemn, placid old age.  JOHNSON.  'Mrs.

Thrale's mother said of me what flattered me much.  A clergyman was

complaining of want of society in the country where he lived; and

said, "They talk of RUNTS;" (that is, young cows).  "Sir, (said

Mrs. Salusbury,) Mr. Johnson would learn to talk of runts:" meaning

that I was a man who would make the most of my situation, whatever

it was.'  He added, 'I think myself a very polite man.'



On Saturday, May 2, I dined with him at Sir Joshua Reynolds's,

where there was a very large company, and a great deal of

conversation; but owing to some circumstance which I cannot now

recollect, I have no record of any part of it, except that there

were several people there by no means of the Johnsonian school; so

that less attention was paid to him than usual, which put him out

of humour; and upon some imaginary offence from me, he attacked me

with such rudeness, that I was vexed and angry, because it gave

those persons an opportunity of enlarging upon his supposed

ferocity, and ill treatment of his best friends.  I was so much

hurt, and had my pride so much roused, that I kept away from him

for a week; and, perhaps, might have kept away much longer, nay,

gone to Scotland without seeing him again, had not we fortunately

met and been reconciled.  To such unhappy chances are human

friendships liable.



On Friday, May 8, I dined with him at Mr. Langton's.  I was

reserved and silent, which I suppose he perceived, and might

recollect the cause.  After dinner when Mr. Langton was called out

of the room, and we were by ourselves, he drew his chair near to

mine, and said, in a tone of conciliating courtesy, 'Well, how have

you done?'  Boswell.  'Sir, you have made me very uneasy by your

behaviour to me when we were last at Sir Joshua Reynolds's.  You

know, my dear Sir, no man has a greater respect and affection for

you, or would sooner go to the end of the world to serve you.  Now

to treat me so--.'  He insisted that I had interrupted him, which I

assured him was not the case; and proceeded--'But why treat me so

before people who neither love you nor me?'  JOHNSON.  'Well, I am

sorry for it.  I'll make it up to you twenty different ways, as you

please.'  BOSWELL.  'I said to-day to Sir Joshua, when he observed

that you TOSSED me sometimes--I don't care how often, or how high

he tosses me, when only friends are present, for then I fall upon

soft ground: but I do not like falling on stones, which is the case

when enemies are present.--I think this a pretty good image, Sir.'

JOHNSON.  'Sir, it is one of the happiest I have ever heard.'



The truth is, there was no venom in the wounds which he inflicted

at any time, unless they were irritated by some malignant infusion

by other hands.  We were instantly as cordial again as ever, and

joined in hearty laugh at some ludicrous but innocent peculiarities

of one of our friends.  BOSWELL.  'Do you think, Sir, it is always

culpable to laugh at a man to his face?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, that

depends upon the man and the thing.  If it is a slight man, and a

slight thing, you may; for you take nothing valuable from him.'



When Mr. Langton returned to us, the 'flow of talk' went on.  An

eminent authour being mentioned;--JOHNSON.  'He is not a pleasant

man.  His conversation is neither instructive nor brilliant.  He

does not talk as if impelled by any fulness of knowledge or

vivacity of imagination.  His conversation is like that of any

other sensible man.  He talks with no wish either to inform or to

hear, but only because he thinks it does not become ------ ------

to sit in a company and say nothing.'



Mr. Langton having repeated the anecdote of Addison having

distinguished between his powers in conversation and in writing, by

saying 'I have only nine-pence in my pocket; but I can draw for a

thousand pounds;'--JOHNSON.  'He had not that retort ready, Sir; he

had prepared it before-hand.'  LANGTON.  (turning to me,) 'A fine

surmise.  Set a thief to catch a thief.'



JOHNSON.  'I shall be at home to-morrow.'   BOSWELL.  'Then let us

dine by ourselves at the Mitre, to keep up the old custom, "the

custom of the manor," the custom of the mitre.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, so

it shall be.'



On Saturday, May 9, we fulfilled our purpose of dining by ourselves

at the Mitre, according to old custom.  There was, on these

occasions, a little circumstance of kind attention to Mrs.

Williams, which must not be omitted.  Before coming out, and

leaving her to dine alone, he gave her her choice of a chicken, a

sweetbread, or any other little nice thing, which was carefully

sent to her from the tavern, ready-drest.



On Tuesday, May 12, I waited on the Earl of Marchmont, to know if

his Lordship would favour Dr. Johnson with information concerning

Pope, whose Life he was about to write.  Johnson had not flattered

himself with the hopes of receiving any civility from this

nobleman; for he said to me, when I mentioned Lord Marchmont as one

who could tell him a great deal about Pope,--'Sir, he will tell ME

nothing.'  I had the honour of being known to his Lordship, and

applied to him of myself, without being commissioned by Johnson.

His Lordship behaved in the most polite and obliging manner,

promised to tell all he recollected about Pope, and was so very

courteous as to say, 'Tell Dr. Johnson I have a great respect for

him, and am ready to shew it in any way I can.  I am to be in the

city to-morrow, and will call at his house as I return.'  His

Lordship however asked, 'Will he write the Lives of the Poets

impartially?  He was the first that brought Whig and Tory into a

Dictionary.  And what do you think of his definition of Excise?  Do

you know the history of his aversion to the word transpire?'  Then

taking down the folio Dictionary, he shewed it with this censure on

its secondary sense: '"To escape from secrecy to notice; a sense

lately innovated from France, without necessity."  The truth was

Lord Bolingbroke, who left the Jacobites, first used it; therefore,

it was to be condemned.  He should have shewn what word would do

for it, if it was unnecessary.'  I afterwards put the question to

Johnson: 'Why, Sir, (said he,) GET ABROAD.'  BOSWELL.  'That, Sir,

is using two words.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, there is no end of this.  You

may as well insist to have a word for old age.'  BOSWELL.  'Well,

Sir, Senectus.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, to insist always that there

should be one word to express a thing in English, because there is

one in another language, is to change the language.'



I proposed to Lord Marchmont that he should revise Johnson's Life

of Pope: 'So (said his Lordship,) you would put me in a dangerous

situation.  You know he knocked down Osborne the bookseller.'



Elated with the success of my spontaneous exertion to procure

material and respectable aid to Johnson for his very favourite

work, The Lives of the Poets, I hastened down to Mr. Thrale's at

Streatham, where he now was, that I might insure his being at home

next day; and after dinner, when I thought he would receive the

good news in the best humour, I announced it eagerly: 'I have been

at work for you to-day, Sir.  I have been with Lord Marchmont.  He

bade me tell you he has a great respect for you, and will call on

you to-morrow at one o'clock, and communicate all he knows about

Pope.'--Here I paused, in full expectation that he would be pleased

with this intelligence, would praise my active merit, and would be

alert to embrace such an offer from a nobleman.  But whether I had

shewn an over-exultation, which provoked his spleen; or whether he

was seized with a suspicion that I had obtruded him on Lord

Marchmont, and humbled him too much; or whether there was any thing

more than an unlucky fit of ill-humour, I know not; but, to my

surprize, the result was,--JOHNSON.  'I shall not be in town to-

morrow.  I don't care to know about Pope.'  MRS. THRALE.

(surprized as I was, and a little angry,) 'I suppose, Sir, Mr.

Boswell thought, that as you are to write Pope's Life, you would

wish to know about him.'  JOHNSON.  'Wish! why yes.  If it rained

knowledge I'd hold out my hand; but I would not give myself the

trouble to go in quest of it.'  There was no arguing with him at

the moment.  Some time afterwards he said, 'Lord Marchmont will

call on me, and then I shall call on Lord Marchmont.'  Mr. Thrale

was uneasy at his unaccountable caprice; and told me, that if I did

not take care to bring about a meeting between Lord Marchmont and

him, it would never take place, which would be a great pity.  I

sent a card to his Lordship, to be left at Johnson's house,

acquainting him, that Dr. Johnson could not be in town next day,

but would do himself the honour of waiting on him at another time.

I give this account fairly, as a specimen of that unhappy temper

with which this great and good man had occasionally to struggle,

from something morbid in his constitution.  Let the most censorious

of my readers suppose himself to have a violent fit of the tooth-

ach, or to have received a severe stroke on the shin-bone, and when

in such a state to be asked a question; and if he has any candour,

he will not be surprized at the answers which Johnson sometimes

gave in moments of irritation, which, let me assure them, is

exquisitely painful.  But it must not be erroneously supposed that

he was, in the smallest degree, careless concerning any work which

he undertook, or that he was generally thus peevish.  It will be

seen, that in the following year he had a very agreeable interview

with Lord Marchmont, at his Lordship's house; and this very

afternoon he soon forgot any fretfulness, and fell into

conversation as usual.



JOHNSON.  'How foolish was it in Pope to give all his friendship to

Lords, who thought they honoured him by being with him; and to

choose such Lords as Burlington, and Cobham, and Bolingbroke!

Bathurst was negative, a pleasing man; and I have heard no ill of

Marchmont; and then always saying, "I do not value you for being a

Lord;" which was a sure proof that he did.  I never say, I do not

value Boswell more for being born to an estate, because I do not

care.'  BOSWELL.  'Nor for being a Scotchman?'  JOHNSON.  'Nay,

Sir, I do value you more for being a Scotchman.  You are a

Scotchman without the faults of a Scotchman.  You would not have

been so valuable as you are, had you not been a Scotchman.'



Amongst the numerous prints pasted on the walls of the dining-room

at Streatham, was Hogarth's 'Modern Midnight Conversation.'  I

asked him what he knew of Parson Ford, who makes a conspicuous

figure in the riotous group.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, he was my

acquaintance and relation, my mother's nephew.  He had purchased a

living in the country, but not simoniacally.  I never saw him but

in the country.  I have been told he was a man of great parts; very

profligate, but I never heard he was impious.'  BOSWELL.  'Was

there not a story of his ghost having appeared?'  JOHNSON.  'Sir,

it was believed.  A waiter at the Hummums, in which house Ford

died, had been absent for some time, and returned, not knowing that

Ford was dead.  Going down to the cellar, according to the story,

he met him; going down again he met him a second time.  When he

came up, he asked some of the people of the house what Ford could

be doing there.  They told him Ford was dead.  The waiter took a

fever, in which he lay for some time.  When he recovered, he said

he had a message to deliver to some women from Ford; but he was not

to tell what, or to whom.  He walked out; he was followed; but

somewhere about St. Paul's they lost him.  He came back, and said

he had delivered the message, and the women exclaimed, "Then we are

all undone!"  Dr. Pellet, who was not a credulous man, inquired

into the truth of this story, and he said, the evidence was

irresistible.  My wife went to the Hummums; (it is a place where

people get themselves cupped.)  I believe she went with intention

to hear about this story of Ford.  At first they were unwilling to

tell her; but, after they had talked to her, she came away

satisfied that it was true.  To be sure the man had a fever; and

this vision may have been the beginning of it.  But if the message

to the women, and their behaviour upon it, were true as related,

there was something supernatural.  That rests upon his word; and

there it remains.'



I staid all this day* with him at Streatham.  He talked a great

deal, in very good humour.





* Wednesday, May 13.--ED.





Looking at Messrs. Dilly's splendid edition of Lord Chesterfield's

miscellaneous works, he laughed, and said, 'Here now are two

speeches ascribed to him, both of which were written by me: and the

best of it is, they have found out that one is like Demosthenes,

and the other like Cicero.'



BOSWELL.  'Is not modesty natural?'  JOHNSON.  'I cannot say, Sir,

as we find no people quite in a state of nature; but I think the

more they are taught, the more modest they are.  The French are a

gross, ill-bred, untaught people; a lady there will spit on the

floor and rub it with her foot.  What I gained by being in France

was, learning to be better satisfied with my own country.  Time may

be employed to more advantage from nineteen to twenty-four almost

in any way than in travelling; when you set travelling against mere

negation, against doing nothing, it is better to be sure; but how

much more would a young man improve were he to study during those

years.  Indeed, if a young man is wild, and must run after women

and bad company, it is better this should be done abroad, as, on

his return, he can break off such connections, and begin at home a

new man, with a character to form, and acquaintances to make.  How

little does travelling supply to the conversation of any man who

has travelled; how little to Beauclerk!'  BOSWELL.  'What say you

to Lord ------?'  JOHNSON.  'I never but once heard him talk of

what he had seen, and that was of a large serpent in one of the

Pyramids of Egypt.'  BOSWELL.  'Well, I happened to hear him tell

the same thing, which made me mention him.'



I talked of a country life.  JOHNSON.  'Were I to live in the

country, I would not devote myself to the acquisition of

popularity; I would live in a much better way, much more happily; I

would have my time at my own command.'  BOSWELL.  'But, Sir, is it

not a sad thing to be at a distance from all our literary friends?'

JOHNSON.  'Sir, you will by and by have enough of this

conversation, which now delights you so much.'



As he was a zealous friend of subordination, he was at all times

watchful to repress the vulgar cant against the manners of the

great; 'High people, Sir, (said he,) are the best; take a hundred

ladies of quality, you'll find them better wives, better mothers,

more willing to sacrifice their own pleasure to their children than

a hundred other women.  Tradeswomen (I mean the wives of tradesmen)

in the city, who are worth from ten to fifteen thousand pounds, are

the worst creatures upon the earth, grossly ignorant, and thinking

viciousness fashionable.  Farmers, I think, are often worthless

fellows.  Few lords will cheat; and, if they do, they'll be ashamed

of it: farmers cheat and are not ashamed of it: they have all the

sensual vices too of the nobility, with cheating into the bargain.

There is as much fornication and adultery among farmers as amongst

noblemen.'  BOSWELL.  'The notion of the world, Sir, however is,

that the morals of women of quality are worse than those in lower

stations.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir, the licentiousness of one woman of

quality makes more noise than that of a number of women in lower

stations; then, Sir, you are to consider the malignity of women in

the city against women of quality, which will make them believe any

thing of them, such as that they call their coachmen to bed.  No,

Sir, so far as I have observed, the higher in rank, the richer

ladies are, they are the better instructed and the more virtuous.'



On Tuesday, May 19, I was to set out for Scotland in the evening.

He was engaged to dine with me at Mr. Dilly's, I waited upon him to

remind him of his appointment and attend him thither; he gave me

some salutary counsel, and recommended vigorous resolution against

any deviation from moral duty.  BOSWELL.  'But you would not have

me to bind myself by a solemn obligation?'  JOHNSON.  (much

agitated,) 'What! a vow--O, no, Sir, a vow is a horrible thing, it

is a snare for sin.  The man who cannot go to Heaven without a vow--

may go--'  Here, standing erect, in the middle of his library, and

rolling grand, his pause was truly a curious compound of the solemn

and the ludicrous; he half-whistled in his usual way, when

pleasant, and he paused, as if checked by religious awe.  Methought

he would have added--to Hell--but was restrained.  I humoured the

dilemma.  'What!  Sir, (said I,) In caelum jusseris ibit?' alluding

to his imitation of it,--





    'And bid him go to Hell, to Hell he goes.'





We had a quiet comfortable meeting at Mr. Dilly's; nobody there but

ourselves.  My illustrious friend and I parted with assurances of

affectionate regard.



Mr. Langton has been pleased, at my request, to favour me with some

particulars of Dr. Johnson's visit to Warley-camp, where this

gentleman was at the time stationed as a Captain in the

Lincolnshire militia.  I shall give them in his own words in a

letter to me.



'It was in the summer of the year 1778, that he complied with my

invitation to come down to the Camp at Warley, and he staid with me

about a week; the scene appeared, notwithstanding a great degree of

ill health that he seemed to labour under, to interest and amuse

him, as agreeing with the disposition that I believe you know he

constantly manifested towards enquiring into subjects of the

military kind.  He sate, with a patient degree of attention, to

observe the proceedings of a regimental court-martial, that

happened to be called, in the time of his stay with us; and one

night, as late as at eleven o'clock, he accompanied the Major of

the regiment in going what are styled the Rounds, where he might

observe the forms of visiting the guards, for the seeing that they

and their sentries are ready in their duty on their several posts.

He took occasion to converse at times on military topicks, one in

particular, that I see the mention of, in your Journal of a Tour to

the Hebrides, which lies open before me, as to gun-powder; which he

spoke of to the same effect, in part, that you relate.



'On one occasion, when the regiment were going through their

exercise, he went quite close to the men at one of the extremities

of it, and watched all their practices attentively; and, when he

came away, his remark was, "The men indeed do load their muskets

and fire with wonderful celerity."  He was likewise particular in

requiring to know what was the weight of the musquet balls in use,

and within what distance they might be expected to take effect when

fired off.



'In walking among the tents, and observing the difference between

those of the officers and private men, he said that the superiority

of accommodation of the better conditions of life, to that of the

inferiour ones, was never exhibited to him in so distinct a view.

The civilities paid to him in the camp were, from the gentlemen of

the Lincolnshire regiment, one of the officers of which

accommodated him with a tent in which he slept; and from General

Hall, who very courteously invited him to dine with him, where he

appeared to be very well pleased with his entertainment, and the

civilities he received on the part of the General; the attention

likewise, of the General's aide-de-camp, Captain Smith, seemed to

be very welcome to him, as appeared by their engaging in a great

deal of discourse together.'



We surely cannot but admire the benevolent exertions of this great

and good man, especially when we consider how grievously he was

afflicted with bad health, and how uncomfortable his home was made

by the perpetual jarring of those whom he charitably accommodated

under his roof.  He has sometimes suffered me to talk jocularly of

his group of females, and call them his Seraglio.  He thus mentions

them, together with honest Levett, in one of his letters to Mrs.

Thrale: 'Williams hates every body; Levett hates Desmoulins, and

does not love Williams; Desmoulins hates them both; Poll* loves

none of them.'**





* Miss Carmichael.



** A year later he wrote: At Bolt-court there is much malignity,

but of late little hostility.'--ED.





In 1779, Johnson gave the world a luminous proof that the vigour of

his mind in all its faculties, whether memory, judgement, or

imagination, was not in the least abated; for this year came out

the first four volumes of his Prefaces, biographical and critical,

to the most eminent of the English Poets, published by the

booksellers of London.  The remaining volumes came out in the year

1780.  The Poets were selected by the several booksellers who had

the honorary copy right, which is still preserved among them by

mutual compact, notwithstanding the decision of the House of Lords

against the perpetuity of Literary Property.  We have his own

authority, that by his recommendation the poems of Blackmore,

Watts, Pomfret, and Yalden, were added to the collection.



On the 22nd of January, I wrote to him on several topicks, and

mentioned that as he had been so good as to permit me to have the

proof sheets of his Lives of the Poets, I had written to his

servant, Francis, to take care of them for me.



On the 23rd of February I wrote to him again, complaining of his

silence, as I had heard he was ill, and had written to Mr. Thrale,

for information concerning him; and I announced my intention of

soon being again in London.





'TO JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.



'DEAR SIR,--Why should you take such delight to make a bustle, to

write to Mr. Thrale that I am negligent, and to Francis to do what

is so very unnecessary.  Thrale, you may be sure, cared not about

it; and I shall spare Francis the trouble, by ordering a set both

of the Lives and Poets to dear Mrs. Boswell,* in acknowledgement of

her marmalade.  Persuade her to accept them, and accept them

kindly.  If I thought she would receive them scornfully, I would

send them to Miss Boswell, who, I hope, has yet none of her mamma's

ill-will to me. . . .



'Mrs. Thrale waits in the coach.  I am, dear Sir, &c.,



'March 13, 1779.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





* He sent a set elegantly bound and gilt, which was received as a

very handsome present.--BOSWELL





This letter crossed me on the road to London, where I arrived on

Monday, March 15, and next morning at a late hour, found Dr.

Johnson sitting over his tea, attended by Mrs. Desmoulins, Mr.

Levett, and a clergyman, who had come to submit some poetical

pieces to his revision.  It is wonderful what a number and variety

of writers, some of them even unknown to him, prevailed on his

good-nature to look over their works, and suggest corrections and

improvements.  My arrival interrupted for a little while the

important business of this true representative of Bayes; upon its

being resumed, I found that the subject under immediate

consideration was a tanslation, yet in manuscript, of the Carmen

Seculare of Horace, which had this year been set to musick, and

performed as a publick entertainment in London, for the joint

benefit of monsieur Philidor and Signor Baretti.  When Johnson had

done reading, the authour asked him bluntly, 'If upon the whole it

was a good translation?'  Johnson, whose regard for truth was

uncommonly strict, seemed to be puzzled for a moment, what answer

to make; as he certainly could not honestly commend the

performance: with exquisite address he evaded the question thus,

'Sir, I do not say that it may not be made a very good

translation.'  Here nothing whatever in favour of the performance

was affirmed, and yet the writer was not shocked.  A printed Ode to

the Warlike Genius of Britain, came next in review; the bard was a

lank bony figure, with short black hair; he was writhing himself in

agitation, while Johnson read, and shewing his teeth in a grin of

earnestness, exclaimed in broken sentences, and in a keen sharp

tone, 'Is that poetry, Sir?--Is it Pindar?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir,

there is here a great deal of what is called poetry.'  Then,

turning to me, the poet cried, 'My muse has not been long upon the

town, and (pointing to the Ode) it trembles under the hand of the

great critick.'  Johnson, in a tone of displeasure, asked him, 'Why

do you praise Anson?'  I did not trouble him by asking his reason

for this question.  He proceeded, 'Here is an errour, Sir; you have

made Genius feminine.'  'Palpable, Sir; (cried the enthusiast,) I

know it.  But (in a lower tone,) it was to pay a compliment to the

Duchess of Devonshire, with which her Grace was pleased.  She is

walking across Coxheath, in the military uniform, and I suppose her

to be the Genius of Britain.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, you are giving a

reason for it; but that will not make it right.  You may have a

reason why two and two should make five; but they will still make

but four.'



Although I was several times with him in the course of the

following days, such it seems were my occupations, or such my

negligence, that I have preserved no memorial of his conversation

till Friday, March 26, when I visited him.  He said he expected to

be attacked on account of his Lives of the Poets.  'However (said

he,) I would rather be attacked than unnoticed.  For the worst

thing you can do to an authour is to be silent as to his works.  An

assault upon a town is a bad thing; but starving it is still worse;

an assault may be unsuccessful; you may have more men killed than

you kill; but if you starve the town, you are sure of victory.'



Talking of a friend of ours associating with persons of very

discordant principles and characters; I said he was a very

universal man, quite a man of the world.  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir; but

one may be so much a man of the world as to be nothing in the

world.  I remember a passage in Goldsmith's Vicar of Wakefield,

which he was afterwards fool enough to expunge: "I do not love a

man who is zealous for nothing."'  BOSWELL.  'That was a fine

passage.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir: there was another fine passage too,

which be struck out: "When I was a young man, being anxious to

distinguish myself, I was perpetually starting new propositions.

But I soon gave this over; for, I found that generally what was new

was false."'  I said I did not like to sit with people of whom I

had not a good opinion.  JOHNSON.  'But you must not indulge your

delicacy too much; or you will be a tete-a-tete man all your life.'



During my stay in London this spring, I find I was unaccountably

negligent in preserving Johnson's sayings, more so than at any time

when I was happy enough to have an opportunity of hearing his

wisdom and wit.  There is no help for it now.  I must content

myself with presenting such scraps as I have.  But I am

nevertheless ashamed and vexed to think how much has been lost.  It

is not that there was a bad crop this year; but that I was not

sufficiently careful in gathering it in.  I, therefore, in some

instances can only exhibit a few detached fragments.



Talking of the wonderful concealment of the authour of the

celebrated letters signed Junius; he said, 'I should have believed

Burke to be Junius, because I know no man but Burke who is capable

of writing these letters; but Burke spontaneously denied it to me.

The case would have been different had I asked him if he was the

authour; a man so questioned, as to an anonymous publication, may

think he has a right to deny it.'



On Wednesday, March 31, when I visited him, and confessed an excess

of which I had very seldom been guilty; that I had spent a whole

night in playing at cards, and that I could not look back on it

with satisfaction; instead of a harsh animadversion, he mildly

said, 'Alas, Sir, on how few things can we look back with

satisfaction.'



On Friday, April 2, being Good-Friday, I visited him in the morning

as usual; and finding that we insensibly fell into a train of

ridicule upon the foibles of one of our friends, a very worthy man,

I, by way of a check, quoted some good admonition from The

Government of the Tongue, that very pious book.  It happened also

remarkably enough, that the subject of the sermon preached to us

to-day by Dr. Burrows, the rector of St. Clement Danes, was the

certainty that at the last day we must give an account of 'the

deeds done in the body;' and, amongst various acts of culpability

he mentioned evil-speaking.  As we were moving slowly along in the

crowd from church, Johnson jogged my elbow, and said, 'Did you

attend to the sermon?'  'Yes, Sir, (said I,) it was very applicable

to US.'  He, however, stood upon the defensive.  'Why, Sir, the

sense of ridicule is given us, and may be lawfully used.  The

authour of The Government of the Tongue would have us treat all men

alike.'



In the interval between morning and evening service, he endeavoured

to employ himself earnestly in devotional exercises; and as he has

mentioned in his Prayers and Meditations, gave me Les Pensees de

Paschal, that I might not interrupt him.  I preserve the book with

reverence.  His presenting it to me is marked upon it with his own

hand, and I have found in it a truly divine unction.  We went to

church again in the afternoon.



On Wednesday, April 7, I dined with him at Sir Joshua Reynolds's.

I have not marked what company was there.  Johnson harangued upon

the qualities of different liquors; and spoke with great contempt

of claret, as so weak, that a man would be drowned by it before it

made him drunk.'  He was persuaded to drink one glass of it, that

he might judge, not from recollection, which might be dim, but from

immediate sensation.  He shook his head, and said, 'Poor stuff!

No, Sir, claret is the liquor for boys; port for men; but he who

aspires to be a hero (smiling), must drink brandy.  In the first

place, the flavour of brandy is most grateful to the palate; and

then brandy will do soonest for a man what drinking CAN do for him.

There are, indeed, few who are able to drink brandy.  That is a

power rather to be wished for than attained.  And yet, (proceeded

he,) as in all pleasure hope is a considerable part, I know not but

fruition comes too quick by brandy.  Florence wine I think the

worst; it is wine only to the eye; it is wine neither while you are

drinking it, nor after you have drunk it; it neither pleases the

taste, nor exhilarates the spirits.'  I reminded him how heartily

he and I used to drink wine together, when we were first

acquainted; and how I used to have a head-ache after sitting up

with him.  He did not like to have this recalled, or, perhaps,

thinking that I boasted improperly, resolved to have a witty stroke

at me: 'Nay, Sir, it was not the WINE that made your head ache, but

the SENSE that I put into it.'  BOSWELL.  'What, Sir! will sense

make the head ache?'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir, (with a smile,) when it

is not used to it.'--No man who has a true relish of pleasantry

could be offended at this; especially if Johnson in a long intimacy

had given him repeated proofs of his regard and good estimation.  I

used to say, that as he had given me a thousand pounds in praise,

he had a good right now and then to take a guinea from me.



On Thursday, April 8, I dined with him at Mr. Allan Ramsay's, with

Lord Graham and some other company.  We talked of Shakspeare's

witches.  JOHNSON.  'They are beings of his own creation; they are

a compound of malignity and meanness, without any abilities; and

are quite different from the Italian magician.  King James says in

his Daemonology, 'Magicians command the devils: witches are their

servants.  The Italian magicians are elegant beings.'  RAMSAY.

'Opera witches, not Drury-lane witches.'  Johnson observed, that

abilities might be employed in a narrow sphere, as in getting

money, which he said he believed no man could do, without vigorous

parts, though concentrated to a point.  RAMSAY.  'Yes, like a

strong horse in a mill; he pulls better.'



Lord Graham, while he praised the beauty of Lochlomond, on the

banks of which is his family seat, complained of the climate, and

said he could not bear it.  JOHNSON.  'Nay, my Lord, don't talk so:

you may bear it well enough.  Your ancestors have borne it more

years than I can tell.'  This was a handsome compliment to the

antiquity of the House of Montrose.  His Lordship told me

afterwards, that he had only affected to complain of the climate;

lest, if he had spoken as favourably of his country as he really

thought, Dr. Johnson might have attacked it.  Johnson was very

courteous to Lady Margaret Macdonald.  'Madam, (said he,) when I

was in the Isle of Sky, I heard of the people running to take the

stones off the road, lest Lady Margaret's horse should stumble.'



Lord Graham commended Dr. Drummond at Naples, as a man of

extraordinary talents; and added, that he had a great love of

liberty.  JOHNSON.  'He is YOUNG, my Lord; (looking to his Lordship

with an arch smile,) all BOYS love liberty, till experience

convinces them they are not so fit to govern themselves as they

imagined.  We are all agreed as to our own liberty; we would have

as much of it as we can get; but we are not agreed as to the

liberty of others: for in proportion as we take, others must lose.

I believe we hardly wish that the mob should have liberty to govern

us.  When that was the case some time ago, no man was at liberty

not to have candles in his windows.'  RAMSAY.  'The result is, that

order is better than confusion.'  JOHNSON.  'The result is, that

order cannot be had but by subordination.'



On Friday, April 16, I had been present at the trial of the

unfortunate Mr. Hackman, who, in a fit of frantick jealous love,

had shot Miss Ray, the favourite of a nobleman.  Johnson, in whose

company I dined to-day with some other friends, was much interested

by my account of what passed, and particularly with his prayer for

the mercy of heaven.  He said, in a solemn fervid tone, 'I hope he

SHALL find mercy.'



This day a violent altercation arose between Johnson and Beauclerk,

which having made much noise at the time, I think it proper, in

order to prevent any future misrepresentation, to give a minute

account of it.



In talking of Hackman, Johnson argued, as Judge Blackstone had

done, that his being furnished with two pistols was a proof that he

meant to shoot two persons.  Mr. Beauclerk said, 'No; for that

every wise man who intended to shoot himself, took two pistols,

that he might be sure of doing it at once.  Lord ------ ------'

cook shot himself with one pistol, and lived ten days in great

agony.  Mr. ------, who loved buttered muffins, but durst not eat

them because they disagreed with his stomach, resolved to shoot

himself; and then he eat three buttered muffins for breakfast,

before shooting himself, knowing that he should not be troubled

with indigestion: HE had two charged pistols; one was found lying

charged upon the table by him, after he had shot himself with the

other.'  'Well, (said Johnson, with an air of triumph,) you see

here one pistol was sufficient.'  Beauclerk replied smartly,

'Because it happened to kill him.'  And either then or a very

little afterwards, being piqued at Johnson's triumphant remark,

added, 'This is what you don't know, and I do.'  There was then a

cessation of the dispute; and some minutes intervened, during

which, dinner and the glass went on cheerfully; when Johnson

suddenly and abruptly exclaimed, 'Mr. Beauclerk, how came you to

talk so petulantly to me, as "This is what you don't know, but what

I know"?  One thing I know, which YOU don't seem to know, that you

are very uncivil.'  BEAUCLERK.  'Because YOU began by being

uncivil, (which you always are.)'  The words in parenthesis were, I

believe, not heard by Dr. Johnson.  Here again there was a

cessation of arms.  Johnson told me, that the reason why he waited

at first some time without taking any notice of what Mr. Beauclerk

said, was because he was thinking whether he should resent it.  But

when he considered that there were present a young Lord and an

eminent traveller, two men of the world with whom he had never

dined before, he was apprehensive that they might think they had a

right to take such liberties with him as Beauclerk did, and

therefore resolved he would not let it pass; adding, that 'he would

not appear a coward.'  A little while after this, the conversation

turned on the violence of Hackman's temper.  Johnson then said, 'It

was his business to COMMAND his temper, as my friend, Mr.

Beauclerk, should have done some time ago.'  BEAUCLERK.  'I should

learn of YOU, Sir.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, you have given ME

opportunities enough of learning, when I have been in YOUR company.

No man loves to be treated with contempt.'  BEAUCLERK.  (with a

polite inclination towards Johnson,) 'Sir, you have known me twenty

years, and however I may have treated others, you may be sure I

could never treat you with contempt.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, you have

said more than was necessary.'  Thus it ended; and Beauclerk's

coach not having come for him till very late, Dr. Johnson and

another gentleman sat with him a long time after the rest of the

company were gone; and he and I dined at Beauclerk's on the

Saturday se'nnight following.



After this tempest had subsided, I recollect the following

particulars of his conversation:--



'I am always for getting a boy forward in his learning; for that is

a sure good.  I would let him at first read ANY English book which

happens to engage his attention; because you have done a great deal

when you have brought him to have entertainment from a book.  He'll

get better books afterwards.'



'To be contradicted, in order to force you to talk, is mighty

unpleasing.  You SHINE, indeed; but it is by being GROUND.'



On Saturday, April 24, I dined with him at Mr. Beauclerk's, with

Sir Joshua Reynolds, Mr. Jones, (afterwards Sir William,) Mr.

Langton, Mr. Steevens, Mr. Paradise, and Dr. Higgins.  I mentioned

that Mr. Wilkes had attacked Garrick to me, as a man who had no

friend.  'I believe he is right, Sir.  [Greek text omitted]--He had

friends, but no friend.  Garrick was so diffused, he had no man to

whom he wished to unbosom himself.  He found people always ready to

applaud him, and that always for the same thing: so he saw life

with great uniformity.'  I took upon me, for once, to fight with

Goliath's weapons, and play the sophist.--Garrick did not need a

friend, as he got from every body all he wanted.  What is a friend?

One who supports you and comforts you, while others do not.

Friendship, you know, Sir, is the cordial drop, "to make the

nauseous draught of life go down:" but if the draught be not

nauseous, if it be all sweet, there is no occasion for that drop.'

JOHNSON.  'Many men would not be content to live so.  I hope I

should not.  They would wish to have an intimate friend, with whom

they might compare minds, and cherish private virtues.  One of the

company mentioned Lord Chesterfield, as a man who had no friend.

JOHNSON.  'There were more materials to make friendship in Garrick,

had he not been so diffused.'  BOSWELL.  'Garrick was pure gold,

but beat out to thin leaf.  Lord Chesterfield was tinsel.'

JOHNSON.  'Garrick was a very good man, the cheerfullest man of his

age; a decent liver in a profession which is supposed to give

indulgence to licentiousness; and a man who gave away, freely,

money acquired by himself.  He began the world with a great hunger

for money; the son of a half-pay officer, bred in a family, whose

study was to make four-pence do as much as others made four-pence

halfpenny do.  But, when he had got money, he was very liberal.'  I

presumed to animadvert on his eulogy on Garrick, in his Lives of

the Poets.  'You say, Sir, his death eclipsed the gaiety of

nations.'  JOHNSON.  'I could not have said more nor less.  It is

the truth; ECLIPSED, not EXTINGUISHED; and his death DID eclipse;

it was like a storm.'  BOSWELL.  'But why nations?  Did his gaiety

extend farther than his own nation?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, some

exaggeration must be allowed.  Besides, nations may be said--if we

allow the Scotch to be a nation, and to have gaiety,--which they

have not.  YOU are an exception, though.  Come, gentlemen, let us

candidly admit that there is one Scotchman who is cheerful.'

BEAUCLERK.  'But he is a very unnatural Scotchman.'  I, however,

continued to think the compliment to Garrick hyperbolically untrue.

His acting had ceased some time before his death; at any rate he

had acted in Ireland but a short time, at an early period of his

life, and never in Scotland.  I objected also to what appears an

anticlimax of praise, when contrasted with the preceding

panegyrick,--'and diminished the public stock of harmless

pleasure!'--'Is not HARMLESS PLEASURE very tame?'  JOHNSON.  'Nay,

Sir, harmless pleasure is the highest praise.  Pleasure is a word

of dubious import; pleasure is in general dangerous, and pernicious

to virtue; to be able therefore to furnish pleasure that is

harmless, pleasure pure and unalloyed, is as great a power as man

can possess.'  This was, perhaps, as ingenious a defence as could

be made; still, however, I was not satisfied.



Talking of celebrated and successful irregular practisers in

physick; he said, 'Taylor was the most ignorant man I ever knew;

but sprightly.  Ward the dullest.  Taylor challenged me once to

talk Latin with him; (laughing).  I quoted some of Horace, which he

took to be a part of my own speech.  He said a few words well

enough.'  BEAUCLERK.  'I remember, Sir, you said that Taylor was an

instance how far impudence could carry ignorance.'  Mr. Beauclerk

was very entertaining this day, and told us a number of short

stories in a lively elegant manner, and with that air of THE WORLD

which has I know not what impressive effect, as if there were

something more than is expressed, or than perhaps we could

perfectly understand.  As Johnson and I accompanied Sir Joshua

Reynolds in his coach, Johnson said, 'There is in Beauclerk a

predominance over his company, that one does not like.  But he is a

man who has lived so much in the world, that he has a short story

on every occasion; he is always ready to talk, and is never

exhausted.'



Soon after this time a little incident occurred, which I will not

suppress, because I am desirous that my work should be, as much as

is consistent with the strictest truth, an antidote to the false

and injurious notions of his character, which have been given by

others, and therefore I infuse every drop of genuine sweetness into

my biographical cup.





'TO DR. JOHNSON.



'MY DEAR SIR,--I am in great pain with an inflamed foot, and

obliged to keep my bed, so am prevented from having the pleasure to

dine at Mr. Ramsay's to-day, which is very hard; and my spirits are

sadly sunk.  Will you be so friendly as to come and sit an hour

with me in the evening.  I am ever your most faithful, and

affectionate humble servant,



'South Audley-street,

Monday, April 26.'



'JAMES BOSWELL.'





'TO MR. BOSWELL.



'Mr. Johnson laments the absence of Mr. Boswell, and will come to

him.--Harley-street.'





He came to me in the evening, and brought Sir Joshua Reynolds.  I

need scarcely say, that their conversation, while they sate by my

bedside, was the most pleasing opiate to pain that could have been

administered.



Johnson being now better disposed to obtain information concerning

Pope than he was last year, sent by me to my Lord Marchmont a

present of those volumes of his Lives of the Poets which were at

this time published, with a request to have permission to wait on

him; and his Lordship, who had called on him twice, obligingly

appointed Saturday, the first of May, for receiving us.



On that morning Johnson came to me from Streatham, and after

drinking chocolate at General Paoli's, in South-Audley-street, we

proceeded to Lord Marchmont's in Curzon-street.  His Lordship met

us at the door of his library, and with great politeness said to

Johnson, 'I am not going to make an encomium upon MYSELF, by

telling you the high respect I have for YOU, Sir.'  Johnson was

exceedingly courteous; and the interview, which lasted about two

hours, during which the Earl communicated his anecdotes of Pope,

was as agreeable as I could have wished.  When we came out, I said

to Johnson, that considering his Lordship's civility, I should have

been vexed if he had again failed to come.  'Sir, (said he,) I

would rather have given twenty pounds than not have come.'  I

accompanied him to Streatham, where we dined, and returned to town

in the evening.



He had, before I left London, resumed the conversation concerning

the appearance of a ghost at Newcastle upon Tyne, which Mr. John

Wesley believed, but to which Johnson did not give credit.  I was,

however, desirous to examine the question closely, and at the same

time wished to be made acquainted with Mr. John Wesley; for though

I differed from him in some points, I admired his various talents,

and loved his pious zeal.  At my request, therefore, Dr. Johnson

gave me a letter of introduction to him.





'TO THE REVEREND MR. JOHN WESLEY.



'SIR,--Mr. Boswell, a gentleman who has been long known to me, is

desirous of being known to you, and has asked this recommendation,

which I give him with great willingness, because I think it very

much to be wished that worthy and religious men should be

acquainted with each other.  I am, Sir, your most humble servant,



'May 3, 1779.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





Mr. Wesley being in the course of his ministry at Edinburgh, I

presented this letter to him, and was very politely received.  I

begged to have it returned to me, which was accordingly done.  His

state of the evidence as to the ghost did not satisfy me.



My readers will not be displeased at being told every slight

circumstance of the manner in which Dr. Johnson contrived to amuse

his solitary hours.  He sometimes employed himself in chymistry,

sometimes in watering and pruning a vine, sometimes in small

experiments, at which those who may smile, should recollect that

there are moments which admit of being soothed only by trifles.*





* In one of his manuscript Diaries, there is the following entry,

which marks his curious minute attention: 'July 26, 1768.  I shaved

my nail by accident in whetting the knife, about an eighth of an

inch from the bottom, and about a fourth from the top.  This I

measure that I may know the growth of nails; the whole is about

five eighths of an inch.'



Another of the same kind appears, 'Aug. 7, 1779, Partem brachii

dextri carpo proximum et cutem pectoris circa mamillam dextram

rasi, ut notum fieret quanto temporis pili renovarentur.'



And, 'Aug. 15, 1773.  I cut from the vine 41 leaves, which weighed

five oz. and a half, and eight scruples:--I lay them upon my

bookcase, to see what weight they will lose by drying.'--BOSWELL.





My friend Colonel James Stuart, second son of the Earl of Bute, who

had distinguished himself as a good officer of the Bedfordshire

militia, had taken a publick-spirited resolution to serve his

country in its difficulties, by raising a regular regiment, and

taking the command of it himself.  This, in the heir of the immense

property of Wortley, was highly honourable.  Having been in

Scotland recruiting, he obligingly asked me to accompany him to

Leeds, then the head-quarters of his corps; from thence to London

for a short time, and afterwards to other places to which the

regiment might be ordered.  Such an offer, at a time of the year

when I had full leisure, was very pleasing; especially as I was to

accompany a man of sterling good sense, information, discernment,

and conviviality; and was to have a second crop in one year of

London and Johnson.  Of this I informed my illustrious friend, in

characteristical warm terms, in a letter dated the 30th of

September, from Leeds.



On Monday, October 4, I called at his house before he was up.  He

sent for me to his bedside, and expressed his satisfaction at this

incidental meeting, with as much vivacity as if he had been in the

gaiety of youth.  He called briskly, 'Frank, go and get coffee, and

let us breakfast IN SPLENDOUR.'



On Sunday, October 10, we dined together at Mr. Strahan's.  The

conversation having turned on the prevailing practice of going to

the East-Indies in quest of wealth;--JOHNSON.  'A man had better

have ten thousand pounds at the end of ten years passed in England,

than twenty thousand pounds at the end of ten years passed in

India, because you must compute what you GIVE for money; and a man

who has lived ten years in India, has given up ten years of social

comfort and all those advantages which arise from living in

England.  The ingenious Mr. Brown, distinguished by the name of

Capability Brown, told me, that he was once at the seat of Lord

Clive, who had returned from India with great wealth; and that he

shewed him at the door of his bed-chamber a large chest, which he

said he had once had full of gold; upon which Brown observed, "I am

glad you can bear it so near your bed-chamber."'



We talked of the state of the poor in London.--JOHNSON.  'Saunders

Welch, the Justice, who was once High-Constable of Holborn, and had

the best opportunities of knowing the state of the poor, told me,

that I under-rated the number, when I computed that twenty a week,

that is, above a thousand a year, died of hunger; not absolutely of

immediate hunger; but of the wasting and other diseases which are

the consequences of hunger.  This happens only in so large a place

as London, where people are not known.  What we are told about the

great sums got by begging is not true: the trade is overstocked.

And, you may depend upon it, there are many who cannot get work.  A

particular kind of manufacture fails: those who have been used to

work at it, can, for some time, work at nothing else.  You meet a

man begging; you charge him with idleness: he says, "I am willing

to labour.  Will you give me work?"--"I cannot."--"Why, then you

have no right to charge me with idleness."'  We left Mr. Strahan's

at seven, as Johnson had said he intended to go to evening prayers.

As we walked along, he complained of a little gout in his toe, and

said, 'I shan't go to prayers to-night; I shall go to-morrow:

Whenever I miss church on a Sunday, I resolve to go another day.

But I do not always do it.'  This was a fair exhibition of that

vibration between pious resolutions and indolence, which many of us

have too often experienced.



I went home with him, and we had a long quiet conversation.



BOSWELL.  'Why, Sir, do people play this trick which I observe now,

when I look at your grate, putting the shovel against it to make

the fire burn?'  JOHNSON.  'They play the trick, but it does not

make the fire burn.  THERE is a better; (setting the poker

perpendicularly up at right angles with the grate.)  In days of

superstition they thought, as it made a cross with the bars, it

would drive away the witch.'



BOSWELL.  'By associating with you, Sir, I am always getting an

accession of wisdom.  But perhaps a man, after knowing his own

character--the limited strength of his own mind, should not be

desirous of having too much wisdom, considering, quid valeant

humeri, how little he can carry.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, be as wise as

you can; let a man be aliis laetus, sapiens sibi:





    "Though pleas'd to see the dolphins play,

     I mind my compass and my way."





You may be wise in your study in the morning, and gay in company at

a tavern in the evening.  Every man is to take care of his own

wisdom and his own virtue, without minding too much what others

think.'



He said, 'Dodsley first mentioned to me the scheme of an English

Dictionary; but I had long thought of it.'  BOSWELL.  'You did not

know what you were undertaking.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir, I knew very

well what I was undertaking,--and very well how to do it,--and have

done it very well.'  BOSWELL.  'An excellent climax! and it HAS

availed you.  In your Preface you say, "What would it avail me in

this gloom of solitude?"  You have been agreeably mistaken.'



In his Life of Milton he observes, 'I cannot but remark a kind of

respect, perhaps unconsciously, paid to this great man by his

biographers: every house in which he resided is historically

mentioned, as if it were an injury to neglect naming any place that

he honoured by his presence.'  I had, before I read this

observation, been desirous of shewing that respect to Johnson, by

various inquiries.  Finding him this evening in a very good humour,

I prevailed on him to give me an exact list of his places of

residence, since he entered the metropolis as an authour, which I

subjoin in a note.*





* 1.  Exeter-street, off Catherine-street, Strand.  2.  Greenwich.

3.  Woodstock-street, near Hanover-square.  4.  Castle-street,

Cavendish-square, No. 6.  5.  Strand.  6.  Boswell-Court.  7.

Strand, again.  8.  Bow-street.  9.  Holborn.  10.  Fetter-lane.

11.  Holborn, again.  12.  Gough-square.  13.  Staple Inn.  14.

Gray's Inn.  15.  Inner Temple-lane, No. 1.  16.  Johnson's-court,

No. 7.  17.  Bolt-court.  No. 8.--BOSWELL.





On Tuesday, October 12, I dined with him at Mr. Ramsay's, with Lord

Newhaven, and some other company, none of whom I recollect, but a

beautiful Miss Graham, a relation of his Lordship's, who asked Dr.

Johnson to hob or nob with her.  He was flattered by such pleasing

attention, and politely told her, he never drank wine; but if she

would drink a glass of water, he was much at her service.  She

accepted.  'Oho, Sir! (said Lord Newhaven,) you are caught.'

JOHNSON.  'Nay, I do not see HOW I am CAUGHT; but if I am caught, I

don't want to get free again.  If I am caught, I hope to be kept.'

Then when the two glasses of water were brought, smiling placidly

to the young lady, he said, 'Madam, let us RECIPROCATE.'



Lord Newhaven and Johnson carried on an argument for some time,

concerning the Middlesex election.  Johnson said, 'Parliament may

be considered as bound by law as a man is bound where there is

nobody to tie the knot.  As it is clear that the House of Commons

may expel and expel again and again, why not allow of the power to

incapacitate for that parliament, rather than have a perpetual

contest kept up between parliament and the people.'  Lord Newhaven

took the opposite side; but respectfully said, 'I speak with great

deference to you, Dr. Johnson; I speak to be instructed.'  This had

its full effect on my friend.  He bowed his head almost as low as

the table, to a complimenting nobleman; and called out, 'My Lord,

my Lord, I do not desire all this ceremony; let us tell our minds

to one another quietly.'  After the debate was over, he said, 'I

have got lights on the subject to-day, which I had not before.'

This was a great deal from him, especially as he had written a

pamphlet upon it.



Of his fellow-collegian, the celebrated Mr. George Whitefield, he

said, 'Whitefield never drew as much attention as a mountebank

does; he did not draw attention by doing better than others, but by

doing what was strange.  Were Astley to preach a sermon standing

upon his head on a horse's back, he would collect a multitude to

hear him; but no wise man would say he had made a better sermon for

that.  I never treated Whitefield's ministry with contempt; I

believe he did good.  He had devoted himself to the lower classes

of mankind, and among them he was of use.  But when familiarity and

noise claim the praise due to knowledge, art, and elegance, we must

beat down such pretensions.'
