





(Part Two)



A few days afterwards I called on Davies, and asked him if he

thought I might take the liberty of waiting on Mr. Johnson at his

Chambers in the Temple.  He said I certainly might, and that Mr.

Johnson would take it as a compliment.  So upon Tuesday the 24th of

May, after having been enlivened by the witty sallies of Messieurs

Thornton, Wilkes, Churchill and Lloyd, with whom I had passed the

morning, I boldly repaired to Johnson.  His Chambers were on the

first floor of No. 1, Inner-Temple-lane, and I entered them with an

impression given me by the Reverend Dr. Blair, of Edinburgh, who

had been introduced to him not long before, and described his

having 'found the Giant in his den;' an expression, which, when I

came to be pretty well acquainted with Johnson, I repeated to him,

and he was diverted at this picturesque account of himself.  Dr.

Blair had been presented to him by Dr. James Fordyce.  At this time

the controversy concerning the pieces published by Mr. James

Macpherson, as translations of Ossian, was at its height.  Johnson

had all along denied their authenticity; and, what was still more

provoking to their admirers, maintained that they had no merit.

The subject having been introduced by Dr. Fordyce, Dr. Blair,

relying on the internal evidence of their antiquity, asked Dr.

Johnson whether he thought any man of a modern age could have

written such poems?  Johnson replied, 'Yes, Sir, many men, many

women, and many children.'  Johnson, at this time, did not know

that Dr. Blair had just published a Dissertation, not only

defending their authenticity, but seriously ranking them with the

poems of Homer and Virgil; and when he was afterwards informed of

this circumstance, he expressed some displeasure at Dr. Fordyce's

having suggested the topick, and said, 'I am not sorry that they

got thus much for their pains.  Sir, it was like leading one to

talk of a book when the authour is concealed behind the door.'



He received me very courteously; but, it must be confessed, that

his apartment, and furniture, and morning dress, were sufficiently

uncouth.  His brown suit of cloaths looked very rusty; he had on a

little old shrivelled unpowdered wig, which was too small for his

head; his shirt-neck and knees of his breeches were loose; his

black worsted stockings ill drawn up; and he had a pair of

unbuckled shoes by way of slippers.  But all these slovenly

particularities were forgotten the moment that he began to talk.

Some gentlemen, whom I do not recollect, were sitting with him; and

when they went away, I also rose; but he said to me, 'Nay, don't

go.'  'Sir, (said I,) I am afraid that I intrude upon you.  It is

benevolent to allow me to sit and hear you.'  He seemed pleased

with this compliment, which I sincerely paid him, and answered,

'Sir, I am obliged to any man who visits me.'  I have preserved the

following short minute of what passed this day:--



'Madness frequently discovers itself merely by unnecessary

deviation from the usual modes of the world.  My poor friend Smart

shewed the disturbance of his mind, by falling upon his knees, and

saying his prayers in the street, or in any other unusual place.

Now although, rationally speaking, it is greater madness not to

pray at all, than to pray as Smart did, I am afraid there are so

many who do not pray, that their understanding is not called in

question.'



Concerning this unfortunate poet, Christopher Smart, who was

confined in a mad-house, he had, at another time, the following

conversation with Dr. Burney:--BURNEY.  'How does poor Smart do,

Sir; is he likely to recover?'  JOHNSON.  'It seems as if his mind

had ceased to struggle with the disease; for he grows fat upon it.'

BURNEY.  'Perhaps, Sir, that may be from want of exercise.'

JOHNSON.  'No, Sir; he has partly as much exercise as he used to

have, for he digs in the garden.  Indeed, before his confinement,

he used for exercise to walk to the ale-house; but he was CARRIED

back again.  I did not think he ought to be shut up.  His

infirmities were not noxious to society.  He insisted on people

praying with him; and I'd as lief pray with Kit Smart as any one

else.  Another charge was, that he did not love clean linen; and I

have no passion for it.'--Johnson continued.  'Mankind have a great

aversion to intellectual labour; but even supposing knowledge to be

easily attainable, more people would be content to be ignorant than

would take even a little trouble to acquire it.'



Talking of Garrick, he said, 'He is the first man in the world for

sprightly conversation.'



When I rose a second time he again pressed me to stay, which I did.



He told me, that he generally went abroad at four in the afternoon,

and seldom came home till two in the morning.  I took the liberty

to ask if he did not think it wrong to live thus, and not make more

use of his great talents.  He owned it was a bad habit.  On

reviewing, at the distance of many years, my journal of this

period, I wonder how, at my first visit, I ventured to talk to him

so freely, and that he bore it with so much indulgence.



Before we parted, he was so good as to promise to favour me with

his company one evening at my lodgings; and, as I took my leave,

shook me cordially by the hand.  It is almost needless to add, that

I felt no little elation at having now so happily established an

acquaintance of which I had been so long ambitious.



I did not visit him again till Monday, June 13, at which time I

recollect no part of his conversation, except that when I told him

I had been to see Johnson ride upon three horses, he said, 'Such a

man, Sir, should be encouraged; for his performances shew the

extent of the human powers in one instance, and thus tend to raise

our opinion of the faculties of man.  He shews what may be attained

by persevering application; so that every man may hope, that by

giving as much application, although perhaps he may never ride

three horses at a time, or dance upon a wire, yet he may be equally

expert in whatever profession he has chosen to pursue.'



He again shook me by the hand at parting, and asked me why I did

not come oftener to him.  Trusting that I was now in his good

graces, I answered, that he had not given me much encouragement,

and reminded him of the check I had received from him at our first

interview.  'Poh, poh! (said he, with a complacent smile,) never

mind these things.  Come to me as often as you can.  I shall be

glad to see you.'



I had learnt that his place of frequent resort was the Mitre tavern

in Fleet-street, where he loved to sit up late, and I begged I

might be allowed to pass an evening with him there soon, which he

promised I should.  A few days afterwards I met him near Temple-

bar, about one o'clock in the morning, and asked if he would then

go to the Mitre.  'Sir, (said he) it is too late; they won't let us

in.  But I'll go with you another night with all my heart.'



A revolution of some importance in my plan of life had just taken

place; for instead of procuring a commission in the foot-guards,

which was my own inclination, I had, in compliance with my father's

wishes, agreed to study the law, and was soon to set out for

Utrecht, to hear the lectures of an excellent Civilian in that

University, and then to proceed on my travels.  Though very

desirous of obtaining Dr. Johnson's advice and instructions on the

mode of pursuing my studies, I was at this time so occupied, shall

I call it? or so dissipated, by the amusements of London, that our

next meeting was not till Saturday, June 25, when happening to dine

at Clifton's eating-house, in Butcher-row I was surprized to

perceive Johnson come in and take his seat at another table.  The

mode of dining, or rather being fed, at such houses in London, is

well known to many to be particularly unsocial, as there is no

Ordinary, or united company, but each person has his own mess, and

is under no obligation to hold any intercourse with any one.  A

liberal and full-minded man, however, who loves to talk, will break

through this churlish and unsocial restraint.  Johnson and an Irish

gentleman got into a dispute concerning the cause of some part of

mankind being black.  'Why, Sir, (said Johnson,) it has been

accounted for in three ways: either by supposing that they are the

posterity of Ham, who was cursed; or that GOD at first created two

kinds of men, one black and another white; or that by the heat of

the sun the skin is scorched, and so acquires a sooty hue.  This

matter has been much canvassed among naturalists, but has never

been brought to any certain issue.'  What the Irishman said is

totally obliterated from my mind; but I remember that he became

very warm and intemperate in his expressions; upon which Johnson

rose, and quietly walked away.  When he had retired, his antagonist

took his revenge, as he thought, by saying, 'He has a most ungainly

figure, and an affectation of pomposity, unworthy of a man of

genius.'



Johnson had not observed that I was in the room.  I followed him,

however, and he agreed to meet me in the evening at the Mitre.  I

called on him, and we went thither at nine.  We had a good supper,

and port wine, of which he then sometimes drank a bottle.  The

orthodox high-church sound of the Mitre,--the figure and manner of

the celebrated SAMUEL JOHNSON,--the extraordinary power and

precision of his conversation, and the pride arising from finding

myself admitted as his companion, produced a variety of sensations,

and a pleasing elevation of mind beyond what I had ever before

experienced.  I find in my journal the following minute of our

conversation, which, though it will give but a very faint notion of

what passed, is in some degree a valuable record; and it will be

curious in this view, as shewing how habitual to his mind were some

opinions which appear in his works.



'Colley Cibber, Sir, was by no means a blockhead; but by arrogating

to himself too much, he was in danger of losing that degree of

estimation to which he was entitled.  His friends gave out that he

INTENDED his birth-day Odes should be bad: but that was not the

case, Sir; for he kept them many months by him, and a few years

before he died he shewed me one of them, with great solicitude to

render it as perfect as might be, and I made some corrections, to

which he was not very willing to submit.  I remember the following

couplet in allusion to the King and himself:





    "Perch'd on the eagle's soaring wing,

     The lowly linnet loves to sing."





Sir, he had heard something of the fabulous tale of the wren

sitting upon the eagle's wing, and he had applied it to a linnet.

Cibber's familiar style, however, was better than that which

Whitehead has assumed.  GRAND nonsense is insupportable.  Whitehead

is but a little man to inscribe verses to players.



'Sir, I do not think Gray a first-rate poet.  He has not a bold

imagination, nor much command of words.  The obscurity in which he

has involved himself will not persuade us that he is sublime.  His

Elegy in a Church-yard has a happy selection of images, but I don't

like what are called his great things.  His Ode which begins





    "Ruin seize thee, ruthless King,

     Confusion on thy banners wait!"





has been celebrated for its abruptness, and plunging into the

subject all at once.  But such arts as these have no merit, unless

when they are original.  We admire them only once; and this

abruptness has nothing new in it.  We have had it often before.

Nay, we have it in the old song of Johnny Armstrong:





    "Is there ever a man in all Scotland

     From the highest estate to the lowest degree," &e.





And then, Sir,





    "Yes, there is a man in Westmoreland,

     And Johnny Armstrong they do him call."





There, now, you plunge at once into the subject.  You have no

previous narration to lead you to it.  The two next lines in that

Ode are, I think, very good:





    "Though fann'd by conquest's crimson wing,

     They mock the air with idle state."'





Finding him in a placid humour, and wishing to avail myself of the

opportunity which I fortunately had of consulting a sage, to hear

whose wisdom, I conceived in the ardour of youthful imagination,

that men filled with a noble enthusiasm for intellectual

improvement would gladly have resorted from distant lands;--I

opened my mind to him ingenuously, and gave him a little sketch of

my life, to which he was pleased to listen with great attention.



I acknowledged, that though educated very strictly in the

principles of religion, I had for some time been misled into a

certain degree of infidelity; but that I was come now to a better

way of thinking, and was fully satisfied of the truth of the

Christian revelation, though I was not clear as to every point

considered to be orthodox.  Being at all times a curious examiner

of the human mind, and pleased with an undisguised display of what

had passed in it, he called to me with warmth, 'Give me your hand;

I have taken a liking to you.'  He then began to descant upon the

force of testimony, and the little we could know of final causes;

so that the objections of, why was it so? or why was it not so?

ought not to disturb us: adding, that he himself had at one period

been guilty of a temporary neglect of religion, but that it was not

the result of argument, but mere absence of thought.



After having given credit to reports of his bigotry, I was

agreeably surprized when he expressed the following very liberal

sentiment, which has the additional value of obviating an objection

to our holy religion, founded upon the discordant tenets of

Christians themselves: 'For my part, Sir, I think all Christians,

whether Papists or Protestants, agree in the essential articles,

and that their differences are trivial, and rather political than

religious.'



We talked of belief in ghosts.  He said, 'Sir, I make a distinction

between what a man may experience by the mere strength of his

imagination, and what imagination cannot possibly produce.  Thus,

suppose I should think that I saw a form, and heard a voice cry

"Johnson, you are a very wicked fellow, and unless you repent you

will certainly be punished;" my own unworthiness is so deeply

impressed upon my mind, that I might IMAGINE I thus saw and heard,

and therefore I should not believe that an external communication

had been made to me.  But if a form should appear, and a voice

should tell me that a particular man had died at a particular

place, and a particular hour, a fact which I had no apprehension

of, nor any means of knowing, and this fact, with all its

circumstances, should afterwards be unquestionably proved, I

should, in that case, be persuaded that I had supernatural

intelligence imparted to me.'



Here it is proper, once for all, to give a true and fair statement

of Johnson's way of thinking upon the question, whether departed

spirits are ever permitted to appear in this world, or in any way

to operate upon human life.  He has been ignorantly misrepresented

as weakly credulous upon that subject; and, therefore, though I

feel an inclination to disdain and treat with silent contempt so

foolish a notion concerning my illustrious friend, yet as I find it

has gained ground, it is necessary to refute it.  The real fact

then is, that Johnson had a very philosophical mind, and such a

rational respect for testimony, as to make him submit his

understanding to what was authentically proved, though he could not

comprehend why it was so.  Being thus disposed, he was willing to

inquire into the truth of any relation of supernatural agency, a

general belief of which has prevailed in all nations and ages.  But

so far was he from being the dupe of implicit faith, that he

examined the matter with a jealous attention, and no man was more

ready to refute its falsehood when he had discovered it.

Churchill, in his poem entitled The Ghost, availed himself of the

absurd credulity imputed to Johnson, and drew a caricature of him

under the name of 'POMPOSO,' representing him as one of the

believers of the story of a Ghost in Cock-lane, which, in the year

1762, had gained very general credit in London.  Many of my

readers, I am convinced, are to this hour under an impression that

Johnson was thus foolishly deceived.  It will therefore surprize

them a good deal when they are informed upon undoubted authority,

that Johnson was one of those by whom the imposture was detected.

The story had become so popular, that he thought it should be

investigated; and in this research he was assisted by the Reverend

Dr. Douglas, now Bishop of Salisbury, the great detector of

impostures; who informs me, that after the gentlemen who went and

examined into the evidence were satisfied of its falsity, Johnson

wrote in their presence an account of it, which was published in

the newspapers and Gentleman's Magazine, and undeceived the world.



Our conversation proceeded.  'Sir, (said he) I am a friend to

subordination, as most conducive to the happiness of society.

There is a reciprocal pleasure in governing and being governed.'



'Dr. Goldsmith is one of the first men we now have as an authour,

and he is a very worthy man too.  He has been loose in his

principles, but he is coming right.'



I complained to him that I had not yet acquired much knowledge, and

asked his advice as to my studies.  He said, 'Don't talk of study

now.  I will give you a plan; but it will require some time to

consider of it.'  'It is very good in you (I replied,) to allow me

to be with you thus.  Had it been foretold to me some years ago

that I should pass an evening with the authour of The Rambler, how

should I have exulted!'  What I then expressed, was sincerely from

the heart.  He was satisfied that it was, and cordially answered,

'Sir, I am glad we have met.  I hope we shall pass many evenings

and mornings too, together.'  We finished a couple of bottles of

port, and sat till between one and two in the morning.



As Dr. Oliver Goldsmith will frequently appear in this narrative, I

shall endeavour to make my readers in some degree acquainted with

his singular character.  He was a native of Ireland, and a

contemporary with Mr. Burke at Trinity College, Dublin, but did not

then give much promise of future celebrity.  He, however, observed

to Mr. Malone, that 'though he made no great figure in

mathematicks, which was a study in much repute there, he could turn

an Ode of Horace into English better than any of them.'  He

afterwards studied physick at Edinburgh, and upon the Continent;

and I have been informed, was enabled to pursue his travels on

foot, partly by demanding at Universities to enter the lists as a

disputant, by which, according to the custom of many of them, he

was entitled to the premium of a crown, when luckily for him his

challenge was not accepted; so that, as I once observed to Dr.

Johnson, he DISPUTED his passage through Europe.  He then came to

England, and was employed successively in the capacities of an

usher to an academy, a corrector of the press, a reviewer, and a

writer for a news-paper.  He had sagacity enough to cultivate

assiduously the acquaintance of Johnson, and his faculties were

gradually enlarged by the contemplation of such a model.  To me and

many others it appeared that he studiously copied the manner of

Johnson, though, indeed, upon a smaller scale.



At this time I think he had published nothing with his name, though

it was pretty generally known that one Dr. Goldsmith was the

authour of An Enquiry into the present State of polite Learning in

Europe, and of The Citizen of the World, a series of letters

supposed to be written from London by a Chinese.  No man had the

art of displaying with more advantage as a writer, whatever

literary acquisitions he made.  'Nihil quod tetigit non ornavit.'

His mind resembled a fertile, but thin soil.  There was a quick,

but not a strong vegetation, of whatever chanced to be thrown upon

it.  No deep root could be struck.  The oak of the forest did not

grow there; but the elegant shrubbery and the fragrant parterre

appeared in gay succession.  It has been generally circulated and

believed that he was a mere fool in conversation; but, in truth,

this has been greatly exaggerated.  He had, no doubt, a more than

common share of that hurry of ideas which we often find in his

countrymen, and which sometimes produces a laughable confusion in

expressing them.  He was very much what the French call un etourdi,

and from vanity and an eager desire of being conspicuous wherever

he was, he frequently talked carelessly without knowledge of the

subject, or even without thought.  His person was short, his

countenance coarse and vulgar, his deportment that of a scholar

aukwardly affecting the easy gentleman.  Those who were in any way

distinguished, excited envy in him to so ridiculous an excess, that

the instances of it are hardly credible.  When accompanying two

beautiful young ladies* with their mother on a tour in France, he

was seriously angry that more attention was paid to them than to

him; and once at the exhibition of the Fantoccini in London, when

those who sat next him observed with what dexterity a puppet was

made to toss a pike, he could not bear that it should have such

praise, and exclaimed with some warmth, 'Pshaw! I can do it better

myself.'





* These were the Misses Horneck, known otherwise as 'Little Comedy'

and 'The Jessamy Bride.'--ED.





He boasted to me at this time of the power of his pen in commanding

money, which I believe was true in a certain degree, though in the

instance he gave he was by no means correct.  He told me that he

had sold a novel for four hundred pounds.  This was his Vicar of

Wakefield.  But Johnson informed me, that he had made the bargain

for Goldsmith, and the price was sixty pounds.  'And, Sir, (said

he,) a sufficient price too, when it was sold; for then the fame of

Goldsmith had not been elevated, as it afterwards was, by his

Traveller; and the bookseller had such faint hopes of profit by his

bargain, that he kept the manuscript by him a long time, and did

not publish it till after The Traveller had appeared.  Then, to be

sure, it was accidentally worth more money.



Mrs. Piozzi and Sir John Hawkins have strangely misstated the

history of Goldsmith's situation and Johnson's friendly

interference, when this novel was sold.  I shall give it

authentically from Johnson's own exact narration:--'I received one

morning a message from poor Goldsmith that he was in great

distress, and as it was not in his power to come to me, begging

that I would come to him as soon as possible.  I sent him a guinea,

and promised to come to him directly.  I accordingly went as soon

as I was drest, and found that his landlady had arrested him for

his rent, at which he was in a violent passion.  I perceived that

he had already changed my guinea, and had got a bottle of Madeira

and a glass before him.  I put the cork into the bottle, desired he

would be calm, and began to talk to him of the means by which he

might be extricated.  He then told me that he had a novel ready for

the press, which he produced to me.  I looked into it, and saw its

merit; told the landlady I should soon return, and having gone to a

bookseller, sold it for sixty pounds.  I brought Goldsmith the

money, and he discharged his rent, not without rating his landlady

in a high tone for having used him so ill.'



My next meeting with Johnson was on Friday the 1st of July, when he

and I and Dr. Goldsmith supped together at the Mitre.  I was before

this time pretty well acquainted with Goldsmith, who was one of the

brightest ornaments of the Johnsonian school.  Goldsmith's

respectful attachment to Johnson was then at its height; for his

own literary reputation had not yet distinguished him so much as to

excite a vain desire of competition with his great Master.  He had

increased my admiration of the goodness of Johnson's heart, by

incidental remarks in the course of conversation, such as, when I

mentioned Mr. Levet, whom he entertained under his roof, 'He is

poor and honest, which is recommendation enough to Johnson;' and

when I wondered that he was very kind to a man of whom I had heard

a very bad character, 'He is now become miserable; and that insures

the protection of Johnson.'



He talked very contemptuously of Churchill's poetry, observing,

that 'it had a temporary currency, only from its audacity of abuse,

and being filled with living names, and that it would sink into

oblivion.'  I ventured to hint that he was not quite a fair judge,

as Churchill had attacked him violently.  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, I am

a very fair judge.  He did not attack me violently till he found I

did not like his poetry; and his attack on me shall not prevent me

from continuing to say what I think of him, from an apprehension

that it may be ascribed to resentment.  No, Sir, I called the

fellow a blockhead at first, and I will call him a blockhead still.

However, I will acknowledge that I have a better opinion of him

now, than I once had; for he has shewn more fertility than I

expected.  To be sure, he is a tree that cannot produce good fruit:

he only bears crabs.  But, Sir, a tree that produces a great many

crabs is better than a tree which produces only a few.'



Let me here apologize for the imperfect manner in which I am

obliged to exhibit Johnson's conversation at this period.  In the

early part of my acquaintance with him, I was so wrapt in

admiration of his extraordinary colloquial talents, and so little

accustomed to his peculiar mode of expression, that I found it

extremely difficult to recollect and record his conversation with

its genuine vigour and vivacity.  In progress of time, when my mind

was, as it were, strongly impregnated with the Johnsonian oether, I

could, with much more facility and exactness, carry in my memory

and commit to paper the exuberant variety of his wisdom and wit.



At this time MISS Williams, as she was then called, though she did

not reside with him in the Temple under his roof, but had lodgings

in Bolt-court, Fleet-street, had so much of his attention, that he

every night drank tea with her before he went home, however late it

might be, and she always sat up for him.  This, it may be fairly

conjectured, was not alone a proof of his regard for HER, but of

his own unwillingness to go into solitude, before that unseasonable

hour at which he had habituated himself to expect the oblivion of

repose.  Dr. Goldsmith, being a privileged man, went with him this

night, strutting away, and calling to me with an air of

superiority, like that of an esoterick over an exoterick disciple

of a sage of antiquity, 'I go to Miss Williams.'  I confess, I then

envied him this mighty privilege, of which he seemed so proud; but

it was not long before I obtained the same mark of distinction.



On Tuesday the 5th of July, I again visited Johnson.



Talking of London, he observed, 'Sir, if you wish to have a just

notion of the magnitude of this city, you must not be satisfied

with seeing its great streets and squares, but must survey the

innumerable little lanes and courts.  It is not in the showy

evolutions of buildings, but in the multiplicity of human

habitations which are crouded together, that the wonderful

immensity of London consists.'



On Wednesday, July 6, he was engaged to sup with me at my lodgings

in Downing-street, Westminster.  But on the preceding night my

landlord having behaved very rudely to me and some company who were

with me, I had resolved not to remain another night in his house.

I was exceedingly uneasy at the aukward appearance I supposed I

should make to Johnson and the other gentlemen whom I had invited,

not being able to receive them at home, and being obliged to order

supper at the Mitre.  I went to Johnson in the morning, and talked

of it as a serious distress.  He laughed, and said, 'Consider, Sir,

how insignificant this will appear a twelvemonth hence.'--Were this

consideration to be applied to most of the little vexatious

incidents of life, by which our quiet is too often disturbed, it

would prevent many painful sensations.  I have tried it frequently,

with good effect.  'There is nothing (continued he) in this mighty

misfortune; nay, we shall be better at the Mitre.'



I had as my guests this evening at the Mitre tavern, Dr. Johnson,

Dr. Goldsmith, Mr. Thomas Davies, Mr. Eccles, an Irish gentleman,

for whose agreeable company I was obliged to Mr. Davies, and the

Reverend Mr. John Ogilvie, who was desirous of being in company

with my illustrious friend, while I, in my turn, was proud to have

the honour of shewing one of my countrymen upon what easy terms

Johnson permitted me to live with him.



Goldsmith, as usual, endeavoured, with too much eagerness, to

SHINE, and disputed very warmly with Johnson against the well-known

maxim of the British constitution, 'the King can do no wrong;'

affirming, that 'what was morally false could not be politically

true; and as the King might, in the exercise of his regal power,

command and cause the doing of what was wrong, it certainly might

be said, in sense and in reason, that he could do wrong.'  JOHNSON.

'Sir, you are to consider, that in our constitution, according to

its true principles, the King is the head; he is supreme; he is

above every thing, and there is no power by which he can be tried.

Therefore, it is, Sir, that we hold the King can do no wrong; that

whatever may happen to be wrong in government may not be above our

reach, by being ascribed to Majesty.  Redress is always to be had

against oppression, by punishing the immediate agents.  The King,

though he should command, cannot force a Judge to condemn a man

unjustly; therefore it is the Judge whom we prosecute and punish.

Political institutions are formed upon the consideration of what

will most frequently tend to the good of the whole, although now

and then exceptions may occur.  Thus it is better in general that a

nation should have a supreme legislative power, although it may at

times be abused.  And then, Sir, there is this consideration, that

if the abuse be enormous, Nature will rise up, and claiming her

original rights, overturn a corrupt political system.'  I mark this

animated sentence with peculiar pleasure, as a noble instance of

that truly dignified spirit of freedom which ever glowed in his

heart, though he was charged with slavish tenets by superficial

observers; because he was at all times indignant against that false

patriotism, that pretended love of freedom, that unruly

restlessness, which is inconsistent with the stable authority of

any good government.



'Bayle's Dictionary is a very useful work for those to consult who

love the biographical part of literature, which is what I love

most.'



Talking of the eminent writers in Queen Anne's reign, he observed,

'I think Dr. Arbuthnot the first man among them.  He was the most

universal genius, being an excellent physician, a man of deep

learning, and a man of much humour.  Mr. Addison was, to be sure, a

great man; his learning was not profound; but his morality, his

humour, and his elegance of writing, set him very high.'



Mr. Ogilvie was unlucky enough to choose for the topick of his

conversation the praises of his native country.  He began with

saying, that there was very rich land round Edinburgh.  Goldsmith,

who had studied physick there, contradicted this, very untruly,

with a sneering laugh.  Disconcerted a little by this, Mr. Ogilvie

then took new ground, where, I suppose, he thought himself

perfectly safe; for he observed, that Scotland had a great many

noble wild prospects.  JOHNSON.  'I believe, Sir, you have a great

many.  Norway, too, has noble wild prospects; and Lapland is

remarkable for prodigious noble wild prospects.  But, Sir, let me

tell you, the noblest prospect which a Scotchman ever sees, is the

high road that leads him to England!'  This unexpected and pointed

sally produced a roar of applause.  After all, however, those, who

admire the rude grandeur of Nature, cannot deny it to Caledonia.



On Saturday, July 9, I found Johnson surrounded with a numerous

levee, but have not preserved any part of his conversation.  On the

14th we had another evening by ourselves at the Mitre.  It

happening to be a very rainy night, I made some common-place

observations on the relaxation of nerves and depression of spirits

which such weather occasioned; adding, however, that it was good

for the vegetable creation.  Johnson, who, as we have already seen,

denied that the temperature of the air had any influence on the

human frame, answered, with a smile of ridicule.  'Why yes, Sir, it

is good for vegetables, and for the animals who eat those

vegetables, and for the animals who eat those animals.'  This

observation of his aptly enough introduced a good supper; and I

soon forgot, in Johnson's company, the influence of a moist

atmosphere.



Feeling myself now quite at ease as his companion, though I had all

possible reverence for him, I expressed a regret that I could not

be so easy with my father, though he was not much older than

Johnson, and certainly however respectable had not more learning

and greater abilities to depress me.  I asked him the reason of

this.  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, I am a man of the world.  I live in the

world, and I take, in some degree, the colour of the world as it

moves along.  Your father is a Judge in a remote part of the

island, and all his notions are taken from the old world.  Besides,

Sir, there must always be a struggle between a father and son while

one aims at power and the other at independence.'



He enlarged very convincingly upon the excellence of rhyme over

blank verse in English poetry.  I mentioned to him that Dr. Adam

Smith, in his lectures upon composition, when I studied under him

in the College of Glasgow, had maintained the same opinion

strenuously, and I repeated some of his arguments.  JOHNSON.  'Sir,

I was once in company with Smith, and we did not take to each

other; but had I known that he loved rhyme as much as you tell me

he does, I should have HUGGED him.'



'Idleness is a disease which must be combated; but I would not

advise a rigid adherence to a particular plan of study.  I myself

have never persisted in any plan for two days together.  A man

ought to read just as inclination leads him; for what he reads as a

task will do him little good.  A young man should read five hours

in a day, and so may acquire a great deal of knowledge.'



To such a degree of unrestrained frankness had he now accustomed

me, that in the course of this evening I talked of the numerous

reflections which had been thrown out against him on account of his

having accepted a pension from his present Majesty.  'Why, Sir,

(said he, with a hearty laugh,) it is a mighty foolish noise that

they make.*  I have accepted of a pension as a reward which has

been thought due to my literary merit; and now that I have this

pension, I am the same man in every respect that I have ever been;

I retain the same principles.  It is true, that I cannot now curse

(smiling) the House of Hanover; nor would it be decent for me to

drink King James's health in the wine that King George gives me

money to pay for.  But, Sir, I think that the pleasure of cursing

the House of Hanover, and drinking King James's health, are amply

overbalanced by three hundred pounds a year.'





* When I mentioned the same idle clamour to him several years

afterwards, he said, with a smile, 'I wish my pension were twice as

large, that they might make twice as much noise.'--BOSWELL.





There was here, most certainly, an affectation of more Jacobitism

than he really had.  Yet there is no doubt that at earlier periods

he was wont often to exercise both his pleasantry and ingenuity in

talking Jacobitism.  My much respected friend, Dr. Douglas, now

Bishop of Salisbury, has favoured me with the following admirable

instance from his Lordship's own recollection.  One day, when

dining at old Mr. Langton's where Miss Roberts, his niece, was one

of the company, Johnson, with his usual complacent attention to the

fair sex, took her by the hand and said, 'My dear, I hope you are a

Jacobite.'  Old Mr. Langton, who, though a high and steady Tory,

was attached to the present Royal Family, seemed offended, and

asked Johnson, with great warmth, what he could mean by putting

such a question to his niece?  'Why, Sir, (said Johnson) I meant no

offence to your niece, I meant her a great compliment.  A Jacobite,

Sir, believes in the divine right of Kings.  He that believes in

the divine right of Kings believes in a Divinity.  A Jacobite

believes in the divine right of Bishops.  He that believes in the

divine right of Bishops believes in the divine authority of the

Christian religion.  Therefore, Sir, a Jacobite is neither an

Atheist nor a Deist.  That cannot be said of a Whig; for Whiggism

is a negation of all principle.'*





* He used to tell, with great humour, from my relation to him, the

following little story of my early years, which was literally true:

'Boswell, in the year 1745, was a fine boy, wore a white cockade,

and prayed for King James, till one of his uncles (General Cochran)

gave him a shilling on condition that he should pray for King

George, which he accordingly did.  So you see (says Boswell) that

Whigs of all ages are made the same way.'--BOSWELL.





He advised me, when abroad, to be as much as I could with the

Professors in the Universities, and with the Clergy; for from their

conversation I might expect the best accounts of every thing in

whatever country I should be, with the additional advantage of

keeping my learning alive.



It will be observed, that when giving me advice as to my travels,

Dr. Johnson did not dwell upon cities, and palaces, and pictures,

and shows, and Arcadian scenes.  He was of Lord Essex's opinion,

who advises his kinsman Roger Earl of Rutland, 'rather to go an

hundred miles to speak with one wise man, than five miles to see a

fair town.'



I described to him an impudent fellow from Scotland, who affected

to be a savage, and railed at all established systems.  JOHNSON.

'There is nothing surprizing in this, Sir.  He wants to make

himself conspicuous.  He would tumble in a hogstye, as long as you

looked at him and called to him to come out.  But let him alone,

never mind him, and he'll soon give it over.'



I added, that the same person maintained that there was no

distinction between virtue and vice.  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, if the

fellow does not think as he speaks, he is lying; and I see not what

honour he can propose to himself from having the character of a

lyar.  But if he does really think that there is no distinction

between virtue and vice, why, Sir, when he leaves our houses let us

count our spoons.'



He recommended to me to keep a journal of my life, full and

unreserved.  He said it would be a very good exercise, and would

yield me great satisfaction when the particulars were faded from my

remembrance.  I was uncommonly fortunate in having had a previous

coincidence of opinion with him upon this subject, for I had kept

such a journal for some time; and it was no small pleasure to me to

have this to tell him, and to receive his approbation.  He

counselled me to keep it private, and said I might surely have a

friend who would burn it in case of my death.  From this habit I

have been enabled to give the world so many anecdotes, which would

otherwise have been lost to posterity.  I mentioned that I was

afraid I put into my journal too many little incidents.  JOHNSON.

'There is nothing, Sir, too little for so little a creature as man.

It is by studying little things that we attain the great art of

having as little misery and as much happiness as possible.'



Next morning Mr. Dempster happened to call on me, and was so much

struck even with the imperfect account which I gave him of Dr.

Johnson's conversation, that to his honour be it recorded, when I

complained that drinking port and sitting up late with him affected

my nerves for some time after, he said, 'One had better be palsied

at eighteen than not keep company with such a man.'



On Tuesday, July 18, I found tall Sir Thomas Robinson sitting with

Johnson.  Sir Thomas said, that the king of Prussia valued himself

upon three things;--upon being a hero, a musician, and an authour.

JOHNSON.  'Pretty well, Sir, for one man.  As to his being an

authour, I have not looked at his poetry; but his prose is poor

stuff.  He writes just as you might suppose Voltaire's footboy to

do, who has been his amanuensis.  He has such parts as the valet

might have, and about as much of the colouring of the style as

might be got by transcribing his works.'  When I was at Ferney, I

repeated this to Voltaire, in order to reconcile him somewhat to

Johnson, whom he, in affecting the English mode of expression, had

previously characterised as 'a superstitious dog;' but after

hearing such a criticism on Frederick the Great, with whom he was

then on bad terms, he exclaimed, 'An honest fellow!'



Mr. Levet this day shewed me Dr. Johnson's library, which was

contained in two garrets over his Chambers, where Lintot, son of

the celebrated bookseller of that name, had formerly his warehouse.

I found a number of good books, but very dusty and in great

confusion.  The floor was strewed with manuscript leaves, in

Johnson's own handwriting, which I beheld with a degree of

veneration, supposing they perhaps might contain portions of The

Rambler or of Rasselas.  I observed an apparatus for chymical

experiments, of which Johnson was all his life very fond.  The

place seemed to be very favourable for retirement and meditation.

Johnson told me, that he went up thither without mentioning it to

his servant, when he wanted to study, secure from interruption; for

he would not allow his servant to say he was not at home when he

really was.  'A servant's strict regard for truth, (said he) must

be weakened by such a practice.  A philosopher may know that it is

merely a form of denial; but few servants are such nice

distinguishers.  If I accustom a servant to tell a lie for ME, have

I not reason to apprehend that he will tell many lies for HIMSELF.'



Mr. Temple, now vicar of St. Gluvias, Cornwall, who had been my

intimate friend for many years, had at this time chambers in

Farrar's-buildings, at the bottom of Inner Temple-lane, which he

kindly lent me upon my quitting my lodgings, he being to return to

Trinity Hall, Cambridge.  I found them particularly convenient for

me, as they were so near Dr. Johnson's.



On Wednesday, July 20, Dr. Johnson, Mr. Dempster, and my uncle Dr.

Boswell, who happened to be now in London, supped with me at these

Chambers.  JOHNSON.  'Pity is not natural to man.  Children are

always cruel.  Savages are always cruel.  Pity is acquired and

improved by the cultivation of reason.  We may have uneasy

sensations from seeing a creature in distress, without pity; for we

have not pity unless we wish to relieve them.  When I am on my way

to dine with a friend, and finding it late, have bid the coachman

make haste, if I happen to attend when he whips his horses, I may

feel unpleasantly that the animals are put to pain, but I do not

wish him to desist.  No, Sir, I wish him to drive on.'



Rousseau's treatise on the inequality of mankind was at this time a

fashionable topick.  It gave rise to an observation by Mr.

Dempster, that the advantages of fortune and rank were nothing to a

wise man, who ought to value only merit.  JOHNSON.  'If man were a

savage, living in the woods by himself, this might be true; but in

civilized society we all depend upon each other, and our happiness

is very much owing to the good opinion of mankind.  Now, Sir, in

civilized society, external advantages make us more respected.  A

man with a good coat upon his back meets with a better reception

than he who has a bad one.  Sir, you may analyse this, and say what

is there in it?  But that will avail you nothing, for it is a part

of a general system.  Pound St. Paul's Church into atoms, and

consider any single atom; it is, to be sure, good for nothing: but,

put all these atoms together, and you have St. Paul's Church.  So

it is with human felicity, which is made up of many ingredients,

each of which may be shewn to be very insignificant.  In civilized

society, personal merit will not serve you so much as money will.

Sir, you may make the experiment.  Go into the street, and give one

man a lecture on morality, and another a shilling, and see which

will respect you most.  If you wish only to support nature, Sir

William Petty fixes your allowance at three pounds a year; but as

times are much altered, let us call it six pounds.  This sum will

fill your belly, shelter you from the weather, and even get you a

strong lasting coat, supposing it to be made of good bull's hide.

Now, Sir, all beyond this is artificial, and is desired in order to

obtain a greater degree of respect from our fellow-creatures.  And,

Sir, if six hundred pounds a year procure a man more consequence,

and, of course, more happiness than six pounds a year, the same

proportion will hold as to six thousand, and so on as far as

opulence can be carried.  Perhaps he who has a large fortune may

not be so happy as he who has a small one; but that must proceed

from other causes than from his having the large fortune: for,

coeteris paribus, he who is rich in a civilized society, must be

happier than he who is poor; as riches, if properly used, (and it

is a man's own fault if they are not,) must be productive of the

highest advantages.  Money, to be sure, of itself is of no use; for

its only use is to part with it.  Rousseau, and all those who deal

in paradoxes, are led away by a childish desire of novelty.  When I

was a boy, I used always to choose the wrong side of a debate,

because most ingenious things, that is to say, most new things,

could be said upon it.  Sir, there is nothing for which you may not

muster up more plausible arguments, than those which are urged

against wealth and other external advantages.  Why, now, there is

stealing; why should it be thought a crime?  When we consider by

what unjust methods property has been often acquired, and that what

was unjustly got it must be unjust to keep, where is the harm in

one man's taking the property of another from him?  Besides, Sir,

when we consider the bad use that many people make of their

property, and how much better use the thief may make of it, it may

be defended as a very allowable practice.  Yet, Sir, the experience

of mankind has discovered stealing to be so very bad a thing, that

they make no scruple to hang a man for it.  When I was running

about this town a very poor fellow, I was a great arguer for the

advantages of poverty; but I was, at the same time, very sorry to

be poor.  Sir, all the arguments which are brought to represent

poverty as no evil, shew it to be evidently a great evil.  You

never find people labouring to convince you that you may live very

happily upon a plentiful fortune.--So you hear people talking how

miserable a King must be; and yet they all wish to be in his

place.'



It was suggested that Kings must be unhappy, because they are

deprived of the greatest of all satisfactions, easy and unreserved

society.  JOHNSON.  'That is an ill-founded notion.  Being a King

does not exclude a man from such society.  Great Kings have always

been social.  The King of Prussia, the only great King at present,

is very social.  Charles the Second, the last King of England who

was a man of parts, was social; and our Henrys and Edwards were all

social.'



Mr. Dempster having endeavoured to maintain that intrinsick merit

OUGHT to make the only distinction amongst mankind.  JOHNSON.

'Why, Sir, mankind have found that this cannot be.  How shall we

determine the proportion of intrinsick merit?  Were that to be the

only distinction amongst mankind, we should soon quarrel about the

degrees of it.  Were all distinctions abolished, the strongest

would not long acquiesce, but would endeavour to obtain a

superiority by their bodily strength.  But, Sir, as subordination

is very necessary for society, and contentions for superiority very

dangerous, mankind, that is to say, all civilized nations, have

settled it upon a plain invariable principle.  A man is born to

hereditary rank; or his being appointed to certain offices, gives

him a certain rank.  Subordination tends greatly to human

happiness.  Were we all upon an equality, we should have no other

enjoyment than mere animal pleasure.'



He took care to guard himself against any possible suspicion that

his settled principles of reverence for rank and respect for wealth

were at all owing to mean or interested motives; for he asserted

his own independence as a literary man.  'No man (said he) who ever

lived by literature, has lived more independently than I have

done.'  He said he had taken longer time than he needed to have

done in composing his Dictionary.  He received our compliments upon

that great work with complacency, and told us that the Academia

della Crusca could scarcely believe that it was done by one man.



At night* Mr. Johnson and I supped in a private room at the Turk's

Head coffee-house, in the Strand.  'I encourage this house (said

he;) for the mistress of it is a good civil woman, and has not much

business.'





* July 21.





'Sir, I love the acquaintance of young people; because, in the

first place, I don't like to think myself growing old.  In the next

place, young acquaintances must last longest, if they do last; and

then, Sir, young men have more virtue than old men: they have more

generous sentiments in every respect.  I love the young dogs of

this age: they have more wit and humour and knowledge of life than

we had; but then the dogs are not so good scholars.  Sir, in my

early years I read very hard.  It is a sad reflection, but a true

one, that I knew almost as much at eighteen as I do now.  My

judgement, to be sure, was not so good; but I had all the facts.  I

remember very well, when I was at Oxford, an old gentleman said to

me, "Young man, ply your book diligently now, and acquire a stock

of knowledge; for when years come upon you, you will find that

poring upon books will be but an irksome task."'



He again insisted on the duty of maintaining subordination of rank.

'Sir, I would no more deprive a nobleman of his respect, than of

his money.  I consider myself as acting a part in the great system

of society, and I do to others as I would have them to do to me.  I

would behave to a nobleman as I should expect he would behave to

me, were I a nobleman and he Sam. Johnson.  Sir, there is one Mrs.

Macaulay* in this town, a great republican.  One day when I was at

her house, I put on a very grave countenance, and said to her,

"Madam, I am now become a convert to your way of thinking.  I am

convinced that all mankind are upon an equal footing; and to give

you an unquestionable proof, Madam, that I am in earnest, here is a

very sensible, civil, well-behaved fellow-citizen, your footman; I

desire that he may be allowed to sit down and dine with us."  I

thus, Sir, shewed her the absurdity of the levelling doctrine.  She

has never liked me since.  Sir, your levellers wish to level DOWN

as far as themselves; but they cannot bear levelling UP to

themselves.  They would all have some people under them; why not

then have some people above them?'  I mentioned a certain authour

who disgusted me by his forwardness, and by shewing no deference to

noblemen into whose company he was admitted.  JOHNSON.  'Suppose a

shoemaker should claim an equality with him, as he does with a

Lord; how he would stare.  "Why, Sir, do you stare?  (says the

shoemaker,) I do great service to society.  'Tis true I am paid for

doing it; but so are you, Sir: and I am sorry to say it, paid

better than I am, for doing something not so necessary.  For

mankind could do better without your books, than without my shoes."

Thus, Sir, there would be a perpetual struggle for precedence, were

there no fixed invariable rules for the distinction of rank, which

creates no jealousy, as it is allowed to be accidental.'





* This ONE Mrs. Macaulay was the same personage who afterwards made

herself so much known as the celebrated female historian.'--

BOSWELL.





He said he would go to the Hebrides with me, when I returned from

my travels, unless some very good companion should offer when I was

absent, which he did not think probable; adding, 'There are few

people to whom I take so much to as you.'  And when I talked of my

leaving England, he said with a very affectionate air, 'My dear

Boswell, I should be very unhappy at parting, did I think we were

not to meet again.'  I cannot too often remind my readers, that

although such instances of his kindness are doubtless very

flattering to me; yet I hope my recording them will be ascribed to

a better motive than to vanity; for they afford unquestionable

evidence of his tenderness and complacency, which some, while they

were forced to acknowledge his great powers, have been so strenuous

to deny.



He maintained that a boy at school was the happiest of human

beings.  I supported a different opinion, from which I have never

yet varied, that a man is happier; and I enlarged upon the anxiety

and sufferings which are endured at school.  JOHNSON.  'Ah! Sir, a

boy's being flogged is not so severe as a man's having the hiss of

the world against him.'



On Tuesday, July 26, I found Mr. Johnson alone.  It was a very wet

day, and I again complained of the disagreeable effects of such

weather.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, this is all imagination, which physicians

encourage; for man lives in air, as a fish lives in water; so that

if the atmosphere press heavy from above, there is an equal

resistance from below.  To be sure, bad weather is hard upon people

who are obliged to be abroad; and men cannot labour so well in the

open air in bad weather, as in good: but, Sir, a smith or a taylor,

whose work is within doors, will surely do as much in rainy

weather, as in fair.  Some very delicate frames, indeed, may be

affected by wet weather; but not common constitutions.'



We talked of the education of children; and I asked him what he

thought was best to teach them first.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, it is no

matter what you teach them first, any more than what leg you shall

put into your breeches first.  Sir, you may stand disputing which

is best to put in first, but in the mean time your breech is bare.

Sir, while you are considering which of two things you should teach

your child first, another boy has learnt them both.'



On Thursday, July 28, we again supped in private at the Turk's Head

coffee-house.  JOHNSON.  'Swift has a higher reputation than he

deserves.  His excellence is strong sense; for his humour, though

very well, is not remarkably good.  I doubt whether The Tale of a

Tub be his; for he never owned it, and it is much above his usual

manner.'



'Thomson, I think, had as much of the poet about him as most

writers.  Every thing appeared to him through the medium of his

favourite pursuit.  He could not have viewed those two candles

burning but with a poetical eye.'



'As to the Christian religion, Sir, besides the strong evidence

which we have for it, there is a balance in its favour from the

number of great men who have been convinced of its truth, after a

serious consideration of the question.  Grotius was an acute man, a

lawyer, a man accustomed to examine evidence, and he was convinced.

Grotius was not a recluse, but a man of the world, who certainly

had no bias to the side of religion.  Sir Isaac Newton set out an

infidel, and came to be a very firm believer.'



He this evening recommended to me to perambulate Spain.  I said it

would amuse him to get a letter from me dated at Salamancha.

JOHNSON.  'I love the University of Salamancha; for when the

Spaniards were in doubt as to the lawfulness of their conquering

America, the University of Salamancha gave it as their opinion that

it was not lawful.'  He spoke this with great emotion, and with

that generous warmth which dictated the lines in his London,

against Spanish encroachment.



I expressed my opinion of my friend Derrick as but a poor writer.

JOHNSON.  'To be sure, Sir, he is; but you are to consider that his

being a literary man has got for him all that he has.  It has made

him King of Bath.  Sir, he has nothing to say for himself but that

he is a writer.  Had he not been a writer, he must have been

sweeping the crossings in the streets, and asking halfpence from

every body that past.'



In justice however, to the memory of Mr. Derrick, who was my first

tutor in the ways of London, and shewed me the town in all its

variety of departments, both literary and sportive, the particulars

of which Dr. Johnson advised me to put in writing, it is proper to

mention what Johnson, at a subsequent period, said of him both as a

writer and an editor: 'Sir, I have often said, that if Derrick's

letters had been written by one of a more established name, they

would have been thought very pretty letters.'  And, 'I sent Derrick

to Dryden's relations to gather materials for his life; and I

believe he got all that I myself should have got.'



Johnson said once to me, 'Sir, I honour Derrick for his presence of

mind.  One night, when Floyd, another poor authour, was wandering

about the streets in the night, he found Derrick fast asleep upon a

bulk; upon being suddenly waked, Derrick started up, "My dear

Floyd, I am sorry to see you in this destitute state; will you go

home with me to MY LODGINGS?"'



I again begged his advice as to my method of study at Utrecht.

'Come, (said he) let us make a day of it.  Let us go down to

Greenwich and dine, and talk of it there.'  The following Saturday

was fixed for this excursion.



As we walked along the Strand to-night, arm in arm, a woman of the

town accosted us, in the usual enticing manner.  'No, no, my girl,

(said Johnson) it won't do.'  He, however, did not treat her with

harshness, and we talked of the wretched life of such women; and

agreed, that much more misery than happiness, upon the whole, is

produced by illicit commerce between the sexes.



On Saturday, July 30, Dr. Johnson and I took a sculler at the

Temple-stairs, and set out for Greenwich.  I asked him if he really

thought a knowledge of the Greek and Latin languages an essential

requisite to a good education.  JOHNSON.  'Most certainly, Sir; for

those who know them have a very great advantage over those who do

not.  Nay, Sir, it is wonderful what a difference learning makes

upon people even in the common intercourse of life, which does not

appear to be much connected with it.'  'And yet, (said I) people go

through the world very well, and carry on the business of life to

good advantage, without learning.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, that may

be true in cases where learning cannot possibly be of any use; for

instance, this boy rows us as well without learning, as if he could

sing the song of Orpheus to the Argonauts, who were the first

sailors.'  He then called to the boy, 'What would you give, my lad,

to know about the Argonauts?'  'Sir, (said the boy,) I would give

what I have.'  Johnson was much pleased with his answer, and we

gave him a double fare.  Dr. Johnson then turning to me, 'Sir,

(said he) a desire of knowledge is the natural feeling of mankind;

and every human being, whose mind is not debauched, will be willing

to give all that he has to get knowledge.'



We landed at the Old Swan, and walked to Billingsgate, where we

took oars, and moved smoothly along the silver Thames.  It was a

very fine day.  We were entertained with the immense number and

variety of ships that were lying at anchor, and with the beautiful

country on each side of the river.



I talked of preaching, and of the great success which those called

Methodists have.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, it is owing to their expressing

themselves in a plain and familiar manner, which is the only way to

do good to the common people, and which clergymen of genius and

learning ought to do from a principle of duty, when it is suited to

their congregations; a practice, for which they will be praised by

men of sense.  To insist against drunkenness as a crime, because it

debases reason, the noblest faculty of man, would be of no service

to the common people: but to tell them that they may die in a fit

of drunkenness, and shew them how dreadful that would be, cannot

fail to make a deep impression.  Sir, when your Scotch clergy give

up their homely manner, religion will soon decay in that country.'

Let this observation, as Johnson meant it, be ever remembered.



I was much pleased to find myself with Johnson at Greenwich, which

he celebrates in his London as a favourite scene.  I had the poem

in my pocket, and read the lines aloud with enthusiasm:





    'On Thames's banks in silent thought we stood:

     Where Greenwich smiles upon the silver flood:

     Pleas'd with the seat which gave ELIZA birth,

     We kneel, and kiss the consecrated earth.'





Afterwards he entered upon the business of the day, which was to

give me his advice as to a course of study.



We walked in the evening in Greenwich Park.  He asked me, I

suppose, by way of trying my disposition, 'Is not this very fine?'

Having no exquisite relish of the beauties of Nature, and being

more delighted with 'the busy hum of men,' I answered, 'Yes, Sir;

but not equal to Fleet-street.'  JOHNSON.  'You are right, Sir.'



I am aware that many of my readers may censure my want of taste.

Let me, however, shelter myself under the authority of a very

fashionable Baronet in the brilliant world, who, on his attention

being called to the fragrance of a May evening in the country,

observed, 'This may be very well; but, for my part, I prefer the

smell of a flambeau at the playhouse.'



We staid so long at Greenwich, that our sail up the river, in our

return to London, was by no means so pleasant as in the morning;

for the night air was so cold that it made me shiver.  I was the

more sensible of it from having sat up all the night before,

recollecting and writing in my journal what I thought worthy of

preservation; an exertion, which, during the first part of my

acquaintance with Johnson, I frequently made.  I remember having

sat up four nights in one week, without being much incommoded in

the day time.



Johnson, whose robust frame was not in the least affected by the

cold, scolded me, as if my shivering had been a paltry effeminacy,

saying, 'Why do you shiver?'  Sir William Scott, of the Commons,

told me, that when he complained of a head-ache in the post-chaise,

as they were travelling together to Scotland, Johnson treated him

in the same manner:



'At your age, Sir, I had no head-ache.'



We concluded the day at the Turk's Head coffee-house very socially.

He was pleased to listen to a particular account which I gave him

of my family, and of its hereditary estate, as to the extent and

population of which he asked questions, and made calculations;

recommending, at the same time, a liberal kindness to the tenantry,

as people over whom the proprietor was placed by Providence.  He

took delight in hearing my description of the romantick seat of my

ancestors.  'I must be there, Sir, (said he) and we will live in

the old castle; and if there is not a room in it remaining, we will

build one.'  I was highly flattered, but could scarcely indulge a

hope that Auchinleck would indeed be honoured by his presence, and

celebrated by a description, as it afterwards was, in his Journey

to the Western Islands.



After we had again talked of my setting out for Holland, he said,

'I must see thee out of England; I will accompany you to Harwich.'

I could not find words to express what I felt upon this unexpected

and very great mark of his affectionate regard.



Next day, Sunday, July 31, I told him I had been that morning at a

meeting of the people called Quakers, where I had heard a woman

preach.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, a woman's preaching is like a dog's

walking on his hinder legs.  It is not done well; but you are

surprized to find it done at all.'



On Tuesday, August 2 (the day of my departure from London having

been fixed for the 5th,) Dr. Johnson did me the honour to pass a

part of the morning with me at my Chambers.  He said, that 'he

always felt an inclination to do nothing.'  I observed, that it was

strange to think that the most indolent man in Britain had written

the most laborious work, The English Dictionary.



I had now made good my title to be a privileged man, and was

carried by him in the evening to drink tea with Miss Williams,

whom, though under the misfortune of having lost her sight, I found

to be agreeable in conversation; for she had a variety of

literature, and expressed herself well; but her peculiar value was

the intimacy in which she had long lived with Johnson, by which she

was well acquainted with his habits, and knew how to lead him on to

talk.



After tea he carried me to what he called his walk, which was a

long narrow paved court in the neighbourhood, overshadowed by some

trees.  There we sauntered a considerable time; and I complained to

him that my love of London and of his company was such, that I

shrunk almost from the thought of going away, even to travel, which

is generally so much desired by young men.  He roused me by manly

and spirited conversation.  He advised me, when settled in any

place abroad, to study with an eagerness after knowledge, and to

apply to Greek an hour every day; and when I was moving about, to

read diligently the great book of mankind.



On Wednesday, August 3, we had our last social evening at the

Turk's Head coffee-house, before my setting out for foreign parts.

I had the misfortune, before we parted, to irritate him

unintentionally.  I mentioned to him how common it was in the world

to tell absurd stories of him, and to ascribe to him very strange

sayings.  JOHNSON.  'What do they make me say, Sir?'  BOSWELL.

'Why, Sir, as an instance very strange indeed, (laughing heartily

as I spoke,) David Hume told me, you said that you would stand

before a battery of cannon, to restore the Convocation to its full

powers.'  Little did I apprehend that he had actually said this:

but I was soon convinced of my errour; for, with a determined look,

he thundered out 'And would I not, Sir?  Shall the Presbyterian

KIRK of Scotland have its General Assembly, and the Church of

England be denied its Convocation?'  He was walking up and down the

room while I told him the anecdote; but when he uttered this

explosion of high-church zeal, he had come close to my chair, and

his eyes flashed with indignation.  I bowed to the storm, and

diverted the force of it, by leading him to expatiate on the

influence which religion derived from maintaining the church with

great external respectability.



On Friday, August 5, we set out early in the morning in the Harwich

stage coach.  A fat elderly gentlewoman, and a young Dutchman,

seemed the most inclined among us to conversation.  At the inn

where we dined, the gentlewoman said that she had done her best to

educate her children; and particularly, that she had never suffered

them to be a moment idle.  JOHNSON.  'I wish, madam, you would

educate me too; for I have been an idle fellow all my life.'  'I am

sure, Sir, (said she) you have not been idle.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay,

Madam, it is very true; and that gentleman there (pointing to me,)

has been idle.  He was idle at Edinburgh.  His father sent him to

Glasgow, where he continued to be idle.  He then came to London,

where he has been very idle; and now he is going to Utrecht, where

he will be as idle as ever.  I asked him privately how he could

expose me so.  JOHNSON.  'Poh, poh! (said he) they knew nothing

about you, and will think of it no more.'  In the afternoon the

gentlewoman talked violently against the Roman Catholicks, and of

the horrours of the Inquisition.  To the utter astonishment of all

the passengers but myself, who knew that he could talk upon any

side of a question, he defended the Inquisition, and maintained,

that 'false doctrine should be checked on its first appearance;

that the civil power should unite with the church in punishing

those who dared to attack the established religion, and that such

only were punished by the Inquisition.'  He had in his pocket

Pomponius Mela de situ Orbis, in which he read occasionally, and

seemed very intent upon ancient geography.  Though by no means

niggardly, his attention to what was generally right was so minute,

that having observed at one of the stages that I ostentatiously

gave a shilling to the coachman, when the custom was for each

passenger to give only six-pence, he took me aside and scolded me,

saying that what I had done would make the coachman dissatisfied

with all the rest of the passengers, who gave him no more than his

due.  This was a just reprimand; for in whatever way a man may

indulge his generosity or his vanity in spending his money, for the

sake of others he ought not to raise the price of any article for

which there is a constant demand.



At supper this night* he talked of good eating with uncommon

satisfaction.  'Some people (said he,) have a foolish way of not

minding, or pretending not to mind, what they eat.  For my part, I

mind my belly very studiously, and very carefully; for I look upon

it, that he who does not mind his belly will hardly mind anything

else.'  He now appeared to me Jean Bull philosophe, and he was, for

the moment, not only serious but vehement.  Yet I have heard him,

upon other occasions, talk with great contempt of people who were

anxious to gratify their palates; and the 206th number of his

Rambler is a masterly essay against gulosity.  His practice,

indeed, I must acknowledge, may be considered as casting the

balance of his different opinions upon this subject; for I never

knew any man who relished good eating more than he did.  When at

table, he was totally absorbed in the business of the moment; his

looks seemed rivetted to his plate; nor would he, unless when in

very high company, say one word, or even pay the least attention to

what was said by others, till he had satisfied his appetite, which

was so fierce, and indulged with such intenseness, that while in

the act of eating, the veins of his forehead swelled, and generally

a strong perspiration was visible.  To those whose sensations were

delicate, this could not but be disgusting; and it was doubtless

not very suitable to the character of a philosopher, who should be

distinguished by self-command.  But it must be owned, that Johnson,

though he could be rigidly ABSTEMIOUS, was not a TEMPERATE man

either in eating or drinking.  He could refrain, but he could not

use moderately.  He told me, that he had fasted two days without

inconvenience, and that he had never been hungry but once.  They

who beheld with wonder how much he eat upon all occasions when his

dinner was to his taste, could not easily conceive what he must

have meant by hunger; and not only was he remarkable for the

extraordinary quantity which he eat, but he was, or affected to be,

a man of very nice discernment in the science of cookery.  He used

to descant critically on the dishes which had been at table where

he had dined or supped, and to recollect very minutely what he had

liked.  I remember, when he was in Scotland, his praising 'Gordon's

palates,' (a dish of palates at the Honourable Alexander Gordon's)

with a warmth of expression which might have done honour to more

important subjects.  'As for Maclaurin's imitation of a MADE DISH,

it was a wretched attempt.'  He about the same time was so much

displeased with the performances of a nobleman's French cook, that

he exclaimed with vehemence, 'I'd throw such a rascal into the

river, and he then proceeded to alarm a lady at whose house he was

to sup, by the following manifesto of his skill: 'I, Madam, who

live at a variety of good tables, am a much better judge of

cookery, than any person who has a very tolerable cook, but lives

much at home; for his palate is gradually adapted to the taste of

his cook; whereas, Madam, in trying by a wider range, I can more

exquisitely judge.'  When invited to dine, even with an intimate

friend, he was not pleased if something better than a plain dinner

was not prepared for him.  I have heard him say on such an

occasion, 'This was a good dinner enough, to be sure; but it was

not a dinner to ASK a man to.'  On the other hand, he was wont to

express, with great glee, his satisfaction when he had been

entertained quite to his mind.  One day when we had dined with his

neighbour and landlord in Bolt-court, Mr. Allen, the printer, whose

old housekeeper had studied his taste in every thing, he pronounced

this eulogy: 'Sir, we could not have had a better dinner had there

been a Synod of Cooks.'





* At Colchester.--ED.





While we were left by ourselves, after the Dutchman had gone to

bed, Dr. Johnson talked of that studied behaviour which many have

recommended and practised.  He disapproved of it; and said, 'I

never considered whether I should be a grave man, or a merry man,

but just let inclination, for the time, have its course.'



I teized him with fanciful apprehensions of unhappiness.  A moth

having fluttered round the candle, and burnt itself, he laid hold

of this little incident to admonish me; saying, with a sly look,

and in a solemn but quiet tone, 'That creature was its own

tormentor, and I believe its name was BOSWELL.'



Next day we got to Harwich to dinner; and my passage in the packet-

boat to Helvoetsluys being secured, and my baggage put on board, we

dined at our inn by ourselves.  I happened to say it would be

terrible if he should not find a speedy opportunity of returning to

London, and be confined to so dull a place.  JOHNSON.  'Don't Sir,

accustom yourself to use big words for little matters.  It would

NOT be TERRIBLE, though I WERE to be detained some time here.'



We went and looked at the church, and having gone into it and

walked up to the altar, Johnson, whose piety was constant and

fervent, sent me to my knees, saying, 'Now that you are going to

leave your native country, recommend yourself to the protection of

your CREATOR and REDEEMER.'



After we came out of the church, we stood talking for some time

together of Bishop Berkeley's ingenious sophistry to prove the non-

existence of matter, and that every thing in the universe is merely

ideal.  I observed, that though we are satisfied his doctrine is

not true, it is impossible to refute it.  I never shall forget the

alacrity with which Johnson answered, striking his foot with mighty

force against a large stone, till he rebounded from it, 'I refute

it THUS.'



My revered friend walked down with me to the beach, where we

embraced and parted with tenderness, and engaged to correspond by

letters.  I said, 'I hope, Sir, you will not forget me in my

ahsence.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, it is more likely you should forget

me, than that I should forget you.'  As the vessel put out to sea,

I kept my eyes upon him for a considerable time, while he remained

rolling his majestick frame in his usual manner: and at last I

perceived him walk hack into the town, and he disappeared.



1764: AETAT. 55.]--Early in 1764 Johnson paid a visit to the

Langton family, at their seat of Langton, in Lincolnshire, where he

passed some time, much to his satisfaction.  His friend Bennet

Langton, it will not he doubted, did every thing in his power to

make the place agreeable to so illustrious a guest; and the elder

Mr. Langton and his lady, being fully capable of understanding his

value, were not wanting in attention.



Johnson, during his stay at Langton, had the advantage of a good

library, and saw several gentlemen of the neighbourhood.  I have

obtained from Mr. Langton the following particulars of this period.



He was now fully convinced that he could not have been satisfied

with a country living; for, talking of a respectable clergyman in

Lincolnshire, he observed, 'This man, Sir, fills up the duties of

his life well.  I approve of him, but could not imitate him.'



To a lady who endeavoured to vindicate herself from blame for

neglecting social attention to worthy neighbours, by saying, 'I

would go to them if it would do them any good,' he said, 'What

good, Madam, do you expect to have in your power to do them?  It is

shewing them respect, and that is doing them good.'



So socially accommodating was he, that once when Mr. Langton and he

were driving together in a coach, and Mr. Langton complained of

being sick, he insisted that they should go out and sit on the back

of it in the open air, which they did.  And being sensible how

strange the appearance must be, observed, that a countryman whom

they saw in a field, would probably be thinking, 'If these two

madmen should come down, what would become of me?'



Soon after his return to London, which was in February, was founded

that CLUB which existed long without a name, but at Mr. Garrick's

funeral became distinguished by the title of THE LITERARY CLUB.

Sir Joshua Reynolds had the merit of being the first proposer of

it, to which Johnson acceded, and the original members were, Sir

Joshua Reynolds, Dr. Johnson, Mr. Edmund Burke, Dr. Nugent, Mr.

Beauclerk, Mr. Langton, Dr. Goldsmith, Mr. Chamier, and Sir John

Hawkins.  They met at the Turk's Head, in Gerrard-street, Soho, one

evening in every week, at seven, and generally continued their

conversation till a pretty late hour.  This club has been gradually

increased to its present number, thirty-five: After about ten

years, instead of supping weekly, it was resolved to dine together

once a fortnight during the meeting of Parliament.  Their original

tavern having been converted into a private house, they moved first

to Prince's in Sackville-street, then to Le Telier's in Dover-

street, and now meet at Parsloe's, St. James's-street.  Between the

time of its formation, and the time at which this work is passing

through the press, (June 1792,) the following persons, now dead,

were members of it: Mr. Dunning, (afterwards Lord Ashburton,) Mr.

Samuel Dyer, Mr. Garrick, Dr. Shipley Bishop of St. Asaph, Mr.

Vesey, Mr. Thomas Warton and Dr. Adam Smith.  The present members

are,--Mr. Burke, Mr. Langton, Lord Charlemont, Sir Robert Chambers,

Dr. Percy Bishop of Dromore, Dr. Barnard Bishop of Killaloc, Dr.

Marlay Bishop of Clonfert, Mr. Fox, Dr. George Fordyce, Sir William

Scott, Sir Joseph Banks, Sir Charles Bunbury, Mr. Windham of

Norfolk, Mr. Sheridan, Mr. Gibbon, Sir William Jones, Mr. Colman,

Mr. Steevens, Dr. Burney, Dr. Joseph Warton, Mr. Malone, Lord

Ossory, Lord Spencer, Lord Lucan, Lord Palmerston, Lord Eliot, Lord

Macartney, Mr. Richard Burke junior, Sir William Hamilton, Dr.

Warren, Mr. Courtenay, Dr. Hinchcliffe Bishop of Peterborough, the

Duke of Leeds, Dr. Douglas Bishop of Salisbury, and the writer of

this account.



Not very long after the institution of our club, Sir Joshua

Reynolds was speaking of it to Garrick.  'I like it much, (said

he), I think I shall be of you.'  When Sir Joshua mentioned this to

Dr. Johnson, he was much displeased with the actor's conceit.

'HE'LL BE OF US, (said Johnson) how does he know we will PERMIT

him?  The first Duke in England has no right to hold such

language.'  However, when Garrick was regularly proposed some time

afterwards, Johnson, though he had taken a momentary offence at his

arrogance, warmly and kindly supported him, and he was accordingly

elected, was a most agreeable member, and continued to attend our

meetings to the time of his death.



It was Johnson's custom to observe certain days with a pious

abstraction; viz. New-year's-day, the day of his wife's death, Good

Friday, Easter-day, and his own birth-day.  He this year says:--'I

have now spent fifty-five years in resolving; having, from the

earliest time almost that I can remember, been forming schemes of a

better life.  I have done nothing.  The need of doing, therefore,

is pressing, since the time of doing is short.  O GOD, grant me to

resolve aright, and to keep my resolutions, for JESUS CHRIST'S

sake.  Amen.'



About this time he was afflicted with a very severe return of the

hypochondriack disorder, which was ever lurking about him.  He was

so ill, as, notwithstanding his remarkable love of company, to be

entirely averse to society, the most fatal symptom of that malady.

Dr. Adams told me, that as an old friend he was admitted to visit

him, and that he found him in a deplorable state, sighing,

groaning, talking to himself, and restlessly walking from room to

room.  He then used this emphatical expression of the misery which

he felt: 'I would consent to have a limb amputated to recover my

spirits.'



Talking to himself was, indeed, one of his singularities ever since

I knew him.  I was certain that he was frequently uttering pious

ejaculations; for fragments of the Lord's Prayer have been

distinctly overheard.  His friend Mr. Thomas Davies, of whom

Churchill says,





     'That Davies hath a very pretty wife,'





when Dr. Johnson muttered 'lead us not into temptation,' used with

waggish and gallant humour to whisper Mrs. Davies, 'You, my dear,

are the cause of this.'



He had another particularity, of which none of his friends ever

ventured to ask an explanation.  It appeared to me some

superstitious habit, which he had contracted early, and from which

he had never called upon his reason to disentangle him.  This was

his anxious care to go out or in at a door or passage by a certain

number of steps from a certain point, or at least so as that either

his right or his left foot, (I am not certain which,) should

constantly make the first actual movement when he came close to the

door or passage.  Thus I conjecture: for I have, upon innumerable

occasions, observed him suddenly stop, and then seem to count his

steps with a deep earnestness; and when he had neglected or gone

wrong in this sort of magical movement, I have seen him go back

again, put himself in a proper posture to begin the ceremony, and,

having gone through it, break from his abstraction, walk briskly

on, and join his companion.  A strange instance of something of

this nature, even when on horseback, happened when he was in the

isle of Sky.  Sir Joshua Reynolds has observed him to go a good way

about, rather than cross a particular alley in Leicester-fields;

but this Sir Joshua imputed to his having had some disagreeable

recollection associated with it.



That the most minute singularities which belonged to him, and made

very observable parts of his appearance and manner, may not be

omitted, it is requisite to mention, that while talking or even

musing as he sat in his chair, he commonly held his head to one

side towards his right shoulder, and shook it in a tremulous

manner, moving his body backwards and forwards, and rubbing his

left knee in the same direction, with the palm of his hand.  In the

intervals of articulating he made various sounds with his mouth,

sometimes as if ruminating, or what is called chewing the cud,

sometimes giving a half whistle, sometimes making his tongue play

backwards from the roof of his mouth, as if clucking like a hen,

and sometimes protruding it against his upper gums in front, as if

pronouncing quickly under his breath, TOO, TOO, TOO: all this

accompanied sometimes with a thoughtful look, but more frequently

with a smile.  Generally when he had concluded a period, in the

course of a dispute, by which time he was a good deal exhausted by

violence and vociferation, he used to blow out his breath like a

Whale.  This I supposed was a relief to his lungs; and seemed in

him to be a contemptuous mode of expression, as if he had made the

arguments of his opponent fly like chaff before the wind.



1765: AETAT. 56.]--Trinity College, Dublin, at this time surprised

Johnson with a spontaneous compliment of the highest academical

honours, by creating him Doctor of Laws.



He appears this year to have been seized with a temporary fit of

ambition, for he had thoughts both of studying law and of engaging

in politics.  His 'Prayer before the Study of Law' is truly

admirable:--





'Sept. 26, 1765.



'Almighty GOD, the giver of wisdom, without whose help resolutions

are vain, without whose blessing study is ineffectual; enable me,

if it be thy will, to attain such knowledge as may qualify me to

direct the doubtful, and instruct the ignorant; to prevent wrongs

and terminate contentions; and grant that I may use that knowledge

which I shall attain, to thy glory and my own salvation, for JESUS

CHRIST'S sake.  Amen.'





This year was distinguished by his being introduced into the family

of Mr. Thrale, one of the most eminent brewers in England, and

Member of Parliament for the borough of Southwark.  Foreigners are

not a little amazed when they hear of brewers, distillers, and men

in similar departments of trade, held forth as persons of

considerable consequence.  In this great commercial country it is

natural that a situation which produces much wealth should be

considered as very respectable; and, no doubt, honest industry is

entitled to esteem.  But, perhaps, the too rapid advance of men of

low extraction tends to lessen the value of that distinction by

birth and gentility, which has ever been found beneficial to the

grand scheme of subordination.  Johnson used to give this account

of the rise of Mr. Thrale's father: 'He worked at six shillings a

week for twenty years in the great brewery, which afterwards was

his own.  The proprietor of it had an only daughter, who was

married to a nobleman.  It was not fit that a peer should continue

the business.  On the old man's death, therefore, the brewery was

to be sold.  To find a purchaser for so large a property was a

difficult matter; and, after some time, it was suggested, that it

would be adviseable to treat with Thrale, a sensible, active,

honest man, who had been employed in the house, and to transfer the

whole to him for thirty thousand pounds, security being taken upon

the property.  This was accordingly settled.  In eleven years

Thrale paid the purchase-money.  He acquired a large fortune, and

lived to be Member of Parliament for Southwark.  But what was most

remarkable was the liberality with which he used his riches.  He

gave his son and daughters the best education.  The esteem which

his good conduct procured him from the nobleman who had married his

master's daughter, made him be treated with much attention; and his

son, both at school and at the University of Oxford, associated

with young men of the first rank.  His allowance from his father,

after he left college, was splendid; no less than a thousand a

year.  This, in a man who had risen as old Thrale did, was a very

extraordinary instance of generosity.  He used to say, "If this

young dog does not find so much after I am gone as he expects, let

him remember that he has had a great deal in my own time."'



The son, though in affluent circumstances, had good sense enough to

carry on his father's trade, which was of such extent, that I

remember he once told me, he would not quit it for an annuity of

ten thousand a year; 'Not (said he,) that I get ten thousand a year

by it, but it is an estate to a family.'  Having left daughters

only, the property was sold for the immense sum of one hundred and

thirty-five thousand pounds; a magnificent proof of what may be

done by fair trade in no long period of time.



Mr. Thrale had married Miss Hesther Lynch Salusbury, of good Welsh

extraction, a lady of lively talents, improved by education.  That

Johnson's introduction into Mr. Thrale's family, which contributed

so much to the happiness of his life, was owing to her desire for

his conversation, is very probable and a general supposition: but

it is not the truth.  Mr. Murphy, who was intimate with Mr. Thrale,

having spoken very highly of Dr. Johnson, he was requested to make

them acquainted.  This being mentioned to Johnson, he accepted of

an invitation to dinner at Thrale's, and was so much pleased with

his reception, both by Mr. and Mrs. Thrale, and they so much

pleased with him, that his invitations to their house were more and

more frequent, till at last he became one of the family, and an

apartment was appropriated to him, both in their house in

Southwark, and in their villa at Streatham.



Johnson had a very sincere esteem for Mr. Thrale, as a man of

excellent principles, a good scholar, well skilled in trade, of a

sound understanding, and of manners such as presented the character

of a plain independent English Squire.  As this family will

frequently be mentioned in the course of the following pages, and

as a false notion has prevailed that Mr. Thrale was inferiour, and

in some degree insignificant, compared with Mrs. Thrale, it may be

proper to give a true state of the case from the authority of

Johnson himself in his own words.



'I know no man, (said he,) who is more master of his wife and

family than Thrale.  If he but holds up a finger, he is obeyed.  It

is a great mistake to suppose that she is above him in literary

attainments.  She is more flippant; but he has ten times her

learning: he is a regular scholar; but her learning is that of a

school-boy in one of the lower forms.'  My readers may naturally

wish for some representation of the figures of this couple.  Mr.

Thrale was tall, well proportioned, and stately.  As for Madam, or

my Mistress, by which epithets Johnson used to mention Mrs. Thrale,

she was short, plump, and brisk.  She has herself given us a lively

view of the idea which Johnson had of her person, on her appearing

before him in a dark-coloured gown: 'You little creatures should

never wear those sort of clothes, however; they are unsuitable in

every way.  What! have not all insects gay colours?'  Mr. Thrale

gave his wife a liberal indulgence, both in the choice of their

company, and in the mode of entertaining them.  He understood and

valued Johnson, without remission, from their first acquaintance to

the day of his death.  Mrs. Thrale was enchanted with Johnson's

conversation, for its own sake, and had also a very allowable

vanity in appearing to be honoured with the attention of so

celebrated a man.



Nothing could be more fortunate for Johnson than this connection.

He had at Mr. Thrale's all the comforts and even luxuries of life;

his melancholy was diverted, and his irregular habits lessened by

association with an agreeable and well-ordered family.  He was

treated with the utmost respect, and even affection.  The vivacity

of Mrs. Thrale's literary talk roused him to cheerfulness and

exertion, even when they were alone.  But this was not often the

case; for he found here a constant succession of what gave him the

highest enjoyment: the society of the learned, the witty, and the

eminent in every way, who were assembled in numerous companies,

called forth his wonderful powers, and gratified him with

admiration, to which no man could be insensible.



In the October of this year he at length gave to the world his

edition of Shakspeare, which, if it had no other merit but that of

producing his Preface, in which the excellencies and defects of

that immortal bard are displayed with a masterly hand, the nation

would have had no reason to complain.



In 1764 and 1765 it should seem that Dr. Johnson was so busily

employed with his edition of Shakspeare, as to have had little

leisure for any other literary exertion, or, indeed, even for

private correspondence.  He did not favour me with a single letter

for more than two years, for which it will appear that he

afterwards apologised.



He was, however, at all times ready to give assistance to his

friends, and others, in revising their works, and in writing for

them, or greatly improving their Dedications.  In that courtly

species of composition no man excelled Dr. Johnson.  Though the

loftiness of his mind prevented him from ever dedicating in his own

person, he wrote a very great number of Dedications for others.

Some of these, the persons who were favoured with them are

unwilling should be mentioned, from a too anxious apprehension, as

I think, that they might be suspected of having received larger

assistance; and some, after all the diligence I have bestowed, have

escaped my enquiries.  He told me, a great many years ago, 'he

believed he had dedicated to all the Royal Family round;' and it

was indifferent to him what was the subject of the work dedicated,

provided it were innocent.  He once dedicated some Musick for the

German Flute to Edward, Duke of York.  In writing Dedications for

others, he considered himself as by no means speaking his own

sentiments.



I returned to London in February,* and found Dr. Johnson in a good

house in Johnson's Court, Fleet-street, in which he had

accommodated Miss Williams with an apartment on the ground floor,

while Mr. Levet occupied his post in the garret: his faithful

Francis was still attending upon him.  He received me with much

kindness.  The fragments of our first conversation, which I have

preserved, are these:



I told him that Voltaire, in a conversation with me, had

distinguished Pope and Dryden thus:--'Pope drives a handsome

chariot, with a couple of neat trim nags; Dryden a coach, and six

stately horses.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, the truth is, they both

drive coaches and six; but Dryden's horses are either galloping or

stumbling: Pope's go at a steady even trot.'  He said of

Goldsmith's Traveller, which had been published in my absence,

'There has not been so fine a poem since Pope's time.'





* 1766.





Talking of education, 'People have now a-days, (said he,) got a

strange opinion that every thing should be taught by lectures.

Now, I cannot see that lectures can do so much good as reading the

books from which the lectures are taken.  I know nothing that can

be best taught by lectures, except where experiments are to be

shewn.  You may teach chymistry by lectures.--You might teach

making of shoes by lectures!'



At night I supped with him at the Mitre tavern, that we might renew

our social intimacy at the original place of meeting.  But there

was now a considerable difference in his way of living.  Having had

an illness, in which he was advised to leave off wine, he had, from

that period, continued to abstain from it, and drank only water, or

lemonade.



I told him that a foreign friend of his, whom I had met with

abroad, was so wretchedly perverted to infidelity, that he treated

the hopes of immortality with brutal levity; and said, 'As man dies

like a dog, let him lie like a dog.'  JOHNSON.  'IF he dies like a

dog, LET him lie like a dog.'  I added, that this man said to me,

'I hate mankind, for I think myself one of the best of them, and I

know how bad I am.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, he must be very singular in

his opinion, if he thinks himself one of the best of men; for none

of his friends think him so.'--He said, 'no honest man could be a

Deist; for no man could be so after a fair examination of the

proofs of Christianity.'  I named Hume.  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir; Hume

owned to a clergyman in the bishoprick of Durham, that he had never

read the New Testament with attention.'  I mentioned Hume's notion,

that all who are happy are equally happy; a little miss with a new

gown at a dancing school ball, a general at the head of a

victorious army, and an orator, after having made an eloquent

speech in a great assembly.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, that all who are

happy, are equally happy, is not true.  A peasant and a philosopher

may be equally SATISFIED, but not equally HAPPY.  Happiness

consists in the multiplicity of agreeable consciousness.  A peasant

has not capacity for having equal happiness with a philosopher.'



Dr. Johnson was very kind this evening, and said to me 'You have

now lived five-and-twenty years, and you have employed them well.'

'Alas, Sir, (said I,) I fear not.  Do I know history?  Do I know

mathematicks?  Do I know law?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, though you may

know no science so well as to be able to teach it, and no

profession so well as to be able to follow it, your general mass of

knowledge of books and men renders you very capable to make

yourself master of any science, or fit yourself for any

profession.'  I mentioned that a gay friend had advised me against

being a lawyer, because I should be excelled by plodding block-

heads.  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, in the formulary and statutory part of

law, a plodding block-head may excel; but in the ingenious and

rational part of it a plodding block-head can never excel.'



I talked of the mode adopted by some to rise in the world, by

courting great men, and asked him whether he had ever submitted to

it.  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, I never was near enough to great men, to

court them.  You may be prudently attached to great men and yet

independent.  You are not to do what you think wrong; and, Sir, you

are to calculate, and not pay too dear for what you get.  You must

not give a shilling's worth of court for six-pence worth of good.

But if you can get a shilling's worth of good for six-pence worth

of court, you are a fool if you do not pay court.'



I talked to him a great deal of what I had seen in Corsica, and of

my intention to publish an account of it.  He encouraged me by

saying, 'You cannot go to the bottom of the subject; but all that

you tell us will be new to us.  Give us as many anecdotes as you

can.'



Our next meeting at the Mitre was on Saturday the 15th of February,

when I presented to him my old and most intimate friend, the

Reverend Mr. Temple, then of Cambridge.  I having mentioned that I

had passed some time with Rousseau in his wild retreat, and having

quoted some remark made by Mr. Wilkes, with whom I had spent many

pleasant hours in Italy, Johnson said (sarcastically,) 'It seems,

Sir, you have kept very good company abroad, Rousseau and Wilkes!'

Thinking it enough to defend one at a time, I said nothing as to my

gay friend, but answered with a smile, 'My dear Sir, you don't call

Rousseau bad company.  Do you really think HIM a bad man?'

JOHNSON.  'Sir, if you are talking jestingly of this, I don't talk

with you.  If you mean to be serious, I think him one of the worst

of men; a rascal who ought to be hunted out of society, as he has

been.  Three or four nations have expelled him; and it is a shame

that he is protected in this country.'  BOSWELL.  'I don't deny,

Sir, but that his novel may, perhaps, do harm; but I cannot think

his intention was bad.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, that will not do.  We

cannot prove any man's intention to be bad.  You may shoot a man

through the head, and say you intended to miss him; but the Judge

will order you to be hanged.  An alleged want of intention, when

evil is committed, will not be allowed in a court of justice.

Rousseau, Sir, is a very bad man.  I would sooner sign a sentence

for his transportation, than that of any felon who has gone from

the Old Bailey these many years.  Yes, I should like to have him

work in the plantations.'  BOSWELL.  'Sir, do you think him as bad

a man as Voltaire?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, it is difficult to settle

the proportion of iniquity between them.'



On his favourite subject of subordination, Johnson said, 'So far is

it from being true that men are naturally equal, that no two people

can be half an hour together, but one shall acquire an evident

superiority over the other.'



I mentioned the advice given us by philosophers, to console

ourselves, when distressed or embarrassed, by thinking of those who

are in a worse situation than ourselves.  This, I observed, could

not apply to all, for there must be some who have nobody worse than

they are.  JOHNSON.  'Why, to be sure, Sir, there are; but they

don't know it.  There is no being so poor and so contemptible, who

does not think there is somebody still poorer, and still more

contemptible.'



As my stay in London at this time was very short, I had not many

opportunities of being with Dr. Johnson; but I felt my veneration

for him in no degree lessened, by my having seen multoram hominum

mores et urbes.  On the contrary, by having it in my power to

compare him with many of the most celebrated persons of other

countries, my admiration of his extraordinary mind was increased

and confirmed.



The roughness, indeed, which sometimes appeared in his manners, was

more striking to me now, from my having been accustomed to the

studied smooth complying habits of the Continent; and I clearly

recognised in him, not without respect for his honest conscientious

zeal, the same indignant and sarcastical mode of treating every

attempt to unhinge or weaken good principles.



One evening when a young gentleman teized him with an account of

the infidelity of his servant, who, he said, would not believe the

scriptures, because he could not read them in the original tongues,

and be sure that they were not invented, 'Why, foolish fellow,

(said Johnson,) has he any better authority for almost every thing

that he believes?'  BOSWELL.  'Then the vulgar, Sir, never can know

they are right, but must submit themselves to the learned.'

JOHNSON.  'To be sure, Sir.  The vulgar are the children of the

State, and must be taught like children.'  BOSWELL.  'Then, Sir, a

poor Turk must be a Mahometan, just as a poor Englishman must be a

Christian?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, yes, Sir; and what then?  This now is

such stuff as I used to talk to my mother, when I first began to

think myself a clever fellow; and she ought to have whipt me for

it.'



Another evening Dr. Goldsmith and I called on him, with the hope of

prevailing on him to sup with us at the Mitre.  We found him

indisposed, and resolved not to go abroad.  'Come then, (said

Goldsmith,) we will not go to the Mitre to-night, since we cannot

have the big man with us.'  Johnson then called for a bottle of

port, of which Goldsmith and I partook, while our friend, now a

water-drinker, sat by us.  GOLDSMITH.  'I think, Mr. Johnson, you

don't go near the theatres now.  You give yourself no more concern

about a new play, than if you had never had any thing to do with

the stage.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, our tastes greatly alter.  The

lad does not care for the child's rattle, and the old man does not

care for the young man's whore.'  GOLDSMITH.  'Nay, Sir, but your

Muse was not a whore.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, I do not think she was.

But as we advance in the journey of life, we drop some of the

things which have pleased us; whether it be that we are fatigued

and don't choose to carry so many things any farther, or that we

find other things which we like better.'  BOSWELL.  'But, Sir, why

don't you give us something in some other way?'  GOLDSMITH.  'Ay,

Sir, we have a claim upon you.'  JOHNSON.  No, Sir, I am not

obliged to do any more.  No man is obliged to do as much as he can

do.  A man is to have part of his life to himself.  If a soldier

has fought a good many campaigns, he is not to be blamed if he

retires to ease and tranquillity.  A physician, who has practised

long in a great city, may be excused if he retires to a small town,

and takes less practice.  Now, Sir, the good I can do by my

conversation bears the same proportion to the good I can do by my

writings, that the practice of a physician, retired to a small

town, does to his practice in a great city.'  BOSWELL.  'But I

wonder, Sir, you have not more pleasure in writing than in not

writing.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, you MAY wonder.'



He talked of making verses, and observed, 'The great difficulty is

to know when you have made good ones.  When composing, I have

generally had them in my mind, perhaps fifty at a time, walking up

and down in my room; and then I have written them down, and often,

from laziness, have written only half lines.  I have written a

hundred lines in a day.  I remember I wrote a hundred lines of The

Vanity of Human Wishes in a day.  Doctor, (turning to Goldsmith,) I

am not quite idle; I made one line t'other day; but I made no

more.'  GOLDSMITH.  'Let us hear it; we'll put a bad one to it.'

JOHNSON.  'No, Sir, I have forgot it.'





'TO BENNET LANGTON, ESQ., AT LANGTON, NEAR SPILSBY, LINCOLNSHIRE



'DEAR SIR,--What your friends have done, that from your departure

till now nothing has been heard of you, none of us are able to

inform the rest; but as we are all neglected alike, no one thinks

himself entitled to the privilege of complaint.



'I should have known nothing of you or of Langton, from the time

that dear Miss Langton left us, had not I met Mr. Simpson, of

Lincoln, one day in the street, by whom I was informed that Mr.

Langton, your Mamma, and yourself, had been all ill, but that you

were all recovered.



'That sickness should suspend your correspondence, I did not

wonder; but hoped that it would be renewed at your recovery.



'Since you will not inform us where you are, or how you live, I

know not whether you desire to know any thing of us.  However, I

will tell you that THE CLUB subsists; but we have the loss of

Burke's company since he has been engaged in publick business, in

which he has gained more reputation than perhaps any man at his

[first] appearance ever gained before.  He made two speeches in the

House for repealing the Stamp-act, which were publickly commended

by Mr. Pitt, and have filled the town with wonder.



'Burke is a great man by nature, and is expected soon to attain

civil greatness.  I am grown greater too, for I have maintained the

news-papers these many weeks; and what is greater still, I have

risen every morning since New-year's day, at about eight; when I

was up, I have indeed done but little; yet it is no slight

advancement to obtain for so many hours more, the consciousness of

being.



'I wish you were in my new study; I am now writing the first letter

in it.  I think it looks very pretty about me.



'Dyer is constant at THE CLUB; Hawkins is remiss; I am not over

diligent.  Dr. Nugent, Dr. Goldsmith, and Mr. Reynolds, are very

constant.  Mr. Lye is printing his Saxon and Gothick Dictionary;

all THE CLUB subscribes.



'You will pay my respects to all my Lincolnshire friends.  I am,

dear Sir, most affectionately your's,



'March 9, 1766.



'SAM. JOHNSON.'



Johnson's-court, Fleet-street.'





The Honourable Thomas Hervey and his lady having unhappily

disagreed, and being about to separate, Johnson interfered as their

friend, and wrote him a letter of expostulation, which I have not

been able to find; but the substance of it is ascertained by a

letter to Johnson in answer to it, which Mr. Hervey printed.  The

occasion of this correspondence between Dr. Johnson and Mr. Harvey,

was thus related to me by Mr. Beauclerk.  'Tom Harvey had a great

liking for Johnson, and in his will had left him a legacy of fifty

pounds.  One day he said to me, "Johnson may want this money now,

more than afterwards.  I have a mind to give it him directly.  Will

you be so good as to carry a fifty pound note from me to him?"

This I positively refused to do, as he might, perhaps, have knocked

me down for insulting him, and have afterwards put the note in his

pocket.  But I said, if Harvey would write him a letter, and

enclose a fifty pound note, I should take care to deliver it.  He

accordingly did write him a letter, mentioning that he was only

paying a legacy a little sooner.  To his letter he added, "P. S.  I

am going to part with my wife."  Johnson then wrote to him, saying

nothing of the note, but remonstrating with him against parting

with his wife.'



In February, 1767, there happened one of the most remarkable

incidents of Johnson's life, which gratified his monarchical

enthusiasm, and which he loved to relate with all its

circumstances, when requested by his friends.  This was his being

honoured by a private conversation with his Majesty, in the library

at the Queen's house.  He had frequently visited those splendid

rooms and noble collection of books, which he used to say was more

numerous and curious than he supposed any person could have made in

the time which the King had employed.  Mr. Barnard, the librarian,

took care that he should have every accommodation that could

contribute to his ease and convenience, while indulging his

literary taste in that place; so that he had here a very agreeable

resource at leisure hours.



His Majesty having been informed of his occasional visits, was

pleased to signify a desire that he should be told when Dr. Johnson

came next to the library.  Accordingly, the next time that Johnson

did come, as soon as he was fairly engaged with a book, on which,

while he sat by the fire, he seemed quite intent, Mr. Barnard stole

round to the apartment where the King was, and, in obedience to his

Majesty's commands, mentioned that Dr. Johnson was then in the

library.  His Majesty said he was at leisure, and would go to him;

upon which Mr. Barnard took one of the candles that stood on the

King's table, and lighted his Majesty through a suite of rooms,

till they came to a private door into the library, of which his

Majesty had the key.  Being entered, Mr. Barnard stepped forward

hastily to Dr. Johnson, who was still in a profound study, and

whispered him, 'Sir, here is the King.'  Johnson started up, and

stood still.  His Majesty approached him, and at once was

courteously easy.



His Majesty began by observing, that he understood he came

sometimes to the library; and then mentioning his having heard that

the Doctor had been lately at Oxford, asked him if he was not fond

of going thither.  To which Johnson answered, that he was indeed

fond of going to Oxford sometimes, but was likewise glad to come

back again.  The King then asked him what they were doing at

Oxford.  Johnson answered, he could not much commend their

diligence, but that in some respects they were mended, for they had

put their press under better regulations, and were at that time

printing Polybius.  He was then asked whether there were better

libraries at Oxford or Cambridge.  He answered, he believed the

Bodleian was larger than any they had at Cambridge; at the same

time adding, 'I hope, whether we have more books or not than they

have at Cambridge, we shall make as good use of them as they do.'

Being asked whether All-Souls or Christ-Church library was the

largest, he answered, 'All-Souls library is the largest we have,

except the Bodleian.'  'Aye, (said the King,) that is the publick

library.'



His Majesty enquired if he was then writing any thing.  He

answered, he was not, for he had pretty well told the world what he

knew, and must now read to acquire more knowledge.  The King, as it

should seem with a view to urge him to rely on his own stores as an

original writer, and to continue his labours, then said 'I do not

think you borrow much from any body.'  Johnson said, he thought he

had already done his part as a writer.  'I should have thought so

too, (said the King,) if you had not written so well.'--Johnson

observed to me, upon this, that 'No man could have paid a handsomer

compliment; and it was fit for a King to pay.  It was decisive.'

When asked by another friend, at Sir Joshua Reynolds's, whether he

made any reply to this high compliment, he answered, 'No, Sir.

When the King had said it, it was to be so.  It was not for me to

bandy civilities with my Sovereign.'  Perhaps no man who had spent

his whole life in courts could have shewn a more nice and dignified

sense of true politeness, than Johnson did in this instance.




His Majesty having observed to him that he supposed he must have

read a great deal; Johnson answered, that he thought more than he

read; that he had read a great deal in the early part of his life,

but having fallen into ill health, he had not been able to read

much, compared with others: for instance, he said he had not read

much, compared with Dr. Warburton.  Upon which the King said, that

he heard Dr. Warburton was a man of such general knowledge, that

you could scarce talk with him on any subject on which he was not

qualified to speak; and that his learning resembled Garrick's

acting, in its universality.  His Majesty then talked of the

controversy between Warburton and Lowth, which he seemed to have

read, and asked Johnson what he thought of it.  Johnson answered,

'Warburton has most general, most scholastick learning; Lowth is

the more correct scholar.  I do not know which of them calls names

best.'  The King was pleased to say he was of the same opinion;

adding, 'You do not think, then, Dr. Johnson, that there was much

argument in the case.'  Johnson said, he did not think there was.

'Why truly, (said the King,) when once it comes to calling names,

argument is pretty well at an end.'



His Majesty then asked him what he thought of Lord Lyttelton's

History, which was then just published.  Johnson said, he thought

his style pretty good, but that he had blamed Henry the Second

rather too much.  'Why, (said the King,) they seldom do these

things by halves.'  'No, Sir, (answered Johnson,) not to Kings.'

But fearing to be misunderstood, he proceeded to explain himself;

and immediately subjoined, 'That for those who spoke worse of Kings

than they deserved, he could find no excuse; but that he could more

easily conceive how some might speak better of them than they

deserved, without any ill intention; for, as Kings had much in

their power to give, those who were favoured by them would

frequently, from gratitude, exaggerate their praises; and as this

proceeded from a good motive, it was certainly excusable, as far as

errour could be excusable.'



The King then asked him what he thought of Dr. Hill.  Johnson

answered, that he was an ingenious man, but had no veracity; and

immediately mentioned, as an instance of it, an assertion of that

writer, that he had seen objects magnified to a much greater degree

by using three or four microscopes at a time, than by using one.

'Now, (added Johnson,) every one acquainted with microscopes knows,

that the more of them he looks through, the less the object will

appear.'  'Why, (replied the King,) this is not only telling an

untruth, but telling it clumsily; for, if that be the case, every

one who can look through a microscope will be able to detect him.'



'I now, (said Johnson to his friends, when relating what had

passed) began to consider that I was depreciating this man in the

estimation of his Sovereign, and thought it was time for me to say

something that might be more favourable.'  He added, therefore,

that Dr. Hill was, notwithstanding, a very curious observer; and if

he would have been contented to tell the world no more than he

knew, he might have been a very considerable man, and needed not to

have recourse to such mean expedients to raise his reputation.



The King then talked of literary journals, mentioned particularly

the Journal des Savans, and asked Johnson if it was well done.

Johnson said, it was formerly very well done, and gave some account

of the persons who began it, and carried it on for some years;

enlarging, at the same time, on the nature and use of such works.

The King asked him if it was well done now.  Johnson answered, he

had no reason to think that it was.  The King then asked him if

there were any other literary journals published in this kingdom,

except the Monthly and Critical Reviews; and on being answered

there were no other, his Majesty asked which of them was the best:

Johnson answered, that the Monthly Review was done with most care,

the Critical upon the best principles; adding that the authours of

the Monthly Review were enemies to the Church.  This the King said

he was sorry to hear.



The conversation next turned on the Philosophical Transactions,

when Johnson observed, that they had now a better method of

arranging their materials than formerly.  'Aye, (said the King,)

they are obliged to Dr. Johnson for that;' for his Majesty had

heard and remembered the circumstance, which Johnson himself had

forgot.



His Majesty expressed a desire to have the literary biography of

this country ably executed, and proposed to Dr. Johnson to

undertake it.  Johnson signified his readiness to comply with his

Majesty's wishes.



During the whole of this interview, Johnson talked to his Majesty

with profound respect, but still in his firm manly manner, with a

sonorous voice, and never in that subdued tone which is commonly

used at the levee and in the drawing-room.  After the King

withdrew, Johnson shewed himself highly pleased with his Majesty's

conversation, and gracious behaviour.  He said to Mr. Barnard,

'Sir, they may talk of the King as they will; but he is the finest

gentleman I have ever seen.'  And he afterwards observed to Mr.

Langton, 'Sir, his manners are those of as fine a gentleman as we

may suppose Lewis the Fourteenth or Charles the Second.'



At Sir Joshua Reynolds's, where a circle of Johnson's friends was

collected round him to hear his account of this memorable

conversation, Dr. Joseph Warton, in his frank and lively manner,

was very active in pressing him to mention the particulars.  'Come

now, Sir, this is an interesting matter; do favour us with it.'

Johnson, with great good humour, complied.



He told them, 'I found his Majesty wished I should talk, and I made

it my business to talk.  I find it does a man good to be talked to

by his Sovereign.  In the first place, a man cannot be in a

passion--.'  Here some question interrupted him, which is to be

regretted, as he certainly would have pointed out and illustrated

many circumstances of advantage, from being in a situation, where

the powers of the mind are at once excited to vigorous exertion,

and tempered by reverential awe.



During all the time in which Dr. Johnson was employed in relating

to the circle at Sir Joshua Reynolds's the particulars of what

passed between the King and him, Dr. Goldsmith remained unmoved

upon a sopha at some distance, affecting not to join in the least

in the eager curiosity of the company.  He assigned as a reason for

his gloom and seeming inattention, that he apprehended Johnson had

relinquished his purpose of furnishing him with a Prologue to his

play, with the hopes of which he had been flattered; but it was

strongly suspected that he was fretting with chagrin and envy at

the singular honour Dr. Johnson had lately enjoyed.  At length, the

frankness and simplicity of his natural character prevailed.  He

sprung from the sopha, advanced to Johnson, and in a kind of

flutter, from imagining himself in the situation which he had just

been hearing described, exclaimed, 'Well, you acquitted yourself in

this conversation better than I should have done; for I should have

bowed and stammered through the whole of it.'



His diary affords no light as to his employment at this time.  He

passed three months at Lichfield; and I cannot omit an affecting

and solemn scene there, as related by himself:--



'Sunday, Oct. 18, 1767.  Yesterday, Oct. 17, at about ten in the

morning, I took my leave for ever of my dear old friend, Catharine

Chambers, who came to live with my mother about 1724, and has been

but little parted from us since.  She buried my father, my brother,

and my mother.  She is now fifty-eight years old.



'I desired all to withdraw, then told her that we were to part for

ever; that as Christians, we should part with prayer; and that I

would, if she was willing, say a short prayer beside her.  She

expressed great desire to hear me; and held up her poor hands, as

she lay in bed, with great fervour, while I prayed, kneeling by

her, nearly in the following words:



'Almighty and most merciful Father, whose loving kindness is over

all thy works, behold, visit, and relieve this thy servant, who is

grieved with sickness.  Grant that the sense of her weakness may

add strength to her faith, and seriousness to her repentance.  And

grant that by the help of thy Holy Spirit, after the pains and

labours of this short life, we may all obtain everlasting

happiness, through JESUS CHRIST our Lord; for whose sake hear our

prayers.  Amen.  Our Father, &c.



'I then kissed her.  She told me, that to part was the greatest

pain that she had ever felt, and that she hoped we should meet

again in a better place.  I expressed, with swelled eyes, and great

emotion of tenderness, the same hopes.  We kissed, and parted.  I

humbly hope to meet again, and to part no more.'



1768: AETAT. 59]--It appears from his notes of the state of his

mind, that he suffered great perturbation and distraction in 1768.

Nothing of his writing was given to the publick this year, except

the Prologue to his friend Goldsmith's comedy of The Good-natured

Man.  The first lines of this Prologue are strongly

characteristical of the dismal gloom of his mind; which in his

case, as in the case of all who are distressed with the same malady

of imagination, transfers to others its own feelings.  Who could

suppose it was to introduce a comedy, when Mr. Bensley solemnly

began,





    'Press'd with the load of life, the weary mind

     Surveys the general toil of human kind.'





But this dark ground might make Goldsmith's humour shine the more.



In the spring of this year, having published my Account of Corsica,

with the Journal of a Tour to that Island, I returned to London,

very desirous to see Dr. Johnson, and hear him upon the subject.  I

found he was at Oxford, with his friend Mr. Chambers, who was now

Vinerian Professor, and lived in New Inn Hall.  Having had no

letter from him since that in which he criticised the Latinity of

my Thesis, and having been told by somebody that he was offended at

my having put into my Book an extract of his letter to me at Paris,

I was impatient to be with him, and therefore followed him to

Oxford, where I was entertained by Mr. Chambers, with a civility

which I shall ever gratefully remember.  I found that Dr. Johnson

had sent a letter to me to Scotland, and that I had nothing to

complain of but his being more indifferent to my anxiety than I

wished him to be.  Instead of giving, with the circumstances of

time and place, such fragments of his conversation as I preserved

during this visit to Oxford, I shall throw them together in

continuation.



Talking of some of the modern plays, he said False Delicacy was

totally void of character.  He praised Goldsmith's Good-natured

Man; said, it was the best comedy that had appeared since The

Provoked Husband, and that there had not been of late any such

character exhibited on the stage as that of Croaker.  I observed it

was the Suspirius of his Rambler.  He said, Goldsmith had owned he

had borrowed it from thence.  'Sir, (continued he,) there is all

the difference in the world between characters of nature and

characters of manners; and THERE is the difference between the

characters of Fielding and those of Richardson.  Characters of

manners are very entertaining; but they are to be understood by a

more superficial observer than characters of nature, where a man

must dive into the recesses of the human heart.'



It always appeared to me that he estimated the compositions of

Richardson too highly, and that he had an unreasonable prejudice

against Fielding.  In comparing those two writers, he used this

expression: 'that there was as great a difference between them as

between a man who knew how a watch was made, and a man who could

tell the hour by looking on the dial-plate.'



'I have not been troubled for a long time with authours desiring my

opinion of their works.  I used once to be sadly plagued with a man

who wrote verses, but who literally had no other notion of a verse,

but that it consisted of ten syllables.  Lay your knife and your

fork, across your plate, was to him a verse:





     Lay your knife and your fork, across your plate.





As he wrote a great number of verses, he sometimes by chance made

good ones, though he did not know it.'



Johnson expatiated on the advantages of Oxford for learning.

'There is here, Sir, (said he,) such a progressive emulation.  The

students are anxious to appear well to their tutors; the tutors are

anxious to have their pupils appear well in the college; the

colleges are anxious to have their students appear well in the

University; and there are excellent rules of discipline in every

college.  That the rules are sometimes ill observed, may be true;

but is nothing against the system.  The members of an University

may, for a season, be unmindful of their duty.  I am arguing for

the excellency of the institution.'



He said he had lately been a long while at Lichfield, but had grown

very weary before he left it.  BOSWELL.  'I wonder at that, Sir; it

is your native place.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, so is Scotland YOUR native

place.'



His prejudice against Scotland appeared remarkably strong at this

time.  When I talked of our advancement in literature, 'Sir, (said

he,) you have learnt a little from us, and you think yourselves

very great men.  Hume would never have written History, had not

Voltaire written it before him.  He is an echo of Voltaire.'

BOSWELL.  'But, Sir, we have Lord Kames.'  JOHNSON.  'You HAVE Lord

Kames.  Keep him; ha, ha, ha!  We don't envy you him.  Do you ever

see Dr. Robertson?'  BOSWELL.  'Yes, Sir.'  JOHNSON.  'Does the dog

talk of me?'  BOSWELL.  'Indeed, Sir, he does, and loves you.'

Thinking that I now had him in a corner, and being solicitous for

the literary fame of my country, I pressed him for his opinion on

the merit of Dr. Robertson's History of Scotland.  But, to my

surprize, he escaped.--'Sir, I love Robertson, and I won't talk of

his book.'



An essay, written by Mr. Deane, a divine of the Church of England,

maintaining the future life of brutes, by an explication of certain

parts of the scriptures, was mentioned, and the doctrine insisted

on by a gentleman who seemed fond of curious speculation.  Johnson,

who did not like to hear of any thing concerning a future state

which was not authorised by the regular canons of orthodoxy,

discouraged this talk; and being offended at its continuation, he

watched an opportunity to give the gentleman a blow of

reprehension.  So, when the poor speculatist, with a serious

metaphysical pensive face, addressed him, 'But really, Sir, when we

see a very sensible dog, we don't know what to think of him;'

Johnson, rolling with joy at the thought which beamed in his eye,

turned quickly round, and replied, 'True, Sir: and when we see a

very foolish FELLOW, we don't know what to think of HIM.'  He then

rose up, strided to the fire, and stood for some time laughing and

exulting.



I asked him if it was not hard that one deviation from chastity

should so absolutely ruin a young woman.  Johnson.  'Why, no, Sir;

it is the great principle which she is taught.  When she has given

up that principle, she has given up every notion of female honour

and virtue, which are all included in chastity.'



A gentleman talked to him of a lady whom he greatly admired and

wished to marry, but was afraid of her superiority of talents.

'Sir, (said he,) you need not be afraid; marry her.  Before a year

goes about, you'll find that reason much weaker, and that wit not

so bright.'  Yet the gentleman may be justified in his apprehension

by one of Dr. Johnson's admirable sentences in his life of Waller:

'He doubtless praised many whom he would have been afraid to marry;

and, perhaps, married one whom he would have been ashamed to

praise.  Many qualities contribute to domestic happiness, upon

which poetry has no colours to bestow; and many airs and sallies

may delight imagination, which he who flatters them never can

approve.'



He praised Signor Baretti.  'His account of Italy is a very

entertaining book; and, Sir, I know no man who carries his head

higher in conversation than Baretti.  There are strong powers in

his mind.  He has not, indeed, many hooks; but with what hooks he

has, he grapples very forcibly.'



At this time I observed upon the dial-plate of his watch a short

Greek inscription, taken from the New Testament, [Greek text omitted],

being the first words of our SAVIOUR'S solemn admonition to the

improvement of that time which is allowed us to prepare for eternity:

'the night cometh when no man can work.'  He sometime afterwards laid

aside this dial-plate; and when I asked him the reason, he said,

'It might do very well upon a clock which a man keeps in his

closet; but to have it upon his watch which he carries about with

him, and which is often looked at by others, might be censured as

ostentatious.'  Mr. Steevens is now possessed of the dial-plate

inscribed as above.



He remained at Oxford a considerable time; I was obliged to go to

London, where I received his letter, which had been returned from

Scotland.





'TO JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.



'MY DEAR BOSWELL,--I have omitted a long time to write to you,

without knowing very well why.  I could now tell why I should not

write; for who would write to men who publish the letters of their

friends, without their leave?  Yet I write to you in spite of my

caution, to tell you that I shall be glad to see you, and that I

wish you would empty your head of Corsica, which I think has filled

it rather too long.  But, at all events, I shall be glad, very glad

to see you.  I am, Sir, yours affectionately,



'SAM. JOHNSON.'



'Oxford, March 23, 1768.'





Upon his arrival in London in May, he surprized me one morning with

a visit at my lodgings in Half-Moon-street, was quite satisfied

with my explanation, and was in the kindest and most agreeable

frame of mind.  As he had objected to a part of one of his letters

being published, I thought it right to take this opportunity of

asking him explicitly whether it would be improper to publish his

letters after his death.  His answer was, 'Nay, Sir, when I am

dead, you may do as you will.'



He talked in his usual style with a rough contempt of popular

liberty.  'They make a rout about UNIVERSAL liberty, without

considering that all that is to be valued, or indeed can be enjoyed

by individuals, is PRIVATE liberty.  Political liberty is good only

so far as it produces private liberty.  Now, Sir, there is the

liberty of the press, which you know is a constant topick.  Suppose

you and I and two hundred more were restrained from printing our

thoughts: what then?  What proportion would that restraint upon us

bear to the private happiness of the nation?'



This mode of representing the inconveniences of restraint as light

and insignificant, was a kind of sophistry in which he delighted to

indulge himself, in opposition to the extreme laxity for which it

has been fashionable for too many to argue, when it is evident,

upon reflection, that the very essence of government is restraint;

and certain it is, that as government produces rational happiness,

too much restraint is better than too little.  But when restraint

is unnecessary, and so close as to gall those who are subject to

it, the people may and ought to remonstrate; and, if relief is not

granted, to resist.  Of this manly and spirited principle, no man

was more convinced than Johnson himself.



His sincere regard for Francis Barber, his faithful negro servant,

made him so desirous of his further improvement, that he now placed

him at a school at Bishop Stortford, in Hertfordshire.  This humane

attention does Johnson's heart much honour.  Out of many letters

which Mr. Barber received from his master, he has preserved three,

which he kindly gave me, and which I shall insert according to

their dates.





'TO MR. FRANCIS BARBER.



'DEAR FRANCIS,--I have been very much out of order.  I am glad to

hear that you are well, and design to come soon to see you.  I

would have you stay at Mrs. Clapp's for the present, till I can

determine what we shall do.  Be a good boy.



'My compliments to Mrs. Clapp and to Mr. Fowler.  I am, your's

affectionately,



SAM. JOHNSON.'



'May 28, 1768.'





Soon afterwards, he supped at the Crown and Anchor tavern, in the

Strand, with a company whom I collected to meet him.  They were Dr.

Percy, now Bishop of Dromore, Dr. Douglas, now Bishop of Salisbury,

Mr. Langton, Dr. Robertson the Historian, Dr. Hugh Blair, and Mr.

Thomas Davies, who wished much to be introduced to these eminent

Scotch literati; but on the present occasion he had very little

opportunity of hearing them talk, for with an excess of prudence,

for which Johnson afterwards found fault with them, they hardly

opened their lips, and that only to say something which they were

certain would not expose them to the sword of Goliath; such was

their anxiety for their fame when in the presence of Johnson.  He

was this evening in remarkable vigour of mind, and eager to exert

himself in conversation, which he did with great readiness and

fluency; but I am sorry to find that I have preserved but a small

part of what passed.



He was vehement against old Dr. Mounsey, of Chelsea College, as 'a

fellow who swore and talked bawdy.'  'I have been often in his

company, (said Dr. Percy,) and never heard him swear or talk

bawdy.'  Mr. Davies, who sat next to Dr. Percy, having after this

had some conversation aside with him, made a discovery which, in

his zeal to pay court to Dr. Johnson, he eagerly proclaimed aloud

from the foot of the table: 'O, Sir, I have found out a very good

reason why Dr. Percy never heard Mounsey swear or talk bawdy; for

he tells me, he never saw him but at the Duke of Northumberland's

table.'  'And so, Sir, (said Johnson loudly, to Dr. Percy,) you

would shield this man from the charge of swearing and talking

bawdy, because he did not do so at the Duke of Northumberland's

table.  Sir, you might as well tell us that you had seen him hold

up his hand at the Old Bailey, and he neither swore nor talked

bawdy; or that you had seen him in the cart at Tyburn, and he

neither swore nor talked bawdy.  And is it thus, Sir, that you

presume to controvert what I have related?'  Dr. Johnson's

animadversion was uttered in such a manner, that Dr. Percy seemed

to be displeased, and soon afterwards left the company, of which

Johnson did not at that time take any notice.



Swift having been mentioned, Johnson, as usual, treated him with

little respect as an authour.  Some of us endeavoured to support

the Dean of St. Patrick's by various arguments.  One in particular

praised his Conduct of the Allies.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, his Conduct of

the Allies is a performance of very little ability.'  'Surely, Sir,

(said Dr. Douglas,) you must allow it has strong facts.'  JOHNSON.

'Why yes, Sir; but what is that to the merit of the composition?

In the Sessions-paper of the Old Bailey, there are strong facts.

Housebreaking is a strong fact; robbery is a strong fact; and

murder is a MIGHTY strong fact; but is great praise due to the

historian of those strong facts?  No, Sir.  Swift has told what he

had to tell distinctly enough, but that is all.  He had to count

ten, and he has counted it right.'  Then recollecting that Mr.

Davies, by acting as an INFORMER, had been the occasion of his

talking somewhat too harshly to his friend Dr. Percy, for which,

probably, when the first ebullition was over, he felt some

compunction, he took an opportunity to give him a hit; so added,

with a preparatory laugh, 'Why, Sir, Tom Davies might have written

The Conduct of the Allies.'  Poor Tom being thus suddenly dragged

into ludicrous notice in presence of the Scottish Doctors, to whom

he was ambitious of appearing to advantage, was grievously

mortified.  Nor did his punishment rest here; for upon subsequent

occasions, whenever he, 'statesman all over,' assumed a strutting

importance, I used to hail him--'the Authour of The Conduct of the

Allies.'



When I called upon Dr. Johnson next morning, I found him highly

satisfied with his colloquial prowess the preceding evening.

'Well, (said he,) we had good talk.'  BOSWELL.  'Yes, Sir; you

tossed and gored several persons.'



The late Alexander, Earl of Eglintoune, who loved wit more than

wine, and men of genius more than sycophants, had a great

admiration of Johnson; but from the remarkable elegance of his own

manners, was, perhaps, too delicately sensible of the roughness

which sometimes appeared in Johnson's behaviour.  One evening about

this time, when his Lordship did me the honour to sup at my

lodgings with Dr. Robertson and several other men of literary

distinction, he regretted that Johnson had not been educated with

more refinement, and lived more in polished society.  'No, no, my

Lord, (said Signor Baretti,) do with him what you would, he would

always have been a bear.'  'True, (answered the Earl, with a

smile,) but he would have been a DANCING bear.'



To obviate all the reflections which have gone round the world to

Johnson's prejudice, by applying to him the epithet of a BEAR, let

me impress upon my readers a just and happy saying of my friend

Goldsmith, who knew him well: 'Johnson, to be sure, has a roughness

in his manner; but no man alive has a more tender heart.  He has

nothing of the bear but his skin.'



1769: AETAT. 60.]--I came to London in the autumn, and having

informed him that I was going to be married in a few months, I

wished to have as much of his conversation as I could before

engaging in a state of life which would probably keep me more in

Scotland, and prevent me seeing him so often as when I was a single

man; but I found he was at Brighthelmstone with Mr. and Mrs.

Thrale.



After his return to town, we met frequently, and I continued the

practice of making notes of his conversation, though not with so

much assiduity as I wish I had done.  At this time, indeed, I had a

sufficient excuse for not being able to appropriate so much time to

my Journal; for General Paoli, after Corsica had been overpowered

by the monarchy of France, was now no longer at the head of his

brave countrymen, but having with difficulty escaped from his

native island, had sought an asylum in Great-Britain; and it was my

duty, as well as my pleasure, to attend much upon him.  Such

particulars of Johnson's conversation at this period as I have

committed to writing, I shall here introduce, without any strict

attention to methodical arrangement.  Sometimes short notes of

different days shall be blended together, and sometimes a day may

seem important enough to be separately distinguished.



He said, he would not have Sunday kept with rigid severity and

gloom, but with a gravity and simplicity of behaviour.



I told him that David Hume had made a short collection of

Scotticisms.  'I wonder, (said Johnson,) that HE should find them.'



On the 30th of September we dined together at the Mitre.  I

attempted to argue for the superior happiness of the savage life,

upon the usual fanciful topicks.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, there can be

nothing more false.  The savages have no bodily advantages beyond

those of civilised men.  They have not better health; and as to

care or mental uneasiness, they are not above it, but below it,

like bears.  No, Sir; you are not to talk such paradox: let me have

no more on't.  It cannot entertain, far less can it instruct.  Lord

Monboddo, one of your Scotch Judges, talked a great deal of such

nonsense.  I suffered HIM; but I will not suffer YOU.'--BOSWELL.

'But, Sir, does not Rousseau talk such nonsense?'  JOHNSON.  'True,

Sir, but Rousseau KNOWS he is talking nonsense, and laughs at the

world for staring at him.'  BOSWELL.  'How so, Sir?'  JOHNSON.

'Why, Sir, a man who talks nonsense so well, must know that he is

talking nonsense.  But I am AFRAID, (chuckling and laughing,)

Monboddo does NOT know that he is talking nonsense.'  BOSWELL.  'Is

it wrong then, Sir, to affect singularity, in order to make people

stare?'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, if you do it by propagating errour: and,

indeed, it is wrong in any way.  There is in human nature a general

inclination to make people stare; and every wise man has himself to

cure of it, and does cure himself.  If you wish to make people

stare by doing better than others, why, make them stare till they

stare their eyes out.  But consider how easy it is to make people

stare by being absurd.  I may do it by going into a drawing-room

without my shoes.  You remember the gentleman in The Spectator, who

had a commission of lunacy taken out against him for his extreme

singularity, such as never wearing a wig, but a night-cap.  Now,

Sir, abstractedly, the night-cap was best; but, relatively, the

advantage was overbalanced by his making the boys run after him.'



Talking of a London life, he said, 'The happiness of London is not

to be conceived but by those who have been in it.  I will venture

to say, there is more learning and science within the circumference

of ten miles from where we now sit, than in all the rest of the

kingdom.'  BOSWELL.  'The only disadvantage is the great distance

at which people live from one another.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir; but

that is occasioned by the largeness of it, which is the cause of

all the other advantages.'  BOSWELL.  'Sometimes I have been in the

humour of wishing to retire to a desart.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, you have

desart enough in Scotland.'



Although I had promised myself a great deal of instructive

conversation with him on the conduct of the married state, of which

I had then a near prospect, he did not say much upon that topick.

Mr. Seward heard him once say, that 'a man has a very bad chance

for happiness in that state, unless he marries a woman of very

strong and fixed principles of religion.'  He maintained to me,

contrary to the common notion, that a woman would not be the worse

wife for being learned; in which, from all that I have observed of

Artemisias, I humbly differed from him.



When I censured a gentleman of my acquaintance for marrying a

second time, as it shewed a disregard of his first wife, he said,

'Not at all, Sir.  On the contrary, were he not to marry again, it

might be concluded that his first wife had given him a disgust to

marriage; but by taking a second wife he pays the highest

compliment to the first, by shewing that she made him so happy as a

married man, that he wishes to be so a second time.'  So ingenious

a turn did he give to this delicate question.  And yet, on another

occasion, he owned that he once had almost asked a promise of Mrs.

Johnson that she would not marry again, but had checked himself.

Indeed, I cannot help thinking, that in his case the request would

have been unreasonable; for if Mrs. Johnson forgot, or thought it

no injury to the memory of her first love,--the husband of her

youth and the father of her children,--to make a second marriage,

why should she be precluded from a third, should she be so

inclined?  In Johnson's persevering fond appropriation of his

Tetty, even after her decease, he seems totally to have overlooked

the prior claim of the honest Birmingham trader.  I presume that

her having been married before had, at times, given him some

uneasiness; for I remember his observing upon the marriage of one

of our common friends, 'He has done a very foolish thing, Sir; he

has married a widow, when he might have had a maid.'



We drank tea with Mrs. Williams.  I had last year the pleasure of

seeing Mrs. Thrale at Dr. Johnson's one morning, and had

conversation enough with her to admire her talents, and to shew her

that I was as Johnsonian as herself.  Dr. Johnson had probably been

kind enough to speak well of me, for this evening he delivered me a

very polite card from Mr. Thrale and her, inviting me to Streatham.



On the 6th of October I complied with this obliging invitation, and

found, at an elegant villa, six miles from town, every circumstance

that can make society pleasing.  Johnson, though quite at home, was

yet looked up to with an awe, tempered by affection, and seemed to

be equally the care of his host and hostess.  I rejoiced at seeing

him so happy.



He played off his wit against Scotland with a good humoured

pleasantry, which gave me, though no bigot to national prejudices,

an opportunity for a little contest with him.  I having said that

England was obliged to us for gardeners, almost all their good

gardeners being Scotchmen.  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, that is because

gardening is much more necessary amongst you than with us, which

makes so many of your people learn it.  It is ALL gardening with

you.  Things which grow wild here, must be cultivated with great

care in Scotland.  Pray now (throwing himself back in his chair,

and laughing,) are you ever able to bring the SLOE to perfection?'



I boasted that we had the honour of being the first to abolish the

unhospitable, troublesome, and ungracious custom of giving vails to

servants.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, you abolished vails, because you were

too poor to be able to give them.'



Mrs. Thrale disputed with him on the merit of Prior.  He attacked

him powerfully; said he wrote of love like a man who had never felt

it: his love verses were college verses; and he repeated the song

'Alexis shunn'd his fellow swains,' &c., in so ludicrous a manner,

as to make us all wonder how any one could have been pleased with

such fantastical stuff.  Mrs. Thrale stood to her gun with great

courage, in defence of amorous ditties, which Johnson despised,

till he at last silenced her by saying, 'My dear Lady, talk no more

of this.  Nonsense can be defended but by nonsense.'



Mrs. Thrale then praised Garrick's talent for light gay poetry;

and, as a specimen, repeated his song in Florizel and Perdita, and

dwelt with peculiar pleasure on this line:





     'I'd smile with the simple, and feed with the poor.'





JOHNSON.  'Nay, my dear Lady, this will never do.  Poor David!

Smile with the simple;--What folly is that?  And who would feed

with the poor that can help it?  No, no; let me smile with the

wise, and feed with the rich.'  I repeated this sally to Garrick,

and wondered to find his sensibility as a writer not a little

irritated by it.  To sooth him, I observed, that Johnson spared

none of us; and I quoted the passage in Horace, in which he

compares one who attacks his friends for the sake of a laugh, to a

pushing ox, that is marked by a bunch of hay put upon his horns:

'foenum habet in cornu.'  'Ay, (said Garrick vehemently,) he has a

whole MOW of it.'



He would not allow much merit to Whitefield's oratory.  'His

popularity, Sir, (said be,) is chiefly owing to the peculiarity of

his manner.  He would be followed by crowds were he to wear a

night-cap in the pulpit, or were he to preach from a tree.'



On the evening of October 10, I presented Dr. Johnson to General

Paoli.  I had greatly wished that two men, for whom I had the

highest esteem, should meet.  They met with a manly ease, mutually

conscious of their own abilities, and of the abilities of each

other.  The General spoke Italian, and Dr. Johnson English, and

understood one another very well, with a little aid of

interpretation from me, in which I compared myself to an isthmus

which joins two great continents.  Upon Johnson's approach, the

General said, 'From what I have read of your works, Sir, and from

what Mr. Boswell has told me of you, I have long held you in great

veneration.'  The General talked of languages being formed on the

particular notions and manners of a people, without knowing which,

we cannot know the language.  We may know the direct signification

of single words; but by these no beauty of expression, no sally of

genius, no wit is conveyed to the mind.  All this must be by

allusion to other ideas.  'Sir, (said Johnson,) you talk of

language, as if you had never done any thing else but study it,

instead of governing a nation.'  The General said, 'Questo e un

troppo gran complimento;' this is too great a compliment.  Johnson

answered, 'I should have thought so, Sir, if I had not heard you

talk.'  The General asked him, what he thought of the spirit of

infidelity which was so prevalent.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, this gloom of

infidelity, I hope, is only a transient cloud passing through the

hemisphere, which will soon be dissipated, and the sun break forth

with his usual splendour.'  'You think then, (said the General,)

that they will change their principles like their clothes.'

JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, if they bestow no more thought on principles

than on dress, it must be so.'  The General said, that 'a great

part of the fashionable infidelity was owing to a desire of shewing

courage.  Men who have no opportunities of shewing it as to things

in this life, take death and futurity as objects on which to

display it.'  JOHNSON.  'That is mighty foolish affectation.  Fear

is one of the passions of human nature, of which it is impossible

to divest it.  You remember that the Emperour Charles V, when he

read upon the tomb-stone of a Spanish nobleman, "Here lies one who

never knew fear," wittily said, "Then he never snuffed a candle

with his fingers."'



Dr. Johnson went home with me, and drank tea till late in the

night.  He said, 'General Paoli had the loftiest port of any man he

had ever seen.'  He denied that military men were always the best

bred men.  'Perfect good breeding,' he observed, 'consists in

having no particular mark of any profession, but a general elegance

of manners; whereas, in a military man, you can commonly

distinguish the BRAND of a soldier, l'homme d'epee.'



Dr. Johnson shunned to-night any discussion of the perplexed

question of fate and free will, which I attempted to agitate.

'Sir, (said he,) we KNOW our will is free, and THERE'S an end

on't.'



He honoured me with his company at dinner on the 16th of October,

at my lodgings in Old Bond-street, with Sir Joshua Reynolds, Mr.

Garrick, Dr. Goldsmith, Mr. Murphy, Mr. Bickerstaff, and Mr. Thomas

Davies.  Garrick played round him with a fond vivacity, taking hold

of the breasts of his coat, and, looking up in his face with a

lively archness, complimented him on the good health which he

seemed then to enjoy; while the sage, shaking his head, beheld him

with a gentle complacency.  One of the company not being come at

the appointed hour, I proposed, as usual upon such occasions, to

order dinner to be served; adding, 'Ought six people to be kept

waiting for one?'  'Why, yes, (answered Johnson, with a delicate

humanity,) if the one will suffer more by your sitting down, than

the six will do by waiting.'  Goldsmith, to divert the tedious

minutes, strutted about, bragging of his dress, and I believe was

seriously vain of it, for his mind was wonderfully prone to such

impressions.  'Come, come, (said Garrick,) talk no more of that.

You are, perhaps, the worst--eh, eh!'--Goldsmith was eagerly

attempting to interrupt him, when Garrick went on, laughing

ironically, 'Nay, you will always LOOK like a gentleman; but I am

talking of being well or ILL DREST.'  'Well, let me tell you, (said

Goldsmith,) when my tailor brought home my bloom-coloured coat, he

said, "Sir, I have a favour to beg of you.  When any body asks you

who made your clothes, be pleased to mention John Filby, at the

Harrow, in Waterlane."'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, that was because he

knew the strange colour would attract crowds to gaze at it, and

thus they might hear of him, and see how well he could make a coat

even of so absurd a colour.'



After dinner our conversation first turned upon Pope.  Johnson

said, his characters of men were admirably drawn, those of women

not so well.  He repeated to us, in his forcible melodious manner,

the concluding lines of the Dunciad.  While he was talking loudly

in praise of those lines, one of the company* ventured to say, 'Too

fine for such a poem:--a poem on what?'  JOHNSON, (with a

disdainful look,) 'Why, on DUNCES.  It was worth while being a

dunce then.  Ah, Sir, hadst THOU lived in those days!  It is not

worth while 'being a dunce now, when there are no wits.'

Bickerstaff observed, as a peculiar circumstance, that Pope's fame

was higher when he was alive than it was then.  Johnson said, his

Pastorals were poor things, though the versification was fine.  He

told us, with high satisfaction, the anecdote of Pope's inquiring

who was the authour of his London, and saying, he will be soon

deterre.  He observed, that in Dryden's poetry there were passages

drawn from a profundity which Pope could never reach.  He repeated

some fine lines on love, by the former, (which I have now

forgotten,) and gave great applause to the character of Zimri.

Goldsmith said, that Pope's character of Addison shewed a deep

knowledge of the human heart.  Johnson said, that the description

of the temple, in The Mourning Bride, was the finest poetical

passage he had ever read; he recollected none in Shakspeare equal

to it.  'But, (said Garrick, all alarmed for the 'God of his

idolatry,') we know not the extent and variety of his powers.  We

are to suppose there are such passages in his works.  Shakspeare

must not suffer from the badness of our memories.'  Johnson,

diverted by this enthusiastick jealousy, went on with greater

ardour: 'No, Sir; Congreve has NATURE;' (smiling on the tragick

eagerness of Garrick;) but composing himself, he added, 'Sir, this

is not comparing Congreve on the whole, with Shakspeare on the

whole; but only maintaining that Congreve has one finer passage

than any that can be found in Shakspeare.  Sir, a man may have no

more than ten guineas in the world, but he may have those ten

guineas in one piece; and so may have a finer piece than a man who

has ten thousand pounds: but then he has only one ten-guinea piece.

What I mean is, that you can shew me no passage where there is

simply a description of material objects, without any intermixture

of moral notions, which produces such an effect.'  Mr. Murphy

mentioned Shakspeare's description of the night before the battle

of Agincourt; but it was observed, it had MEN in it.  Mr. Davies

suggested the speech of Juliet, in which she figures herself

awaking in the tomb of her ancestors.  Some one mentioned the

description of Dover Cliff.  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir; it should be all

precipice,--all vacuum.  The crows impede your fall.  The

diminished appearance of the boats, and other circumstances, are

all very good descriptions; but do not impress the mind at once

with the horrible idea of immense height.  The impression is

divided; you pass on by computation, from one stage of the

tremendous space to another.  Had the girl in The Mourning Bride

said, she could not cast her shoe to the top of one of the pillars

in the temple, it would not have aided the idea, but weakened it.'





* Everyone guesses that 'one of the company' was Boswell.--HILL.





Talking of a Barrister who had a bad utterance, some one, (to rouse

Johnson,) wickedly said, that he was unfortunate in not having been

taught oratory by Sheridan.  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, if he had been

taught by Sheridan, he would have cleared the room.'  GARRICK.

'Sheridan has too much vanity to be a good man.'  We shall now see

Johnson's mode of DEFENDING a man; taking him into his own hands,

and discriminating.  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir.  There is, to be sure, in

Sheridan, something to reprehend, and every thing to laugh at; but,

Sir, he is not a bad man.  No, Sir; were mankind to be divided into

good and bad, he would stand considerably within the ranks of good.

And, Sir, it must be allowed that Sheridan excels in plain

declamation, though he can exhibit no character.'



Mrs. Montagu, a lady distinguished for having written an Essay on

Shakspeare, being mentioned; REYNOLDS.  'I think that essay does

her honour.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir: it does HER honour, but it would

do nobody else honour.  I have, indeed, not read it all.  But when

I take up the end of a web, and find it packthread, I do not

expect, by looking further, to find embroidery.  Sir, I will

venture to say, there is not one sentence of true criticism in her

book.'  GARRICK.  'But, Sir, surely it shews how much Voltaire has

mistaken Shakspeare, which nobody else has done.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir,

nobody else has thought it worth while.  And what merit is there in

that?  You may as well praise a schoolmaster for whipping a boy who

has construed ill.  No, Sir, there is no real criticism in it: none

shewing the beauty of thought, as formed on the workings of the

human heart.'



The admirers of this Essay may be offended at the slighting manner

in which Johnson spoke of it; but let it be remembered, that he

gave his honest opinion unbiassed by any prejudice, or any proud

jealousy of a woman intruding herself into the chair of criticism;

for Sir Joshua Reynolds has told me, that when the Essay first came

out, and it was not known who had written it, Johnson wondered how

Sir Joshua could like it.  At this time Sir Joshua himself had

received no information concerning the authour, except being

assured by one of our most eminent literati, that it was clear its

authour did not know the Greek tragedies in the original.  One day

at Sir Joshua's table, when it was related that Mrs. Montagu, in an

excess of compliment to the authour of a modern tragedy, had

exclaimed, 'I tremble for Shakspeare;' Johnson said, 'When

Shakspeare has got ---- for his rival, and Mrs. Montagu for his

defender, he is in a poor state indeed.'



On Thursday, October 19, I passed the evening with him at his

house.  He advised me to complete a Dictionary of words peculiar to

Scotland, of which I shewed him a specimen.  'Sir, (said he,) Ray

has made a collection of north-country words.  By collecting those

of your country, you will do a useful thing towards the history of

the language.  He bade me also go on with collections which I was

making upon the antiquities of Scotland.  'Make a large book; a

folio.'  BOSWELL.  'But of what use will it be, Sir?'  JOHNSON.

'Never mind the use; do it.'



I complained that he had not mentioned Garrick in his Preface to

Shakspeare; and asked him if he did not admire him.  JOHNSON.

'Yes, as "a poor player, who frets and struts his hour upon the

stage;"--as a shadow.'  BOSWELL.  'But has he not brought

Shakspeare into notice?'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, to allow that, would be

to lampoon the age.  Many of Shakspeare's plays are the worse for

being acted: Macbeth, for instance.'  BOSWELL.  'What, Sir, is

nothing gained by decoration and action?  Indeed, I do wish that

you had mentioned Garrick.'  JOHNSON.  'My dear Sir, had I

mentioned him, I must have mentioned many more: Mrs. Pritchard,

Mrs. Cibber,--nay, and Mr. Cibber too; he too altered Shakspeare.'

BOSWELL.  'You have read his apology, Sir?'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, it is

very entertaining.  But as for Cibber himself, taking from his

conversation all that he ought not to have said, he was a poor

creature.  I remember when he brought me one of his Odes to have my

opinion of it; I could not bear such nonsense, and would not let

him read it to the end; so little respect had I for THAT GREAT MAN!

(laughing.)  Yet I remember Richardson wondering that I could treat

him with familiarity.'



I mentioned to him that I had seen the execution of several

convicts at Tyburn, two days before, and that none of them seemed

to be under any concern.  JOHNSON.  'Most of them, Sir, have never

thought at all.'  BOSWELL.  'But is not the fear of death natural

to man?'  JOHNSON.  'So much so, Sir, that the whole of life is but

keeping away the thoughts of it.'  He then, in a low and earnest

tone, talked of his meditating upon the aweful hour of his own

dissolution, and in what manner he should conduct himself upon that

occasion: 'I know not (said he,) whether I should wish to have a

friend by me, or have it all between GOD and myself.'



Talking of our feeling for the distresses of others;--JOHNSON.

'Why, Sir, there is much noise made about it, but it is greatly

exaggerated.  No, Sir, we have a certain degree of feeling to

prompt us to do good: more than that, Providence does not intend.

It would be misery to no purpose.'  BOSWELL.  'But suppose now,

Sir, that one of your intimate friends were apprehended for an

offence for which he might be hanged.'  JOHNSON.  'I should do what

I could to bail him, and give him any other assistance; but if he

were once fairly hanged, I should not suffer.'  BOSWELL.  'Would

you eat your dinner that day, Sir?'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir; and eat

it as if he were eating it with me.  Why, there's Baretti, who is

to be tried for his life to-morrow, friends have risen up for him

on every side; yet if he should be hanged, none of them will eat a

slice of plumb-pudding the less.  Sir, that sympathetic feeling

goes a very little way in depressing the mind.'



I told him that I had dined lately at Foote's, who shewed me a

letter which he had received from Tom Davies, telling him that he

had not been able to sleep from the concern which he felt on

account of 'This sad affair of Baretti,' begging of him to try if

he could suggest any thing that might be of service; and, at the

same time, recommending to him an industrious young man who kept a

pickle-shop.  JOHNSON.  'Ay, Sir, here you have a specimen of human

sympathy; a friend hanged, and a cucumber pickled.  We know not

whether Baretti or the pickle-man has kept Davies from sleep; nor

does he know himself.  And as to his not sleeping, Sir; Tom Davies

is a very great man; Tom has been upon the stage, and knows how to

do those things.  I have not been upon the stage, and cannot do

those things.'  BOSWELL.  'I have often blamed myself, Sir, for not

feeling for others as sensibly as many say they do.'  JOHNSON.

'Sir, don't be duped by them any more.  You will find these very

feeling people are not very ready to do you good.  They PAY you by

FEELING.'



BOSWELL.  'Foote has a great deal of humour?'  JOHNSON.  'Yes,

Sir.'  BOSWELL.  'He has a singular talent of exhibiting

character.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, it is not a talent; it is a vice; it

is what others abstain from.  It is not comedy, which exhibits the

character of a species, as that of a miser gathered from many

misers: it is farce, which exhibits individuals.'  BOSWELL.  'Did

not he think of exhibiting you, Sir?'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, fear

restrained him; he knew I would have broken his bones.  I would

have saved him the trouble of cutting off a leg; I would not have

left him a leg to cut off.'  BOSWELL.  'Pray, Sir, is not Foote an

infidel?'  JOHNSON.  'I do not know, Sir, that the fellow is an

infidel; but if he be an infidel, he is an infidel as a dog is an

infidel; that is to say, he has never thought upon the subject.'*

BOSWELL.  'I suppose, Sir, he has thought superficially, and seized

the first notions which occurred to his mind.'  JOHNSON.  'Why

then, Sir, still he is like a dog, that snatches the piece next

him.  Did you never observe that dogs have not the power of

comparing?  A dog will take a small bit of meat as readily as a

large, when both are before him.'





* When Mr. Foote was at Edinburgh, he thought fit to entertain a

numerous Scotch company, with a great deal of coarse jocularity, at

the expense of Dr. Johnson, imagining it would be acceptable.  I

felt this as not civil to me; but sat very patiently till he had

exhausted his merriment on that subject; and then observed, that

surely Johnson must be allowed to have some sterling wit, and that

I had heard him say a very good thing of Mr. Foote himself.  'Ah,

my old friend Sam (cried Foote,) no man says better things; do let

us have it.'  Upon which I told the above story, which produced a

very loud laugh from the company.  But I never saw Foote so

disconcerted.--BOSWELL.





BOSWELL.  'What do you think of Dr. Young's Night Thoughts, Sir?'

JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, there are very fine things in them.'  BOSWELL.

'Is there not less religion in the nation now, Sir, than there was

formerly?'  JOHNSON.  'I don't know, Sir, that there is.'  BOSWELL.

'For instance, there used to be a chaplain in every great family,

which we do not find now.'  JOHNSON.  'Neither do you find any of

the state servants, which great families used formerly to have.

There is a change of modes in the whole department of life.'



Next day, October 20, he appeared, for the only time I suppose in

his life, as a witness in a Court of Justice, being called to give

evidence to the character of Mr. Baretti, who having stabbed a man

in the street, was arraigned at the Old Bailey for murder.  Never

did such a constellation of genius enlighten the aweful Sessions-

House, emphatically called JUSTICE HALL; Mr. Burke, Mr. Garrick,

Mr. Beauclerk, and Dr. Johnson: and undoubtedly their favourable

testimony had due weight with the Court and Jury.  Johnson gave his

evidence in a slow, deliberate, and distinct manner, which was

uncommonly impressive.  It is well known that Mr. Baretti was

acquitted.



On the 26th of October, we dined together at the Mitre tavern.  I

found fault with Foote for indulging his talent of ridicule at the

expence of his visitors, which I colloquially termed making fools

of his company.  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, when you go to see Foote, you

do not go to see a saint: you go to see a man who will be

entertained at your house, and then bring you on a publick stage;

who will entertain you at his house, for the very purpose of

bringing you on a publick stage.  Sir, he does not make fools of

his company; they whom he exposes are fools already: he only brings

them into action.'



We went home to his house to tea.  Mrs. Williams made it with

sufficient dexterity, notwithstanding her blindness, though her

manner of satisfying herself that the cups were full enough

appeared to me a little aukward; for I fancied she put her finger

down a certain way, till she felt the tea touch it.*  In my first

elation at being allowed the privilege of attending Dr. Johnson at

his late visits to this lady, which was like being e secretioribus

consiliis, I willingly drank cup after cup, as if it had been the

Heliconian spring.  But as the charm of novelty went off, I grew

more fastidious; and besides, I discovered that she was of a

peevish temper.





* Boswell afterwards learned that she felt the rising tea on the

outside of the cup.--ED.





There was a pretty large circle this evening.  Dr. Johnson was in

very good humour, lively, and ready to talk upon all subjects.  Mr.

Fergusson, the self-taught philosopher, told him of a new-invented

machine which went without horses: a man who sat in it turned a

handle, which worked a spring that drove it forward.  'Then, Sir,

(said Johnson,) what is gained is, the man has his choice whether

he will move himself alone, or himself and the machine too.'

Dominicetti being mentioned, he would not allow him any merit.

'There is nothing in all this boasted system.  No, Sir; medicated

baths can be no better than warm water: their only effect can be

that of tepid moisture.'  One of the company took the other side,

maintaining that medicines of various sorts, and some too of most

powerful effect, are introduced into the human frame by the medium

of the pores; and, therefore, when warm water is impregnated with

salutiferous substances, it may produce great effects as a bath.

This appeared to me very satisfactory.  Johnson did not answer it;

but talking for victory, and determined to be master of the field,

he had recourse to the device which Goldsmith imputed to him in the

witty words of one of Cibber's comedies: 'There is no arguing with

Johnson; for when his pistol misses fire, he knocks you down with

the butt end of it.'  He turned to the gentleman, 'well, Sir, go to

Dominicetti, and get thyself fumigated; but be sure that the steam

be directed to thy HEAD, for THAT is the PECCANT PART.'  This

produced a triumphant roar of laughter from the motley assembly of

philosophers, printers, and dependents, male and female.



I know not how so whimsical a thought came into my mind, but I

asked, 'If, Sir, you were shut up in a castle, and a newborn child

with you, what would you do?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, I should not

much like my company.'  BOSWELL.  'But would you take the trouble

of rearing it?'  He seemed, as may well be supposed, unwilling to

pursue the subject: but upon my persevering in my question,

replied, 'Why yes, Sir, I would; but I must have all conveniencies.

If I had no garden, I would make a shed on the roof, and take it

there for fresh air.  I should feed it, and wash it much, and with

warm water to please it, not with cold water to give it pain.'

BOSWELL.  'But, Sir, does not heat relax?'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, you are

not to imagine the water is to be very hot.  I would not CODDLE the

child.  No, Sir, the hardy method of treating children does no

good.  I'll take you five children from London, who shall cuff five

Highland children.  Sir, a man bred in London will carry a burthen,

or run, or wrestle, as well as a man brought up in the hardiest

manner in the country.'  BOSWELL.  'Good living, I suppose, makes

the Londoners strong.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, I don't know that it

does.  Our Chairmen from Ireland, who are as strong men as any,

have been brought up upon potatoes.  Quantity makes up for

quality.'  BOSWELL.  'Would you teach this child that I have

furnished you with, any thing?'  JOHNSON.  'No, I should not be apt

to teach it.'  BOSWELL.  'Would not you have a pleasure in teaching

it?'  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir, I should NOT have a pleasure in teaching

it.'  BOSWELL.  'Have you not a pleasure in teaching men?--THERE I

have you.  You have the same pleasure in teaching men, that I

should have in teaching children.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, something about

that.'



I had hired a Bohemian as my servant while I remained in London,

and being much pleased with him, I asked Dr. Johnson whether his

being a Roman Catholick should prevent my taking him with me to

Scotland.  JOHNSON.  'Why no, Sir, if HE has no objection, you can

have none.'  BOSWELL.  'So, Sir, you are no great enemy to the

Roman Catholick religion.'  JOHNSON.  'No more, Sir, than to the

Presbyterian religion.'  BOSWELL.  'You are joking.'  JOHNSON.

'No, Sir, I really think so.  Nay, Sir, of the two, I prefer the

Popish.'  BOSWELL.  'How so, Sir?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, the

Presbyterians have no church, no apostolical ordination.'  BOSWELL.

'And do you think that absolutely essential, Sir?'  JOHNSON.  'Why,

Sir, as it was an apostolical institution, I think it is dangerous

to be without it.  And, Sir, the Presbyterians have no public

worship: they have no form of prayer in which they know they are to

join.  They go to hear a man pray, and are to judge whether they

will join with him.'



I proceeded: 'What do you think, Sir, of Purgatory, as believed by

the Roman Catholicks?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, it is a very harmless

doctrine.  They are of opinion that the generality of mankind are

neither so obstinately wicked as to deserve everlasting punishment,

nor so good as to merit being admitted into the society of blessed

spirits; and therefore that God is graciously pleased to allow of a

middle state, where they may be purified by certain degrees of

suffering.  You see, Sir, there is nothing unreasonable in this.'

BOSWELL.  'But then, Sir, their masses for the dead?'  JOHNSON.

'Why, Sir, if it be once established that there are souls in

purgatory, it is as proper to pray for THEM, as for our brethren of

mankind who are yet in this life.'   BOSWELL.  'The idolatry of the

Mass?'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, there is no idolatry in the Mass.  They

believe god to be there, and they adore him.'  BOSWELL.  'The

worship of Saints?'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, they do not worship saints;

they invoke them; they only ask their prayers.  I am talking all

this time of the DOCTRINES of the Church of Rome.  I grant you that

in PRACTICE, Purgatory is made a lucrative imposition, and that the

people do become idolatrous as they recommend themselves to the

tutelary protection of particular saints.  I think their giving the

sacrament only in one kind is criminal, because it is contrary to

the express institution of CHRIST, and I wonder how the Council of

Trent admitted it.'  BOSWELL.  'Confession?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, I

don't know but that is a good thing.  The scripture says, "Confess

your faults one to another," and the priests confess as well as the

laity.  Then it must be considered that their absolution is only

upon repentance, and often upon penance also.  You think your sins

may be forgiven without penance, upon repentance alone.'



When we were alone, I introduced the subject of death, and

endeavoured to maintain that the fear of it might be got over.  I

told him that David Hume said to me, he was no more uneasy to think

he should NOT BE after this life, than that he HAD NOT BEEN before

he began to exist.  JOHNSON.  Sir, if he really thinks so, his

perceptions are disturbed; he is mad: if he does not think so, he

lies.  He may tell you, he holds his finger in the flame of a

candle, without feeling pain; would you believe him?  When he dies,

he at least gives up all he has.'  BOSWELL.  'Foote, Sir, told me,

that when he was very ill he was not afraid to die.'  JOHNSON.  'It

is not true, Sir.  Hold a pistol to Foote's breast, or to Hume's

breast, and threaten to kill them, and you'll see how they behave.'

BOSWELL.  'But may we not fortify our minds for the approach of

death?'  Here I am sensible I was in the wrong, to bring before his

view what he ever looked upon with horrour; for although when in a

celestial frame, in his Vanity of Human Wishes he has supposed

death to be 'kind Nature's signal for retreat,' from this state of

being to 'a happier seat,' his thoughts upon this aweful change

were in general full of dismal apprehensions.  His mind resembled

the vast amphitheatre, the Colisaeum at Rome.  In the centre stood

his judgement, which, like a mighty gladiator, combated those

apprehensions that, like the wild beasts of the Arena, were all

around in cells, ready to be let out upon him.  After a conflict,

he drives them back into their dens; but not killing them, they

were still assailing him.  To my question, whether we might not

fortify our minds for the approach of death, he answered, in a

passion, 'No, Sir, let it alone.  It matters not how a man dies,

but how he lives.  The act of dying is not of importance, it lasts

so short a time.'  He added, (with an earnest look,) 'A man knows

it must be so, and submits.  It will do him no good to whine.'



I attempted to continue the conversation.  He was so provoked, that

he said, 'Give us no more of this;' and was thrown into such a

state of agitation, that he expressed himself in a way that alarmed

and distressed me; shewed an impatience that I should leave him,

and when I was going away, called to me sternly, 'Don't let us meet

tomorrow.'



I went home exceedingly uneasy.  All the harsh observations which I

had ever heard made upon his character, crowded into my mind; and I

seemed to myself like the man who had put his head into the lion's

mouth a great many times with perfect safety, but at last had it

bit off.



Next morning I sent him a note, stating, that I might have been in

the wrong, but it was not intentionally; he was therefore, I could

not help thinking, too severe upon me.  That notwithstanding our

agreement not to meet that day, I would call on him in my way to

the city, and stay five minutes by my watch.  'You are, (said I,)

in my mind, since last night, surrounded with cloud and storm.  Let

me have a glimpse of sunshine, and go about my affairs in serenity

and chearfulness.'



Upon entering his study, I was glad that he was not alone, which

would have made our meeting more awkward.  There were with him, Mr.

Steevens and Mr. Tyers, both of whom I now saw for the first time.

My note had, on his own reflection, softened him, for he received

me very complacently; so that I unexpectedly found myself at ease,

and joined in the conversation.



I whispered him, 'Well, Sir, you are now in good humour.  JOHNSON.

'Yes, Sir.'  I was going to leave him, and had got as far as the

staircase.  He stopped me, and smiling, said, 'Get you gone IN;' a

curious mode of inviting me to stay, which I accordingly did for

some time longer.



This little incidental quarrel and reconciliation, which, perhaps,

I may be thought to have detailed too minutely, must be esteemed as

one of many proofs which his friends had, that though he might be

charged with bad humour at times, he was always a good-natured man;

and I have heard Sir Joshua Reynolds, a nice and delicate observer

of manners, particularly remark, that when upon any occasion

Johnson had been rough to any person in company, he took the first

opportunity of reconciliation, by drinking to him, or addressing

his discourse to him; but if he found his dignified indirect

overtures sullenly neglected, he was quite indifferent, and

considered himself as having done all that he ought to do, and the

other as now in the wrong.



I went to him early on the morning of the tenth of November.  'Now

(said he,) that you are going to marry, do not expect more from

life, than life will afford.  You may often find yourself out of

humour, and you may often think your wife not studious enough to

please you; and yet you may have reason to consider yourself as

upon the whole very happily married.'



1770: AETAT. 61.]--During this year there was a total cessation of

all correspondence between Dr. Johnson and me, without any coldness

on either side, but merely from procrastination, continued from day

to day; and as I was not in London, I had no opportunity of

enjoying his company and recording his conversation.  To supply

this blank, I shall present my readers with some Collectanea,

obligingly furnished to me by the Rev. Dr. Maxwell, of Falkland, in

Ireland, sometime assistant preacher at the Temple, and for many

years the social friend of Johnson, who spoke of him with a very

kind regard.



'His general mode of life, during my acquaintance, seemed to be

pretty uniform.  About twelve o'clock I commonly visited him, and

frequently found him in bed, or declaiming over his tea, which he

drank very plentifully.  He generally had a levee of morning

visitors, chiefly men of letters; Hawkesworth, Goldsmith, Murphy,

Langton, Steevens, Beaucherk, &c. &c., and sometimes learned

ladies, particularly I remember a French lady of wit and fashion

doing him the honour of a visit.  He seemed to me to be considered

as a kind of publick oracle, whom every body thought they had a

right to visit and consult; and doubtless they were well rewarded.

I never could discover how he found time for his compositions.  He

declaimed all the morning, then went to dinner at a tavern, where

he commonly staid late, and then drank his tea at some friend's

house, over which he loitered a great while, but seldom took

supper.  I fancy he must have read and wrote chiefly in the night,

for I can scarcely recollect that he ever refused going with me to

a tavern, and he often went to Ranelagh, which he deemed a place of

innocent recreation.



'He frequently gave all the silver in his pocket to the poor, who

watched him, between his house and the tavern where he dined.  He

walked the streets at all hours, and said he was never robbed, for

the rogues knew he had little money, nor had the appearance of

having much.



'Though the most accessible and communicative man alive; yet when

he suspected he was invited to be exhibited, he constantly spurned

the invitation.



'Two young women from Staffordshire visited him when I was present,

to consult him on the subject of Methodism, to which they were

inclined.  "Come, (said he,) you pretty fools, dine with Maxwell

and me at the Mitre, and we will talk over that subject;" which

they did, and after dinner he took one of them upon his knee, and

fondled her for half an hour together.



'Johnson was much attached to London: he observed, that a man

stored his mind better there, than any where else; and that in

remote situations a man's body might be feasted, but his mind was

starved, and his faculties apt to degenerate, from want of exercise

and competition.  No place, (he said,) cured a man's vanity or

arrogance so well as London; for as no man was either great or good

per se, but as compared with others not so good or great, he was

sure to find in the metropolis many his equals, and some his

superiours.  He observed, that a man in London was in less danger

of falling in love indiscreetly, than any where else; for there the

difficulty of deciding between the conflicting pretensions of a

vast variety of objects, kept him safe.  He told me, that he had

frequently been offered country preferment, if he would consent to

take orders; but he could not leave the improved society of the

capital, or consent to exchange the exhilarating joys and splendid

decorations of publick life, for the obscurity, insipidity, and

uniformity of remote situations.



'Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy, he said, was the only book that

ever took him out of bed two hours sooner than he wished to rise.



'When exasperated by contradiction, he was apt to treat his

opponents with too much acrimony: as, "Sir, you don't see your way

through that question:"--"Sir, you talk the language of ignorance."

On my observing to him that a certain gentleman had remained silent

the whole evening, in the midst of a very brilliant and learned

society, "Sir, (said he,) the conversation overflowed, and drowned

him."



'He observed, that the established clergy in general did not preach

plain enough; and that polished periods and glittering sentences

flew over the heads of the common people, without any impression

upon their hearts.  Something might be necessary, he observed, to

excite the affections of the common people, who were sunk in

languor and lethargy, and therefore he supposed that the new

concomitants of methodism might probably produce so desirable an

effect.  The mind, like the body, he observed, delighted in change

and novelty, and even in religion itself, courted new appearances

and modifications.  Whatever might be thought of some methodist

teachers, he said, he could scarcely doubt the sincerity of that

man, who travelled nine hundred miles in a month, and preached

twelve times a week; for no adequate reward, merely temporal, could

be given for such indefatigable labour.



'In a Latin conversation with the Pere Boscovitch, at the house of

Mrs. Cholmondeley, I heard him maintain the superiority of Sir

Isaac Newton over all foreign philosophers, with a dignity and

eloquence that surprized that learned foreigner.  It being observed

to him, that a rage for every thing English prevailed much in

France after Lord Chatham's glorious war, he said, he did not

wonder at it, for that we had drubbed those fellows into a proper

reverence for us, and that their national petulance required

periodical chastisement.



'Speaking of a dull tiresome fellow, whom he chanced to meet, he

said, "That fellow seems to me to possess but one idea, and that is

a wrong one."



'Much enquiry having been made concerning a gentleman, who had

quitted a company where Johnson was, and no information being

obtained; at last Johnson observed, that "he did not care to speak

ill of any man behind his back, but he believed the gentleman was

an ATTORNEY."



'A gentleman who had been very unhappy in marriage, married

immediately after his wife died: Johnson said, it was the triumph

of hope over experience.



'He observed, that a man of sense and education should meet a

suitable companion in a wife.  It was a miserable thing when the

conversation could only be such as, whether the mutton should be

boiled or roasted, and probably a dispute about that.



'He did not approve of late marriages, observing that more was lost

in point of time, than compensated for by any possible advantages.

Even ill assorted marriages were preferable to cheerless celibacy.



'He said, foppery was never cured; it was the bad stamina of the

mind, which, like those of the body, were never rectified: once a

coxcomb, and always a coxcomb.



'Being told that Gilbert Cowper called him the Caliban of

literature; "Well, (said he,) I must dub him the Punchinello."



'He said few people had intellectual resources sufficient to forego

the pleasures of wine.  They could not otherwise contrive how to

fill the interval between dinner and supper.



'One evening at Mrs. Montagu's, where a splendid company was

assembled, consisting of the most eminent literary characters, I

thought he seemed highly pleased with the respect and attention

that were shewn him, and asked him on our return home if he was not

highly gratified by his visit:



"No, Sir, (said he,) not highly gratified; yet I do not recollect

to have passed many evenings with fewer objections."



'Though of no high extraction himself, he had much respect for

birth and family, especially among ladies.  He said, "adventitious

accomplishments may be possessed by all ranks; but one may easily

distinguish the born gentlewoman."



'Speaking of Burke, he said, "It was commonly observed, he spoke

too often in parliament; but nobody could say he did not speak

well, though too frequently and too familiarly."



'We dined tete a tete at the Mitre, as I was preparing to return to

Ireland, after an absence of many years.  I regretted much leaving

London, where I had formed many agreeable connexions: "Sir, (said

he,) I don't wonder at it; no man, fond of letters, leaves London

without regret.  But remember, Sir, you have seen and enjoyed a

great deal;-- you have seen life in its highest decorations, and

the world has nothing new to exhibit.  No man is so well qualifyed

to leave publick life as he who has long tried it and known it

well.  We are always hankering after untried situations and

imagining greater felicity from them than they can afford.  No,

Sir, knowledge and virtue may be acquired in all countries, and

your local consequence will make you some amends for the

intellectual gratifications you relinquish."



'He then took a most affecting leave of me; said, he knew, it was a

point of DUTY that called me away.  "We shall all be sorry to lose

you," said he: "laudo tamen."'





1771, AETAT. 62.]--





'To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS, IN LEICESTER-FIELDS.



'DEAR SIR,--When I came to Lichfield, I found that my portrait had

been much visited, and much admired.  Every man has a lurking wish

to appear considerable in his native place; and I was pleased with

the dignity conferred by such a testimony of your regard.



'Be pleased, therefore, to accept the thanks of, Sir, your most

obliged and most humble servant,



'Ashbourn in Derbyshire,



'SAM. JOHNSON.



July 17, 1771.'



'Compliments to Miss Reynolds.'





In his religious record of this year, we observe that he was better

than usual, both in body and mind, and better satisfied with the

regularity of his conduct.  But he is still 'trying his ways' too

rigorously.  He charges himself with not rising early enough; yet

he mentions what was surely a sufficient excuse for this, supposing

it to be a duty seriously required, as he all his life appears to

have thought it.  'One great hindrance is want of rest; my

nocturnal complaints grow less troublesome towards morning; and I

am tempted to repair the deficiencies of the night.'  Alas! how

hard would it be if this indulgence were to be imputed to a sick

man as a crime.  In his retrospect on the following Easter-Eve, he

says, 'When I review the last year, I am able to recollect so

little done, that shame and sorrow, though perhaps too weakly, come

upon me.'



In 1772 he was altogether quiescent as an authour; but it will be

found from the various evidences which I shall bring together that

his mind was acute, lively, and vigorous.





'TO JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.



'DEAR SIR,--That you are coming so soon to town I am very glad; and

still more glad that you are coming as an advocate.  I think

nothing more likely to make your life pass happily away, than that

consciousness of your own value, which eminence in your profession

will certainly confer.  If I can give you any collateral help, I

hope you do not suspect that it will be wanting.  My kindness for

you has neither the merit of singular virtue, nor the reproach of

singular prejudice.  Whether to love you be right or wrong, I have

many on my side: Mrs. Thrale loves you, and Mrs. Williams loves

you, and what would have inclined me to love you, if I had been

neutral before, you are a great favourite of Dr. Beattie.*



'Of Dr. Beattie I should have thought much, but that his lady puts

him out of my head; she is a very lovely woman.



'The ejection which you come hither to oppose, appears very cruel,

unreasonable, and oppressive.  I should think there could not be

much doubt of your success.



'My health grows better, yet I am not fully recovered.  I believe

it is held, that men do not recover very fast after threescore.  I

hope yet to see Beattie's College: and have not given up the

western voyage.  But however all this may be or not, let us try to

make each other happy when we meet, and not refer our pleasure to

distant times or distant places.



'How comes it that you tell me nothing of your lady?  I hope to see

her some time, and till then shall be glad to hear of her.  I am,

dear Sir, &c.



'March 15, 1772.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





* Boswell had given Beattie a letter of introduction to Johnson the

preceding summer--ED.





On the 21st of March, I was happy to find myself again in my

friend's study, and was glad to see my old acquaintance, Mr.

Francis Barber, who was now returned home.  Dr. Johnson received me

with a hearty welcome; saying, 'I am glad you are come.'



I thanked him for showing civilities to Beattie.  'Sir, (said he,)

I should thank YOU.  We all love Beattie.  Mrs. Thrale says, if

ever she has another husband, she'll have Beattie.  He sunk upon us

that he was married; else we should have shewn his lady more

civilities.  She is a very fine woman.  But how can you shew

civilities to a nonentity?  I did not think he had been married.

Nay, I did not think about it one way or other; but he did not tell

us of his lady till late.'



He then spoke of St. Kilda, the most remote of the Hebrides.  I

told him, I thought of buying it.  JOHNSON.  'Pray do, Sir.  We

will go and pass a winter amid the blasts there.  We shall have

fine fish, and we will take some dried tongues with us, and some

books.  We will have a strong built vessel, and some Orkney men to

navigate her.  We must build a tolerable house: but we may carry

with us a wooden house ready made, and requiring nothing but to be

put up.  Consider, Sir, by buying St. Kilda, you may keep the

people from falling into worse hands.  We must give them a

clergyman, and he shall be one of Beattie's choosing.  He shall be

educated at Marischal College.  I'll be your Lord Chancellor, or

what you please.'  BOSWELL.  'Are you serious, Sir, in advising me

to buy St. Kilda? for if you should advise me to go to Japan, I

believe I should do it.'  JOHNSON.  'Why yes, Sir, I am serious.'

BOSWELL.  'Why then, I'll see what can be done.'



He was engaged to dine abroad, and asked me to return to him in the

evening at nine, which I accordingly did.



We drank tea with Mrs. Williams, who told us a story of second

sight, which happened in Wales where she was born.  He listened to

it very attentively, and said he should be glad to have some

instances of that faculty well authenticated.  His elevated wish

for more and more evidence for spirit, in opposition to the

groveling belief of materialism, led him to a love of such

mysterious disquisitions.  He again justly observed, that we could

have no certainty of the truth of supernatural appearances, unless

something was told us which we could not know by ordinary means, or

something done which could not be done but by supernatural power;

that Pharaoh in reason and justice required such evidence from

Moses; nay, that our Saviour said, 'If I had not done among them

the works which none other man did, they had not had sin.'



We talked of the Roman Catholick religion, and how little

difference there was in essential matters between ours and it.

JOHNSON.  'True, Sir; all denominations of Christians have really

little difference in point of doctrine, though they may differ

widely in external forms.  There is a prodigious difference between

the external form of one of your Presbyterian churches in Scotland,

and a church in Italy; yet the doctrine taught is essentially the

same.



In the morning we had talked of old families, and the respect due

to them.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, you have a right to that kind of respect,

and are arguing for yourself.  I am for supporting the principle,

and am disinterested in doing it, as I have no such right.'

BOSWELL.  'Why, Sir, it is one more incitement to a man to do

well.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir, and it is a matter of opinion, very

necessary to keep society together.  What is it but opinion, by

which we have a respect for authority, that prevents us, who are

the rabble, from rising up and pulling down you who are gentlemen

from your places, and saying, "We will be gentlemen in our turn?"

Now, Sir, that respect for authority is much more easily granted to

a man whose father has had it, than to an upstart, and so Society

is more easily supported.'  BOSWELL.  'At present, Sir, I think

riches seem to gain most respect.'  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir, riches do

not gain hearty respect; they only procure external attention.  A

very rich man, from low beginnings, may buy his election in a

borough; but, coeteris paribus, a man of family will be preferred.

People will prefer a man for whose father their fathers have voted,

though they should get no more money, or even less.  That shows

that the respect for family is not merely fanciful, but has an

actual operation.  If gentlemen of family would allow the rich

upstarts to spend their money profusely, which they are ready

enough to do, and not vie with them in expence, the upstarts would

soon be at an end, and the gentlemen would remain: but if the

gentlemen will vie in expence with the upstarts, which is very

foolish, they must be ruined.'



On Monday, March 23, I found him busy, preparing a fourth edition

of his folio Dictionary.  Mr. Peyton, one of his original

amanuenses, was writing for him.



He seemed also to be intent on some sort of chymical operation.  I

was entertained by observing how he contrived to send Mr. Peyton on

an errand, without seeming to degrade him.  'Mr. Peyton,--Mr.

Peyton, will you be so good as to take a walk to Temple-Bar?  You

will there see a chymist's shop; at which you will be pleased to

buy for me an ounce of oil of vitriol; not spirit of vitriol, but

oil of vitriol.  It will cost three half-pence.'  Peyton

immediately went, and returned with it, and told him it cost but a

penny.



On Saturday, March 27, I introduced to him Sir Alexander Macdonald,

with whom he had expressed a wish to be acquainted.  He received

him very courteously.



SIR A.  'I think, Sir, almost all great lawyers, such at least as

have written upon law, have known only law, and nothing else.'

JOHNSON.  'Why no, Sir; Judge Hale was a great lawyer, and wrote

upon law; and yet he knew a great many other things; and has

written upon other things.  Selden too.'  SIR A.  'Very true, Sir;

and Lord Bacon.  But was not Lord Coke a mere lawyer?'  JOHNSON.

'Why, I am afraid he was; but he would have taken it very ill if

you had told him so.  He would have prosecuted you for scandal.'

BOSWELL.  'Lord Mansfield is not a mere lawyer.  JOHNSON.  'No,

Sir.  I never was in Lord Mansfield's company; but Lord Mansfield

was distinguished at the University.  Lord Mansfield, when he first

came to town, "drank champagne with the wits," as Prior says.  He

was the friend of Pope.'  SIR A.  'Barristers, I believe, are not

so abusive now as they were formerly.  I fancy they had less law

long ago, and so were obliged to take to abuse, to fill up the

time.  Now they have such a number of precedents, they have no

occasion for abuse.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, they had more law long

ago than they have now.  As to precedents, to be sure they will

increase in course of time; but the more precedents there are, the

less occasion is there for law; that is to say, the less occasion

is there for investigating principles.'  SIR A.  'I have been

correcting several Scotch accents in my friend Boswell.  I doubt,

Sir, if any Scotchman ever attains to a perfect English

pronunciation.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, few of them do, because they

do not persevere after acquiring a certain degree of it.  But, Sir,

there can be no doubt that they may attain to a perfect English

pronunciation, if they will.  We find how near they come to it; and

certainly, a man who conquers nineteen parts of the Scottish

accent, may conquer the twentieth.  But, Sir, when a man has got

the better of nine tenths he grows weary, he relaxes his diligence,

he finds he has corrected his accent so far as not to be

disagreeable, and he no longer desires his friends to tell him when

he is wrong; nor does he choose to be told.  Sir, when people watch

me narrowly, and I do not watch myself, they will find me out to be

of a particular county.  In the same manner, Dunning may be found

out to be a Devonshire man.  So most Scotchmen may be found out.

But, Sir, little aberrations are of no disadvantage.  I never

catched Mallet in a Scotch accent; and yet Mallet, I suppose, was

past five-and-twenty before he came to London.'



I again visited him at night.  Finding him in a very good humour, I

ventured to lead him to the subject of our situation in a future

state, having much curiosity to know his notions on that point. . . .



BOSWELL.  'I do not know whether there are any well-attested

stories of the appearance of ghosts.  You know there is a famous

story of the appearance of Mrs. Veal, prefixed to Drelincourt on

Death.'  JOHNSON.  'I believe, Sir, that is given up.  I believe

the woman declared upon her death-bed that it was a lie.'  BOSWELL.

'This objection is made against the truth of ghosts appearing: that

if they are in a state of happiness, it would be a punishment to

them to return to this world; and if they are in a state of misery,

it would be giving them a respite.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, as the

happiness or misery of embodied spirits does not depend upon place,

but is intellectual, we cannot say that they are less happy or less

miserable by appearing upon earth.'



We went down between twelve and one to Mrs. Williams's room, and

drank tea.  I mentioned that we were to have the remains of Mr.

Gray, in prose and verse, published by Mr. Mason.  JOHNSON.  'I

think we have had enough of Gray.  I see they have published a

splendid edition of Akenside's works.  One bad ode may be suffered;

but a number of them together makes one sick.'  BOSWELL.

'Akenside's distinguished poem is his Pleasures of Imagination; but

for my part, I never could admire it so much as most people do.'

JOHNSON.  'Sir, I could not read it through.'  BOSWELL.  'I have

read it through; but I did not find any great power in it.'



On Tuesday, March 31, he and I dined at General Paoli's.



Dr. Johnson went home with me to my lodgings in Conduit-street and

drank tea, previous to our going to the Pantheon, which neither of

us had seen before.



He said, 'Goldsmith's Life of Parnell is poor; not that it is

poorly written, but that he had poor materials; for nobody can

write the life of a man, but those who have eat and drunk and lived

in social intercourse with him.'



I said, that if it was not troublesome and presuming too much, I

would request him to tell me all the little circumstances of his

life; what schools he attended, when he came to Oxford, when he

came to London, &c. &c.  He did not disapprove of my curiosity as

to these particulars; but said, 'They'll come out by degrees as we

talk together.'



We talked of the proper use of riches.  JOHNSON.  'If I were a man

of a great estate, I would drive all the rascals whom I did not

like out of the county at an election.'



We then walked to the Pantheon.  The first view of it did not

strike us so much as Ranelagh, of which he said, the 'coup d'oeil

was the finest thing he had ever seen.'  The truth is, Ranelagh is

of a more beautiful form; more of it or rather indeed the whole

rotunda, appears at once, and it is better lighted.  However, as

Johnson observed, we saw the Pantheon in time of mourning, when

there was a dull uniformity; whereas we had seen Ranelagh when the

view was enlivened with a gay profusion of colours.  Mrs. Bosville,

of Gunthwait, in Yorkshire, joined us, and entered into

conversation with us.  Johnson said to me afterwards, 'Sir, this is

a mighty intelligent lady.'



I said there was not half a guinea's worth of pleasure in seeing

this place.  JOHNSON.  'But, Sir, there is half a guinea's worth of

inferiority to other people in not having seen it.'  BOSWELL.  'I

doubt, Sir, whether there are many happy people here.'  JOHNSON.

'Yes, Sir, there are many happy people here.  There are many people

here who are watching hundreds, and who think hundreds are watching

them.'



Happening to meet Sir Adam Fergusson, I presented him to Dr.

Johnson.  Sir Adam expressed some apprehension that the Pantheon

would encourage luxury.  'Sir, (said Johnson,) I am a great friend

to publick amusements; for they keep people from vice.  You now

(addressing himself to me,) would have been with a wench, had you

not been here.--O! I forgot you were married.'



Sir Adam suggested, that luxury corrupts a people, and destroys the

spirit of liberty.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, that is all visionary.  I would

not give half a guinea to live under one form of government rather

than another.  It is of no moment to the happiness of an

individual.  Sir, the danger of the abuse of power is nothing to a

private man.  What Frenchman is prevented from passing his life as

he pleases?'  SIR ADAM.  'But, Sir, in the British constitution it

is surely of importance to keep up a spirit in the people, so as to

preserve a balance against the crown.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, I perceive

you are a vile Whig.  Why all this childish jealousy of the power

of the crown?  The crown has not power enough.  When I say that all

governments are alike, I consider that in no government power can

be abused long.  Mankind will not bear it.  If a sovereign

oppresses his people to a great degree, they will rise and cut off

his head.  There is a remedy in human nature against tyranny, that

will keep us safe under every form of government.  Had not the

people of France thought themselves honoured as sharing in the

brilliant actions of Lewis XIV, they would not have endured him;

and we may say the same of the King of Prussia's people.'  Sir Adam

introduced the ancient Greeks and Romans.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, the mass

of both of them were barbarians.  The mass of every people must be

barbarous where there is no printing, and consequently knowledge is

not generally diffused.  Knowledge is diffused among our people by

the news-papers.'  Sir Adam mentioned the orators, poets, and

artists of Greece.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, I am talking of the mass of the

people.  We see even what the boasted Athenians were.  The little

effect which Demosthenes's orations had upon them, shews that they

were barbarians.'



On Sunday, April 5, after attending divine service at St. Paul's

church, I found him alone.



He said, he went more frequently to church when there were prayers

only, than when there was also a sermon, as the people required

more an example for the one than the other; it being much easier

for them to hear a sermon, than to fix their minds on prayer.



On Monday, April 6, I dined with him at Sir Alexander Macdonald's,

where was a young officer in the regimentals of the Scots Royal,

who talked with a vivacity, fluency, and precision so uncommon,

that he attracted particular attention.  He proved to be the

Honourable Thomas Erskine, youngest brother to the Earl of Buchan,

who has since risen into such brilliant reputation at the bar in

Westminster-hall.



Fielding being mentioned, Johnson exclaimed, 'he was a blockhead;'

and upon my expressing my astonishment at so strange an assertion,

he said, 'What I mean by his being a blockhead is that he was a

barren rascal.'  BOSWELL.  'Will you not allow, Sir, that he draws

very natural pictures of human life?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, it is

of very low life.  Richardson used to say, that had he not known

who Fielding was, he should have believed he was an ostler.  Sir,

there is more knowledge of the heart in one letter of Richardson's,

than in all Tom Jones.  I, indeed, never read Joseph Andrews.'

ERSKINE.  'Surely, Sir, Richardson is very tedious.'  JOHNSON.

'Why, Sir, if you were to read Richardson for the story, your

impatience would be so much fretted that you would hang yourself.

But you must read him for the sentiment, and consider the story as

only giving occasion to the sentiment.'



We talked of gaming, and animadverted on it with severity.

JOHNSON.  'Nay, gentlemen, let us not aggravate the matter.  It is

not roguery to play with a man who is ignorant of the game, while

you are master of it, and so win his money; for he thinks he can

play better than you, as you think you can play better than he; and

the superiour skill carries it.'  ERSKINE.  'He is a fool, but you

are not a rogue.'  JOHNSON.  'That's much about the truth, Sir.  It

must be considered, that a man who only does what every one of the

society to which he belongs would do, is not a dishonest man.  In

the republick of Sparta, it was agreed, that stealing was not

dishonourable, if not discovered.  I do not commend a society where

there is an agreement that what would not otherwise be fair, shall

be fair; but I maintain, that an individual of any society, who

practises what is allowed, is not a dishonest man.'  BOSWELL.  'So

then, Sir, you do not think ill of a man who wins perhaps forty

thousand pounds in a winter?'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, I do not call a

gamester a dishonest man; but I call him an unsocial man, an

unprofitable man.  Gaming is a mode of transferring property

without producing any intermediate good.  Trade gives employment to

numbers, and so produces intermediate good.'



On Thursday, April 9, I called on him to beg he would go and dine

with me at the Mitre tavern.  He had resolved not to dine at all

this day, I know not for what reason; and I was so unwilling to be

deprived of his company, that I was content to submit to suffer a

want, which was at first somewhat painful, but he soon made me

forget it; and a man is always pleased with himself when he finds

his intellectual inclinations predominate.



He observed, that to reason philosophically on the nature of

prayer, was very unprofitable.



Talking of ghosts, he said, he knew one friend, who was an honest

man and a sensible man, who told him he had seen a ghost, old Mr.

Edward Cave, the printer at St. John's Gate.  He said, Mr. Cave did

not like to talk of it, and seemed to be in great horrour whenever

it was mentioned.  BOSWELL.  'Pray, Sir, what did he say was the

appearance?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, something of a shadowy being.'



On Friday, April 10, I dined with him at General Oglethorpe's,

where we found Dr. Goldsmith.



I started the question whether duelling was consistent with moral

duty.  The brave old General fired at this, and said, with a lofty

air, 'Undoubtedly a man has a right to defend his honour.'

GOLDSMITH.  (turning to me,) 'I ask you first, Sir, what would you

do if you were affronted?'  I answered I should think it necessary

to fight.  'Why then, (replied Goldsmith,) that solves the

question.'  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir, it does not solve the question.  It

does not follow that what a man would do is therefore right.'  I

said, I wished to have it settled, whether duelling was contrary to

the laws of Christianity.  Johnson immediately entered on the

subject, and treated it in a masterly manner; and so far as I have

been able to recollect, his thoughts were these: 'Sir, as men

become in a high degree refined, various causes of offence arise;

which are considered to be of such importance, that life must be

staked to atone for them, though in reality they are not so.  A

body that has received a very fine polish may be easily hurt.

Before men arrive at this artificial refinement, if one tells his

neighbour he lies, his neighbour tells him he lies; if one gives

his neighbour a blow, his neighbour gives him a blow: but in a

state of highly polished society, an affront is held to be a

serious injury.  It must therefore be resented, or rather a duel

must be fought upon it; as men have agreed to banish from their

society one who puts up with an affront without fighting a duel.

Now, Sir, it is never unlawful to fight in self-defence.  He, then,

who fights a duel, does not fight from passion against his

antagonist, but out of self-defence; to avert the stigma of the

world, and to prevent himself from being driven out of society.  I

could wish there was not that superfluity of refinement; but while

such notions prevail, no doubt a man may lawfully fight a duel.'



The General told us, that when he was a very young man, I think

only fifteen, serving under Prince Eugene of Savoy, he was sitting

in a company at table with a Prince of Wirtemberg.  The Prince took

up a glass of wine, and, by a fillip, made some of it fly in

Oglethorpe's face.  Here was a nice dilemma.  To have challenged

him instantly, might have fixed a quarrelsome character upon the

young soldier: to have taken no notice of it might have been

considered as cowardice.  Oglethorpe, therefore, keeping his eye

upon the Prince, and smiling all the time, as if he took what his

Highness had done in jest, said 'Mon Prince,--'.  (I forget the

French words he used, the purport however was,) 'That's a good

joke; but we do it much better in England;' and threw a whole glass

of wine in the Prince's face.  An old General who sat by, said, 'Il

a bien fait, mon Prince, vous l'avez commence:' and thus all ended

in good humour.



Dr. Johnson said, 'Pray, General, give us an account of the siege

of Belgrade.'  Upon which the General, pouring a little wine upon

the table, described every thing with a wet finger: 'Here we were,

here were the Turks,' &c. &c.  Johnson listened with the closest

attention.



A question was started, how far people who disagree in a capital

point can live in friendship together.  Johnson said they might.

Goldsmith said they could not, as they had not the idem velle atque

idem nolle--the same likings and the same aversions.  JOHNSON.

'Why, Sir, you must shun the subject as to which you disagree.  For

instance, I can live very well with Burke: I love his knowledge,

his genius, his diffusion, and affluence of conversation; but I

would not talk to him of the Rockingham party.'  GOLDSMITH.  'But,

Sir, when people live together who have something as to which they

disagree, and which they want to shun, they will be in the

situation mentioned in the story of Bluebeard: "You may look into

all the chambers but one."  But we should have the greatest

inclination to look into that chamber, to talk of that subject.'

JOHNSON.  (with a loud voice,) 'Sir, I am not saying that YOU could

live in friendship with a man from whom you differ as to some

point: I am only saying that I could do it.  You put me in mind of

Sappho in Ovid.'



Goldsmith told us, that he was now busy in writing a natural

history, and, that he might have full leisure for it, he had taken

lodgings, at a farmer's house, near to the six milestone, on the

Edgeware road, and had carried down his books in two returned post-

chaises.  He said, he believed the farmer's family thought him an

odd character, similar to that in which the Spectator appeared to

his landlady and her children: he was The Gentleman.  Mr. Mickle,

the translator of The Lusiad, and I went to visit him at this place

a few days afterwards.  He was not at home; but having a curiosity

to see his apartment, we went in and found curious scraps of

descriptions of animals, scrawled upon the wall with a black lead

pencil.



On Saturday, April 11, he appointed me to come to him in the

evening, when he should be at leisure to give me some assistance

for the defence of Hastie, the schoolmaster of Campbelltown, for

whom I was to appear in the house of Lords.  When I came, I found

him unwilling to exert himself.  I pressed him to write down his

thoughts upon the subject.  He said, 'There's no occasion for my

writing.  I'll talk to you.' . . .



Of our friend, Goldsmith, he said, 'Sir, he is so much afraid of

being unnoticed, that he often talks merely lest you should forget

that he is in the company.'  BOSWELL.  'Yes, he stands forward.'

JOHNSON.  'True, Sir; but if a man is to stand forward, he should

wish to do it not in an aukward posture, not in rags, not so as

that he shall only be exposed to ridicule.'  BOSWELL.  'For my

part, I like very well to hear honest Goldsmith talk away

carelessly.'  JOHNSON.  'Why yes, Sir; but he should not like to

hear himself.' . . .



On Tuesday, April 14, the decree of the Court of Session in the

schoolmaster's cause was reversed in the House of Lords, after a

very eloquent speech by Lord Mansfield, who shewed himself an adept

in school discipline, but I thought was too rigorous towards my

client.  On the evening of the next day I supped with Dr. Johnson,

at the Crown and Anchor tavern, in the Strand, in company with Mr.

Langton and his brother-in-law, Lord Binning.



I talked of the recent expulsion of six students from the

University of Oxford, who were methodists and would not desist from

publickly praying and exhorting.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, that expulsion

was extremely just and proper.  What have they to do at an

University who are not willing to be taught, but will presume to

teach?  Where is religion to be learnt but at an University?  Sir,

they were examined, and found to be mighty ignorant fellows.'

BOSWELL.  'But, was it not hard, Sir, to expel them, for I am told

they were good beings?'  JOHNSON.  'I believe they might be good

beings; but they were not fit to be in the University of Oxford.  A

cow is a very good animal in the field; but we turn her out of a

garden.'  Lord Elibank used to repeat this as an illustration

uncommonly happy.



Desirous of calling Johnson forth to talk, and exercise his wit,

though I should myself be the object of it, I resolutely ventured

to undertake the defence of convivial indulgence in wine, though he

was not to-night in the most genial humour.  After urging the

common plausible topicks, I at last had recourse to the maxim, in

vino veritas, a man who is well warmed with wine will speak truth.

JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, that may be an argument for drinking, if you

suppose men in general to be liars.  But, Sir, I would not keep

company with a fellow, who lyes as long as he is sober, and whom

you must make drunk before you can get a word of truth out of him.'



At this time it appears from his Prayers and Meditations, that he

had been more than commonly diligent in religious duties,

particularly in reading the Holy Scriptures.  It was Passion Week,

that solemn season which the Christian world has appropriated to

the commemoration of the mysteries of our redemption, and during

which, whatever embers of religion are in our breasts, will be

kindled into pious warmth.



I paid him short visits both on Friday and Saturday, and seeing his

large folio Greek Testament before him, beheld him with a

reverential awe, and would not intrude upon his time.  While he was

thus employed to such good purpose, and while his friends in their

intercourse with him constantly found a vigorous intellect and a

lively imagination, it is melancholy to read in his private

register, 'My mind is unsettled and my memory confused.  I have of

late turned my thoughts with a very useless earnestness upon past

incidents.  I have yet got no command over my thoughts; an

unpleasing incident is almost certain to hinder my rest.'  What

philosophick heroism was it in him to appear with such manly

fortitude to the world while he was inwardly so distressed!  We may

surely believe that the mysterious principle of being 'made perfect

through suffering' was to be strongly exemplified in him.



On Sunday, April 19, being Easter-day, General Paoli and I paid him

a visit before dinner.



We talked of sounds.  The General said, there was no beauty in a

simple sound, but only in an harmonious composition of sounds.  I

presumed to differ from this opinion, and mentioned the soft and

sweet sound of a fine woman's voice.  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir, if a

serpent or a toad uttered it, you would think it ugly.'  BOSWELL.

'So you would think, Sir, were a beautiful tune to be uttered by

one of those animals.'  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir, it would be admired.

We have seen fine fiddlers whom we liked as little as toads.'

(laughing.)



While I remained in London this spring, I was with him at several

other times, both by himself and in company.  I dined with him one

day at the Crown and Anchor tavern, in the Strand, with Lord

Elibank, Mr. Langton, and Dr. Vansittart of Oxford.  Without

specifying each particular day, I have preserved the following

memorable things.



I regretted the reflection in his Preface to Shakspeare against

Garrick, to whom we cannot but apply the following passage: 'I

collated such copies as I could procure, and wished for more, but

have not found the collectors of these rarities very

communicative.'  I told him, that Garrick had complained to me of

it, and had vindicated himself by assuring me, that Johnson was

made welcome to the full use of his collection, and that he left

the key of it with a servant, with orders to have a fire and every

convenience for him.  I found Johnson's notion was, that Garrick

wanted to be courted for them, and that, on the contrary, Garrick

should have courted him, and sent him the plays of his own accord.

But, indeed, considering the slovenly and careless manner in which

books were treated by Johnson, it could not be expected that scarce

and valuable editions should have been lent to him.



A gentleman* having to some of the usual arguments for drinking

added this: 'You know, Sir, drinking drives away care, and makes us

forget whatever is disagreeable.  Would not you allow a man to

drink for that reason?'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir, if he sat next YOU.'





* The gentleman most likely is Boswell.--HILL.





A learned gentleman who in the course of conversation wished to

inform us of this simple fact, that the Counsel upon the circuit at

Shrewsbury were much bitten by fleas, took, I suppose, seven or

eight minutes in relating it circumstantially.  He in a plenitude

of phrase told us, that large bales of woollen cloth were lodged in

the town-hall;--that by reason of this, fleas nestled there in

prodigious numbers; that the lodgings of the counsel were near to

the town-hall;--and that those little animals moved from place to

place with wonderful agility.  Johnson sat in great impatience till

the gentleman had finished his tedious narrative, and then burst

out (playfully however), 'It is a pity, Sir, that you have not seen

a lion; for a flea has taken you such a time, that a lion must have

served you a twelvemonth.'



He would not allow Scotland to derive any credit from Lord

Mansfield; for he was educated in England.  'Much (said he,) may be

made of a Scotchman, if he be CAUGHT young.'



He said, 'I am very unwilling to read the manuscripts of authours,

and give them my opinion.  If the authours who apply to me have

money, I bid them boldly print without a name; if they have written

in order to get money, I tell them to go to the booksellers, and

make the best bargain they can.'  BOSWELL.  'But, Sir, if a

bookseller should bring you a manuscript to look at?'  JOHNSON.

'Why, Sir, I would desire the bookseller to take it away.'



I mentioned a friend of mine who had resided long in Spain, and was

unwilling to return to Britain.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, he is attached to

some woman.'  BOSWELL.  'I rather believe, Sir, it is the fine

climate which keeps him there.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, how can you

talk so?  What is CLIMATE to happiness?  Place me in the heart of

Asia, should I not be exiled?  What proportion does climate bear to

the complex system of human life?  You may advise me to go to live

at Bologna to eat sausages.  The sausages there are the best in the

world; they lose much by being carried.'



On Saturday, May 9, Mr. Dempster and I had agreed to dine by

ourselves at the British Coffee-house.  Johnson, on whom I happened

to call in the morning, said he would join us, which he did, and we

spent a very agreeable day, though I recollect but little of what

passed.



He said, 'Walpole was a minister given by the King to the people:

Pitt was a minister given by the people to the King,--as an

adjunct.'



'The misfortune of Goldsmith in conversation is this: he goes on

without knowing how he is to get off.  His genius is great, but his

knowledge is small.  As they say of a generous man, it is a pity he

is not rich, we may say of Goldsmith, it is a pity he is not

knowing.  He would not keep his knowledge to himself.'



1773: AETAT. 64.]--In 1773 his only publication was an edition of

his folio Dictionary, with additions and corrections; nor did he,

so far as is known, furnish any productions of his fertile pen to

any of his numerous friends or dependants, except the Preface to

his old amanuensis Macbean's Dictionary of Ancient Geography.





'TO JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.



'DEAR SIR,-- . . . A new edition of my great Dictionary is printed,

from a copy which I was persuaded to revise; but having made no

preparation, I was able to do very little.  Some superfluities I

have expunged, and some faults I have corrected, and here and there

have scattered a remark; but the main fabrick of the work remains

as it was.  I had looked very little into it since I wrote it, and,

I think, I found it full as often better, as worse, than I

expected.



'Baretti and Davies have had a furious quarrel; a quarrel, I think,

irreconcileable.  Dr. Goldsmith has a new comedy, which is expected

in the spring.  No name is yet given it.  The chief diversion

arises from a stratagem by which a lover is made to mistake his

future father-in-law's house for an inn.  This, you see, borders

upon farce.  The dialogue is quick and gay, and the incidents are

so prepared as not to seem improbable. . . .



'My health seems in general to improve; but I have been troubled

for many weeks with a vexatious catarrh, which is sometimes

sufficiently distressful.  I have not found any great effects from

bleeding and physick; and am afraid, that I must expect help from

brighter days and softer air.



'Write to me now and then; and whenever any good befalls you, make

haste to let me know it, for no one will rejoice at it more than,

dear Sir, your most humble servant,



'SAM. JOHNSON.'



'London, Feb. 24, 1773.'



'You continue to stand very high in the favour of Mrs. Thrale.'





While a former edition of my work was passing through the press, I

was unexpectedly favoured with a packet from Philadelphia, from Mr.

James Abercrombie, a gentleman of that country, who is pleased to

honour me with very high praise of my Life of Dr. Johnson.  To have

the fame of my illustrious friend, and his faithful biographer,

echoed from the New World is extremely flattering; and my grateful

acknowledgements shall be wafted across the Atlantick.  Mr.

Abercrombie has politely conferred on me a considerable additional

obligation, by transmitting to me copies of two letters from Dr.

Johnson to American gentlemen.



On Saturday, April 3, the day after my arrival in London this year,

I went to his house late in the evening, and sat with Mrs. Williams

till he came home.  I found in the London Chronicle, Dr.

Goldsmith's apology to the publick for beating Evans, a bookseller,

on account of a paragraph in a newspaper published by him, which

Goldsmith thought impertinent to him and to a lady of his

acquaintance.  The apology was written so much in Dr. Johnson's

manner, that both Mrs. Williams and I supposed it to be his; but

when he came home, he soon undeceived us.  When he said to Mrs.

Williams, 'Well, Dr. Goldsmith's manifesto has got into your

paper;' I asked him if Dr. Goldsmith had written it, with an air

that made him see I suspected it was his, though subscribed by

Goldsmith.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, Dr. Goldsmith would no more have asked

me to write such a thing as that for him, than he would have asked

me to feed him with a spoon, or to do anything else that denoted

his imbecility.  I as much believe that he wrote it, as if I had

seen him do it.  Sir, had he shewn it to any one friend, he would

not have been allowed to publish it.  He has, indeed, done it very

well; but it is a foolish thing well done.  I suppose he has been

so much elated with the success of his new comedy, that he has

thought every thing that concerned him must he of importance to the

publick.'  BOSWELL.  'I fancy, Sir, this is the first time that he

has been engaged in such an adventure.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, I

believe it is the first time he has BEAT; he may have BEEN BEATEN

before.  This, Sir, is a new plume to him.'



At Mr. Thrale's, in the evening, he repeated his usual paradoxical

declamation against action in publick speaking. 'Action can have no

effect upon reasonable minds.  It may augment noise, but it never

can enforce argument.'



Lord Chesterfield being mentioned, Johnson remarked, that almost

all of that celebrated nobleman's witty sayings were puns.  He,

however, allowed the merit of good wit to his Lordship's saying of

Lord Tyrawley and himself, when both very old and infirm: 'Tyrawley

and I have been dead these two years; but we don't choose to have

it known.'



The conversation having turned on modern imitations of ancient

ballads, and some one having praised their simplicity, he treated

them with that ridicule which he always displayed when that subject

was mentioned.



He disapproved of introducing scripture phrases into secular

discourse.  This seemed to me a question of some difficulty.  A

scripture expression may be used, like a highly classical phrase,

to produce an instantaneous strong impression; and it may be done

without being at all improper.  Yet I own there is danger, that

applying the language of our sacred book to ordinary subjects may

tend to lessen our reverence for it.  If therefore it be introduced

at all, it should be with very great caution.



On Thursday, April 8, I sat a good part of the evening with him,

but he was very silent.



Though he was not disposed to talk, he was unwilling that I should

leave him; and when I looked at my watch, and told him it was

twelve o'clock, he cried, What's that to you and me?' and ordered

Frank to tell Mrs. Williams that we were coming to drink tea with

her, which we did.  It was settled that we should go to church

together next day.



On the 9th of April, being Good Friday, I breakfasted with him on

tea and cross-buns; DOCTOR Levet, as Frank called him, making the

tea.  He carried me with him to the church of St. Clement Danes,

where he had his seat; and his behaviour was, as I had imaged to

myself, solemnly devout.  I never shall forget the tremulous

earnestness with which he pronounced the awful petition in the

Litany: 'In the hour of death, and at the day of judgement, good

LORD deliver us.



We went to church both in the morning and evening.  In the interval

between the two services we did not dine; but he read in the Greek

New Testament, and I turned over several of his books.



I told him that Goldsmith had said to me a few days before, 'As I

take my shoes from the shoemaker, and my coat from the taylor, so I

take my religion from the priest.'  I regretted this loose way of

talking.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, he knows nothing; he has made up his mind

about nothing.'



To my great surprize he asked me to dine with him on Easter-day.  I

never supposed that he had a dinner at his house; for I had not

then heard of any one of his friends having been entertained at his

table.  He told me, 'I generally have a meat pye on Sunday: it is

baked at a publick oven, which is very properly allowed, because

one man can attend it; and thus the advantage is obtained of not

keeping servants from church to dress dinners.'



April 11, being Easter-Sunday, after having attended Divine Service

at St. Paul's, I repaired to Dr. Johnson's.  I had gratified my

curiosity much in dining with JEAN JAQUES ROUSSEAU, while he lived

in the wilds of Neufchatel: I had as great a curiosity to dine with

DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON, in the dusky recess of a court in Fleet-street.

I supposed we should scarcely have knives and forks, and only some

strange, uncouth, ill-drest dish: but I found every thing in very

good order.  We had no other company but Mrs. Williams and a young

woman whom I did not know.  As a dinner here was considered as a

singular phaenomenon, and as I was frequently interrogated on the

subject, my readers may perhaps be desirous to know our bill of

fare.  Foote, I remember, in allusion to Francis, the NEGRO, was

willing to suppose that our repast was BLACK BROTH.  But the fact

was, that we had a very good soup, a boiled leg of lamb and

spinach, a veal pye, and a rice pudding.



He owned that he thought Hawkesworth was one of his imitators, but

he did not think Goldsmith was.  Goldsmith, he said, had great

merit.  BOSWELL.  'But, Sir, he is much indebted to you for his

getting so high in the publick estimation.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir,

he has perhaps got SOONER to it by his intimacy with me.'



Goldsmith, though his vanity often excited him to occasional

competition, had a very high regard for Johnson, which he at this

time expressed in the strongest manner in the Dedication of his

comedy, entitled, She Stoops to Conquer.



He told me that he had twelve or fourteen times attempted to keep a

journal of his life, but never could persevere.  He advised me to

do it.  'The great thing to be recorded, (said he,) is the state of

your own mind; and you should write down every thing that you

remember, for you cannot judge at first what is good or bad; and

write immediately while the impression is fresh, for it will not be

the same a week afterwards.'



I again solicited him to communicate to me the particulars of his

early life.  He said, 'You shall have them all for two-pence.  I

hope you shall know a great deal more of me before you write my

Life.'  He mentioned to me this day many circumstances, which I

wrote down when I went home, and have interwoven in the former part

of this narrative.



On Tuesday, April 13, he and Dr. Goldsmith and I dined at General

Oglethorpe's.  Goldsmith expatiated on the common topick, that the

race of our people was degenerated, and that this was owing to

luxury.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, in the first place, I doubt the fact.  I

believe there are as many tall men in England now, as ever there

were.  But, secondly, supposing the stature of our people to be

diminished, that is not owing to luxury; for, Sir, consider to how

very small a proportion of our people luxury can reach.  Our

soldiery, surely, are not luxurious, who live on sixpence a day;

and the same remark will apply to almost all the other classes.

Luxury, so far as it reaches the poor, will do good to the race of

people; it will strengthen and multiply them.  Sir, no nation was

ever hurt by luxury; for, as I said before, it can reach but to a

very few.  I admit that the great increase of commerce and

manufactures hurts the military spirit of a people; because it

produces a competition for something else than martial honours,--a

competition for riches.  It also hurts the bodies of the people;

for you will observe, there is no man who works at any particular

trade, but you may know him from his appearance to do so.  One part

or other of his body being more used than the rest, he is in some

degree deformed: but, Sir, that is not luxury.  A tailor sits

cross-legged; but that is not luxury.'  GOLDSMITH.  'Come, you're

just going to the same place by another road.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay,

Sir, I say that is not LUXURY.  Let us take a walk from Charing-

cross to White-chapel, through, I suppose, the greatest series of

shops in the world; what is there in any of these shops (if you

except gin-shops,) that can do any human being any harm?'

GOLDSMITH.  'Well, Sir, I'll accept your challenge.  The very next

shop to Northumberland-house is a pickle-shop.'  JOHNSON.  'Well,

Sir: do we not know that a maid can in one afternoon make pickles

sufficient to serve a whole family for a year? nay, that five

pickle-shops can serve all the kingdom?  Besides, Sir, there is no

harm done to any body by the making of pickles, or the eating of

pickles.'



We drank tea with the ladies; and Goldsmith sung Tony Lumpkin's

song in his comedy, She Stoops to Conquer, and a very pretty one,

to an Irish tune, which he had designed for Miss Hardcastle; but as

Mrs. Bulkeley, who played the part, could not sing, it was left

out.  He afterwards wrote it down for me, by which means it was

preserved, and now appears amongst his poems.  Dr. Johnson, in his

way home, stopped at my lodgings in Piccadilly, and sat with me,

drinking tea a second time, till a late hour.



I told him that Mrs. Macaulay said, she wondered how he could

reconcile his political principles with his moral; his notions of

inequality and subordination with wishing well to the happiness of

all mankind, who might live so agreeably, had they all their

portions of land, and none to domineer over another.  JOHNSON.

'Why, Sir, I reconcile my principles very well, because mankind are

happier in a state of inequality and subordination.  Were they to

be in this pretty state of equality, they would soon degenerate

into brutes;--they would become Monboddo's nation;--their tails

would grow.  Sir, all would be losers were all to work for all--

they would have no intellectual improvement.  All intellectual

improvement arises from leisure; all leisure arises from one

working for another.'



Talking of the family of Stuart, he said, 'It should seem that the

family at present on the throne has now established as good a right

as the former family, by the long consent of the people; and that

to disturb this right might be considered as culpable.  At the same

time I own, that it is a very difficult question, when considered

with respect to the house of Stuart.  To oblige people to take

oaths as to the disputed right, is wrong.  I know not whether I

could take them: but I do not blame those who do.'  So

conscientious and so delicate was he upon this subject, which has

occasioned so much clamour against him.



On Thursday, April 15, I dined with him and Dr. Goldsmith at

General Paoli's.



I spoke of Allan Ramsay's Gentle Shepherd, in the Scottish dialect,

as the best pastoral that had ever been written; not only abounding

with beautiful rural imagery, and just and pleasing sentiments, but

being a real picture of manners; and I offered to teach Dr. Johnson

to understand it.  'No, Sir, (said he,) I won't learn it.  You

shall retain your superiority by my not knowing it.'



It having been observed that there was little hospitality in

London;--JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, any man who has a name, or who has

the power of pleasing, will be very generally invited in London.

The man, Sterne, I have been told, has had engagements for three

months.'  GOLDSMITH.  'And a very dull fellow.'  JOHNSON.  'Why,

no, Sir.'



Martinelli told us, that for several years he lived much with

Charles Townshend, and that he ventured to tell him he was a bad

joker.  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, thus much I can say upon the subject.

One day he and a few more agreed to go and dine in the country, and

each of them was to bring a friend in his carriage with him.

Charles Townshend asked Fitzherbert to go with him, but told him,

"You must find somebody to bring you back: I can only carry you

there."  Fitzherbert did not much like this arrangement.  He

however consented, observing sarcastically, "It will do very well;

for then the same jokes will serve you in returning as in going."'



An eminent publick character being mentioned;--JOHNSON.  'I

remember being present when he shewed himself to be so corrupted,

or at least something so different from what I think right, as to

maintain, that a member of parliament should go along with his

party right or wrong.  Now, Sir, this is so remote from native

virtue, from scholastick virtue, that a good man must have

undergone a great change before he can reconcile himself to such a

doctrine.  It is maintaining that you may lie to the publick; for

you lie when you call that right which you think wrong, or the

reverse.  A friend of ours, who is too much an echo of that

gentleman, observed, that a man who does not stick uniformly to a

party, is only waiting to be bought.  Why then, said I, he is only

waiting to be what that gentleman is already.'



We talked of the King's coming to see Goldsmith's new play.--'I

wish he would,' said Goldsmith; adding, however, with an affected

indifference, 'Not that it would do me the least good.'  JOHNSON.

'Well then, Sir, let us say it would do HIM good, (laughing.)  No,

Sir, this affectation will not pass;--it is mighty idle.  In such a

state as ours, who would not wish to please the Chief Magistrate?'

GOLDSMITH.  'I DO wish to please him.  I remember a line in

Dryden,--





     "And every poet is the monarch's friend."





It ought to be reversed.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, there are finer lines in

Dryden on this subject:--





    "For colleges on bounteous Kings depend,

     And never rebel was to arts a friend."'





General Paoli observed, that 'successful rebels might.'

MARTINELLI.  'Happy rebellions.'  GOLDSMITH.  'We have no such

phrase.'  GENERAL PAOLI.  'But have you not the THING?'  GOLDSMITH.

'Yes; all our HAPPY revolutions.  They have hurt our constitution,

and will hurt it, till we mend it by another HAPPY REVOLUTION.'  I

never before discovered that my friend Goldsmith had so much of the

old prejudice in him.



General Paoli, talking of Goldsmith's new play, said, 'Il a fait un

compliment tres gracieux a une certaine grande dame;' meaning a

Duchess of the first rank.



I expressed a doubt whether Goldsmith intended it, in order that I

might hear the truth from himself.  It, perhaps, was not quite fair

to endeavour to bring him to a confession, as he might not wish to

avow positively his taking part against the Court.  He smiled and

hesitated.  The General at once relieved him, by this beautiful

image: 'Monsieur Goldsmith est comme la mer, qui jette des perles

et beaucoup d'autres belles choses, sans s'en appercevoir.'

GOLDSMITH.  'Tres bien dit et tres elegamment.'



A person was mentioned, who it was said could take down in short

hand the speeches in parliament with perfect exactness.  JOHNSON.

'Sir, it is impossible.  I remember one, Angel, who came to me to

write for him a Preface or Dedication to a book upon short hand,

and he professed to write as fast as a man could speak.  In order

to try him, I took down a book, and read while he wrote; and I

favoured him, for I read more deliberately than usual.  I had

proceeded but a very little way, when he begged I would desist, for

he could not follow me.'  Hearing now for the first time of this

Preface or Dedication, I said, 'What an expense, Sir, do you put us

to in buying books, to which you have written Prefaces or

Dedications.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, I have dedicated to the Royal family

all round; that is to say, to the last generation of the Royal

family.'  GOLDSMITH.  'And perhaps, Sir, not one sentence of wit in

a whole Dedication.'  JOHNSON.  'Perhaps not, Sir.'  BOSWELL.

'What then is the reason for applying to a particular person to do

that which any one may do as well?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, one man

has greater readiness at doing it than another.'



I spoke of Mr. Harris, of Salisbury, as being a very learned man,

and in particular an eminent Grecian.  JOHNSON.  'I am not sure of

that.  His friends give him out as such, but I know not who of his

friends are able to judge of it.'  GOLDSMITH.  'He is what is much

better: he is a worthy humane man.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, that is

not to the purpose of our argument: that will as much prove that he

can play upon the fiddle as well as Giardini, as that he is an

eminent Grecian.'  GOLDSMITH.  'The greatest musical performers

have but small emoluments.  Giardini, I am told, does not get above

seven hundred a year.'  JOHNSON.  'That is indeed but little for a

man to get, who does best that which so many endeavour to do.

There is nothing, I think, in which the power of art is shown so

much as in playing on the fiddle.  In all other things we can do

something at first.  Any man will forge a bar of iron, if you give

him a hammer; not so well as a smith, but tolerably.  A man will

saw a piece of wood, and make a box, though a clumsy one; but give

him a fiddle and a fiddle-stick, and he can do nothing.'



On Monday, April 19, he called on me with Mrs. Williams, in Mr.

Strahan's coach, and carried me out to dine with Mr. Elphinston, at

his academy at Kensington.  A printer having acquired a fortune

sufficient to keep his coach, was a good topick for the credit of

literature.  Mrs. Williams said, that another printer, Mr.

Hamilton, had not waited so long as Mr. Strahan, but had kept his

coach several years sooner.  JOHNSON.  'He was in the right.  Life

is short.  The sooner that a man begins to enjoy his wealth the

better.'



Mr. Elphinston talked of a new book that was much admired, and

asked Dr. Johnson if he had read it.  JOHNSON.  'I have looked into

it.'  'What, (said Elphinston,) have you not read it through?'

Johnson, offended at being thus pressed, and so obliged to own his

cursory mode of reading, answered tartly, 'No, Sir, do YOU read

books THROUGH?'



On Wednesday, April 21, I dined with him at Mr. Thrale's.  A

gentleman attacked Garrick for being vain.  JOHNSON.  'No wonder,

Sir, that he is vain; a man who is perpetually flattered in every

mode that can be conceived.  So many bellows have blown the fire,

that one wonders he is not by this time become a cinder.'  BOSWELL.

'And such bellows too.  Lord Mansfield with his cheeks like to

burst: Lord Chatham like an Aeolus.  I have read such notes from

them to him, as were enough to turn his head.'  JOHNSON.  'True.

When he whom every body else flatters, flatters me, I then am truly

happy.'  Mrs. THRALE.  'The sentiment is in Congreve, I think.'

JOHNSON.  'Yes, Madam, in The Way of the World:





    "If there's delight in love, 'tis when I see

     That heart which others bleed for, bleed for me."





No, Sir, I should not be surprized though Garrick chained the

ocean, and lashed the winds.'  BOSWELL.  'Should it not be, Sir,

lashed the ocean and chained the winds?'  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir,

recollect the original:





    "In Corum atque Eurum solitus saevire flagellis

     Barbarus, Aeolia nunquam hoc in carcere passos,

     Ipsum compedibus qui vinxerat Ennosigaeum."





The modes of living in different countries, and the various views

with which men travel in quest of new scenes, having been talked

of, a learned gentleman who holds a considerable office in the law,

expatiated on the happiness of a savage life; and mentioned an

instance of an officer who had actually lived for some time in the

wilds of America, of whom, when in that state, he quoted this

reflection with an air of admiration, as if it had been deeply

philosophical: 'Here am I, free and unrestrained, amidst the rude

magnificence of Nature, with this Indian woman by my side, and this

gun with which I can procure food when I want it; what more can be

desired for human happiness?'  It did not require much sagacity to

foresee that such a sentiment would not be permitted to pass

without due animadversion.  JOHNSON.  'Do not allow yourself, Sir,

to be imposed upon by such gross absurdity.  It is sad stuff; it is

brutish.  If a bull could speak, he might as well exclaim,--Here am

I with this cow and this grass; what being can enjoy greater

felicity?'



We talked of the melancholy end of a gentleman who had destroyed

himself.  JOHNSON.  'It was owing to imaginary difficulties in his

affairs, which, had he talked with any friend, would soon have

vanished.'  BOSWELL.  'Do you think, Sir, that all who commit

suicide are mad?'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, they are often not universally

disordered in their intellects, but one passion presses so upon

them, that they yield to it, and commit suicide, as a passionate

man will stab another.'  He added, 'I have often thought, that

after a man has taken the resolution to kill himself, it is not

courage in him to do any thing, however desperate, because he has

nothing to fear.'  GOLDSMITH.  'I don't see that.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay,

but my dear Sir, why should not you see what every one else sees?'

GOLDSMITH.  'It is for fear of something that he has resolved to

kill himself; and will not that timid disposition restrain him?'

JOHNSON.  'It does not signify that the fear of something made him

resolve; it is upon the state of his mind, after the resolution is

taken, that I argue.  Suppose a man, either from fear, or pride, or

conscience, or whatever motive, has resolved to kill himself; when

once the resolution is taken, he has nothing to fear.  He may then

go and take the King of Prussia by the nose, at the head of his

army.  He cannot fear the rack, who is resolved to kill himself.

When Eustace Budgel was walking down to the Thames, determined to

drown himself, he might, if he pleased, without any apprehension of

danger, have turned aside, and first set fire to St. James's

palace.'



On Tuesday, April 27, Mr. Beauclerk and I called on him in the

morning.  As we walked up Johnson's-court, I said, 'I have a

veneration for this court;' and was glad to find that Beauclerk had

the same reverential enthusiasm.  We found him alone.  We talked of

Mr. Andrew Stuart's elegant and plausible Letters to Lord

Mansfield: a copy of which had been sent by the authour to Dr.

Johnson.  JOHNSON.  'They have not answered the end.  They have not

been talked of; I have never heard of them.  This is owing to their

not being sold.  People seldom read a book which is given to them;

and few are given.  The way to spread a work is to sell it at a low

price.  No man will send to buy a thing that costs even sixpence,

without an intention to read it.'



He said, 'Goldsmith should not be for ever attempting to shine in

conversation: he has not temper for it, he is so much mortified

when he fails.  Sir, a game of jokes is composed partly of skill,

partly of chance, a man may be beat at times by one who has not the

tenth part of his wit.  Now Goldsmith's putting himself against

another, is like a man laying a hundred to one who cannot spare the

hundred.  It is not worth a man's while.  A man should not lay a

hundred to one, unless he can easily spare it, though he has a

hundred chances for him: he can get but a guinea, and he may lose a

hundred.  Goldsmith is in this state.  When he contends, if he gets

the better, it is a very little addition to a man of his literary

reputation: if he does not get the better, he is miserably vexed.'



Johnson's own superlative powers of wit set him above any risk of

such uneasiness.  Garrick had remarked to me of him, a few days

before, 'Rabelais and all other wits are nothing compared with him.

You may be diverted by them; but Johnson gives you a forcible hug,

and shakes laughter out of you, whether you will or no.'



Goldsmith, however, was often very fortunate in his witty contests,

even when he entered the lists with Johnson himself.  Sir Joshua

Reynolds was in company with them one day, when Goldsmith said,

that he thought he could write a good fable, mentioned the

simplicity which that kind of composition requires, and observed,

that in most fables the animals introduced seldom talk in

character.  'For instance, (said he,) the fable of the little

fishes, who saw birds fly over their heads, and envying them,

petitioned Jupiter to be changed into birds.  The skill (continued

he,) consists in making them talk like little fishes.'  While he

indulged himself in this fanciful reverie, he observed Johnson

shaking his sides, and laughing.  Upon which he smartly proceeded,

'Why, Dr. Johnson, this is not so easy as you seem to think; for if

you were to make little fishes talk, they would talk like WHALES.'



On Thursday, April 29, I dined with him at General Oglethorpe's,

where were Sir Joshua Reynolds, Mr. Langton, Dr. Goldsmith, and Mr.

Thrale.  I was very desirous to get Dr. Johnson absolutely fixed in

his resolution to go with me to the Hebrides this year; and I told

him that I had received a letter from Dr. Robertson the historian,

upon the subject, with which he was much pleased; and now talked in

such a manner of his long-intended tour, that I was satisfied he

meant to fulfil his engagement.



The character of Mallet having been introduced, and spoken of

slightingly by Goldsmith; JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, Mallet had talents

enough to keep his literary reputation alive as long as he himself

lived; and that, let me tell you, is a good deal.'  GOLDSMITH.

'But I cannot agree that it was so.  His literary reputation was

dead long before his natural death.  I consider an authour's

literary reputation to be alive only while his name will ensure a

good price for his copy from the booksellers.  I will get you (to

Johnson,) a hundred guineas for any thing whatever that you shall

write, if you put your name to it.'



Dr. Goldsmith's new play, She Stoops to Conquer, being mentioned;

JOHNSON.  'I know of no comedy for many years that has so much

exhilarated an audience, that has answered so much the great end of

comedy--making an audience merry.'



Goldsmith having said, that Garrick's compliment to the Queen,

which he introduced into the play of The Chances, which he had

altered and revised this year, was mean and gross flattery;

JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, I would not WRITE, I would not give solemnly

under my hand, a character beyond what I thought really true; but a

speech on the stage, let it flatter ever so extravagantly, is

formular.  It has always been formular to flatter Kings and Queens;

so much so, that even in our church-service we have "our most

religious King," used indiscriminately, whoever is King.  Nay, they

even flatter themselves;--"we have been graciously pleased to

grant."  No modern flattery, however, is so gross as that of the

Augustan age, where the Emperour was deified.  "Proesens Divus

habebitur Augustus."  And as to meanness, (rising into warmth,) how

is it mean in a player,--a showman,--a fellow who exhibits himself

for a shilling, to flatter his Queen?  The attempt, indeed, was

dangerous; for if it had missed, what became of Garrick, and what

became of the Queen?  As Sir William Temple says of a great

General, it is necessary not only that his designs be formed in a

masterly manner, but that they should be attended with success.

Sir, it is right, at a time when the Royal Family is not generally

liked, to let it be seen that the people like at least one of

them.'  SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.  'I do not perceive why the profession

of a player should be despised; for the great and ultimate end of

all the employments of mankind is to produce amusement.  Garrick

produces more amusement than any body.'  BOSWELL.  'You say, Dr.

Johnson, that Garrick exhibits himself for a shilling.  In this

respect he is only on a footing with a lawyer who exhibits himself

for his fee, and even will maintain any nonsense or absurdity, if

the case requires it.  Garrick refuses a play or a part which he

does not like; a lawyer never refuses.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, what

does this prove? only that a lawyer is worse.  Boswell is now like

Jack in The Tale of a Tub, who, when he is puzzled by an argument,

hangs himself.  He thinks I shall cut him down, but I'll let him

hang.' (laughing vociferously.)  SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.  'Mr. Boswell

thinks that the profession of a lawyer being unquestionably

honourable, if he can show the profession of a player to be more

honourable, he proves his argument.'



On Friday, April 30, I dined with him at Mr. Beauclerk's, where

were Lord Charlemont, Sir Joshua Reynolds, and some more members of

the LITERARY CLUB, whom he had obligingly invited to meet me, as I

was this evening to be balloted for as candidate for admission into

that distinguished society.  Johnson had done me the honour to

propose me, and Beauclerk was very zealous for me.



Goldsmith being mentioned; JOHNSON.  'It is amazing how little

Goldsmith knows.  He seldom comes where he is not more ignorant

than any one else.'  SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.  'Yet there is no man

whose company is more liked.'  JOHNSON.  'To be sure, Sir.  When

people find a man of the most distinguished abilities as a writer,

their inferiour while he is with them, it must be highly gratifying

to them.  What Goldsmith comically says of himself is very true,--

he always gets the better when he argues alone; meaning, that he is

master of a subject in his study, and can write well upon it; but

when he comes into company, grows confused, and unable to talk.

Take him as a poet, his Traveller is a very fine performance; ay,

and so is his Deserted Village, were it not sometimes too much the

echo of his Traveller.  Whether, indeed, we take him as a poet,--as

a comick writer,--or as an historian, he stands in the first

class.'  BOSWELL.  'An historian!  My dear Sir, you surely will not

rank his compilation of the Roman History with the works of other

historians of this age?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, who are before him?'

BOSWELL.  'Hume,--Robertson,--Lord Lyttelton.'  JOHNSON (his

antipathy to the Scotch beginning to rise).  'I have not read Hume;

but, doubtless, Goldsmith's History is better than the VERBIAGE of

Robertson, or the foppery of Dalrymple.'  BOSwELL.  'Will you not

admit the superiority of Robertson, in whose History we find such

penetration--such painting?'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, you must consider how

that penetration and that painting are employed.  It is not

history, it is imagination.  He who describes what he never saw,

draws from fancy.  Robertson paints minds as Sir Joshua paints

faces in a history-piece: he imagines an heroic countenance.  You

must look upon Robertson's work as romance, and try it by that

standard.  History it is not.  Besides, Sir, it is the great

excellence of a writer to put into his book as much as his book

will hold.  Goldsmith has done this in his History.  Now Robertson

might have put twice as much into his book.  Robertson is like a

man who has packed gold in wool: the wool takes up more room than

the gold.  No, Sir; I always thought Robertson would be crushed by

his own weight,--would be buried under his own ornaments.

Goldsmith tells you shortly all you want to know: Robertson detains

you a great deal too long.  No man will read Robertson's cumbrous

detail a second time; but Goldsmith's plain narrative will please

again and again.  I would say to Robertson what an old tutor of a

college said to one of his pupils: "Read over your compositions,

and where ever you meet with a passage which you think is

particularly fine, strike it out."  Goldsmith's abridgement is

better than that of Lucius Florus or Eutropius; and I will venture

to say, that if you compare him with Vertot, in the same places of

the Roman History, you will find that he excels Vertot.  Sir, he

has the art of compiling, and of saying every thing he has to say

in a pleasing manner.  He is now writing a Natural History and will

make it as entertaining as a Persian Tale.'



I cannot dismiss the present topick without observing, that it is

probable that Dr. Johnson, who owned that he often 'talked for

victory,' rather urged plausible objections to Dr. Robertson's

excellent historical works, in the ardour of contest, than

expressed his real and decided opinion; for it is not easy to

suppose, that he should so widely differ from the rest of the

literary world.



JOHNSON.  'I remember once being with Goldsmith in Westminster-

abbey.  While we surveyed the Poets' Corner, I said to him,





    "Forsitan et nostrum nomen miscebitur istis."





when we got to Temple-bar he stopped me, pointed to the heads upon

it, and slily whispered me,





    "Forsitan et nostrum nomen miscebitur ISTIS."'*





* In allusion to Dr. Johnson's supposed political principles, and

perhaps his own.  Boswell.





Johnson praised John Bunyan highly.  'His Pilgrim's Progress has

great merit, both for invention, imagination, and the conduct of

the story; and it has had the best evidence of its merit, the

general and continued approbation of mankind.  Few books, I

believe, have had a more extensive sale.  It is remarkable, that it

begins very much like the poem of Dante; yet there was no

translation of Dante when Bunyan wrote.  There is reason to think

that he had read Spenser.'



A proposition which had been agitated, that monuments to eminent

persons should, for the time to come, be erected in St. Paul's

church as well as in Westminster-abbey, was mentioned; and it was

asked, who should be honoured by having his monument first erected

there.  Somebody suggested Pope.  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, as Pope was

a Roman Catholick, I would not have his to be first.  I think

Milton's rather should have the precedence.  I think more highly of

him now than I did at twenty.  There is more thinking in him and in

Butler, than in any of our poets.'



The gentlemen went away to their club, and I was left at

Beauclerk's till the fate of my election should be announced to me.

I sat in a state of anxiety which even the charming conversation of

Lady Di Beauclerk could not entirely dissipate.  In a short time I

received the agreeable intelligence that I was chosen.  I hastened

to the place of meeting, and was introduced to such a society as

can seldom be found.  Mr. Edmund Burke, whom I then saw for the

first time, and whose splendid talents had long made me ardently

wish for his acquaintance; Dr. Nugent, Mr. Garrick, Dr. Goldsmith,

Mr. (afterwards Sir William) Jones, and the company with whom I had

dined.  Upon my entrance, Johnson placed himself behind a chair, on

which he leaned as on a desk or pulpit, and with humorous formality

gave me a Charge, pointing out the conduct expected from me as a

good member of this club.



Goldsmith produced some very absurd verses which had been publickly

recited to an audience for money.  JOHNSON.  'I can match this

nonsense.  There was a poem called Eugenio, which came out some

years ago, and concludes thus:





    "And now, ye trifling, self-assuming elves,

     Brimful of pride, of nothing, of yourselves,

     Survey Eugenio, view him o'er and o'er,

     Then sink into yourselves, and be no more."





Nay, Dryden in his poem on the Royal Society, has these lines:





    "Then we upon our globe's last verge shall go,

       And see the ocean leaning on the sky;

     From thence our rolling neighbours we shall know,

       And on the lunar world securely pry."'





Much pleasant conversation passed, which Johnson relished with

great good humour.  But his conversation alone, or what led to it,

or was interwoven with it, is the business of this work.



On Saturday, May 1, we dined by ourselves at our old rendezvous,

the Mitre tavern.  He was placid, but not much disposed to talk.

He observed that 'The Irish mix better with the English than the

Scotch do; their language is nearer to English; as a proof of

which, they succeed very well as players, which Scotchmen do not.

Then, Sir, they have not that extreme nationality which we find in

the Scotch.  I will do you, Boswell, the justice to say, that you

are the most UNSCOTTIFIED of your countrymen.  You are almost the

only instance of a Scotchman that I have known, who did not at

every other sentence bring in some other Scotchman.'
