




( Part Three )



On Friday, May 7, I breakfasted with him at Mr. Thrale's in the

Borough.  While we were alone, I endeavoured as well as I could to

apologise for a lady who had been divorced from her husband by act

of Parliament.  I said, that he had used her very ill, had behaved

brutally to her, and that she could not continue to live with him

without having her delicacy contaminated; that all affection for

him was thus destroyed; that the essence of conjugal union being

gone, there remained only a cold form, a mere civil obligation;

that she was in the prime of life, with qualities to produce

happiness; that these ought not to be lost; and, that the gentleman

on whose account she was divorced had gained her heart while thus

unhappily situated.  Seduced, perhaps, by the charms of the lady in

question, I thus attempted to palliate what I was sensible could

not be justified; for when I had finished my harangue, my venerable

friend gave me a proper check: 'My dear Sir, never accustom your

mind to mingle virtue and vice.  The woman's a whore, and there's

an end on't.'



He described the father of one of his friends thus: 'Sir, he was so

exuberant a talker at publick meeting, that the gentlemen of his

county were afraid of him.  No business could be done for his

declamation.'



He did not give me full credit when I mentioned that I had carried

on a short conversation by signs with some Esquimaux who were then

in London, particularly with one of them who was a priest.  He

thought I could not make them understand me.  No man was more

incredulous as to particular facts, which were at all

extraordinary; and therefore no man was more scrupulously

inquisitive, in order to discover the truth.



I dined with him this day at the house of my friends, Messieurs

Edward and Charles Dilly, booksellers in the Poultry: there were

present, their elder brother Mr. Dilly of Bedfordshire, Dr.

Goldsmith, Mr. Langton, Mr. Claxton, Reverend Dr. Mayo a dissenting

minister, the Reverend Mr. Toplady, and my friend the Reverend Mr.

Temple.



BOSWELL.  'I am well assured that the people of Otaheite who have

the bread tree, the fruit of which serves them for bread, laughed

heartily when they were informed of the tedious process necessary

with us to have bread;--plowing, sowing, harrowing, reaping,

threshing, grinding, baking.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, all ignorant

savages will laugh when they are told of the advantages of

civilized life.  Were you to tell men who live without houses, how

we pile brick upon brick, and rafter upon rafter, and that after a

house is raised to a certain height, a man tumbles off a scaffold,

and breaks his neck; he would laugh heartily at our folly in

building; but it does not follow that men are better without

houses.  No, Sir, (holding up a slice of a good loaf,) this is

better than the bread tree.'



I introduced the subject of toleration.  JOHNSON.  'Every society

has a right to preserve publick peace and order, and therefore has

a good right to prohibit the propagation of opinions which have a

dangerous tendency.  To say the MAGISTRATE has this right, is using

an inadequate word: it is the SOCIETY for which the magistrate is

agent.  He may be morally or theologically wrong in restraining the

propagation of opinions which he thinks dangerous, but he is

politically right.'  MAYO.  'I am of opinion, Sir, that every man

is entitled to liberty of conscience in religion; and that the

magistrate cannot restrain that right.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, I agree

with you.  Every man has a right to liberty of conscience, and with

that the magistrate cannot interfere.  People confound liberty of

thinking with liberty of talking; nay, with liberty of preaching.

Every man has a physical right to think as he pleases; for it

cannot be discovered how he thinks.  He has not a moral right, for

he ought to inform himself, and think justly.  But, Sir, no member

of a society has a right to TEACH any doctrine contrary to what the

society holds to be true.  The magistrate, I say, may be wrong in

what he thinks: but while he thinks himself right, he may and ought

to enforce what he thinks.'  MAYO.  'Then, Sir, we are to remain

always in errour, and truth never can prevail; and the magistrate

was right in persecuting the first Christians.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir,

the only method by which religious truth can be established is by

martyrdom.  The magistrate has a right to enforce what he thinks;

and he who is conscious of the truth has a right to suffer.  I am

afraid there is no other way of ascertaining the truth, but by

persecution on the one hand and enduring it on the other.'

GOLDSMITH.  'But how is a man to act, Sir?  Though firmly convinced

of the truth of his doctrine, may he not think it wrong to expose

himself to persecution?  Has he a right to do so?  Is it not, as it

were, committing voluntary suicide?'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, as to

voluntary suicide, as you call it, there are twenty thousand men in

an army who will go without scruple to be shot at, and mount a

breach for five-pence a day.'  GOLDSMITH.  'But have they a moral

right to do this?'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, if you will not take the

universal opinion of mankind, I have nothing to say.  If mankind

cannot defend their own way of thinking, I cannot defend it.  Sir,

if a man is in doubt whether it would be better for him to expose

himself to martyrdom or not, he should not do it.  He must be

convinced that he has a delegation from heaven.'  GOLDSMITH.  'I

would consider whether there is the greater chance of good or evil

upon the whole.  If I see a man who had fallen into a well, I would

wish to help him out; but if there is a greater probability that he

shall pull me in, than that I shall pull him out, I would not

attempt it.  So were I to go to Turkey, I might wish to convert the

Grand Signor to the Christian faith; but when I considered that I

should probably be put to death without effectuating my purpose in

any degree, I should keep myself quiet.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, you must

consider that we have perfect and imperfect obligations.  Perfect

obligations, which are generally not to do something, are clear and

positive; as, "thou shalt not kill?'  But charity, for instance, is

not definable by limits.  It is a duty to give to the poor; but no

man can say how much another should give to the poor, or when a man

has given too little to save his soul.  In the same manner it is a

duty to instruct the ignorant, and of consequence to convert

infidels to Christianity; but no man in the common course of things

is obliged to carry this to such a degree as to incur the danger of

martyrdom, as no man is obliged to strip himself to the shirt in

order to give charity.  I have said, that a man must be persuaded

that he has a particular delegation from heaven.'  GOLDSMITH.  'How

is this to be known?  Our first reformers, who were burnt for not

believing bread and wine to be CHRIST'--JOHNSON.  (interrupting

him,) 'Sir, they were not burnt for not believing bread and wine to

be CHRIST, but for insulting those who did believe it.  And, Sir,

when the first reformers began, they did not intend to be martyred:

as many of them ran away as could.'  BOSWELL.  'But, Sir, there was

your countryman, Elwal, who you told me challenged King George with

his black-guards, and his red-guards.'  JOHNSON.  'My countryman,

Elwal, Sir, should have been put in the stocks; a proper pulpit for

him; and he'd have had a numerous audience.  A man who preaches in

the stocks will always have hearers enough.'  BOSWELL.  'But Elwal

thought himself in the right.'  JOHNSON.  'We are not providing for

mad people; there are places for them in the neighbourhood.'

(meaning moorfields.)  MAYO.  'But, Sir, is it not very hard that I

should not be allowed to teach my children what I really believe to

be the truth?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, you might contrive to teach

your children extra scandalum; but, Sir, the magistrate, if he

knows it, has a right to restrain you.  Suppose you teach your

children to be thieves?'  MAYO.  'This is making a joke of the

subject.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, take it thus:--that you teach them

the community of goods; for which there are as many plausible

arguments as for most erroneous doctrines.  You teach them that all

things at first were in common, and that no man had a right to any

thing but as he laid his hands upon it; and that this still is, or

ought to be, the rule amongst mankind.  Here, Sir, you sap a great

principle in society,--property.  And don't you think the

magistrate would have a right to prevent you?  Or, suppose you

should teach your children the notion of the Adamites, and they

should run naked into the streets, would not the magistrate have a

right to flog 'em into their doublets?'  MAYO.  'I think the

magistrate has no right to interfere till there is some overt act.'

BOSWELL.  'So, Sir, though he sees an enemy to the state charging a

blunderbuss, he is not to interfere till it is fired off?'  MAYO.

'He must be sure of its direction against the state.'  JOHNSON.

'The magistrate is to judge of that.--He has no right to restrain

your thinking, because the evil centers in yourself.  If a man were

sitting at this table, and chopping off his fingers, the

magistrate, as guardian of the community, has no authority to

restrain him, however he might do it from kindness as a parent.--

Though, indeed, upon more consideration, I think he may; as it is

probable, that he who is chopping off his own fingers, may soon

proceed to chop off those of other people.  If I think it right to

steal Mr. Dilly's plate, I am a bad man; but he can say nothing to

me.  If I make an open declaration that I think so, he will keep me

out of his house.  If I put forth my hand, I shall be sent to

Newgate.  This is the gradation of thinking, preaching, and acting:

if a man thinks erroneously, he may keep his thoughts to himself,

and nobody will trouble him; if he preaches erroneous doctrine,

society may expel him; if he acts in consequence of it, the law

takes place, and he is hanged.'  MAYO.  'But, Sir, ought not

Christians to have liberty of conscience?'  JOHNSON.  'I have

already told you so, Sir.  You are coming back to where you were.'

BOSWELL.  'Dr. Mayo is always taking a return post-chaise, and

going the stage over again.  He has it at half price.'  JOHNSON.

'Dr. Mayo, like other champions for unlimited toleration, has got a

set of words.  Sir, it is no matter, politically, whether the

magistrate be right or wrong.  Suppose a club were to be formed, to

drink confusion to King George the Third, and a happy restoration

to Charles the Third, this would be very bad with respect to the

State; but every member of that club must either conform to its

rules, or be turned out of it.  Old Baxter, I remember, maintains,

that the magistrate should "tolerate all things that are

tolerable."  This is no good definition of toleration upon any

principle; but it shows that he thought some things were not

tolerable.'  TOPLADY.  'Sir, you have untwisted this difficult

subject with great dexterity.'



During this argument, Goldsmith sat in restless agitation, from a

wish to get in and SHINE.  Finding himself excluded, he had taken

his hat to go away, but remained for some time with it in his hand,

like a gamester, who at the close of a long night, lingers for a

little while, to see if he can have a favourable opening to finish

with success.  Once when he was beginning to speak, he found

himself overpowered by the loud voice of Johnson, who was at the

opposite end of the table, and did not perceive Goldsmith's

attempt.  Thus disappointed of his wish to obtain the attention of

the company, Goldsmith in a passion threw down his hat, looking

angrily at Johnson, and exclaiming in a bitter tone, 'TAKE IT.'

When Toplady was going to speak, Johnson uttered some sound, which

led Goldsmith to think that he was beginning again, and taking the

words from Toplady.  Upon which, he seized this opportunity of

venting his own envy and spleen, under the pretext of supporting

another person:



'Sir, (said he to Johnson,) the gentleman has heard you patiently

for an hour; pray allow us now to hear him.'  JOHNSON.  (sternly,)

'Sir, I was not interrupting the gentleman.  I was only giving him

a signal of my attention.  Sir, you are impertinent.'  Goldsmith

made no reply, but continued in the company for some time.



A gentleman present ventured to ask Dr. Johnson if there was not a

material difference as to toleration of opinions which lead to

action, and opinions merely speculative; for instance, would it be

wrong in the magistrate to tolerate those who preach against the

doctrine of the TRINITY?  Johnson was highly offended, and said, 'I

wonder, Sir, how a gentleman of your piety can introduce this

subject in a mixed company.'  He told me afterwards, that the

impropriety was, that perhaps some of the company might have talked

on the subject in such terms as might have shocked him; or he might

have been forced to appear in their eyes a narrow-minded man.  The

gentleman, with submissive deference, said, he had only hinted at

the question from a desire to hear Dr. Johnson's opinion upon it.

JOHNSON.  'Why then, Sir, I think that permitting men to preach any

opinion contrary to the doctrine of the established church tends,

in a certain degree, to lessen the authority of the church, and

consequently, to lessen the influence of religion.'  'It may be

considered, (said the gentleman,) whether it would not be politick

to tolerate in such a case.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, we have been talking

of RIGHT: this is another question.  I think it is NOT politick to

tolerate in such a case.'



BOSWELL.  'Pray, Mr. Dilly, how does Dr. Leland's History of

Ireland sell?'  JOHNSON.  (bursting forth with a generous

indignation,) 'The Irish are in a most unnatural state; for we see

there the minority prevailing over the majority.  There is no

instance, even in the ten persecutions, of such severity as that

which the protestants of Ireland have exercised against the

Catholicks.  Did we tell them we have conquered them, it would be

above board: to punish them by confiscation and other penalties, as

rebels, was monstrous injustice.  King William was not their lawful

sovereign: he had not been acknowledged by the Parliament of

Ireland, when they appeared in arms against him.'



He and Mr. Langton and I went together to THE CLUB, where we found

Mr. Burke, Mr. Garrick, and some other members, and amongst them

our friend Goldsmith, who sat silently brooding over Johnson's

reprimand to him after dinner.  Johnson perceived this, and said

aside to some of us, 'I'll make Goldsmith forgive me;' and then

called to him in a loud voice, 'Dr. Goldsmith,--something passed

to-day where you and I dined; I ask your pardon.'  Goldsmith

answered placidly, 'It must be much from you, Sir, that I take

ill.'  And so at once the difference was over, and they were on as

easy terms as ever, and Goldsmith rattled away as usual.



In our way to the club to-night, when I regretted that Goldsmith

would, upon every occasion, endeavour to shine, by which he often

exposed himself, Mr. Langton observed, that he was not like

Addison, who was content with the fame of his writings, and did not

aim also at excellency in conversation, for which he found himself

unfit; and that he said to a lady who complained of his having

talked little in company, 'Madam, I have but ninepence in ready

money, but I can draw for a thousand pounds.'  I observed, that

Goldsmith had a great deal of gold in his cabinet, but, not content

with that, was always taking out his purse.  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir,

and that so often an empty purse!'



Goldsmith's incessant desire of being conspicuous in company, was

the occasion of his sometimes appearing to such disadvantage as one

should hardly have supposed possible in a man of his genius.  When

his literary reputation had risen deservedly high, and his society

was much courted, he became very jealous of the extraordinary

attention which was every where paid to Johnson.  One evening, in a

circle of wits, he found fault with me for talking of Johnson as

entitled to the honour of unquestionable superiority.  'Sir, (said

he,) you are for making a monarchy of what should be a republick.'



He was still more mortified, when talking in a company with fluent

vivacity, and, as he flattered himself, to the admiration of all

who were present; a German who sat next him, and perceived Johnson

rolling himself, as if about to speak, suddenly stopped him,

saying, 'Stay, stay,--Toctor Shonson is going to say something.'

This was, no doubt, very provoking, especially to one so irritable

as Goldsmith, who frequently mentioned it with strong expressions

of indignation.



It may also be observed, that Goldsmith was sometimes content to be

treated with an easy familiarity, but, upon occasions, would be

consequential and important.  An instance of this occurred in a

small particular.  Johnson had a way of contracting the names of

his friends; as Beauclerk, Beau; Boswell, Bozzy; Langton, Lanky;

Murphy, Mur; Sheridan, Sherry.  I remember one day, when Tom Davies

was telling that Dr. Johnson said, 'We are all in labour for a name

to GOLDY'S play,' Goldsmith seemed displeased that such a liberty

should be taken with his name, and said, 'I have often desired him

not to call me GOLDY.'  Tom was remarkably attentive to the most

minute circumstance about Johnson.  I recollect his telling me

once, on my arrival in London, 'Sir, our great friend has made an

improvement on his appellation of old Mr. Sheridan.  He calls him

now Sherry derry.'



On Monday, May 9, as I was to set out on my return to Scotland next

morning, I was desirous to see as much of Dr. Johnson as I could.

But I first called on Goldsmith to take leave of him.  The jealousy

and envy which, though possessed of many most amiable qualities, he

frankly avowed, broke out violently at this interview.  Upon

another occasion, when Goldsmith confessed himself to be of an

envious disposition, I contended with Johnson that we ought not to

be angry with him, he was so candid in owning it.  'Nay, Sir, (said

Johnson,) we must be angry that a man has such a superabundance of

an odious quality, that he cannot keep it within his own breast,

but it boils over.'  In my opinion, however, Goldsmith had not more

of it than other people have, but only talked of it freely.



He now seemed very angry that Johnson was going to be a traveller;

said 'he would be a dead weight for me to carry, and that I should

never be able to lug him along through the Highlands and Hebrides.'

Nor would he patiently allow me to enlarge upon Johnson's wonderful

abilities; but exclaimed, 'Is he like Burke, who winds into a

subject like a serpent?'  'But, (said I,) Johnson is the Hercules

who strangled serpents in his cradle.'



I dined with Dr. Johnson at General Paoli's.  He was obliged, by

indisposition, to leave the company early; he appointed me,

however, to meet him in the evening at Mr. (now Sir Robert)

Chambers's in the Temple, where he accordingly came, though he

continued to be very ill.  Chambers, as is common on such

occasions, prescribed various remedies to him.  JOHNSON.  (fretted

by pain,) 'Pr'ythee don't tease me.  Stay till I am well, and then

you shall tell me how to cure myself.'  He grew better, and talked

with a noble enthusiasm of keeping up the representation of

respectable families.  His zeal on this subject was a circumstance

in his character exceedingly remarkable, when it is considered that

he himself had no pretensions to blood.  I heard him once say, 'I

have great merit in being zealous for subordination and the honours

of birth; for I can hardly tell who was my grandfather.'  He

maintained the dignity and propriety of male succession, in

opposition to the opinion of one of our friends, who had that day

employed Mr. Chambers to draw his will, devising his estate to his

three sisters, in preference to a remote heir male.  Johnson called

them 'three DOWDIES,' and said, with as high a spirit as the

boldest Baron in the most perfect days of the feudal system, 'An

ancient estate should always go to males.  It is mighty foolish to

let a stranger have it because he marries your daughter, and takes

your name.  As for an estate newly acquired by trade, you may give

it, if you will, to the dog Towser, and let him keep his OWN name.'



I have known him at times exceedingly diverted at what seemed to

others a very small sport.  He now laughed immoderately, without

any reason that we could perceive, at our friend's making his will;

called him the TESTATOR, and added, 'I dare say, he thinks he has

done a mighty thing.  He won't stay till he gets home to his seat

in the country, to produce this wonderful deed: he'll call up the

landlord of the first inn on the road; and, after a suitable

preface upon mortality and the uncertainty of life, will tell him

that he should not delay making his will; and here, Sir, will he

say, is my will, which I have just made, with the assistance of one

of the ablest lawyers in the kingdom; and he will read it to him

(laughing all the time).  He believes he has made this will; but he

did not make it: you, Chambers, made it for him.  I trust you have

had more conscience than to make him say, "being of sound

understanding;" ha, ha, ha!  I hope he has left me a legacy.  I'd

have his will turned into verse, like a ballad.'



Mr. Chambers did not by any means relish this jocularity upon a

matter of which pars magna fuit, and seemed impatient till he got

rid of us.  Johnson could not stop his merriment, but continued it

all the way till we got without the Temple-gate.  He then burst

into such a fit of laughter, that he appeared to be almost in a

convulsion; and, in order to support himself, laid hold of one of

the posts at the side of the foot pavement, and sent forth peals so

loud, that in the silence of the night his voice seemed to resound

from Temple-bar to Fleet-ditch.



This most ludicrous exhibition of the aweful, melancholy, and

venerable Johnson, happened well to counteract the feelings of

sadness which I used to experience when parting with him for a

considerable time.  I accompanied him to his door, where he gave me

his blessing.





'TO JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.



'DEAR Sir,--I shall set out from London on Friday the sixth of this

month, and purpose not to loiter much by the way.  Which day I

shall be at Edinburgh, I cannot exactly tell.  I suppose I must

drive to an inn, and send a porter to find you.



'I am afraid Beattie will not be at his College soon enough for us,

and I shall be sorry to miss him; but there is no staying for the

concurrence of all conveniences.  We will do as well as we can.  I

am, Sir, your most humble servant,



'August 3, 1773.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





TO JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.



'Newcastle, Aug. 11, 1773.



'DEAR SIR, I came hither last night, and hope, but do not

absolutely promise, to be in Edinburgh on Saturday.  Beattie will

not come so soon.  I am, Sir, your most humble servant,



'My compliments to your lady.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





TO THE SAME.



'Mr. Johnson sends his compliments to Mr. Boswell, being just

arrived at Boyd's.--Saturday night.'





His stay in Scotland was from the 18th of August, on which day he

arrived, till the 22nd of November, when he set out on his return

to London; and I believe ninety-four days were never passed by any

man in a more vigorous exertion.*





* In his Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides, published the year

after Johnson died, Boswell gives a detailed account of Johnson's

conversation and adventures with him throughout the journey of

1773.  Partly owing to their uninterrupted association, partly to

the strangeness and variation of background and circumstances, and

partly to Boswell's larger leisure during the tour for the

elaboration of his account, the journal is even more racy,

picturesque, and interesting than any equal part of the Life.  No

reader who enjoys the Life should fail to read the Tour--

unabridged!--ED.





His humane forgiving disposition was put to a pretty strong test on

his return to London, by a liberty which Mr. Thomas Davies had

taken with him in his absence, which was, to publish two volumes,

entitled, Miscellaneous and fugitive Pieces, which he advertised in

the news-papers, 'By the Authour of the Rambler.'  In this

collection, several of Dr. Johnson's acknowledged writings, several

of his anonymous performances, and some which he had written for

others, were inserted; but there were also some in which he had no

concern whatever.  He was at first very angry, as he had good

reason to be.  But, upon consideration of his poor friend's narrow

circumstances, and that he had only a little profit in view, and

meant no harm, he soon relented, and continued his kindness to him

as formerly.



In the course of his self-examination with retrospect to this year,

he seems to have been much dejected; for he says, January 1, 1774,

'This year has passed with so little improvement, that I doubt

whether I have not rather impaired than increased my learning'; and

yet we have seen how he READ, and we know how he TALKED during that

period.



He was now seriously engaged in writing an account of our travels

in the Hebrides, in consequence of which I had the pleasure of a

more frequent correspondence with him.





'TO BENNET LANGTON, ESQ., AT LANGTON, NEAR SPILSBY, LINCOLNSHIRE.



'DEAR SIR,--You have reason to reproach me that I have left your

last letter so long unanswered, but I had nothing particular to

say.  Chambers, you find, is gone far, and poor Goldsmith is gone

much further.  He died of a fever, exasperated, as I believe, by

the fear of distress.  He had raised money and squandered it, by

every artifice of acquisition, and folly of expence.  But let not

his frailties be remembered; he was a very great man.



'I have just begun to print my Journey to the Hebrides, and am

leaving the press to take another journey into Wales, whither Mr.

Thrale is going, to take possession of, at least, five hundred a

year, fallen to his lady.  All at Streatham, that are alive, are

well.



'I have never recovered from the last dreadful illness, but flatter

myself that I grow gradually better; much, however, yet remains to

mend.  [Greek text omitted].



'If you have the Latin version of Busy, curious, thirsty fly, be so

kind as to transcribe and send it; but you need not be in haste,

for I shall be I know not where, for at least five weeks.  I wrote

the following tetastrick on poor Goldsmith:--





[Greek text omitted]





'Please to make my most respectful compliments to all the ladies,

and remember me to young George and his sisters.  I reckon George

begins to shew a pair of heels.



'Do not be sullen now, but let me find a letter when I come back.

I am, dear Sir, your affectionate, humble servant,



'SAM. JOHNSON.



'July 5,1774.'





In his manuscript diary of this year, there is the following

entry:--



'Nov. 27.  Advent Sunday.  I considered that this day, being the

beginning of the ecclesiastical year, was a proper time for a new

course of life.  I began to read the Greek Testament regularly at

160 verses every Sunday.  This day I began the Acts.



'In this week I read Virgil's Pastorals.  I learned to repeat the

Pollio and Gallus.  I read carelessly the first Georgick.'



Such evidences of his unceasing ardour, both for 'divine and human

lore,' when advanced into his sixty-fifth year, and notwithstanding

his many disturbances from disease, must make us at once honour his

spirit, and lament that it should be so grievously clogged by its

material tegument.





1775: AETAT. 66.]--





'MR. BOSWELL TO DR. JOHNSON.



'Edinburgh, Feb. 2,1775.



'. . . As to Macpherson,' I am anxious to have from yourself a full

and pointed account of what has passed between you and him.  It is

confidently told here, that before your book came out he sent to

you, to let you know that he understood you meant to deny the

authenticity of Ossian's poems; that the originals were in his

possession; that you might have inspection of them, and might take

the evidence of people skilled in the Erse language; and that he

hoped, after this fair offer, you would not be so uncandid as to

assert that he had refused reasonable proof.  That you paid no

regard to his message, but published your strong attack upon him;

and then he wrote a letter to you, in such terms as he thought

suited to one who had not acted as a man of veracity.' . . .



What words were used by Mr. Macpherson in his letter to the

venerable Sage, I have never heard; but they are generally said to

have been of a nature very different from the language of literary

contest.  Dr. Johnson's answer appeared in the news-papers of the

day, and has since been frequently re-published; but not with

perfect accuracy.  I give it as dictated to me by himself, written

down in his presence, and authenticated by a note in his own

handwriting, 'This, I think, is a true copy.'





'MR. JAMES MACPHERSON,--I received your foolish and impudent

letter.  Any violence offered me I shall do my best to repel; and

what I cannot do for myself, the law shall do for me.  I hope I

shall never be deterred from detecting what I think a cheat, by the

menaces of a ruffian.



'What would you have me retract?  I thought your book an imposture;

I think it an imposture still.  For this opinion I have given my

reasons to the publick, which I here dare you to refute.  Your rage

I defy.  Your abilities, since your Homer, are not so formidable;

and what I hear of your morals, inclines me to pay regard not to

what you shall say, but to what you shall prove.  You may print

this if

you will.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





Mr. Macpherson little knew the character of Dr. Johnson, if he

supposed that he could be easily intimidated; for no man was ever

more remarkable for personal courage.  He had, indeed, an aweful

dread of death, or rather, 'of something after death;' and what

rational man, who seriously thinks of quitting all that he has ever

known, and going into a new and unknown state of being, can be

without that dread?  But his fear was from reflection; his courage

natural.  His fear, in that one instance, was the result of

philosophical and religious consideration.  He feared death, but he

feared nothing else, not even what might occasion death.  Many

instances of his resolution may be mentioned.  One day, at Mr.

Beauclerk's house in the country, when two large dogs were

fighting, he went up to them, and beat them till they separated;

and at another time, when told of the danger there was that a gun

might burst if charged with many balls, he put in six or seven, and

fired it off against a wall.  Mr. Langton told me, that when they

were swimming together near Oxford, he cautioned Dr. Johnson

against a pool, which was reckoned particularly dangerous; upon

which Johnson directly swam into it.  He told me himself that one

night he was attacked in the street by four men, to whom he would

not yield, but kept them all at bay, till the watch came up, and

carried both him and them to the round-house.  In the playhouse at

Lichfield, as Mr. Garrick informed me, Johnson having for a moment

quitted a chair which was placed for him between the side-scenes, a

gentleman took possession of it, and when Johnson on his return

civilly demanded his seat, rudely refused to give it up; upon which

Johnson laid hold of it, and tossed him and the chair into the pit.

Foote, who so successfully revived the old comedy, by exhibiting

living characters, had resolved to imitate Johnson on the stage,

expecting great profits from his ridicule of so celebrated a man.

Johnson being informed of his intention, and being at dinner at Mr.

Thomas Davies's the bookseller, from whom I had the story, he asked

Mr. Davies 'what was the common price of an oak stick;' and being

answered six-pence, 'Why then, Sir, (said he,) give me leave to

send your servant to purchase me a shilling one.  I'll have a

double quantity; for I am told Foote means to take me off, as he

calls it, and I am determined the fellow shall not do it with

impunity.  Davies took care to acquaint Foote of this, which

effectually checked the wantonness of the mimick.  Mr. Macpherson's

menaces made Johnson provide himself with the same implement of

defence; and had he been attacked, I have no doubt that, old as he

was, he would have made his corporal prowess be felt as much as his

intellectual.



His Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland is a most valuable

performance.  Johnson's grateful acknowledgements of kindnesses

received in the course of this tour, completely refute the brutal

reflections which have been thrown out against him, as if he had

made an ungrateful return; and his delicacy in sparing in his book

those who we find from his letters to Mrs. Thrale were just objects

of censure, is much to be admired.  His candour and amiable

disposition is conspicuous from his conduct, when informed by Mr.

Macleod, of Rasay, that he had committed a mistake, which gave that

gentleman some uneasiness.  He wrote him a courteous and kind

letter, and inserted in the news-papers an advertisement,

correcting the mistake.



As to his prejudice against the Scotch, which I always ascribed to

that nationality which he observed in THEM, he said to the same

gentleman, 'When I find a Scotchman, to whom an Englishman is as a

Scotchman, that Scotchman shall be as an Englishman to me.'  His

intimacy with many gentlemen of Scotland, and his employing so many

natives of that country as his amanuenses, prove that his prejudice

was not virulent; and I have deposited in the British Museum,

amongst other pieces of his writing, the following note in answer

to one from me, asking if he would meet me at dinner at the Mitre,

though a friend of mine, a Scotchman, was to be there:--



'Mr. Johnson does not see why Mr. Boswell should suppose a

Scotchman less acceptable than any other man.  He will be at the

Mitre.'



My much-valued friend Dr. Barnard, now Bishop of Killaloc, having

once expressed to him an apprehension, that if he should visit

Ireland he might treat the people of that country more unfavourably

than he had done the Scotch, he answered, with strong pointed

double-edged wit, 'Sir, you have no reason to be afraid of me.  The

Irish are not in a conspiracy to cheat the world by false

representations of the merits of their countrymen.  No, Sir; the

Irish are a FAIR PEOPLE;--they never speak well of one another.'



All the miserable cavillings against his Journey, in newspapers,

magazines, and other fugitive publications, I can speak from

certain knowledge, only furnished him with sport.  At last there

came out a scurrilous volume, larger than Johnson's own, filled

with malignant abuse, under a name, real or fictitious, of some low

man in an obscure corner of Scotland, though supposed to be the

work of another Scotchman, who has found means to make himself well

known both in Scotland and England.  The effect which it had upon

Johnson was, to produce this pleasant observation to Mr. Seward, to

whom he lent the book: 'This fellow must be a blockhead.  They

don't know how to go about their abuse.  Who will read a five-

shilling book against me?  No, Sir, if they had wit, they should

have kept pelting me with pamphlets.'



On Tuesday, March 21, I arrived in London; and on repairing to Dr.

Johnson's before dinner, found him in his study, sitting with Mr.

Peter Garrick, the elder brother of David, strongly resembling him

in countenance and voice, but of more sedate and placid manners.

Johnson informed me, that 'though Mr. Beauclerk was in great pain,

it was hoped he was not in danger, and that he now wished to

consult Dr. Heberden to try the effect of a NEW UNDERSTANDING.'

Both at this interview, and in the evening at Mr. Thrale's where he

and Mr. Peter Garrick and I met again, he was vehement on the

subject of the Ossian controversy; observing, 'We do not know that

there are any ancient Erse manuscripts; and we have no other reason

to disbelieve that there are men with three heads, but that we do

not know that there are any such men.'  He also was outrageous upon

his supposition that my countrymen 'loved Scotland better than

truth,' saying, 'All of them,--nay not all,--but DROVES of them,

would come up, and attest any thing for the honour of Scotland.'

He also persevered in his wild allegation, that he questioned if

there was a tree between Edinburgh and the English border older

than himself.  I assured him he was mistaken, and suggested that

the proper punishment would be that he should receive a stripe at

every tree above a hundred years old, that was found within that

space.  He laughed, and said, 'I believe I might submit to it for a

BAUBEE!'



The doubts which, in my correspondence with him, I had ventured to

state as to the justice and wisdom of the conduct of Great-Britain

towards the American colonies, while I at the same time requested

that he would enable me to inform myself upon that momentous

subject, he had altogether disregarded; and had recently published

a pamphlet, entitled, Taxation no Tyranny; an answer to the

Resolutions and Address of the American Congress.



He had long before indulged most unfavourable sentiments of our

fellow-subjects in America.  For, as early as 1769, I was told by

Dr. John Campbell, that he had said of them, 'Sir, they are a race

of convicts, and ought to be thankful for any thing we allow them

short of hanging.'



Of this performance I avoided to talk with him; for I had now

formed a clear and settled opinion, that the people of America were

well warranted to resist a claim that their fellow-subjects in the

mother-country should have the entire command of their fortunes, by

taxing them without their own consent; and the extreme violence

which it breathed, appeared to me so unsuitable to the mildness of

a christian philosopher, and so directly opposite to the principles

of peace which he had so beautifully recommended in his pamphlet

respecting Falkland's Islands, that I was sorry to see him appear

in so unfavourable a light.



On Friday, March 24, I met him at the LITERARY CLUB, where were Mr.

Beauclerk, Mr. Langton, Mr. Colman, Dr. Percy, Mr. Vesey, Sir

Charles Bunbury, Dr. George Fordyce, Mr. Steevens, and Mr. Charles

Fox.  Before he came in, we talked of his Journey to the Western

Islands, and of his coming away 'willing to believe the second

sight,' which seemed to excite some ridicule.  I was then so

impressed with the truth of many of the stories of it which I had

been told, that I avowed my conviction, saying, 'He is only WILLING

to believe: I DO believe.  The evidence is enough for me, though

not for his great mind.  What will not fill a quart bottle will

fill a pint bottle.  I am filled with belief.'  'Are you? (said

Colman,) then cork it up.'



I found his Journey the common topick of conversation in London at

this time, wherever I happened to be.  At one of Lord Mansfield's

formal Sunday evening conversations, strangely called Levees, his

Lordship addressed me, 'We have all been reading your travels, Mr.

Boswell.'  I answered, 'I was but the humble attendant of Dr.

Johnson.'  The Chief Justice replied, with that air and manner

which none, who ever saw and heard him, can forget, 'He speaks ill

of nobody but Ossian.'



Johnson was in high spirits this evening at the club, and talked

with great animation and success.  He attacked Swift, as he used to

do upon all occasions.  The Tale of a Tub is so much superiour to

his other writings, that one can hardly believe he was the authour

of it: 'there is in it such a vigour of mind, such a swarm of

thoughts, so much of nature, and art, and life.'  I wondered to

hear him say of Gulliver's Travels, 'When once you have thought of

big men and little men, it is very easy to do all the rest.'  I

endeavoured to make a stand for Swift, and tried to rouse those who

were much more able to defend him; but in vain.  Johnson at last,

of his own accord, allowed very great merit to the inventory of

articles found in the pocket of the Man Mountain, particularly the

description of his watch, which it was conjectured was his God; as

he consulted it upon all occasions.  He observed, that 'Swift put

his name to but two things, (after he had a name to put,) The Plan

for the Improvement of the English Language, and the last Drapier's

Letter.'



From Swift, there was an easy transition to Mr. Thomas Sheridan--

JOHNSON.  'Sheridan is a wonderful admirer of the tragedy of

Douglas, and presented its authour with a gold medal.  Some years

ago, at a coffee-house in Oxford, I called to him, "Mr. Sheridan,

Mr. Sheridan, how came you to give a gold medal to Home, for

writing that foolish play?"  This you see, was wanton and insolent;

but I MEANT to be wanton and insolent.  A medal has no value but as

a stamp of merit.  And was Sheridan to assume to himself the right

of giving that stamp?  If Sheridan was magnificent enough to bestow

a gold medal as an honorary reward of dramatick excellence, he

should have requested one of the Universities to choose the person

on whom it should be conferred.  Sheridan had no right to give a

stamp of merit: it was counterfeiting Apollo's coin.'



On Monday, March 27, I breakfasted with him at Mr Strahan's.  He

told us, that he was engaged to go that evening to Mrs. Abington's

benefit.  'She was visiting some ladies whom I was visiting, and

begged that I would come to her benefit.  I told her I could not

hear: but she insisted so much on my coming, that it would have

been brutal to have refused her.'  This was a speech quite

characteristical.  He loved to bring forward his having been in the

gay circles of life; and he was, perhaps, a little vain of the

solicitations of this elegant and fashionable actress.  He told us,

the play was to be the The Hypocrite, altered from Cibber's

Nonjuror, so as to satirize the Methodists.  'I do not think (said

he,) the character of The Hypocrite justly applicable to the

Methodists, but it was very applicable to the Nonjurors.'



Mr. Strahan had taken a poor boy from the country as an apprentice,

upon Johnson's recommendation.  Johnson having enquired after him,

said, 'Mr. Strahan, let me have five guineas on account, and I'll

give this boy one.  Nay if a man recommends a boy, and does nothing

for him, it is sad work.  Call him down.'



I followed him into the court-yard, behind Mr. Strahan's house; and

there I had a proof of what I had heard him profess, that he talked

alike to all.  'Some people tell you that they let themselves down

to the capacity of their hearers.  I never do that.  I speak

uniformly, in as intelligible a manner as I can.'



'Well, my boy, how do you go on?'--'Pretty well, Sir; but they are

afraid I an't strong enough for some parts of the business.'

JOHNSON.  'Why, I shall be sorry for it; for when you consider with

how little mental power and corporeal labour a printer can get a

guinea a week, it is a very desirable occupation for you.  Do you

hear,--take all the pains you can; and if this does not do, we must

think of some other way of life for you.  There's a guinea.'



Here was one of the many, many instances of his active benevolence.

At the same time, the slow and sonorous solemnity with which, while

he bent himself down, he addressed a little thick short-legged boy,

contrasted with the boy's aukwardness and awe, could not but excite

some ludicrous emotions.



I met him at Drury-lane play-house in the evening.  Sir Joshua

Reynolds, at Mrs. Abington's request, had promised to bring a body

of wits to her benefit; and having secured forty places in the

front boxes, had done me the honour to put me in the group.

Johnson sat on the seat directly behind me; and as he could neither

see nor hear at such a distance from the stage, he was wrapped up

in grave abstraction, and seemed quite a cloud, amidst all the

sunshine of glitter and gaiety.  I wondered at his patience in

sitting out a play of five acts, and a farce of two.  He said very

little; but after the prologue to Bon Ton had been spoken, which he

could hear pretty well from the more slow and distinct utterance,

he talked of prologue-writing, and observed, 'Dryden has written

prologues superiour to any that David Garrick has written; but

David Garrick has written more good prologues than Dryden has done.

It is wonderful that he has been able to write such variety of

them.'



At Mr. Beauclerk's, where I supped, was Mr. Garrick, whom I made

happy with Johnson's praise of his prologues; and I suppose, in

gratitude to him, he took up one of his favourite topicks, the

nationality of the Scotch, which he maintained in a pleasant

manner, with the aid of a little poetical fiction.  'Come, come,

don't deny it: they are really national.  Why, now, the Adams are

as liberal-minded men as any in the world: but, I don't know how it

is, all their workmen are Scotch.  You are, to be sure, wonderfully

free from that nationality: but so it happens, that you employ the

only Scotch shoe-black in London.'  He imitated the manner of his

old master with ludicrous exaggeration; repeating, with pauses and

half-whistlings interjected,





    'Os homini sublime dedit,--caelumque tueri

     Jussit,--et erectos ad sidera--tollere vultus';





looking downwards all the time, and, while pronouncing the four

last words, absolutely touching the ground with a kind of contorted

gesticulation.



Garrick, however, when he pleased, could imitate Johnson very

exactly; for that great actor, with his distinguished powers of

expression which were so universally admired, possessed also an

admirable talent of mimickry.  He was always jealous that Johnson

spoke lightly of him.  I recollect his exhibiting him to me one

day, as if saying, 'Davy has some convivial pleasantry about him,

but 'tis a futile fellow;' which he uttered perfectly with the tone

and air of Johnson.



I cannot too frequently request of my readers, while they peruse my

account of Johnson's conversation, to endeavour to keep in mind his

deliberate and strong utterance.  His mode of speaking was indeed

very impressive; and I wish it could be preserved as musick is

written, according to the very ingenious method of Mr. Steele, who

has shewn how the recitation of Mr. Garrick, and other eminent

speakers, might be transmitted to posterity IN SCORE.



Next day I dined with Johnson at Mr. Thrale's.  He attacked Gray,

calling him 'a dull fellow.'  BOSWELL.  'I understand he was

reserved, and might appear dull in company; but surely he was not

dull in poetry.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, he was dull in company, dull in

his closet, dull every where.  He was dull in a new way, and that

made many people think him GREAT.  He was a mechanical poet.'  He

then repeated some ludicrous lines, which have escaped my memory,

and said, 'Is not that GREAT, like his Odes?'  Mrs. Thrale

maintained that his Odes were melodious; upon which he exclaimed,





   'Weave the warp, and weave the woof;'--



I added, in a solemn tone,





    'The winding-sheet of Edward's race.'





'THERE is a good line.'  'Ay, (said he,) and the next line is a

good one,' (pronouncing it contemptuously;)





    'Give ample verge and room enough.'--





'No, Sir, there are but two good stanzas in Gray's poetry, which

are in his Elegy in a Country Church-yard.'  He then repeated the

stanza,





    'For who to dumb forgetfulness a prey,' &c.





mistaking one word; for instead of precincts he said confines.  He

added, 'The other stanza I forget.'



A young lady who had married a man much her inferiour in rank being

mentioned, a question arose how a woman's relations should behave

to her in such a situation; and, while I recapitulate the debate,

and recollect what has since happened, I cannot but be struck in a

manner that delicacy forbids me to express.  While I contended that

she ought to be treated with an inflexible steadiness of

displeasure, Mrs. Thrale was all for mildness and forgiveness, and,

according to the vulgar phrase, 'making the best of a bad bargain.'

JOHNSON.  Madam, we must distinguish.  Were I a man of rank, I

would not let a daughter starve who had made a mean marriage; but

having voluntarily degraded herself from the station which she was

originally entitled to hold, I would support her only in that which

she herself had chosen; and would not put her on a level with my

other daughters.  You are to consider, Madam, that it is our duty

to maintain the subordination of civilized society; and when there

is a gross and shameful deviation from rank, it should be punished

so as to deter others from the same perversion.'



On Friday, March 31, I supped with him and some friends at a

tavern.  One of the company* attempted, with too much forwardness,

to rally him on his late appearance at the theatre; but had reason

to repent of his temerity.  'Why, Sir, did you go to Mrs.

Abington's benefit?  Did you see?'  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir.'  'Did you

hear?'  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir.'  'Why then, Sir, did you go?'

JOHNSON.  'Because, Sir, she is a favourite of the publick; and

when the publick cares the thousandth part for you that it does for

her, I will go to your benefit too.'





* Very likely Boswell.--HILL.





Next morning I won a small bet from Lady Diana Beauclerk, by asking

him as to one of his particularities, which her Ladyship laid I

durst not do.  It seems he had been frequently observed at the Club

to put into his pocket the Seville oranges, after he had squeezed

the juice of them into the drink which he made for himself.

Beauclerk and Garrick talked of it to me, and seemed to think that

he had a strange unwillingness to be discovered.  We could not

divine what he did with them; and this was the bold question to be

put.  I saw on his table the spoils of the preceding night, some

fresh peels nicely scraped and cut into pieces.  'O, Sir, (said I,)

I now partly see what you do with the squeezed oranges which you

put into your pocket at the Club.'  JOHNSON.  'I have a great love

for them.'  BOSWELL.  'And pray, Sir, what do you do with them?

You scrape them, it seems, very neatly, and what next?'  JOHNSON.

'Let them dry, Sir.'  BOSWELL.  'And what next?'  JOHNSON.  'Nay,

Sir, you shall know their fate no further.'  BOSWELL.  'Then the

world must be left in the dark.  It must be said (assuming a mock

solemnity,) he scraped them, and let them dry, but what he did with

them next, he never could be prevailed upon to tell.'  JOHNSON.

'Nay, Sir, you should say it more emphatically:--he could not be

prevailed upon, even by his dearest friends, to tell.'



He had this morning received his Diploma as Doctor of Laws from the

University of Oxford.  He did not vaunt of his new dignity, but I

understood he was highly pleased with it.



I observed to him that there were very few of his friends so

accurate as that I could venture to put down in writing what they

told me as his sayings.  JOHNSON.  'Why should you write down MY

sayings?'  BOSWELL.  'I write them when they are good.'  JOHNSON.

'Nay, you may as well write down the sayings of any one else that

are good.'  But WHERE, I might with great propriety have added, can

I find such?



Next day, Sunday, April 2, I dined with him at Mr. Hoole's.  We

talked of Pope.  JOHNSON.  'He wrote, his Dunciad for fame.  That

was his primary motive.  Had it not been for that, the dunces might

have railed against him till they were weary, without his troubling

himself about them.  He delighted to vex them, no doubt; but he had

more delight in seeing how well he could vex them.'



His Taxation no Tyranny being mentioned, he said, 'I think I have

not been attacked enough for it.  Attack is the re-action; I never

think I have hit hard, unless it rebounds.'  BOSWELL.  'I don't

know, Sir, what you would be at.  Five or six shots of small arms

in every newspaper, and repeated cannonading in pamphlets, might, I

think, satisfy you.  But, Sir, you'll never make out this match, of

which we have talked, with a certain political lady,* since you are

so severe against her principles.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, I have the

better chance for that.  She is like the Amazons of old; she must

be courted by the sword.  But I have not been severe upon her.'

BOSWELL.  'Yes, Sir, you have made her ridiculous.'  JOHNSON.

'That was already done, Sir.  To endeavour to make HER ridiculous,

is like blacking the chimney.'





* Croker identifies her as Mrs. Macaulay.  See p. 119.--ED.





I talked of the cheerfulness of Fleet-street, owing to the constant

quick succession of people which we perceive passing through it.

JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, Fleet-street has a very animated appearance;

but I think the full tide of human existence is at Charing-cross.'



He made the common remark on the unhappiness which men who have led

a busy life experience, when they retire in expectation of enjoying

themselves at ease, and that they generally languish for want of

their habitual occupation, and wish to return to it.  He mentioned

as strong an instance of this as can well be imagined.  'An eminent

tallow-chandler in London, who had acquired a considerable fortune,

gave up the trade in favour of his foreman, and went to live at a

country-house near town.  He soon grew weary, and paid frequent

visits to his old shop, where he desired they might let him know

their melting-days, and he would come and assist them; which he

accordingly did.  Here, Sir, was a man, to whom the most disgusting

circumstance in the business to which he had been used was a relief

from idleness.'



On Wednesday, April 5, I dined with him at Messieurs Dilly's, with

Mr. John Scott of Amwell, the Quaker, Mr. Langton, Mr. Miller, (now

Sir John,) and Dr. Thomas Campbell, an Irish clergyman, whom I took

the liberty of inviting to Mr. Dilly's table, having seen him at

Mr. Thrale's, and been told that he had come to England chiefly

with a view to see Dr. Johnson, for whom he entertained the highest

veneration.  He has since published A Philosophical Survey of the

South of Ireland, a very entertaining book, which has, however, one

fault;--that it assumes the fictitious character of an Englishman.



We talked of publick speaking--JOHNSON.  'We must not estimate a

man's powers by his being able, or not able to deliver his

sentiments in publick.  Isaac Hawkins Browne, one of the first wits

of this country, got into Parliament, and never opened his mouth.

For my own part, I think it is more disgraceful never to try to

speak, than to try it and fail; as it is more disgraceful not to

fight, than to fight and be beaten.'  This argument appeared to me

fallacious; for if a man has not spoken, it may be said that he

would have done very well it he had tried; whereas, if he has tried

and failed, there is nothing to be said for him.  'Why then, (I

asked,) is it thought disgraceful for a man not to fight, and not

disgraceful not to speak in publick?'  JOHNSON.  'Because there may

be other reasons for a man's not speaking in publick than want of

resolution: he may have nothing to say, (laughing.) Whereas, Sir,

you know courage is reckoned the greatest of all virtues; because,

unless a man has that virtue, he has no security for preserving any

other.'



On Thursday, April 6, I dined with him at Mr. Thomas Davies's, with

Mr. Hicky, the painter, and my old acquaintance Mr. Moody, the

player.



Dr. Johnson, as usual, spoke contemptuously of Colley Cibber.  'It

is wonderful that a man, who for forty years had lived with the

great and the witty, should have acquired so ill the talents of

conversation: and he had but half to furnish; for one half of what

he said was oaths.'  He, however, allowed considerable merit to

some of his comedies, and said there was no reason to believe that

the Careless Husband was not written by himself.  Davies said, he

was the first dramatick writer who introduced genteel ladies upon

the stage.  Johnson refuted this observation by instancing several

such characters in comedies before his time.  DAVIES.  (trying to

defend himself from a charge of ignorance,) 'I mean genteel moral

characters.'  'I think (said Hicky,) gentility and morality are

inseparable.'  BOSWELL.  'By no means, Sir.  The genteelest

characters are often the most immoral.  Does not Lord Chesterfield

give precepts for uniting wickedness and the graces?  A man,

indeed, is not genteel when he gets drunk; but most vices may be

committed very genteelly: a man may debauch his friend's wife

genteelly: he may cheat at cards genteelly.'  HICKY.  'I do not

think THAT is genteel.'  BOSWELL.  'Sir, it may not be like a

gentleman, but it may be genteel.'  JOHNSON.  'You are meaning two

different things.  One means exteriour grace; the other honour.  It

is certain that a man may be very immoral with exteriour grace.

Lovelace, in Clarissa, is a very genteel and a very wicked

character.  Tom Hervey, who died t'other day, though a vicious man,

was one of the genteelest men that ever lived.'  Tom Davies

instanced Charles the Second.  JOHNSON.  (taking fire at any attack

upon that Prince, for whom he had an extraordinary partiality,)

'Charles the Second was licentious in his practice; but he always

had a reverence for what was good.  Charles the Second knew his

people, and rewarded merit.  The Church was at no time better

filled than in his reign.  He was the best King we have had from

his time till the reign of his present Majesty, except James the

Second, who was a very good King, but unhappily believed that it

was necessary for the salvation of his subjects that they should be

Roman Catholicks.  HE had the merit of endeavouring to do what he

thought was for the salvation of the souls of his subjects, till he

lost a great Empire.  WE, who thought that we should NOT be saved

if we were Roman Catholicks, had the merit of maintaining our

religion, at the expence of submitting ourselves to the government

of King William, (for it could not be done otherwise,)--to the

government of one of the most worthless scoundrels that ever

existed.  No; Charles the Second was not such a man as -----,

(naming another King).  He did not destroy his father's will.  He

took money, indeed, from France: but he did not betray those over

whom he ruled: he did not let the French fleet pass ours.  George

the First knew nothing, and desired to know nothing; did nothing,

and desired to do nothing: and the only good thing that is told of

him is, that he wished to restore the crown to its hereditary

successor.'  He roared with prodigious violence against George the

Second.  When he ceased, Moody interjected, in an Irish tone, and

with a comick look, 'Ah! poor George the Second.'



I mentioned that Dr. Thomas Campbell had come from Ireland to

London, principally to see Dr. Johnson.  He seemed angry at this

observation.  DAVIES.  'Why, you know, Sir, there came a man from

Spain to see Livy; and Corelli came to England to see Purcell, and

when he heard he was dead, went directly back again to Italy.'

JOHNSON.  'I should not have wished to be dead to disappoint

Campbell, had he been so foolish as you represent him; but I should

have wished to have been a hundred miles off.'  This was apparently

perverse; and I do believe it was not his real way of thinking: he

could not but like a man who came so far to see him.  He laughed

with some complacency, when I told him Campbell's odd expression to

me concerning him: 'That having seen such a man, was a thing to

talk of a century hence,'--as if he could live so long.



We got into an argument whether the Judges who went to India might

with propriety engage in trade.  Johnson warmly maintained that

they might.  'For why (he urged,) should not Judges get riches, as

well as those who deserve them less?'  I said, they should have

sufficient salaries, and have nothing to take off their attention

from the affairs of the publick.  JOHNSON.  'No Judge, Sir, can

give his whole attention to his office; and it is very proper that

he should employ what time he has to himself, to his own advantage,

in the most profitable manner.'  'Then, Sir, (said Davies, who

enlivened the dispute by making it somewhat dramatick,) he may

become an insurer; and when he is going to the bench, he may be

stopped,--"Your Lordship cannot go yet: here is a bunch of

invoices: several ships are about to sail."'  JOHNSON.  Sir, you

may as well say a Judge should not have a house; for they may come

and tell him, "Your Lordship's house is on fire;" and so, instead

of minding the business of his Court, he is to be occupied in

getting the engine with the greatest speed.  There is no end of

this.  Every Judge who has land, trades to a certain extent in corn

or in cattle; and in the land itself, undoubtedly.  His steward

acts for him, and so do clerks for a great merchant.  A Judge may

be a farmer; but he is not to geld his own pigs.  A Judge may play

a little at cards for his amusement; but he is not to play at

marbles, or at chuck-farthing in the Piazza.  No, Sir; there is no

profession to which a man gives a very great proportion of his

time.  It is wonderful, when a calculation is made, how little the

mind is actually employed in the discharge of any profession.  No

man would be a Judge, upon the condition of being totally a Judge.

The best employed lawyer has his mind at work but for a small

proportion of his time; a great deal of his occupation is merely

mechanical.  I once wrote for a magazine: I made a calculation,

that if I should write but a page a day, at the same rate, I

should, in ten years, write nine volumes in folio, of an ordinary

size and print.'  BOSWELL.  'Such as Carte's History?'  JOHNSON.

'Yes, Sir.  When a man writes from his own mind, he writes very

rapidly.  The greatest part of a writer's time is spent in reading,

in order to write: a man will turn over half a library to make one

book.'



We spoke of Rolt, to whose Dictionary of Commerce Dr. Johnson wrote

the Preface.    JOHNSON.  'Old Gardner the bookseller employed Rolt

and Smart to write a monthly miscellany, called The Universal

Visitor.  There was a formal written contract, which Allen the

printer saw.  Gardner thought as you do of the Judge.  They were

bound to write nothing else; they were to have, I think, a third of

the profits of this sixpenny pamphlet; and the contract was for

ninety-nine years.  I wish I had thought of giving this to Thurlow,

in the cause about Literary Property.  What an excellent instance

would it have been of the oppression of booksellers towards poor

authours!' (smiling.)  Davies, zealous for the honour of THE TRADE,

said, Gardner was not properly a bookseller.  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir;

he certainly was a bookseller.  He had served his time regularly,

was a member of the Stationers' company, kept a shop in the face of

mankind, purchased copyright, and was a bibliopole, Sir, in every

sense.  I wrote for some months in The Universal Visitor, for poor

Smart, while he was mad, not then knowing the terms on which he was

engaged to write, and thinking I was doing him good.  I hoped his

wits would soon return to him.  Mine returned to me, and I wrote in

The Universal Visitor no longer.



Friday, April 7, I dined with him at a Tavern, with a numerous

company.



One of the company suggested an internal objection to the antiquity

of the poetry said to be Ossian's, that we do not find the wolf in

it, which must have been the case had it been of that age.



The mention of the wolf had led Johnson to think of other wild

beasts; and while Sir Joshua Reynolds and Mr. Langton were carrying

on a dialogue about something which engaged them earnestly, he, in

the midst of it, broke out, 'Pennant tells of Bears--' [what he

added, I have forgotten.]  They went on, which he being dull of

hearing, did not perceive, or, if he did, was not willing to break

off his talk; so he continued to vociferate his remarks, and BEAR

('like a word in a catch' as Beauclerk said,) was repeatedly heard

at intervals, which coming from him who, by those who did not know

him, had been so often assimilated to that ferocious animal, while

we who were sitting around could hardly stifle laughter, produced a

very ludicrous effect.  Silence having ensued, he proceeded: 'We

are told, that the black bear is innocent; but I should not like to

trust myself with him.'  Mr. Gibbon muttered, in a low tone of

voice, 'I should not like to trust myself with YOU.'  This piece of

sarcastick pleasantry was a prudent resolution, if applied to a

competition of abilities.



Patriotism having become one of our topicks, Johnson suddenly

uttered, in a strong determined tone, an apophthegm, at which many

will start: 'Patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel.'  But

let it be considered, that he did not mean a real and generous love

of our country, but that pretended patriotism which so many, in all

ages and countries, have made a cloak for self-interest.



Mrs. Prichard being mentioned, he said, 'Her playing was quite

mechanical.  It is wonderful how little mind she had.  Sir, she had

never read the tragedy of Macbeth all through.  She no more thought

of the play out of which her part was taken, than a shoemaker

thinks of the skin, out of which the piece of leather, of which he

is making a pair of shoes, is cut.'



On Saturday, April 8, I dined with him at Mr. Thrale's, where we

met the Irish Dr. Campbell.  Johnson had supped the night before at

Mrs. Abington's, with some fashionable people whom he named; and he

seemed much pleased with having made one in so elegant a circle.

Nor did he omit to pique his MISTRESS a little with jealousy of her

housewifery; for he said, (with a smile,) 'Mrs. Abington's jelly,

my dear lady, was better than yours.'



Mrs. Thrale, who frequently practised a coarse mode of flattery, by

repeating his bon-mots in his hearing, told us that he had said, a

certain celebrated actor was just fit to stand at the door of an

auction-room with a long pole, and cry 'Pray gentlemen, walk in;'

and that a certain authour, upon hearing this, had said, that

another still more celebrated actor was fit for nothing better than

that, and would pick your pocket after you came out.  JOHNSON.

'Nay, my dear lady, there is no wit in what our friend added; there

is only abuse.  You may as well say of any man that he will pick a

pocket.  Besides, the man who is stationed at the door does not

pick people's pockets; that is done within, by the auctioneer.'



On Monday, April 10, I dined with him at General Oglethorpe's, with

Mr. Langton and the Irish Dr. Campbell, whom the General had

obligingly given me leave to bring with me.  This learned gentleman

was thus gratified with a very high intellectual feast, by not only

being in company with Dr. Johnson, but with General Oglethorpe, who

had been so long a celebrated name both at home and abroad.



I must, again and again, intreat of my readers not to suppose that

my imperfect record of conversation contains the whole of what was

said by Johnson, or other eminent persons who lived with him.  What

I have preserved, however, has the value of the most perfect

authenticity.



He urged General Oglethorpe to give the world his Life.  He said,

'I know no man whose Life would be more interesting.  If I were

furnished with materials, I should be very glad to write it.'



Mr. Scott of Amwell's Elegies were lying in the room.  Dr. Johnson

observed, 'They are very well; but such as twenty people might

write.'  Upon this I took occasion to controvert Horace's maxim,





    '------- mediocribus esse poetis

     Non Di, non homines, non concessere columnae.'





For here, (I observed,) was a very middle-rate poet, who pleased

many readers, and therefore poetry of a middle sort was entitled to

some esteem; nor could I see why poetry should not, like every

thing else, have different gradations of excellence, and

consequently of value.  Johnson repeated the common remark, that,

'as there is no necessity for our having poetry at all, it being

merely a luxury, an instrument of pleasure, it can have no value,

unless when exquisite in its kind.'  I declared myself not

satisfied.  'Why then, Sir, (said he,) Horace and you must settle

it.'  He was not much in the humour of talking.



No more of his conversation for some days appears in my journal,

except that when a gentleman told him he had bought a suit of lace

for his lady, he said, 'Well, Sir, you have done a good thing and a

wise thing.'  'I have done a good thing, (said the gentleman,) but

I do not know that I have done a wise thing.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir;

no money is better spent than what is laid out for domestick

satisfaction.  A man is pleased that his wife is drest as well as

other people; and a wife is pleased that she is drest.'



On Friday, April 14, being Good-Friday, I repaired to him in the

morning, according to my usual custom on that day, and breakfasted

with him.  I observed that he fasted so very strictly, that he did

not even taste bread, and took no milk with his tea; I suppose

because it is a kind of animal food.



I told him that I had been informed by Mr. Orme, that many parts of

the East-Indies were better mapped than the Highlands of Scotland.

JOHNSON.  'That a country may be mapped, it must be travelled

over.'  'Nay, (said I, meaning to laugh with him at one of his

prejudices,) can't you say, it is not WORTH mapping?'



As we walked to St. Clement's church, and saw several shops open

upon this most solemn fast-day of the Christian world, I remarked,

that one disadvantage arising from the immensity of London, was,

that nobody was heeded by his neighbour; there was no fear of

censure for not observing Good-Friday, as it ought to be kept, and

as it is kept in country-towns.  He said, it was, upon the whole,

very well observed even in London.  He, however, owned, that London

was too large; but added, 'It is nonsense to say the head is too

big for the body.  It would be as much too big, though the body

were ever so large; that is to say, though the country were ever so

extensive.  It has no similarity to a head connected with a body.'



Dr. Wetherell, Master of University College, Oxford, accompanied us

home from church; and after he was gone, there came two other

gentlemen, one of whom uttered the commonplace complaints, that by

the increase of taxes, labour would be dear, other nations would

undersell us, and our commerce would be ruined.  JOHNSON.

(smiling,) 'Never fear, Sir.  Our commerce is in a very good state;

and suppose we had no commerce at all, we could live very well on

the produce of our own country.'  I cannot omit to mention, that I

never knew any man who was less disposed to be querulous than

Johnson.  Whether the subject was his own situation, or the state

of the publick, or the state of human nature in general, though he

saw the evils, his mind was turned to resolution, and never to

whining or complaint.



We went again to St. Clement's in the afternoon.  He had found

fault with the preacher in the morning for not choosing a text

adapted to the day.  The preacher in the afternoon had chosen one

extremely proper: 'It is finished.'



After the evening service, he said, 'Come, you shall go home with

me, and sit just an hour.'  But he was better than his word; for

after we had drunk tea with Mrs. Williams, he asked me to go up to

his study with him, where we sat a long while together in a serene

undisturbed frame of mind, sometimes in silence, and sometimes

conversing, as we felt ourselves inclined, or more properly

speaking, as HE was inclined; for during all the course of my long

intimacy with him, my respectful attention never abated, and my

wish to hear him was such, that I constantly watched every dawning

of communication from that great and illuminated mind.



He again advised me to keep a journal fully and minutely, but not

to mention such trifles as, that meat was too much or too little

done, or that the weather was fair or rainy.  He had, till very

near his death, a contempt for the notion that the weather affects

the human frame.



I told him that our friend Goldsmith had said to me, that he had

come too late into the world, for that Pope and other poets had

taken up the places in the Temple of Fame; so that, as but a few at

any period can possess poetical reputation, a man of genius can now

hardly acquire it.  JOHNSON.  'That is one of the most sensible

things I have ever heard of Goldsmith.  It is difficult to get

literary fame, and it is every day growing more difficult.  Ah,

Sir, that should make a man think of securing happiness in another

world, which all who try sincerely for it may attain.  In

comparison of that, how little are all other things!  The belief of

immortality is impressed upon all men, and all men act under an

impression of it, however they may talk, and though, perhaps, they

may be scarcely sensible of it.'  I said, it appeared to me that

some people had not the least notion of immortality; and I

mentioned a distinguished gentleman of our acquaintance.  JOHNSON.

'Sir, if it were not for the notion of immortality, he would cut a

throat to fill his pockets.'  When I quoted this to Beauclerk, who

knew much more of the gentleman than we did, he said, in his acid

manner, 'He would cut a throat to fill his pockets, if it were not

for fear of being hanged.'



He was pleased to say, 'If you come to settle here, we will have

one day in the week on which we will meet by ourselves.  That is

the happiest conversation where there is no competition, no vanity,

but a calm quiet interchange of sentiments.'  In his private

register this evening is thus marked, 'Boswell sat with me till

night; we had some serious talk.'  It also appears from the same

record, that after I left him he was occupied in religious duties,

in 'giving Francis, his servant, some directions for preparation to

communicate; in reviewing his life, and resolving on better

conduct.'  The humility and piety which he discovers on such

occasions, is truely edifying.  No saint, however, in the course of

his religious warfare, was more sensible of the unhappy failure of

pious resolves, than Johnson.  He said one day, talking to an

acquaintance on this subject, 'Sir Hell is paved with good

intentions.'



On Sunday, April 16, being Easter Day, after having attended the

solemn service at St. Paul's, I dined with Dr. Johnson and Mrs.

Williams.  I maintained that Horace was wrong in placing happiness

in Nil admirari, for that I thought admiration one of the most

agreeable of all our feelings; and I regretted that I had lost much

of my disposition to admire, which people generally do as they

advance in life.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, as a man advances in life, he

gets what is better than admiration--judgement, to estimate things

at their true value.'  I still insisted that admiration was more

pleasing than judgement, as love is more pleasing than friendship.

The feeling of friendship is like that of being comfortably filled

with roast beef; love, like being enlivened with champagne.

JOHNSON.  'No, Sir; admiration and love are like being intoxicated

with champagne; judgement and friendship like being enlivened.

Waller has hit upon the same thought with you: but I don't believe

you have borrowed from Waller.  I wish you would enable yourself to

borrow more.'



He then took occasion to enlarge on the advantages of reading, and

combated the idle superficial notion, that knowledge enough may be

acquired in conversation.  'The foundation (said he,) must be laid

by reading.  General principles must be had from books, which,

however, must be brought to the test of real life.  In conversation

you never get a system.  What is said upon a subject is to be

gathered from a hundred people.  The parts of a truth, which a man

gets thus, are at such a distance from each other that he never

attains to a full view.'



On Tuesday, April 15, he and I were engaged to go with Sir Joshua

Reynolds to dine with Mr. Cambridge, at his beautiful villa on the

banks of the Thames, near Twickenham.  Dr. Johnson's tardiness was

such, that Sir Joshua, who had an appointment at Richmond, early in

the day, was obliged to go by himself on horseback, leaving his

coach to Johnson and me.  Johnson was in such good spirits, that

every thing seemed to please him as we drove along.



Our conversation turned on a variety of subjects.  He thought

portrait-painting an improper employment for a woman.  'Publick

practice of any art, (he observed,) and staring in men's faces, is

very indelicate in a female.'  I happened to start a question,

whether, when a man knows that some of his intimate friends are

invited to the house of another friend, with whom they are all

equally intimate, he may join them without an invitation.  JOHNSON.

'No, Sir; he is not to go when he is not invited.  They may be

invited on purpose to abuse him' (smiling).



As a curious instance how little a man knows, or wishes to know,

his own character in the world, or, rather, as a convincing proof

that Johnson's roughness was only external, and did not proceed

from his heart, I insert the following dialogue.  JOHNSON.  'It is

wonderful, Sir, how rare a quality good humour is in life.  We meet

with very few good humoured men.'  I mentioned four of our friends,

none of whom he would allow to be good humoured.  One was ACID,

another was MUDDY, and to the others he had objections which have

escaped me.  Then, shaking his head and stretching himself at ease

in the coach, and smiling with much complacency, he turned to me

and said, 'I look upon MYSELF as a good humoured fellow.'  The

epithet FELLOW, applied to the great Lexicographer, the stately

Moralist, the masterly critick, as if he had been SAM Johnson, a

mere pleasant companion, was highly diverting; and this light

notion of himself struck me with wonder.  I answered, also smiling,

'No, no, Sir; that will NOT do.  You are good natured, but not good

humoured: you are irascible.  You have not patience with folly and

absurdity.  I believe you would pardon them, if there were time to

deprecate your vengeance; but punishment follows so quick after

sentence, that they cannot escape.



I had brought with me a great bundle of Scotch magazines and news-

papers, in which his Journey to the Western Islands was attacked in

every mode; and I read a great part of them to him, knowing they

would afford him entertainment.  I wish the writers of them had

been present: they would have been sufficiently vexed.  One

ludicrous imitation of his style, by Mr. Maclaurin, now one of the

Scotch Judges, with the title of Lord Dreghorn, was distinguished

by him from the rude mass.  'This (said he,) is the best.  But I

could caricature my own style much better myself.'  He defended his

remark upon the general insufficiency of education in Scotland; and

confirmed to me the authenticity of his witty saying on the

learning of the Scotch;--'Their learning is like bread in a

besieged town: every man gets a little, but no man gets a full

meal.'  'There is (said he,) in Scotland, a diffusion of learning,

a certain portion of it widely and thinly spread.  A merchant there

has as much learning as one of their clergy.



No sooner had we made our bow to Mr. Cambridge, in his library,

than Johnson ran eagerly to one side of the room, intent on poring

over the backs of the books.  Sir Joshua observed, (aside,) 'He

runs to the books, as I do to the pictures: but I have the

advantage.  I can see much more of the pictures than he can of the

books.'  Mr. Cambridge, upon this, politely said, 'Dr. Johnson, I

am going, with your pardon, to accuse myself, for I have the same

custom which I perceive you have.  But it seems odd that one should

have such a desire to look at the backs of books.'  Johnson, ever

ready for contest, instantly started from his reverie, wheeled

about, and answered, 'Sir, the reason is very plain.  Knowledge is

of two kinds.  We know a subject ourselves, or we know where we can

find information upon it.  When we enquire into any subject, the

first thing we have to do is to know what books have treated of it.

This leads us to look at catalogues, and the backs of books in

libraries.'  Sir Joshua observed to me the extraordinary

promptitude with which Johnson flew upon an argument.  'Yes, (said

I,) he has no formal preparation, no flourishing with his sword; he

is through your body in an instant.'



Johnson was here solaced with an elegant entertainment, a very

accomplished family, and much good company; among whom was Mr.

Harris of Salisbury, who paid him many compliments on his Journey

to the Western Islands.



The common remark as to the utility of reading history being made;--

JOHNSON.  'We must consider how very little history there is; I

mean real authentick history.  That certain Kings reigned, and

certain battles were fought, we can depend upon as true; but all

the colouring, all the philosophy of history is conjecture.'

BOSWELL.  'Then, Sir, you would reduce all history to no better

than an almanack, a mere chronological series of remarkable

events.'  Mr. Gibbon, who must at that time have been employed upon

his History, of which he published the first volume in the

following year, was present; but did not step forth in defence of

that species of writing.  He probably did not like to TRUST himself

with JOHNSON!



The Beggar's Opera, and the common question, whether it was

pernicious in its effects, having been introduced;--JOHNSON.  'As

to this matter, which has been very much contested, I myself am of

opinion, that more influence has been ascribed to The Beggar's

Opera, than it in reality ever had; for I do not believe that any

man was ever made a rogue by being present at its representation.

At the same time I do not deny that it may have some influence, by

making the character of a rogue familiar, and in some degree

pleasing.'  Then collecting himself as it were, to give a heavy

stroke: 'There is in it such a LABEFACTATION of all principles, as

may be injurious to morality.'



While he pronounced this response, we sat in a comical sort of

restraint, smothering a laugh, which we were afraid might burst

out.



We talked of a young gentleman's* marriage with an eminent singer,

and his determination that she should no longer sing in publick,

though his father was very earnest she should, because her talents

would be liberally rewarded, so as to make her a good fortune.  It

was questioned whether the young gentleman, who had not a shilling

in the world, but was blest with very uncommon talents, was not

foolishly delicate, or foolishly proud, and his father truely

rational without being mean.  Johnson, with all the high spirit of

a Roman senator, exclaimed, 'He resolved wisely and nobly to be

sure.  He is a brave man.  Would not a gentleman be disgraced by

having his wife singing publickly for hire?  No, Sir, there can be

no doubt here.  I know not if I should not PREPARE myself for a

publick singer, as readily as let my wife be one.'





* Probably Richard Brinsley Sheridan, whose romantic marriage with

the beautiful Elizabeth Linley took place in 1773.  He became a

member of the Club on Johnson's proposal.  See below, p. 325.--ED.





Johnson arraigned the modern politicks of this country, as entirely

devoid of all principle of whatever kind.  'Politicks (said he,)

are now nothing more than means of rising in the world.  With this

sole view do men engage in politicks, and their whole conduct

proceeds upon it.'



Somebody found fault with writing verses in a dead language,

maintaining that they were merely arrangements of so many words,

and laughed at the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, for

sending forth collections of them not only in Greek and Latin, but

even in Syriac, Arabick, and other more unknown tongues.  JOHNSON.

'I would have as many of these as possible; I would have verses in

every language that there are the means of acquiring.  Nobody

imagines that an University is to have at once two hundred poets;

but it should be able to show two hundred scholars.  Pieresc's

death was lamented, I think, in forty languages.  And I would have

had at every coronation, and every death of a King, every Gaudium,

and every Luctus, University verses, in as many languages as can be

acquired.  I would have the world to be thus told, "Here is a

school where every thing may be learnt."'



Having set out next day on a visit to the Earl of Pembroke, at

Wilton, and to my friend, Mr. Temple, at Mamhead, in Devonshire,

and not having returned to town till the second of May, I did not

see Dr. Johnson for a considerable time, and during the remaining

part of my stay in London, kept very imperfect notes of his

conversation, which had I according to my usual custom written out

at large soon after the time, much might have been preserved, which

is now irretrievably lost.



On Monday, May 8, we went together and visited the mansions of

Bedlam.  I had been informed that he had once been there before

with Mr. Wedderburne, (now Lord Loughborough,) Mr. Murphy, and Mr.

Foote; and I had heard Foote give a very entertaining account of

Johnson's happening to have his attention arrested by a man who was

very furious, and who, while beating his straw, supposed it was

William Duke of Cumberland, whom he was punishing for his cruelties

in Scotland, in 1746.  There was nothing peculiarly remarkable this

day; but the general contemplation of insanity was very affecting.

I accompanied him home, and dined and drank tea with him.



On Friday, May 12, as he had been so good as to assign me a room in

his house, where I might sleep occasionally, when I happened to sit

with him to a late hour, I took possession of it this night, found

every thing in excellent order, and was attended by honest Francis

with a most civil assiduity.  I asked Johnson whether I might go to

a consultation with another lawyer upon Sunday, as that appeared to

me to be doing work as much in my way, as if an artisan should work

on the day appropriated for religious rest.  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir,

when you are of consequence enough to oppose the practice of

consulting upon Sunday, you should do it: but you may go now.  It

is not criminal, though it is not what one should do, who is

anxious for the preservation and increase of piety, to which a

peculiar observance of Sunday is a great help.  The distinction is

clear between what is of moral and what is of ritual obligation.'



On Saturday, May 13, I breakfasted with him by invitation,

accompanied by Mr. Andrew Crosbie, a Scotch Advocate, whom he had

seen at Edinburgh, and the Hon. Colonel (now General) Edward

Stopford, brother to Lord Courtown, who was desirous of being

introduced to him.  His tea and rolls and butter, and whole

breakfast apparatus were all in such decorum, and his behaviour was

so courteous, that Colonel Stopford was quite surprized, and

wondered at his having heard so much said of Johnson's slovenliness

and roughness.



I passed many hours with him on the 17th, of which I find all my

memorial is, 'much laughing.'  It should seem he had that day been

in a humour for jocularity and merriment, and upon such occasions I

never knew a man laugh more heartily.  We may suppose, that the

high relish of a state so different from his habitual gloom,

produced more than ordinary exertions of that distinguishing

faculty of man, which has puzzled philosophers so much to explain.

Johnson's laugh was as remarkable as any circumstance in his

manner.  It was a kind of good humoured growl.  Tom Davies

described it drolly enough: 'He laughs like a rhinoceros.'





'TO BENNET LANGTON, ESQ.



'DEAR SIR,--I have an old amanuensis in great distress.  I have

given what I think I can give, and begged till I cannot tell where

to beg again.  I put into his hands this morning four guineas.  If

you could collect three guineas more, it would clear him from his

present difficulty.  I am, Sir, your most humble servant,



'May 21, 1775.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





After my return to Scotland, I wrote three letters to him.





'TO JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.



'DEAR SIR,--I am returned from the annual ramble into the middle

counties.  Having seen nothing I had not seen before, I have

nothing to relate.  Time has left that part of the island few

antiquities; and commerce has left the people no singularities.  I

was glad to go abroad, and, perhaps, glad to come home; which is,

in other words, I was, I am afraid, weary of being at home, and

weary of being abroad.  Is not this the state of life?  But, if we

confess this weariness, let us not lament it, for all the wise and

all the good say, that we may cure it. . . .



'Mrs. Thrale was so entertained with your Journal,* that she almost

read herself blind.  She has a great regard for you.



'Of Mrs. Boswell, though she knows in her heart that she does not

love me, I am always glad to hear any good, and hope that she and

the little dear ladies will have neither sickness nor any other

affliction.  But she knows that she does not care what becomes of

me, and for that she may be sure that I think her very much to

blame.



'Never, my dear Sir, do you take it into your head to think that I

do not love you; you may settle yourself in full confidence both of

my love and my esteem; I love you as a kind man, I value you as a

worthy man, and hope in time to reverence you as a man of exemplary

piety.  I hold you, as Hamlet has it, "in my heart of hearts," and

therefore, it is little to say, that I am, Sir, your affectionate

humble servant,



'SAM. JOHNSON.'



'London, Aug. 27, 1775.'





* My Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides, which that lady read in the

original manuscript.--BOSWELL.





'TO MR. ROBERT LEVET.



'Paris,* Oct. 22, 1775.



'DEAR SIR,--We are still here, commonly very busy in looking about

us.  We have been to-day at Versailles.  You have seen it, and I

shall not describe it.  We came yesterday from Fontainbleau, where

the Court is now.  We went to see the King and Queen at dinner, and

the Queen was so impressed by Miss,** that she sent one of the

Gentlemen to enquire who she was.  I find all true that you have

ever told me of Paris.  Mr. Thrale is very liberal, and keeps us

two coaches, and a very fine table; but I think our cookery very

bad.  Mrs. Thrale got into a convent of English nuns; and I talked

with her through the grate, and I am very kindly used by the

English Benedictine friars.  But upon the whole I cannot make much

acquaintance here; and though the churches, palaces, and some

private houses are very magnificent, there is no very great

pleasure after having seen many, in seeing more; at least the

pleasure, whatever it be, must some time have an end, and we are

beginning to think when we shall come home.  Mr. Thrale calculates

that, as we left Streatham on the fifteenth of September, we shall

see it again about the fifteenth of November.





* Written from a tour in France with the Thrales, Johnson's only

visit to the Continent.--ED.



** Miss Thrale.





'I think I had not been on this side of the sea five days before I

found a sensible improvement in my health.  I ran a race in the

rain this day, and beat Baretti.  Baretti is a fine fellow, and

speaks French, I think, quite as well as English.



'Make my compliments to Mrs. Williams; and give my love to Francis;

and tell my friends that I am not lost.  I am, dear Sir, your

affectionate humble, &c.



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





It is to be regretted that he did not write an account of his

travels in France; for as he is reported to have once said, that

'he could write the Life of a Broomstick,' so, notwithstanding so

many former travellers have exhausted almost every subject for

remark in that great kingdom, his very accurate observation, and

peculiar vigour of thought and illustration, would have produced a

valuable work.



When I met him in London the following year, the account which he

gave me of his French tour, was, 'Sir, I have seen all the

visibilities of Paris, and around it; but to have formed an

acquaintance with the people there, would have required more time

than I could stay.  I was just beginning to creep into acquaintance

by means of Colonel Drumgold, a very high man, Sir, head of L'Ecole

Militaire, a most complete character, for he had first been a

professor of rhetorick, and then became a soldier.  And, Sir, I was

very kindly treated by the English Benedictines, and have a cell

appropriated to me in their convent.'



He observed, 'The great in France live very magnificently, but the

rest very miserably.  There is no happy middle state as in England.

The shops of Paris are mean; the meat in the markets is such as

would be sent to a gaol in England: and Mr. Thrale justly observed,

that the cookery of the French was forced upon them by necessity;

for they could not eat their meat, unless they added some taste to

it.  The French are an indelicate people; they will spit upon any

place.  At Madame ------'s, a literary lady of rank, the footman

took the sugar in his fingers, and threw it into my coffee.  I was

going to put it aside; but hearing it was made on purpose for me, I

e'en tasted Tom's fingers.  The same lady would needs make tea a

l'Angloise.  The spout of the tea-pot did not pour freely; she had

the footman blow into it.  France is worse than Scotland in every

thing but climate.  Nature has done more for the French; but they

have done less for themselves than the Scotch have done.'



It happened that Foote was at Paris at the same time with Dr.

Johnson, and his description of my friend while there, was

abundantly ludicrous.  He told me, that the French were quite

astonished at his figure and manner, and at his dress, which he

obstinately continued exactly as in London;--his brown clothes,

black stockings, and plain shirt.  He mentioned, that an Irish

gentleman said to Johnson, 'Sir, you have not seen the best French

players.'  JOHNSON.  'Players, Sir!  I look on them as no better

than creatures set upon tables and joint-stools to make faces and

produce laughter, like dancing dogs.'--'But, Sir, you will allow

that some players are better than others?'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir, as

some dogs dance better than others.'



While Johnson was in France, he was generally very resolute in

speaking Latin.  It was a maxim with him that a man should not let

himself down, by speaking a language which he speaks imperfectly.

Indeed, we must have often observed how inferiour, how much like a

child a man appears, who speaks a broken tongue.  When Sir Joshua

Reynolds, at one of the dinners of the Royal Academy, presented him

to a Frenchman of great distinction, he would not deign to speak

French, but talked Latin, though his Excellency did not understand

it, owing, perhaps, to Johnson's English pronunciation: yet upon

another occasion he was observed to speak French to a Frenchman of

high rank, who spoke English; and being asked the reason, with some

expression of surprise,--he answered, 'because I think my French is

as good as his English.'  Though Johnson understood French

perfectly, he could not speak it readily, as I have observed at his

first interview with General Pauli, in 1769; yet he wrote it, I

imagine, pretty well.



Here let me not forget a curious anecdote, as related to me by Mr.

Beauclerk, which I shall endeavour to exhibit as well as I can in

that gentleman's lively manner; and in justice to him it is proper

to add, that Dr. Johnson told me I might rely both on the

correctness of his memory, and the fidelity of his narrative.

'When Madame de Boufflers was first in England, (said Beauclerk,)

she was desirous to see Johnson.  I accordingly went with her to

his chambers in the Temple, where she was entertained with his

conversation for some time.  When our visit was over, she and I

left him, and were got into Inner Temple-lane, when all at once I

heard a noise like thunder.  This was occasioned by Johnson, who it

seems, upon a little recollection, had taken it into his head that

he ought to have done the honours of his literary residence to a

foreign lady of quality, and eager to shew himself a man of

gallantry, was hurrying down the stair-case in violent agitation.

He overtook us before we reached the Temple-gate, and brushing in

between me and Madame de Boufflers, seized her hand, and conducted

her to her coach.  His dress was a rusty brown morning suit, a pair

of old shoes by way of slippers, a little shrivelled wig sticking

on the top of his head, and the sleeves of his shirt and the knees

of his breeches hanging loose.  A considerable crowd of people

gathered round, and were not a little struck by this singular

appearance.'



He spoke Latin with wonderful fluency and elegance.  When Pere

Boscovich was in England, Johnson dined in company with him at Sir

Joshua Reynolds's, and at Dr.  Douglas's, now Bishop of Salisbury.

Upon both occasions that celebrated foreigner expressed his

astonishment at Johnson's Latin conversation.  When at Paris,

Johnson thus characterised Voltaire to Freron the Journalist: 'Vir

est acerrimi ingenii et paucarum literarum.'



In the course of this year Dr. Burney informs me that 'he very

frequently met Dr. Johnson at Mr. Thrale's, at Streatham, where

they had many long conversations, often sitting up as long as the

fire and candles lasted, and much longer than the patience of the

servants subsisted.'



A few of Johnson's sayings, which that gentleman recollects, shall

here be inserted.



'I never take a nap after dinner but when I have had a bad night,

and then the nap takes me.'



'The writer of an epitaph should not be considered as saying

nothing but what is strictly true.  Allowance must be made for some

degree of exaggerated praise.  In lapidary inscriptions a man is

not upon oath.'



'There is now less flogging in our great schools than formerly, but

then less is learned there; so that what the boys get at one end

they lose at the other.'



'More is learned in publick than in private schools, from

emulation; there is the collision of mind with mind, or the

radiation of many minds pointing to one centre.  Though few boys

make their own exercises, yet if a good exercise is given up, out

of a great number of boys, it is made by somebody.'



'I hate by-roads in education.  Education is as well known, and has

long been as well known, as ever it can be.  Endeavouring to make

children prematurely wise is useless labour.  Suppose they have

more knowledge at five or six years old than other children, what

use can be made of it?  It will be lost before it is wanted, and

the waste of so much time and labour of the teacher can never be

repaid.  Too much is expected from precocity, and too little

performed.  Miss ---- was an instance of early cultivation, but in

what did it terminate?  In marrying a little Presbyterian parson,

who keeps an infant boarding-school, so that all her employment now

is,





    "To suckle fools, and chronicle small-beer."





She tells the children, "This is a cat, and that is a dog, with

four legs and a tail; see there! you are much better than a cat or

a dog, for you can speak."  If I had bestowed such an education on

a daughter, and had discovered that she thought of marrying such a

fellow, I would have sent her to the Congress.'



'After having talked slightingly of musick, he was observed to

listen very attentively while Miss Thrale played on the

harpsichord, and with eagerness he called to her, "Why don't you

dash away like Burney?"  Dr. Burney upon this said to him, "I

believe, Sir, we shall make a musician of you at last."  Johnson

with candid complacency replied, "Sir, I shall be glad to have a

new sense given to me."'



'He had come down one morning to the breakfast-room, and been a

considerable time by himself before any body appeared.  When, on a

subsequent day, he was twitted by Mrs. Thrale for being very late,

which he generally was, he defended himself by alluding to the

extraordinary morning, when he had been too early.  "Madame, I do

not like to come down to VACUITY."'



'Dr. Burney having remarked that Mr. Garrick was beginning to look

old, he said, "Why, Sir, you are not to wonder at that; no man's

face has had more wear and tear."'



1776: AETAT. 67.]--Having arrived in London late on Friday, the

15th of March, I hastened next morning to wait on Dr. Johnson, at

his house; but found he was removed from Johnson's-court, No. 7, to

Bolt-court, No. 8, still keeping to his favourite Fleet-street.  My

reflection at the time upon this change as marked in my Journal, is

as follows: 'I felt a foolish regret that he had left a court which

bore his name;* but it was not foolish to be affected with some

tenderness of regard for a place in which I had seen him a great

deal, from whence I had often issued a better and a happier man

than when I went in, and which had often appeared to my imagination

while I trod its pavements, in the solemn darkness of the night, to

be sacred to wisdom and piety.'  Being informed that he was at Mr.

Thrale's, in the Borough, I hastened thither, and found Mrs. Thrale

and him at breakfast.  I was kindly welcomed.  In a moment he was

in a full glow of conversation, and I felt myself elevated as if

brought into another state of being.  Mrs. Thrale and I looked to

each other while he talked, and our looks expressed our congenial

admiration and affection for him.  I shall ever recollect this

scene with great pleasure, I exclaimed to her, 'I am now,

intellectually, Hermippus redivivus, I am quite restored by him, by

transfusion of mind.'  'There are many (she replied) who admire and

respect Mr. Johnson; but you and I LOVE him.'





* He said, when in Scotland, that he was Johnson of that Ilk.--

BOSWELL.





He seemed very happy in the near prospect of going to Italy with

Mr. and Mrs. Thrale.  'But, (said he,) before leaving England I am

to take a jaunt to Oxford, Birmingham, my native city Lichfield,

and my old friend, Dr. Taylor's, at Ashbourn, in Derbyshire.  I

shall go in a few days, and you, Boswell, shall go with me.'  I was

ready to accompany him; being willing even to leave London to have

the pleasure of his conversation.



We got into a boat to cross over to Black-friars; and as we moved

along the Thames, I talked to him of a little volume, which,

altogether unknown to him, was advertised to be published in a few

days, under the title of Johnsoniana, or Bon-Mots of Dr. Johnson.

JOHNSON.  'Sir, it is a mighty impudent thing.'  BOSWELL.  'Pray,

Sir, could you have no redress if you were to prosecute a publisher

for bringing out, under your name, what you never said, and

ascribing to you dull stupid nonsense, or making you swear

profanely, as many ignorant relaters of your bon-mots do?'

JOHNSON.  'No, Sir; there will always be some truth mixed with the

falsehood, and how can it be ascertained how much is true and how

much is false?  Besides, Sir, what damages would a jury give me for

having been represented as swearing?'  BOSWELL.  'I think, Sir, you

should at least disavow such a publication, because the world and

posterity might with much plausible foundation say, "Here is a

volume which was publickly advertised and came out in Dr. Johnson's

own time, and, by his silence, was admitted by him to be genuine."'

JOHNSON.  'I shall give myself no trouble about the matter.'



He was, perhaps, above suffering from such spurious publications;

but I could not help thinking, that many men would be much injured

in their reputation, by having absurd and vicious sayings imputed

to them; and that redress ought in such cases to be given.



He said, 'The value of every story depends on its being true.  A

story is a picture either of an individual or of human nature in

general: if it be false, it is a picture of nothing.  For instance:

suppose a man should tell that Johnson, before setting out for

Italy, as he had to cross the Alps, sat down to make himself wings.

This many people would believe; but it would be a picture of

nothing.  ******* (naming a worthy friend of ours,) used to think a

story, a story, till I shewed him that truth was essential to it.'

I observed, that Foote entertained us with stories which were not

true; but that, indeed, it was properly not as narratives that

Foote's stories pleased us, but as collections of ludicrous images.

JOHNSON.  'Foote is quite impartial, for he tells lies of every

body.'



The importance of strict and scrupulous veracity cannot be too

often inculcated.  Johnson was known to be so rigidly attentive to

it, that even in his common conversation the slightest circumstance

was mentioned with exact precision.  The knowledge of his having

such a principle and habit made his friends have a perfect reliance

on the truth of every thing that he told, however it might have

been doubted if told by many others.  As an instance of this, I may

mention an odd incident which he related as having happened to him

one night in Fleet-street.  'A gentlewoman (said he) begged I would

give her my arm to assist her in crossing the street, which I

accordingly did; upon which she offered me a shilling, supposing me

to be the watchman.  I perceived that she was somewhat in liquor.'

This, if told by most people, would have been thought an invention;

when told by Johnson, it was believed by his friends as much as if

they had seen what passed.



We landed at the Temple-stairs, where we parted.



I found him in the evening in Mrs. Williams's room.  Finding him

still persevering in his abstinence from wine, I ventured to speak

to him of it--JOHNSON.  'Sir, I have no objection to a man's

drinking wine, if he can do it in moderation.  I found myself apt

to go to excess in it, and therefore, after having been for some

time without it, on account of illness, I thought it better not to

return to it.  Every man is to judge for himself, according to the

effects which he experiences.  One of the fathers tells us, he

found fasting made him so peevish that he did not practise it.'



Though he often enlarged upon the evil of intoxication, he was by

no means harsh and unforgiving to those who indulged in occasional

excess in wine.  One of his friends, I well remember, came to sup

at a tavern with him and some other gentlemen, and too plainly

discovered that he had drunk too much at dinner.  When one who

loved mischief, thinking to produce a severe censure, asked

Johnson, a few days afterwards, 'Well, Sir, what did your friend

say to you, as an apology for being in such a situation?'  Johnson

answered, 'Sir, he said all that a man SHOULD say: he said he was

sorry for it.'



I again visited him on Monday.  He took occasion to enlarge, as he

often did, upon the wretchedness of a sea-life.  'A ship is worse

than a gaol.  There is, in a gaol, better air, better company,

better conveniency of every kind; and a ship has the additional

disadvantage of being in danger.  When men come to like a sea-life,

they are not fit to live on land.'--'Then (said I) it would be

cruel in a father to breed his son to the sea.'  JOHNSON.  'It

would be cruel in a father who thinks as I do.  Men go to sea,

before they know the unhappiness of that way of life; and when they

have come to know it, they cannot escape from it, because it is

then too late to choose another profession; as indeed is generally

the case with men, when they have once engaged in any particular

way of life.'



On Tuesday, March 19, which was fixed for our proposed jaunt, we

met in the morning at the Somerset coffee-house in the Strand,

where we were taken up by the Oxford coach.  He was accompanied by

Mr. Gwyn, the architect; and a gentleman of Merton College, whom we

did not know, had the fourth seat.  We soon got into conversation;

for it was very remarkable of Johnson, that the presence of a

stranger had no restraint upon his talk.  I observed that Garrick,

who was about to quit the stage, would soon have an easier life.

JOHNSON.  'I doubt that, Sir.'  BOSWELL.  'Why, Sir, he will be

Atlas with the burthen off his back.'  JOHNSON.  'But I know not,

Sir, if he will be so steady without his load.  However, he should

never play any more, but be entirely the gentleman, and not partly

the player: he should no longer subject himself to be hissed by a

mob, or to be insolently treated by performers, whom he used to

rule with a high hand, and who would gladly retaliate.'  BOSWELL.

'I think he should play once a year for the benefit of decayed

actors, as it has been said he means to do.'  JOHNSON.  'Alas, Sir!

he will soon be a decayed actor himself.'



Johnson expressed his disapprobation of ornamental architecture,

such as magnificent columns supporting a portico, or expensive

pilasters supporting merely their own capitals, 'because it

consumes labour disproportionate to its utility.'  For the same

reason he satyrised statuary.  'Painting (said he) consumes labour

not disproportionate to its effect; but a fellow will hack half a

year at a block of marble to make something in stone that hardly

resembles a man.  The value of statuary is owing to its difficulty.

You would not value the finest head cut upon a carrot.'



Gwyn was a fine lively rattling fellow.  Dr. Johnson kept him in

subjection, but with a kindly authority.  The spirit of the artist,

however, rose against what he thought a Gothick attack, and he made

a brisk defence.  'What, Sir, will you allow no value to beauty in

architecture or in statuary?  Why should we allow it then in

writing?  Why do you take the trouble to give us so many fine

allusions, and bright images, and elegant phrases?  You might

convey all your instruction without these ornaments.'  Johnson

smiled with complacency; but said, 'Why, Sir, all these ornaments

are useful, because they obtain an easier reception for truth; but

a building is not at all more convenient for being decorated with

superfluous carved work.'



Gwyn at last was lucky enough to make one reply to Dr. Johnson,

which he allowed to be excellent.  Johnson censured him for taking

down a church which might have stood many years, and building a new

one at a different place, for no other reason but that there might

be a direct road to a new bridge; and his expression was, 'You are

taking a church out of the way, that the people may go in a

straight line to the bridge.'--'No, Sir, (said Gwyn,) I am putting

the church IN the way, that the people may not GO OUT OF THE WAY.'

JOHNSON.  (with a hearty loud laugh of approbation,) 'Speak no

more.  Rest your colloquial fame upon this.'



Upon our arrival at Oxford, Dr. Johnson and I went directly to

University College, but were disappointed on finding that one of

the fellows, his friend Mr. Scott, who accompanied him from

Newcastle to Edinburgh, was gone to the country.  We put up at the

Angel inn, and passed the evening by ourselves in easy and familiar

conversation.  Talking of constitutional melancholy, he observed,

'A man so afflicted, Sir, must divert distressing thoughts, and not

combat with them.'  BOSWELL.  'May not he think them down, Sir?'

JOHNSON.  'No, Sir.  To attempt to THINK THEM DOWN is madness.  He

should have a lamp constantly burning in his bed-chamber during the

night, and if wakefully disturbed, take a book, and read, and

compose himself to rest.  To have the management of the mind is a

great art, and it may be attained in a considerable degree by

experience and habitual exercise.'  BOSWELL.  'Should not he

provide amusements for himself?  Would it not, for instance, be

right for him to take a course of chymistry?'  JOHNSON.  'Let him

take a course of chymistry, or a course of rope-dancing, or a

course of any thing to which he is inclined at the time.  Let him

contrive to have as many retreats for his mind as he can, as many

things to which it can fly from itself.  Burton's Anatomy of

Melancholy is a valuable work.  It is, perhaps, overloaded with

quotation.  But there is great spirit and great power in what

Burton says, when he writes from his own mind.'



Next morning we visited Dr. Wetherell, Master of University

College, with whom Dr. Johnson conferred on the most advantageous

mode of disposing of the books printed at the Clarendon press.  I

often had occasion to remark, Johnson loved business, loved to have

his wisdom actually operate on real life.



We then went to Pembroke College, and waited on his old friend Dr.

Adams, the master of it, whom I found to be a most polite,

pleasing, communicative man.  Before his advancement to the

headship of his college, I had intended to go and visit him at

Shrewsbury, where he was rector of St. Chad's, in order to get from

him what particulars he could recollect of Johnson's academical

life.  He now obligingly gave me part of that authentick

information, which, with what I afterwards owed to his kindness,

will be found incorporated in its proper place in this work.



Dr. Adams told us, that in some of the Colleges at Oxford, the

fellows had excluded the students from social intercourse with them

in the common room.  JOHNSON.  'They are in the right, Sir: there

can be no real conversation, no fair exertion of mind amongst them,

if the young men are by; for a man who has a character does not

choose to stake it in their presence.'  BOSWELL.  'But, Sir, may

there not be very good conversation without a contest for

superiority?'  JOHNSON.  'No animated conversation, Sir, for it

cannot be but one or other will come off superiour.  I do not mean

that the victor must have the better of the argument, for he may

take the weak side; but his superiority of parts and knowledge will

necessarily appear: and he to whom he thus shews himself superiour

is lessened in the eyes of the young men.'



We walked with Dr. Adams into the master's garden, and into the

common room.  JOHNSON.  (after a reverie of meditation,) 'Ay! Here

I used to play at draughts with Phil. Jones and Fludyer.  Jones

loved beer, and did not get very forward in the church.  Fludyer

turned out a scoundrel, a Whig, and said he was ashamed of having

been bred at Oxford.  He had a living at Putney, and got under the

eye of some retainers to the court at that time, and so became a

violent Whig: but he had been a scoundrel all along to be sure.'

BOSWELL.  'Was he a scoundrel, Sir, in any other way than that of

being a political scoundrel?  Did he cheat at draughts?'  JOHNSON.

'Sir, we never played for MONEY.'



He then carried me to visit Dr. Bentham, Canon of Christ-Church,

and Divinity Professor, with whose learned and lively conversation

we were much pleased.  He gave us an invitation to dinner, which

Dr. Johnson told me was a high honour.  'Sir, it is a great thing

to dine with the Canons of Christ-Church.'  We could not accept his

invitation, as we were engaged to dine at University College.  We

had an excellent dinner there, with the Master and Fellows, it

being St. Cuthbert's day, which is kept by them as a festival, as

he was a saint of Durham, with which this college is much

connected.



We drank tea with Dr. Horne, late President of Magdalen College,

and Bishop of Norwich, of whose abilities, in different respects,

the publick has had eminent proofs, and the esteem annexed to whose

character was increased by knowing him personally.



We then went to Trinity College, where he introduced me to Mr.

Thomas Warton, with whom we passed a part of the evening.  We

talked of biography--JOHNSON.  'It is rarely well executed.  They

only who live with a man can write his life with any genuine

exactness and discrimination; and few people who have lived with a

man know what to remark about him.  The chaplain of a late Bishop,

whom I was to assist in writing some memoirs of his Lordship, could

tell me scarcely any thing.'



I said, Mr. Robert Dodsley's life should be written, as he had been

so much connected with the wits of his time, and by his literary

merit had raised himself from the station of a footman.  Mr. Warton

said, he had published a little volume under the title of The Muse

in Livery.  JOHNSON.  'I doubt whether Dodsley's brother would

thank a man who should write his life: yet Dodsley himself was not

unwilling that his original low condition should be recollected.

When Lord Lyttelton's Dialogues of the Dead came out, one of which

is between Apicius, an ancient epicure, and Dartineuf, a modern

epicure, Dodsley said to me, "I knew Dartineuf well, for I was once

his footman."'



I mentioned Sir Richard Steele having published his Christian Hero,

with the avowed purpose of obliging himself to lead a religious

life; yet, that his conduct was by no means strictly suitable.

JOHNSON.  'Steele, I believe, practised the lighter vices.'



Mr. Warton, being engaged, could not sup with us at our inn; we had

therefore another evening by ourselves.  I asked Johnson, whether a

man's being forward to make himself known to eminent people, and

seeing as much of life, and getting as much information as he could

in every way, was not yet lessening himself by his forwardness.

JOHNSON.  'No, Sir, a man always makes himself greater as he

increases his knowledge.



I censured some ludicrous fantastick dialogues between two coach-

horses and other such stuff, which Baretti had lately published.

He joined with me, and said, 'Nothing odd will do long.  Tristram

Shandy did not last.'  I expressed a desire to be acquainted with a

lady who had been much talked of, and universally celebrated for

extraordinary address and insinuation.  JOHNSON.  'Never believe

extraordinary characters which you hear of people.  Depend upon it,

Sir, they are exaggerated.  You do not see one man shoot a great

deal higher than another.'  I mentioned Mr. Burke.  JOHNSON.  'Yes;

Burke is an extraordinary man.  His stream of mind is perpetual.'

It is very pleasing to me to record, that Johnson's high estimation

of the talents of this gentleman was uniform from their early

acquaintance.  Sir Joshua Reynolds informs me, that when Mr. Burke

was first elected a member of Parliament, and Sir John Hawkins

expressed a wonder at his attaining a seat, Johnson said, 'Now we

who know Mr. Burke, know, that he will be one of the first men in

this country.'  And once, when Johnson was ill, and unable to exert

himself as much as usual without fatigue, Mr. Burke having been

mentioned, he said, 'That fellow calls forth all my powers.  Were I

to see Burke now it would kill me.'  So much was he accustomed to

consider conversation as a contest, and such was his notion of

Burke as an opponent.



Next morning, Thursday, March 21, we set out in a post-chaise to

pursue our ramble.  It was a delightful day, and we rode through

Blenheim park.  When I looked at the magnificent bridge built by

John Duke of Marlborough, over a small rivulet, and recollected the

Epigram made upon it--





    'The lofty arch his high ambition shows,

     The stream, an emblem of his bounty flows:'





and saw that now, by the genius of Brown, a magnificent body of

water was collected, I said, 'They have DROWNED the Epigram.'  I

observed to him, while in the midst of the noble scene around us,

'You and I, Sir, have, I think, seen together the extremes of what

can be seen in Britain:--the wild rough island of Mull, and

Blenheim park.'



We dined at an excellent inn at Chapel-house, where he expatiated

on the felicity of England in its taverns and inns, and triumphed

over the French for not having, in any perfection, the tavern life.

'There is no private house, (said he,) in which people can enjoy

themselves so well, as at a capital tavern.  Let there be ever so

great plenty of good things, ever so much grandeur, ever so much

elegance, ever so much desire that every body should be easy; in

the nature of things it cannot be: there must always be some degree

of care and anxiety.  The master of the house is anxious to

entertain his guests; the guests are anxious to be agreeable to

him: and no man, but a very impudent dog indeed, can as freely

command what is in another man's house, as if it were his own.

Whereas, at a tavern, there is a general freedom from anxiety.  You

are sure you are welcome: and the more noise you make, the more

trouble you give, the more good things you call for, the welcomer

you are.  No servants will attend you with the alacrity which

waiters do, who are incited by the prospect of an immediate reward,

in proportion as they please.  No, Sir; there is nothing which has

yet been contrived by man, by which so much happiness is produced

as by a good tavern or inn.'*  He then repeated, with great

emotion, Shenstone's lines:--





    'Whoe'er has travell'd life's dull round,

       Where'er his stages may have been,

     May sigh to think he still has found

       The warmest welcome at an inn.'





* Sir John Hawkins has preserved very few Memorabilia of Johnson.

There is, however, to be found, in his bulky tome [p. 87], a very

excellent one upon this subject:--'In contradiction to those, who,

having a wife and children, prefer domestick enjoyments to those

which a tavern affords, I have heard him assert, that a tavern

chair was the throne of human felicity.--"As soon," said he, "as I

enter the door of a tavern, I experience an oblivion of care, and a

freedom from solicitude: when I am seated, I find the master

courteous, and the servants obsequious to my call; anxious to know

and ready to supply my wants: wine there exhilarates my spirits,

and prompts me to free conversation and an interchange of discourse

with those whom I most love: I dogmatise and am contradicted, and

in this conflict of opinions and sentiments I find delight."'--

BOSWELL.





In the afternoon, as we were driven rapidly along in the post-

chaise, he said to me 'Life has not many things better than this.'



We stopped at Stratford-upon-Avon, and drank tea and coffee; and it

pleased me to be with him upon the classick ground of Shakspeare's

native place.



He spoke slightingly of Dyer's Fleece.--'The subject, Sir, cannot

be made poetical.  How can a man write poetically of serges and

druggets?  Yet you will hear many people talk to you gravely of

that excellent poem, The Fleece.'  Having talked of Grainger's

Sugar-Cane, I mentioned to him Mr. Langton's having told me, that

this poem, when read in manuscript at Sir Joshua Reynolds's, had

made all the assembled wits burst into a laugh, when, after much

blank-verse pomp, the poet began a new paragraph thus:--





    'Now, Muse, let's sing of rats.'





And what increased the ridicule was, that one of the company, who

slily overlooked the reader, perceived that the word had been

originally MICE, and had been altered to RATS, as more dignified.



Johnson said, that Dr. Grainger was an agreeable man; a man who

would do any good that was in his power.  His translation of

Tibullus, he thought, was very well done; but The Sugar-Cane, a

poem, did not please him; for, he exclaimed, 'What could he make of

a sugar-cane?  One might as well write the "Parsley-bed, a Poem;"

or "The Cabbage-garden, a Poem."'  BOSWELL.  'You must then pickle

your cabbage with the sal atticum.'  JOHNSON.  'You know there is

already The Hop-Garden, a Poem: and, I think, one could say a great

deal about cabbage.  The poem might begin with the advantages of

civilized society over a rude state, exemplified by the Scotch, who

had no cabbages till Oliver Cromwell's soldiers introduced them;

and one might thus shew how arts are propagated by conquest, as

they were by the Roman arms.'  He seemed to be much diverted with

the fertility of his own fancy.



I told him, that I heard Dr. Percy was writing the history of the

wolf in Great-Britain.  JOHNSON.  'The wolf, Sir! why the wolf? why

does he not write of the bear, which we had formerly?  Nay, it is

said we had the beaver.  Or why does he not write of the grey rat,

the Hanover rat, as it is called, because it is said to have come

into this country about the time that the family of Hanover came?

I should like to see The History of the Grey Rat, by Thomas Percy,

D. D., Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty,' (laughing

immoderately).  BOSWELL.  'I am afraid a court chaplain could not

decently write of the grey rat.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, he need not give

it the name of the Hanover rat.'  Thus could he indulge a luxuriant

sportive imagination, when talking of a friend whom he loved and

esteemed.



On Friday, March 22, having set out early from Henley, where we had

lain the preceding night, we arrived at Birmingham about nine

o'clock, and, after breakfast, went to call on his old schoolfellow

Mr. Hector.  A very stupid maid, who opened the door, told us, that

'her master was gone out; he was gone to the country; she could not

tell when he would return.'  In short, she gave us a miserable

reception; and Johnson observed, 'She would have behaved no better

to people who wanted him in the way of his profession.'  He said to

her, 'My name is Johnson; tell him I called.  Will you remember the

name?'  She answered with rustick simplicity, in the Warwickshire

pronunciation, 'I don't understand you, Sir.'--'Blockhead, (said

he,) I'll write.'  I never heard the word blockhead applied to a

woman before, though I do not see why it should not, when there is

evident occasion for it.  He, however, made another attempt to make

her understand him, and roared loud in her ear, 'Johnson,' and then

she catched the sound.



We next called on Mr. Lloyd, one of the people called Quakers.  He

too was not at home; but Mrs. Lloyd was, and received us

courteously, and asked us to dinner.  Johnson said to me, 'After

the uncertainty of all human things at Hector's, this invitation

came very well.'  We walked about the town, and he was pleased to

see it increasing.



Mr. Lloyd joined us in the street; and in a little while we met

Friend Hector, as Mr. Lloyd called him.  It gave me pleasure to

observe the joy which Johnson and he expressed on seeing each other

again.  Mr. Lloyd and I left them together, while he obligingly

shewed me some of the manufactures of this very curious assemblage

of artificers.  We all met at dinner at Mr. Lloyd's, where we were

entertained with great hospitality.  Mr. and Mrs. Lloyd had been

married the same year with their Majesties, and like them, had been

blessed with a numerous family of fine children, their numbers

being exactly the same.  Johnson said, 'Marriage is the best state

for a man in general; and every man is a worse man, in proportion

as he is unfit for the married state.'



Dr. Johnson said to me in the morning, 'You will see, Sir, at Mr.

Hector's, his sister, Mrs. Careless, a clergyman's widow.  She was

the first woman with whom I was in love.  It dropt out of my head

imperceptibly; but she and I shall always have a kindness for each

other.'  He laughed at the notion that a man never can be really in

love but once, and considered it as a mere romantick fancy.



On our return from Mr. Bolton's, Mr. Hector took me to his house,

where we found Johnson sitting placidly at tea, with his first

love; who, though now advanced in years, was a genteel woman, very

agreeable, and well-bred.



Johnson lamented to Mr. Hector the state of one of their school-

fellows, Mr. Charles Congreve, a clergyman, which he thus

described: 'He obtained, I believe, considerable preferment in

Ireland, but now lives in London, quite as a valetudinarian, afraid

to go into any house but his own.  He takes a short airing in his

post-chaise every day.  He has an elderly woman, whom he calls

cousin, who lives with him, and jogs his elbow when his glass has

stood too long empty, and encourages him in drinking, in which he

is very willing to be encouraged; not that he gets drunk, for he is

a very pious man, but he is always muddy.  He confesses to one

bottle of port every day, and he probably drinks more.  He is quite

unsocial; his conversation is quite monosyllabical: and when, at my

last visit, I asked him what a clock it was? that signal of my

departure had so pleasing an effect on him, that he sprung up to

look at his watch, like a greyhound bounding at a hare.'  When

Johnson took leave of Mr. Hector, he said, 'Don't grow like

Congreve; nor let me grow like him, when you are near me.'



When he again talked of Mrs. Careless to-night, he seemed to have

had his affection revived; for he said, 'If I had married her, it

might have been as happy for me.'  BOSWELL.  'Pray, Sir, do you not

suppose that there are fifty women in the world, with any one of

whom a man may be as happy, as with any one woman in particular?'

JOHNSON.  'Ay, Sir, fifty thousand.'  BOSWELL.  'Then, Sir, you are

not of opinion with some who imagine that certain men and certain

women are made for each other; and that they cannot be happy if

they miss their counterparts?'  JOHNSON.  'To be sure not, Sir.  I

believe marriages would in general be as happy, and often more so,

if they were all made by the Lord Chancellor, upon a due

consideration of characters and circumstances, without the parties

having any choice in the matter.'



I wished to have staid at Birmingham to-night, to have talked more

with Mr. Hector; but my friend was impatient to reach his native

city; so we drove on that stage in the dark, and were long pensive

and silent.  When we came within the focus of the Lichfield lamps,

'Now (said he,) we are getting out of a state of death.'  We put up

at the Three Crowns, not one of the great inns, but a good old

fashioned one, which was kept by Mr. Wilkins, and was the very next

house to that in which Johnson was born and brought up, and which

was still his own property.  We had a comfortable supper, and got

into high spirits.  I felt all my Toryism glow in this old capital

of Staffordshire.  I could have offered incense genio loci; and I

indulged in libations of that ale, which Boniface, in The Beaux

Stratagem, recommends with such an eloquent jollity.



Next morning he introduced me to Mrs. Lucy Porter, his step-

daughter.  She was now an old maid, with much simplicity of manner.

She had never been in London.  Her brother, a Captain in the navy,

had left her a fortune of ten thousand pounds; about a third of

which she had laid out in building a stately house, and making a

handsome garden, in an elevated situation in Lichfield.  Johnson,

when here by himself, used to live at her house.  She reverenced

him, and he had a parental tenderness for her.



We then visited Mr. Peter Garrick, who had that morning received a

letter from his brother David, announcing our coming to Lichfield.

He was engaged to dinner, but asked us to tea, and to sleep at his

house.  Johnson, however, would not quit his old acquaintance

Wilkins, of the Three Crowns.  The family likeness of the Garricks

was very striking; and Johnson thought that David's vivacity was

not so peculiar to himself as was supposed.  'Sir, (said he,) I

don't know but if Peter had cultivated all the arts of gaiety as

much as David has done, he might have been as brisk and lively.

Depend upon it, Sir, vivacity is much an art, and depends greatly

on habit.'  I believe there is a good deal of truth in this,

notwithstanding a ludicrous story told me by a lady abroad, of a

heavy German baron, who had lived much with the young English at

Geneva, and was ambitious to be as lively as they; with which view,

he, with assiduous exertion, was jumping over the tables and chairs

in his lodgings; and when the people of the house ran in and asked,

with surprize, what was the matter, he answered, 'Sh' apprens

t'etre fif.'



We dined at our inn, and had with us a Mr. Jackson, one of

Johnson's schoolfellows, whom he treated with much kindness, though

he seemed to be a low man, dull and untaught.  He had a coarse grey

coat, black waistcoat, greasy leather breeches, and a yellow

uncurled wig; and his countenance had the ruddiness which betokens

one who is in no haste to 'leave his can.'  He drank only ale.  He

had tried to be a cutler at Birmingham, but had not succeeded; and

now he lived poorly at home, and had some scheme of dressing

leather in a better manner than common; to his indistinct account

of which, Dr. Johnson listened with patient attention, that he

might assist him with his advice.  Here was an instance of genuine

humanity and real kindness in this great man, who has been most

unjustly represented as altogether harsh and destitute of

tenderness.  A thousand such instances might have been recorded in

the course of his long life; though that his temper was warm and

hasty, and his manner often rough, cannot be denied.



I saw here, for the first time, oat ale; and oat cakes not hard as

in Scotland, but soft like a Yorkshire cake, were served at

breakfast.  It was pleasant to me to find, that Oats, the food of

horses, were so much used as the food of the people in Dr.

Johnson's own town.  He expatiated in praise of Lichfield and its

inhabitants, who, he said, were 'the most sober, decent people in

England, the genteelest in proportion to their wealth, and spoke

the purest English.'  I doubted as to the last article of this

eulogy: for they had several provincial sounds; as THERE,

pronounced like FEAR, instead of like FAIR; ONCE pronounced WOONSE,

instead of WUNSE, or WONSE.  Johnson himself never got entirely

free of those provincial accents.  Garrick sometimes used to take

him off, squeezing a lemon into a punch-bowl, with uncouth

gesticulations, looking round the company, and calling out, 'Who's

for POONSH?'



Very little business appeared to be going forward in Lichfield.  I

found however two strange manufactures for so inland a place, sail-

cloth and streamers for ships; and I observed them making some

saddle-cloths, and dressing sheepskins: but upon the whole, the

busy hand of industry seemed to be quite slackened.  'Surely, Sir,

(said I,) you are an idle set of people.'  'Sir, (said Johnson,) we

are a city of philosophers, we work with our heads, and make the

boobies of Birmingham work for us with their hands.'



There was at this time a company of players performing at

Lichfield, The manager, Mr. Stanton, sent his compliments, and

begged leave to wait on Dr. Johnson.  Johnson received him very

courteously, and he drank a glass of wine with us.  He was a plain

decent well-behaved man, and expressed his gratitude to Dr. Johnson

for having once got him permission from Dr. Taylor at Ashbourne to

play there upon moderate terms.  Garrick's name was soon

introduced.  JOHNSON.  'Garrick's conversation is gay and

grotesque.  It is a dish of all sorts, but all good things.  There

is no solid meat in it: there is a want of sentiment in it.  Not

but that he has sentiment sometimes, and sentiment, too, very

powerful and very pleasing: but it has not its full proportion in

his conversation.'



When we were by ourselves he told me, 'Forty years ago, Sir, I was

in love with an actress here, Mrs. Emmet, who acted Flora, in Hob

in the Well.'  What merit this lady had as an actress, or what was

her figure, or her manner, I have not been informed: but, if we may

believe Mr. Garrick, his old master's taste in theatrical merit was

by no means refined; he was not an elegans formarum spectator.

Garrick used to tell, that Johnson said of an actor, who played Sir

Harry Wildair at Lichfield, 'There is a courtly vivacity about the

fellow;' when in fact, according to Garrick's account, 'he was the

most vulgar ruffian that ever went upon boards.'



We had promised Mr. Stanton to be at his theatre on Monday.  Dr.

Johnson jocularly proposed me to write a Prologue for the occasion:

'A Prologue, by James Boswell, Esq. from the Hebrides.'  I was

really inclined to take the hint.  Methought, 'Prologue, spoken

before Dr. Samuel Johnson, at Lichfield, 1776;' would have sounded

as well as, 'Prologue, spoken before the Duke of York, at Oxford,'

in Charles the Second's time.  Much might have been said of what

Lichfield had done for Shakspeare, by producing Johnson and

Garrick.  But I found he was averse to it.



We went and viewed the museum of Mr. Richard Green, apothecary

here, who told me he was proud of being a relation of Dr.

Johnson's.  It was, truely, a wonderful collection, both of

antiquities and natural curiosities, and ingenious works of art.

He had all the articles accurately arranged, with their names upon

labels, printed at his own little press; and on the staircase

leading to it was a board, with the names of contributors marked in

gold letters.  A printed catalogue of the collection was to be had

at a bookseller's.  Johnson expressed his admiration of the

activity and diligence and good fortune of Mr. Green, in getting

together, in his situation, so great a variety of things; and Mr.

Green told me that Johnson once said to him, 'Sir, I should as soon

have thought of building a man of war, as of collecting such a

museum.'  Mr. Green's obliging alacrity in shewing it was very

pleasing.



We drank tea and coffee at Mr. Peter Garrick's, where was Mrs.

Aston, one of the maiden sisters of Mrs. Walmsley, wife of

Johnson's first friend, and sister also of the lady of whom Johnson

used to speak with the warmest admiration, by the name of Molly

Aston, who was afterwards married to Captain Brodie of the navy.



On Sunday, March 24, we breakfasted with Mrs. Cobb, a widow lady,

who lived in an agreeable sequestered place close by the town,

called the Friary, it having been formerly a religious house.  She

and her niece, Miss Adey, were great admirers of Dr. Johnson; and

he behaved to them with a kindness and easy pleasantry, such as we

see between old and intimate acquaintance.  He accompanied Mrs.

Cobb to St. Mary's church, and I went to the cathedral, where I was

very much delighted with the musick, finding it to be peculiarly

solemn and accordant with the words of the service.



We dined at Mr. Peter Garrick's, who was in a very lively humour,

and verified Johnson's saying, that if he had cultivated gaiety as

much as his brother David, he might have equally excelled in it.

He was to-day quite a London narrator, telling us a variety of

anecdotes with that earnestness and attempt at mimicry which we

usually find in the wits of the metropolis.  Dr. Johnson went with

me to the cathedral in the afternoon.  It was grand and pleasing to

contemplate this illustrious writer, now full of fame, worshipping

in the 'solemn temple' of his native city.



I returned to tea and coffee at Mr. Peter Garrick's, and then found

Dr. Johnson at the Reverend Mr. Seward's, Canon Residentiary, who

inhabited the Bishop's palace, in which Mr. Walmsley lived, and

which had been the scene of many happy hours in Johnson's early

life.



On monday, March 25, we breakfasted at Mrs. Lucy Porter's.  Johnson

had sent an express to Dr. Taylor's, acquainting him of our being

at Lichfield, and Taylor had returned an answer that his postchaise

should come for us this day.  While we sat at breakfast, Dr.

Johnson received a letter by the post, which seemed to agitate him

very much.  When he had read it, he exclaimed, 'One of the most

dreadful things that has happened in my time.'  The phrase my time,

like the word age, is usually understood to refer to an event of a

publick or general nature.  I imagined something like an

assassination of the King--like a gunpowder plot carried into

execution--or like another fire of London.  When asked, 'What is

it, Sir?' he answered, 'Mr. Thrale has lost his only son!'  This

was, no doubt, a very great affliction to Mr. and Mrs. Thrale,

which their friends would consider accordingly; but from the manner

in which the intelligence of it was communicated by Johnson, it

appeared for the moment to be comparatively small.  I, however,

soon felt a sincere concern, and was curious to observe, how Dr.

Johnson would be affected.  He said, 'This is a total extinction to

their family, as much as if they were sold into captivity.'  Upon

my mentioning that Mr. Thrale had daughters, who might inherit his

wealth;--'Daughters, (said Johnson, warmly,) he'll no more value

his daughters than--'  I was going to speak.--'Sir, (said he,)

don't you know how you yourself think?  Sir, he wishes to propagate

his name.'  In short, I saw male succession strong in his mind,

even where there was no name, no family of any long standing.  I

said, it was lucky he was not present when this misfortune

happened.  JOHNSON.  'It is lucky for ME.  People in distress never

think that you feel enough.'  BOSWELL.  'And Sir, they will have

the hope of seeing you, which will be a relief in the mean time;

and when you get to them, the pain will be so far abated, that they

will be capable of being consoled by you, which, in the first

violence of it, I believe, would not be the case.'  JOHNSON.  'No,

Sir; violent pain of mind, like violent pain of body, MUST be

severely felt.'  BOSWELL.  'I own, Sir, I have not so much feeling

for the distress of others, as some people have, or pretend to

have: but I know this, that I would do all in my power to relieve

them.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir it is affectation to pretend to feel the

distress of others, as much as they do themselves.  It is equally

so, as if one should pretend to feel as much pain while a friend's

leg is cutting off, as he does.  No, Sir; you have expressed the

rational and just nature of sympathy.  I would have gone to the

extremity of the earth to have preserved this boy.'



He was soon quite calm.  The letter was from Mr. Thrale's clerk,

and concluded, 'I need not say how much they wish to see you in

London.'  He said, 'We shall hasten back from Taylor's.'



Mrs. Lucy Porter and some other ladies of the place talked a great

deal of him when he was out of the room, not only with veneration

but affection.  It pleased me to find that he was so much BELOVED

in his native city.



Mrs. Aston, whom I had seen the preceding night, and her sister,

Mrs. Gastrel, a widow lady, had each a house and garden, and

pleasure-ground, prettily situated upon Stowhill, a gentle

eminence, adjoining to Lichfield.  Johnson walked away to dinner

there, leaving me by myself without any apology; I wondered at this

want of that facility of manners, from which a man has no

difficulty in carrying a friend to a house where he is intimate; I

felt it very unpleasant to be thus left in solitude in a country

town, where I was an entire stranger, and began to think myself

unkindly deserted; but I was soon relieved, and convinced that my

friend, instead of being deficient in delicacy, had conducted the

matter with perfect propriety, for I received the following note in

his handwriting: 'Mrs. Gastrel, at the lower house on Stowhill,

desires Mr. Boswell's company to dinner at two.'  I accepted of the

invitation, and had here another proof how amiable his character

was in the opinion of those who knew him best.  I was not informed,

till afterwards, that Mrs. Gastrel's husband was the clergyman who,

while he lived at Stratford upon Avon, where he was proprietor of

Shakspeare's garden, with Gothick barbarity cut down his mulberry-

tree, and, as Dr. Johnson told me, did it to vex his neighbours.

His lady, I have reason to believe, on the same authority,

participated in the guilt of what the enthusiasts for our immortal

bard deem almost a species of sacrilege.



After dinner Dr. Johnson wrote a letter to Mrs. Thrale on the death

of her son.  I said it would be very distressing to Thrale, but she

would soon forget it, as she had so many things to think of.

JOHNSON.  'No, Sir, Thrale will forget it first.  SHE has many

things that she MAY think of.  HE has many things that he MUST

think of.'  This was a very just remark upon the different effect

of those light pursuits which occupy a vacant and easy mind, and

those serious engagements which arrest attention, and keep us from

brooding over grief.



In the evening we went to the Town-hall, which was converted into a

temporary theatre, and saw Theodosius, with The Stratford Jubilee.

I was happy to see Dr. Johnson sitting in a conspicuous part of the

pit, and receiving affectionate homage from all his acquaintance.

We were quite gay and merry.  I afterwards mentioned to him that I

condemned myself for being so, when poor Mr. and Mrs. Thrale were

in such distress.  JOHNSON.  'You are wrong, Sir; twenty years

hence Mr. and Mrs. Thrale will not suffer much pain from the death

of their son.  Now, Sir, you are to consider, that distance of

place, as well as distance of time, operates upon the human

feelings.  I would not have you be gay in the presence of the

distressed, because it would shock them; but you may be gay at a

distance.  Pain for the loss of a friend, or of a relation whom we

love, is occasioned by the want which we feel.  In time the vacuity

is filled with something else; or sometimes the vacuity closes up

of itself.'



Mr. Seward and Mr. Pearson, another clergyman here, supt with us at

our inn, and after they left us, we sat up late as we used to do in

London.



Here I shall record some fragments of my friend's conversation

during this jaunt.



'Marriage, Sir, is much more necessary to a man than to a woman;

for he is much less able to supply himself with domestick comforts.

You will recollect my saying to some ladies the other day, that I

had often wondered why young women should marry, as they have so

much more freedom, and so much more attention paid to them while

unmarried, than when married.  I indeed did not mention the STRONG

reason for their marrying--the MECHANICAL reason.'  BOSWELL.  'Why,

that IS a strong one.  But does not imagination make it much more

important than it is in reality?  Is it not, to a certain degree, a

delusion in us as well as in women?' JOHNSON.  'Why yes, Sir; but

it is a delusion that is always beginning again.'  BOSWELL.  'I

don't know but there is upon the whole more misery than happiness

produced by that passion.'  JOHNSON.  'I don't think so, Sir.'



'Never speak of a man in his own presence.  It is always

indelicate, and may be offensive.'



'Questioning is not the mode of conversation among gentlemen.  It

is assuming a superiority, and it is particularly wrong to question

a man concerning himself.  There may be parts of his former life

which he may not wish to be made known to other persons, or even

brought to his own recollection.'



'A man should be careful never to tell tales of himself to his own

disadvantage.  People may be amused and laugh at the time, but they

will be remembered, and brought out against him upon some

subsequent occasion.'



'Much may be done if a man puts his whole mind to a particular

object.  By doing so, Norton has made himself the great lawyer that

he is allowed to be.'



On Tuesday, March 26, there came for us an equipage properly suited

to a wealthy well-beneficed clergyman;--Dr. Taylor's large roomy

post-chaise, drawn by four stout plump horses, and driven by two

steady jolly postillions, which conveyed us to Ashbourne; where I

found my friend's schoolfellow living upon an establishment

perfectly corresponding with his substantial creditable equipage:

his house, garden, pleasure-grounds, table, in short every thing

good, and no scantiness appearing.  Every man should form such a

plan of living as he can execute completely.  Let him not draw an

outline wider than he can fill up.  I have seen many skeletons of

shew and magnificence which excite at once ridicule and pity.  Dr.

Taylor had a good estate of his own, and good preferment in the

church, being a prebendary of Westminster, and rector of Bosworth.

He was a diligent justice of the peace, and presided over the town

of Ashbourne, to the inhabitants of which I was told he was very

liberal; and as a proof of this it was mentioned to me, he had the

preceding winter distributed two hundred pounds among such of them

as stood in need of his assistance.  He had consequently a

considerable political interest in the county of Derby, which he

employed to support the Devonshire family; for though the

schoolfellow and friend of Johnson, he was a Whig.  I could not

perceive in his character much congeniality of any sort with that

of Johnson, who, however, said to me, 'Sir, he has a very strong

understanding.'  His size, and figure, and countenance, and manner,

were that of a hearty English 'Squire, with the parson super-

induced: and I took particular notice of his upper servant, Mr.

Peters, a decent grave man, in purple clothes, and a large white

wig, like the butler or major domo of a Bishop.



Dr. Johnson and Dr. Taylor met with great cordiality; and Johnson

soon gave him the same sad account of their school-fellow,

Congreve, that he had given to Mr. Hector; adding a remark of such

moment to the rational conduct of a man in the decline of life,

that it deserves to be imprinted upon every mind: 'There is nothing

against which an old man should be so much upon his guard as

putting himself to nurse.  Innumerable have been the melancholy

instances of men once distinguished for firmness, resolution, and

spirit, who in their latter days have been governed like children,

by interested female artifice.



Dr. Taylor commended a physician who was known to him and Dr.

Johnson, and said, 'I fight many battles for him, as many people in

the country dislike him.'  JOHNSON.  'But you should consider, Sir,

that by every one of your victories he is a loser; for, every man

of whom you get the better, will be very angry, and resolve not to

employ him; whereas if people get the better of you in argument

about him, they'll think, "We'll send for Dr. ******

nevertheless."'  This was an observation deep and sure in human

nature.



Next day, as Dr. Johnson had acquainted Dr. Taylor of the reason

for his returning speedily to London, it was resolved that we

should set out after dinner.  A few of Dr. Taylor's neighbours were

his guests that day.



Dr. Johnson talked with approbation of one who had attained to the

state of the philosophical wise man, that is to have no want of any

thing.  'Then, Sir, (said I,) the savage is a wise man.'  'Sir,

(said he,) I do not mean simply being without,--but not having a

want.'  I maintained, against this proposition, that it was better

to have fine clothes, for instance, than not to feel the want of

them.  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir; fine clothes are good only as they

supply the want of other means of procuring respect.  Was Charles

the Twelfth, think you, less respected for his coarse blue coat and

black stock?  And you find the King of Prussia dresses plain,

because the dignity of his character is sufficient.'  I here

brought myself into a scrape, for I heedlessly said, 'Would not

YOU, Sir, be the better for velvet and embroidery?'  JOHNSON.

'Sir, you put an end to all argument when you introduce your

opponent himself.  Have you no better manners?  There is YOUR

WANT.'  I apologised by saying, I had mentioned him as an instance

of one who wanted as little as any man in the world, and yet,

perhaps, might receive some additional lustre from dress.



Having left Ashbourne in the evening, we stopped to change horses

at Derby, and availed ourselves of a moment to enjoy the

conversation of my countryman, Dr. Butter, then physician there.

He was in great indignation because Lord Mountstuart's bill for a

Scotch militia had been lost.  Dr. Johnson was as violent against

it.  'I am glad, (said he,) that Parliament has had the spirit to

throw it out.  You wanted to take advantage of the timidity of our

scoundrels;' (meaning, I suppose, the ministry).  It may be

observed, that he used the epithet scoundrel very commonly not

quite in the sense in which it is generally understood, but as a

strong term of disapprobation; as when he abruptly answered Mrs.

Thrale, who had asked him how he did, 'Ready to become a scoundrel,

Madam; with a little more spoiling you will, I think, make me a

complete rascal:' he meant, easy to become a capricious and self-

indulgent valetudinarian; a character for which I have heard him

express great disgust.  We lay this night at Loughborough.



On Thursday, March 28, we pursued our journey.  He said, 'It is

commonly a weak man who marries for love.'  We then talked of

marrying women of fortune; and I mentioned a common remark, that a

man may be, upon the whole, richer by marrying a woman with a very

small portion, because a woman of fortune will be proportionally

expensive; whereas a woman who brings none will be very moderate in

expenses.  JOHNSON.  'Depend upon it, Sir, this is not true.  A

woman of fortune being used to the handling of money, spends it

judiciously: but a woman who gets the command of money for the

first time upon her marriage, has such a gust in spending it, that

she throws it away with great profusion.'



He praised the ladies of the present age, insisting that they were

more faithful to their husbands, and more virtuous in every

respect, than in former times, because their understandings were

better cultivated.



At Leicester we read in the news-paper that Dr. James was dead.  I

thought that the death of an old school-fellow, and one with whom

he had lived a good deal in London, would have affected my fellow-

traveller much: but he only said, Ah! poor Jamy.'  Afterwards,

however, when we were in the chaise, he said, with more tenderness,

'Since I set out on this jaunt, I have lost an old friend and a

young one;--Dr. James, and poor Harry.'  (Meaning Mr. Thrale's

son.)



I enjoyed the luxury of our approach to London, that metropolis

which we both loved so much, for the high and varied intellectual

pleasure which it furnishes.  I experienced immediate happiness

while whirled along with such a companion, and said to him, 'Sir,

you observed one day at General Oglethorpe's, that a man is never

happy for the present, but when he is drunk.  Will you not add,--or

when driving rapidly in a post-chaise?'  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir, you

are driving rapidly FROM something, or TO something.'



Talking of melancholy, he said, 'Some men, and very thinking men

too, have not those vexing thoughts.  Sir Joshua Reynolds is the

same all the year round.  Beauclerk, except when ill and in pain,

is the same.  But I believe most men have them in the degree in

which they are capable of having them.  If I were in the country,

and were distressed by that malady, I would force myself to take a

book; and every time I did it I should find it the easier.

Melancholy, indeed, should be diverted by every means but

drinking.'



We stopped at Messieurs Dillys, booksellers in the Poultry; from

whence he hurried away, in a hackney coach, to Mr. Thrale's, in the

Borough.  I called at his house in the evening, having promised to

acquaint Mrs. Williams of his safe return; when, to my surprize, I

found him sitting with her at tea, and, as I thought, not in a very

good humour: for, it seems, when he had got to Mr. Thrale's, he

found the coach was at the door waiting to carry Mrs. and Miss

Thrale, and Signor Baretti, their Italian master, to Bath.  This

was not shewing the attention which might have been expected to the

'Guide, Philosopher, and Friend,' the Imlac who had hastened from

the country to console a distressed mother, who he understood was

very anxious for his return.  They had, I found, without ceremony,

proceeded on their intended journey.  I was glad to understand from

him that it was still resolved that his tour to Italy with Mr. and

Mrs. Thrale should take place, of which he had entertained some

doubt, on account of the loss which they had suffered; and his

doubts afterwards proved to be well-founded.  He observed, indeed

very justly, that 'their loss was an additional reason for their

going abroad; and if it had not been fixed that he should have been

one of the party, he would force them out; but he would not advise

them unless his advice was asked, lest they might suspect that he

recommended what he wished on his own account.'  I was not pleased

that his intimacy with Mr. Thrale's family, though it no doubt

contributed much to his comfort and enjoyment, was not without some

degree of restraint: not, as has been grossly suggested, that it

was required of him as a task to talk for the entertainment of them

and their company; but that he was not quite at his ease; which,

however, might partly be owing to his own honest pride--that

dignity of mind which is always jealous of appearing too compliant.



On Sunday, March 31, I called on him, and shewed him as a curiosity

which I had discovered, his Translation of Lobo's Account of

Abyssinia, which Sir John Pringle had lent me, it being then little

known as one of his works.  He said, 'Take no notice of it,' or

'don't talk of it.'  He seemed to think it beneath him, though done

at six-and-twenty.  I said to him, 'Your style, Sir, is much

improved since you translated this.'  He answered with a sort of

triumphant smile, 'Sir, I hope it is.'




On Wednesday, April 3, in the morning I found him very busy putting

his books in order, and as they were generally very old ones,

clouds of dust were flying around him.  He had on a pair of large

gloves such as hedgers use.  His present appearance put me in mind

of my uncle, Dr. Boswell's description of him, 'A robust genius,

born to grapple with whole libraries.'



He had been in company with Omai, a native of one of the South Sea

Islands, after he had been some time in this country.  He was

struck with the elegance of his behaviour, and accounted for it

thus: 'Sir, he had passed his time, while in England, only in the

best company; so that all that he had acquired of our manners was

genteel.  As a proof of this, Sir, Lord Mulgrave and he dined one

day at Streatham; they sat with their backs to the light fronting

me, so that I could not see distinctly; and there was so little of

the savage in Omai, that I was afraid to speak to either, lest I

should mistake one for the other.'



We agreed to dine to-day at the Mitre-tavern after the rising of

the House of Lords, where a branch of the litigation concerning the

Douglas Estate, in which I was one of the counsel, was to come on.



I introduced the topick, which is often ignorantly urged, that the

Universities of England are too rich; so that learning does not

flourish in them as it would do, if those who teach had smaller

salaries, and depended on their assiduity for a great part of their

income.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, the very reverse of this is the truth; the

English Universities are not rich enough.  Our fellowships are only

sufficient to support a man during his studies to fit him for the

world, and accordingly in general they are held no longer than till

an opportunity offers of getting away.  Now and then, perhaps,

there is a fellow who grows old in his college; but this is against

his will, unless he be a man very indolent indeed.  A hundred a

year is reckoned a good fellowship, and that is no more than is

necessary to keep a man decently as a scholar.  We do not allow our

fellows to marry, because we consider academical institutions as

preparatory to a settlement in the world.  It is only by being

employed as a tutor, that a fellow can obtain any thing more than a

livelihood.  To be sure a man, who has enough without teaching,

will probably not teach; for we would all be idle if we could.  In

the same manner, a man who is to get nothing by teaching, will not

exert himself.  Gresham College was intended as a place of

instruction for London; able professors were to read lectures

gratis, they contrived to have no scholars; whereas, if they had

been allowed to receive but sixpence a lecture from each scholar,

they would have been emulous to have had many scholars.  Every body

will agree that it should be the interest of those who teach to

have scholars and this is the case in our Universities.  That they

are too rich is certainly not true; for they have nothing good

enough to keep a man of eminent learning with them for his life.

In the foreign Universities a professorship is a high thing.  It is

as much almost as a man can make by his learning; and therefore we

find the most learned men abroad are in the Universities.  It is

not so with us.  Our Universities are impoverished of learning, by

the penury of their provisions.  I wish there were many places of a

thousand a-year at Oxford, to keep first-rate men of learning from

quitting the University.'



I mentioned Mr. Maclaurin's uneasiness on account of a degree of

ridicule carelessly thrown on his deceased father, in Goldsmith's

History of Animated Nature, in which that celebrated mathematician

is represented as being subject to fits of yawning so violent as to

render him incapable of proceeding in his lecture; a story

altogether unfounded, but for the publication of which the law

would give no reparation.  This led us to agitate the question,

whether legal redress could be obtained, even when a man's deceased

relation was calumniated in a publication.



On Friday, April 5, being Good Friday, after having attended the

morning service at St. Clement's Church, I walked home with

Johnson.  We talked of the Roman Catholick religion.  JOHNSON.  'In

the barbarous ages, Sir, priests and people were equally deceived;

but afterwards there were gross corruptions introduced by the

clergy, such as indulgencies to priests to have concubines, and the

worship of images, not, indeed, inculcated, but knowingly

permitted.'  He strongly censured the licensed stews at Rome.

BOSWELL.  'So then, Sir, you would allow of no irregular

intercourse whatever between the sexes?'  JOHNSON.  'To be sure I

would not, Sir.  I would punish it much more than it is done, and

so restrain it.  In all countries there has been fornication, as in

all countries there has been theft; but there may be more or less

of the one, as well as of the other, in proportion to the force of

law.  All men will naturally commit fornication, as all men will

naturally steal.  And, Sir, it is very absurd to argue, as has been

often done, that prostitutes are necessary to prevent the violent

effects of appetite from violating the decent order of life; nay,

should be permitted, in order to preserve the chastity of our wives

and daughters.  Depend upon it, Sir, severe laws, steadily

enforced, would be sufficient against those evils, and would

promote marriage.'



Mr. Thrale called upon him, and appeared to bear the loss of his

son with a manly composure.  There was no affectation about him;

and he talked, as usual, upon indifferent subjects.  He seemed to

me to hesitate as to the intended Italian tour, on which, I

flattered myself, he and Mrs. Thrale and Dr. Johnson were soon to

set out; and, therefore, I pressed it as much as I could.  I

mentioned, that Mr. Beauclerk had said, that Baretti, whom they

were to carry with them, would keep them so long in the little

towns of his own district, that they would not have time to see

Rome.  I mentioned this, to put them on their guard.  JOHNSON.

'Sir, we do not thank Mr. Beauclerk for supposing that we are to be

directed by Baretti.  No, Sir; Mr. Thrale is to go, by my advice,

to Mr. Jackson, (the all-knowing) and get from him a plan for

seeing the most that can be seen in the time that we have to

travel.  We must, to be sure, see Rome, Naples, Florence, and

Venice, and as much more as we can.'  (Speaking with a tone of

animation.)



When I expressed an earnest wish for his remarks on Italy, he said,

'I do not see that I could make a book upon Italy; yet I should be

glad to get two hundred pounds, or five hundred pounds, by such a

work.'  This shewed both that a journal of his Tour upon the

Continent was not wholly out of his contemplation, and that he

uniformly adhered to that strange opinion, which his indolent

disposition made him utter: 'No man but a blockhead ever wrote,

except for money.'  Numerous instances to refute this will occur to

all who are versed in the history of literature.



He gave us one of the many sketches of character which were

treasured in his mind, and which he was wont to produce quite

unexpectedly in a very entertaining manner.  'I lately, (said he,)

received a letter from the East Indies, from a gentleman whom I

formerly knew very well; he had returned from that country with a

handsome fortune, as it was reckoned, before means were found to

acquire those immense sums which have been brought from thence of

late; he was a scholar, and an agreeable man, and lived very

prettily in London, till his wife died.  After her death, he took

to dissipation and gaming, and lost all he had.  One evening he

lost a thousand pounds to a gentleman whose name I am sorry I have

forgotten.  Next morning he sent the gentleman five hundred pounds,

with an apology that it was all he had in the world.  The gentleman

sent the money back to him, declaring he would not accept of it;

and adding, that if Mr. ------ had occasion for five hundred pounds

more, he would lend it to him.  He resolved to go out again to the

East Indies, and make his fortune anew.  He got a considerable

appointment, and I had some intention of accompanying him.  Had I

thought then as I do now, I should have gone: but, at that time, I

had objections to quitting England.'



It was a very remarkable circumstance about Johnson, whom shallow

observers have supposed to have been ignorant of the world, that

very few men had seen greater variety of characters; and none could

observe them better, as was evident from the strong, yet nice

portraits which he often drew.  I have frequently thought that if

he had made out what the French call une catalogue raisonnee of all

the people who had passed under his observation, it would have

afforded a very rich fund of instruction and entertainment.  The

suddenness with which his accounts of some of them started out in

conversation, was not less pleasing than surprizing.  I remember he

once observed to me, 'It is wonderful, Sir, what is to be found in

London.  The most literary conversation that I ever enjoyed, was at

the table of Jack Ellis, a money-scrivener behind the Royal

Exchange, with whom I at one period used to dine generally once a

week.'



Volumes would be required to contain a list of his numerous and

various acquaintance, none of whom he ever forgot; and could

describe and discriminate them all with precision and vivacity.  He

associated with persons the most widely different in manners,

abilities, rank, and accomplishments.  He was at once the companion

of the brilliant Colonel Forrester of the Guards, who wrote The

Polite Philosopher, and of the aukward and uncouth Robert Levet; of

Lord Thurlow, and Mr. Sastres, the Italian master; and has dined

one day with the beautiful, gay, and fascinating Lady Craven, and

the next with good Mrs. Gardiner, the tallow-chandler, on Snow-

hill.



On my expressing my wonder at his discovering so much of the

knowledge peculiar to different professions, he to]d me, 'I learnt

what I know of law, chiefly from Mr. Ballow, a very able man.  I

learnt some, too, from Chambers; but was not so teachable then.

One is not willing to be taught by a young man.'  When I expressed

a wish to know more about Mr. Ballow, Johnson said, 'Sir, I have

seen him but once these twenty years.  The tide of life has driven

us different ways.'  I was sorry at the time to hear this; but

whoever quits the creeks of private connections, and fairly gets

into the great ocean of London, will, by imperceptible degrees,

unavoidably experience such cessations of acquaintance.



'My knowledge of physick, (he added,) I learnt from Dr. James, whom

I helped in writing the proposals for his Dictionary and also a

little in the Dictionary itself.  I also learnt from Dr. Lawrence,

but was then grown more stubborn.'



A curious incident happened to-day, while Mr. Thrale and I sat with

him.  Francis announced that a large packet was brought to him from

the post-office, said to have come from Lisbon, and it was charged

SEVEN POUNDS TEN SHILLINGS.  He would not receive it, supposing it

to be some trick, nor did he even look at it.  But upon enquiry

afterwards he found that it was a real packet for him, from that

very friend in the East Indies of whom he had been speaking; and

the ship which carried it having come to Portugal, this packet,

with others, had been put into the post-office at Lisbon.



I mentioned a new gaming-club, of which Mr. Beauclerk had given me

an account, where the members played to a desperate extent.

JOHNSON.  'Depend upon it, Sir, this is mere talk.  WHO is ruined

by gaming?  You will not find six instances in an age.  There is a

strange rout made about deep play: whereas you have many more

people ruined by adventurous trade, and yet we do not hear such an

outcry against it.'  THRALE.  'There may be few people absolutely

ruined by deep play; but very many are much hurt in their

circumstances by it.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir, and so are very many by

other kinds of expence.'  I had heard him talk once before in the

same manner; and at Oxford he said, 'he wished he had learnt to

play at cards.'  The truth, however, is, that he loved to display

his ingenuity in argument; and therefore would sometimes in

conversation maintain opinions which he was sensible were wrong,

but in supporting which, his reasoning and wit would be most

conspicuous.  He would begin thus: 'Why, Sir, as to the good or

evil of card-playing--'  'Now, (said Garrick,) he is thinking which

side he shall take.'  He appeared to have a pleasure in

contradiction, especially when any opinion whatever was delivered

with an air of confidence; so that there was hardly any topick, if

not one of the great truths of Religion and Morality, that he might

not have been incited to argue, either for or against.  Lord

Elibank had the highest admiration of his powers.  He once observed

to me, 'Whatever opinion Johnson maintains, I will not say that he

convinces me; but he never fails to shew me, that he has good

reasons for it.'  I have heard Johnson pay his Lordship this high

compliment: 'I never was in Lord Elibank's company without learning

something.'



We sat together till it was too late for the afternoon service.

Thrale said he had come with intention to go to church with us.  We

went at seven to evening prayers at St. Clement's church, after

having drank coffee; an indulgence, which I understood Johnson

yielded to on this occasion, in compliment to Thrale.



On Sunday, April 7, Easter-day, after having been at St. Paul's

Cathedral, I came to Dr. Johnson, according to my usual custom.  It

seemed to me, that there was always something peculiarly mild and

placid in his manner upon this holy festival, the commemoration of

the most joyful event in the history of our world, the resurrection

of our LORD and SAVIOUR, who, having triumphed over death and the

grave, proclaimed immortality to mankind.



I repeated to him an argument of a lady of my acquaintance, who

maintained, that her husband's having been guilty of numberless

infidelities, released her from conjugal obligations, because they

were reciprocal.  JOHNSON.  'This is miserable stuff, Sir.  To the

contract of marriage, besides the man and wife, there is a third

party--Society; and if it be considered as a vow--GOD: and,

therefore, it cannot be dissolved by their consent alone.  Laws are

not made for particular cases, but for men in general.  A woman may

be unhappy with her husband; but she cannot be freed from him

without the approbation of the civil and ecclesiastical power.  A

man may be unhappy, because he is not so rich as another; but he is

not to seize upon another's property with his own hand.'  BOSWELL.

'But, Sir, this lady does not want that the contract should be

dissolved; she only argues that she may indulge herself in

gallantries with equal freedom as her husband does, provided she

takes care not to introduce a spurious issue into his family.  You

know, Sir, what Macrobius has told us of Julia.'  JOHNSON.  'This

lady of yours, Sir, I think, is very fit for a brothel.'



Mr. Macbean, authour of the Dictionary of ancient Geography, came

in.  He mentioned that he had been forty years absent from

Scotland.  'Ah, Boswell! (said Johnson, smiling,) what would you

give to be forty years from Scotland?'  I said, 'I should not like

to be so long absent from the seat of my ancestors.'  This

gentleman, Mrs. Williams, and Mr. Levet, dined with us.



Mrs. Williams was very peevish; and I wondered at Johnson's

patience with her now, as I had often done on similar occasions.

The truth is, that his humane consideration of the forlorn and

indigent state in which this lady was left by her father, induced

him to treat her with the utmost tenderness, and even to be

desirous of procuring her amusement, so as sometimes to incommode

many of his friends, by carrying her with him to their houses,

where, from her manner of eating, in consequence of her blindness,

she could not but offend the delicacy of persons of nice

sensations.



After coffee, we went to afternoon service in St. Clement's church.

Observing some beggars in the street as we walked along, I said to

him I supposed there was no civilized country in the world, where

the misery of want in the lowest classes of the people was

prevented.  JOHNSON.  'I believe, Sir, there is not; but it is

better that some should be unhappy, than that none should be happy,

which would be the case in a general state of equality.'



When the service was ended, I went home with him, and we sat

quietly by ourselves.



Upon the question whether a man who had been guilty of vicious

actions would do well to force himself into solitude and sadness;

JOHNSON.  'No, Sir, unless it prevent him from being vicious again.

With some people, gloomy penitence is only madness turned upside

down.  A man may be gloomy, till, in order to be relieved from

gloom, he has recourse again to criminal indulgencies.'



On Wednesday, April 10, I dined with him at Mr. Thrale's, where

were Mr. Murphy and some other company.  Before dinner, Dr. Johnson

and I passed some time by ourselves.  I was sorry to find it was

now resolved that the proposed journey to Italy should not take

place this year.  He said, 'I am disappointed, to be sure; but it

is not a great disappointment.'  I wondered to see him bear, with a

philosophical calmness, what would have made most people peevish

and fretful.  I perceived, however, that he had so warmly cherished

the hope of enjoying classical scenes, that he could not easily

part with the scheme; for he said: 'I shall probably contrive to

get to Italy some other way.  But I won't mention it to Mr. and

Mrs. Thrale, as it might vex them.'  I suggested, that going to

Italy might have done Mr. and Mrs. Thrale good.  JOHNSON.  'I

rather believe not, Sir.  While grief is fresh, every attempt to

divert only irritates.  You must wait till grief be DIGESTED, and

then amusement will dissipate the remains of it.'



I said, I disliked the custom which some people had of bringing

their children into company, because it in a manner forced us to

pay foolish compliments to please their parents.  JOHNSON.  'You

are right, Sir.  We may be excused for not caring much about other

people's children, for there are many who care very little about

their own children.  It may be observed, that men, who from being

engaged in business, or from their course of life in whatever way,

seldom see their children, do not care much about them.  I myself

should not have had much fondness for a child of my own.'  MRS.

THRALE.  'Nay, Sir, how can you talk so?'  JOHNSON.  'At least, I

never wished to have a child.'



He talked of Lord Lyttelton's extreme anxiety as an authour;

observing, that 'he was thirty years in preparing his History, and

that he employed a man to point it for him; as if (laughing)

another man could point his sense better than himself.'  Mr. Murphy

said, he understood his history was kept back several years for

fear of Smollet.  JOHNSON.  'This seems strange to Murphy and me,

who never felt that anxiety, but sent what we wrote to the press,

and let it take its chance.'  MRS. THRALE.  'The time has been,

Sir, when you felt it.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, really, Madam, I do not

recollect a time when that was the case.'



On Thursday, April 11, I dined with him at General Paoli's, in

whose house I now resided, and where I had ever afterwards the

honour of being entertained with the kindest attention as his

constant guest, while I was in London, till I had a house of my own

there.  I mentioned my having that morning introduced to Mr.

Garrick, Count Neni, a Flemish Nobleman of great rank and fortune,

to whom Garrick talked of Abel Drugger as A SMALL PART; and

related, with pleasant vanity, that a Frenchman who had seen him in

one of his low characters, exclaimed, 'Comment! je ne le crois pas.

Ce n'est pas Monsieur Garrick, ce Grand Homme!'  Garrick added,

with an appearance of grave recollection, 'If I were to begin life

again, I think I should not play those low characters.'  Upon which

I observed, 'Sir, you would be in the wrong; for your great

excellence is your variety of playing, your representing so well,

characters so very different.'  JOHNSON.  'Garrick, Sir, was not in

earnest in what he said; for, to be sure, his peculiar excellence

is his variety; and, perhaps, there is not any one character which

has not been as well acted by somebody else, as he could do it.'

BOSWELL.  'Why then, Sir, did he talk so?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, to

make you answer as you did.'  BOSWELL.  'I don't know, Sir; he

seemed to dip deep into his mind for the reflection.'  JOHNSON.

'He had not far to dip, Sir: he said the same thing, probably,

twenty times before.'



Of a nobleman raised at a very early period to high office, he

said, 'His parts, Sir, are pretty well for a Lord; but would not be

distinguished in a man who had nothing else but his parts.'



A journey to Italy was still in his thoughts.  He said, 'A man who

has not been in Italy, is always conscious of an inferiority, from

his not having seen what it is expected a man should see.  The

grand object of travelling is to see the shores of the

Mediterranean.  On those shores were the four great Empires of the

world; the Assyrian, the Persian, the Grecian, and the Roman.--All

our religion, almost all our law, almost all our arts, almost all

that sets us above savages, has come to us from the shores of the

Mediterranean.'  The General observed, that 'THE MEDITERRANEAN

would be a noble subject for a poem.'



We talked of translation.  I said, I could not define it, nor could

I think of a similitude to illustrate it; but that it appeared to

me the translation of poetry could be only imitation.  JOHNSON.

'You may translate books of science exactly.  You may also

translate history, in so far as it is not embellished with oratory,

which is poetical.  Poetry, indeed, cannot be translated; and,

therefore, it is the poets that preserve languages; for we would

not be at the trouble to learn a language, if we could have all

that is written in it just as well in a translation.  But as the

beauties of poetry cannot be preserved in any language except that

in which it was originally written, we learn the language.'



'Goldsmith (he said,) referred every thing to vanity; his virtues,

and his vices too, were from that motive.  He was not a social man.

He never exchanged mind with you.'



We spent the evening at Mr. Hoole's.  Mr. Mickle, the excellent

translator of The Lusiad, was there.  I have preserved little of

the conversation of this evening.  Dr. Johnson said, 'Thomson had a

true poetical genius, the power of viewing every thing in a

poetical light.  His fault is such a cloud of words sometimes, that

the sense can hardly peep through.  Shiels, who compiled Cibber's

Lives of the Poets, was one day sitting with me.  I took down

Thomson, and read aloud a large portion of him, and then asked,--Is

not this fine?  Shiels having expressed the highest admiration.

Well, Sir, (said I,) I have omitted every other line.'



I related a dispute between Goldsmith and Mr. Robert Dodsley, one

day when they and I were dining at Tom Davies's, in 1762.

Goldsmith asserted, that there was no poetry produced in this age.

Dodsley appealed to his own Collection, and maintained, that though

you could not find a palace like Dryden's Ode on St.  Cecilia's

Day, you had villages composed of very pretty houses; and he

mentioned particularly The Spleen.  JOHNSON.  'I think Dodsley gave

up the question.  He and Goldsmith said the same thing; only he

said it in a softer manner than Goldsmith did; for he acknowledged

that there was no poetry, nothing that towered above the common

mark.  You may find wit and humour in verse, and yet no poetry.

Hudibras has a profusion of these; yet it is not to be reckoned a

poem.  The Spleen, in Dodsley's Collection, on which you say he

chiefly rested, is not poetry.'  BOSWELL.  'Does not Gray's poetry,

Sir, tower above the common mark?'  JOHNSON.  Yes, Sir; but we must

attend to the difference between what men in general cannot do if

they would, and what every man may do if he would.  Sixteen-string

Jack* towered above the common mark.'  BOSWELL.  'Then, Sir, what

is poetry?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, it is much easier to say what it

is not.  We all KNOW what light is; but it is not easy to TELL what

it is.'





* A noted highwayman, who after having been several times tried and

acquitted, was at last hanged.  He was remarkable for foppery in

his dress, and particularly for wearing a bunch of sixteen strings

at the knees of his breeches.--BOSWELL.





On Friday, April 12, I dined with him at our friend Tom Davies's.

He reminded Dr. Johnson of Mr. Murphy's having paid him the highest

compliment that ever was paid to a layman, by asking his pardon for

repeating some oaths in the course of telling a story.



Johnson and I supt this evening at the Crown and Anchor tavern, in

company with Sir Joshua Reynolds, Mr. Langton, Mr. Nairne, now one

of the Scotch Judges, with the title of Lord Dunsinan, and my very

worthy friend, Sir William Forbes, of Pitsligo.



We discussed the question whether drinking improved conversation

and benevolence.  Sir Joshua maintained it did.  JOHNSON.  'No,

Sir: before dinner men meet with great inequality of understanding;

and those who are conscious of their inferiority, have the modesty

not to talk.  When they have drunk wine, every man feels himself

happy, and loses that modesty, and grows impudent and vociferous:

but he is not improved; he is only not sensible of his defects.'

Sir Joshua said the Doctor was talking of the effects of excess in

wine; but that a moderate glass enlivened the mind, by giving a

proper circulation to the blood.  'I am (said he,) in very good

spirits, when I get up in the morning.  By dinner-time I am

exhausted; wine puts me in the same state as when I got up; and I

am sure that moderate drinking makes people talk better.'  JOHNSON.

'No, Sir; wine gives not light, gay, ideal hilarity; but

tumultuous, noisy, clamorous merriment.  I have heard none of those

drunken,--nay, drunken is a coarse word,--none of those VINOUS

flights.'  SIR JOSHUA.  'Because you have sat by, quite sober, and

felt an envy of the happiness of those who were drinking.'

JOHNSON.  'Perhaps, contempt.--And, Sir, it is not necessary to be

drunk one's self, to relish the wit of drunkenness.  Do we not

judge of the drunken wit, of the dialogue between Iago and Cassio,

the most excellent in its kind, when we are quite sober?  Wit is

wit, by whatever means it is produced; and, if good, will appear so

at all times.  I admit that the spirits are raised by drinking, as

by the common participation of any pleasure: cock-fighting, or

bear-baiting, will raise the spirits of a company, as drinking

does, though surely they will not improve conversation.  I also

admit, that there are some sluggish men who are improved by

drinking; as there are fruits which are not good till they are

rotten.  There are such men, but they are medlars.  I indeed allow

that there have been a very few men of talents who were improved by

drinking; but I maintain that I am right as to the effects of

drinking in general: and let it be considered, that there is no

position, however false in its universality, which is not true of

some particular man.'  Sir William Forbes said, 'Might not a man

warmed with wine be like a bottle of beer, which is made brisker by

being set before the fire?'--'Nay, (said Johnson, laughing,) I

cannot answer that: that is too much for me.'



I observed, that wine did some people harm, by inflaming,

confusing, and irritating their minds; but that the experience of

mankind had declared in favour of moderate drinking.  JOHNSON.

'Sir, I do not say it is wrong to produce self complacency by

drinking; I only deny that it improves the mind.  When I drank

wine, I scorned to drink it when in company.  I have drunk many a

bottle by myself; in the first place, because I had need of it to

raise my spirits; in the second place, because I would have nobody

to witness its effects upon me.'



He told us, 'almost all his Ramblers were written just as they were

wanted for the press; that he sent a certain portion of the copy of

an essay, and wrote the remainder, while the former part of it was

printing.  When it was wanted, and he had fairly sat down to it, he

was sure it would be done.'



He said, that for general improvement, a man should read whatever

his immediate inclination prompts him to; though, to be sure, if a

man has a science to learn, he must regularly and resolutely

advance.  He added, 'what we read with inclination makes a much

stronger impression.  If we read without inclination, half the mind

is employed in fixing the attention; so there is but one half to be

employed on what we read.'  He told us, he read Fielding's Amelia

through without stopping.  He said, 'if a man begins to read in the

middle of a book, and feels an inclination to go on, let him not

quit it, to go to the beginning.  He may perhaps not feel again the

inclination.'



Soon after this day, he went to Bath with Mr. and Mrs. Thrale.  I

had never seen that beautiful city, and wished to take the

opportunity of visiting it, while Johnson was there.



On the 26th of April, I went to Bath; and on my arrival at the

Pelican inn, found lying for me an obliging invitation from Mr. and

Mrs. Thrale, by whom I was agreeably entertained almost constantly

during my stay.  They were gone to the rooms; but there was a kind

note from Dr. Johnson, that he should sit at home all the evening.

I went to him directly, and before Mr. and Mrs. Thrale returned, we

had by ourselves some hours of tea-drinking and talk.



I shall group together such of his sayings as I preserved during

the few days that I was at Bath.



It having been mentioned, I know not with what truth, that a

certain female political writer, whose doctrines he disliked, had

of late become very fond of dress, sat hours together at her

toilet, and even put on rouge:--JohnsoN.  'She is better employed

at her toilet, than using her pen.  It is better she should be

reddening her own cheeks, than blackening other people's

characters.'



He would not allow me to praise a lady then at Bath; observing,

'She does not gain upon me, Sir; I think her empty-headed.'  He

was, indeed, a stern critick upon characters and manners.  Even

Mrs. Thrale did not escape his friendly animadversion at times.

When he and I were one day endeavouring to ascertain, article by

article, how one of our friends could possibly spend as much money

in his family as he told us he did, she interrupted us by a lively

extravagant sally, on the expence of clothing his children,

describing it in a very ludicrous and fanciful manner.  Johnson

looked a little angry, and said, 'Nay, Madam, when you are

declaiming, declaim; and when you are calculating, calculate.'  At

another time, when she said, perhaps affectedly, 'I don't like to

fly.'  JOHNSON.  'With YOUR wings, Madam, you MUST fly: but have a

care, there are CLIPPERS abroad.'



On Monday, April 29, he and I made an excursion to Bristol, where I

was entertained with seeing him enquire upon the spot, into the

authenticity of 'Rowley's Poetry,' as I had seen him enquire upon

the spot into the authenticity of 'Ossian's Poetry.'  George

Catcot, the pewterer, who was as zealous for Rowley, as Dr. Hugh

Blair was for Ossian, (I trust my Reverend friend will excuse the

comparison,) attended us at our inn, and with a triumphant air of

lively simplicity called out, 'I'll make Dr. Johnson a convert.'

Dr. Johnson, at his desire, read aloud some of Chatterton's


fabricated verses, while Catcot stood at the back of his chair, ,

moving himself like a pendulum, and beating time with his feet, and

now and then looking into Dr. Johnson's face, wondering that he was

not yet convinced.  We called on Mr. Barret, the surgeon, and saw

some of the ORIGINALS as they were called, which were executed very

artificially; but from a careful inspection of them, and a

consideration of the circumstances with which they were attended,

we were quite satisfied of the imposture, which, indeed, has been

clearly demonstrated from internal evidence, by several able

criticks.



Honest Catcot seemed to pay no attention whatever to any

objections, but insisted, as an end of all controversy, that we

should go with him to the tower of the church of St. Mary,

Redcliff, and VIEW WITH OUR OWN EYES the ancient chest in which the

manuscripts were found.  To this, Dr. Johnson good-naturedly

agreed; and though troubled with a shortness of breathing, laboured

up a long flight of steps, till we came to the place where the

wonderous chest stood.  'THERE, (said Cateot, with a bouncing

confident credulity,) THERE is the very chest itself.'  After this

OCULAR DEMONSTRATION, there was no more to be said.  He brought to

my recollection a Scotch Highlander, a man of learning too, and who

had seen the world, attesting, and at the same time giving his

reasons for the authenticity of Fingal:--'I have heard all that

poem when I was young.'--'Have you, Sir?  Pray what have you

heard?'--'I have heard Ossian, Oscar, and EVERY ONE OF THEM.'



Johnson said of Chatterton, 'This is the most extraordinary young

man that has encountered my knowledge.  It is wonderful how the

whelp has written such things.'



We were by no means pleased with our inn at Bristol.  'Let us see

now, (said I,) how we should describe it.'  Johnson was ready with

his raillery.  'Describe it, Sir?--Why, it was so bad that Boswell

wished to be in Scotland!'



After Dr. Johnson's return to London, I was several times with him

at his house, where I occasionally slept, in the room that had been

assigned to me.  I dined with him at Dr. Taylor's, at General

Oglethorpe's, and at General Paoli's.  To avoid a tedious

minuteness, I shall group together what I have preserved of his

conversation during this period also, without specifying each scene

where it passed, except one, which will be found so remarkable as

certainly to deserve a very particular relation.



'Garrick (he observed,) does not play the part of Archer in The

Beaux Stratagem well.  The gentleman should break out through the

footman, which is not the case as he does it.'



'That man is never happy for the present is so true, that all his

relief from unhappiness is only forgetting himself for a little

while.  Life is a progress from want to want, not from enjoyment to

enjoyment.'



'Lord Chesterfield's Letters to his Son, I think, might be made a

very pretty book.  Take out the immorality, and it should be put

into the hands of every young gentleman.  An elegant manner and

easiness of behaviour are acquired gradually and imperceptibly.  No

man can say "I'll be genteel."  There are ten genteel women for one

genteel man, because they are more restrained.  A man without some

degree of restraint is insufferable; but we are all less restrained

than women.  Were a woman sitting in company to put out her legs

before her as most men do, we should be tempted to kick them in.'



No man was a more attentive and nice observer of behaviour in those

in whose company he happened to be, than Johnson; or, however

strange it may seem to many, had a higher estimation of its

refinements.  Lord Eliot informs me, that one day when Johnson and

he were at dinner at a gentleman's house in London, upon Lord

Chesterfield's Letters being mentioned, Johnson surprized the

company by this sentence: 'Every man of any education would rather

be called a rascal, than accused of deficiency in THE GRACES.'  Mr.

Gibbon, who was present, turned to a lady who knew Johnson well,

and lived much with him, and in his quaint manner, tapping his box,

addressed her thus: 'Don't you think, Madam, (looking towards

Johnson,) that among ALL your acquaintance, you could find ONE

exception?'  The lady smiled, and seemed to acquiesce.



The uncommon vivacity of General Oglethorpe's mind, and variety of

knowledge, having sometimes made his conversation seem too

desultory, Johnson observed, 'Oglethorpe, Sir, never COMPLETES what

he has to say.'



He on the same account made a similar remark on Patrick Lord

Elibank: 'Sir, there is nothing CONCLUSIVE in his talk.'



When I complained of having dined at a splendid table without

hearing one sentence of conversation worthy of being remembered, he

said, 'Sir, there seldom is any such conversation.'  BOSWELL.  'Why

then meet at table?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, to eat and drink together,

and to promote kindness; and, Sir, this is better done when there

is no solid conversation; for when there is, people differ in

opinion, and get into bad humour, or some of the company who are

not capable of such conversation, are left out, and feel themselves

uneasy.  It was for this reason, Sir Robert Walpole said, he always

talked bawdy at his table, because in that all could join.'



Being irritated by hearing a gentleman* ask Mr. Levett a variety of

questions concerning him, when he was sitting by, he broke out,

'Sir, you have but two topicks, yourself and me.  I am sick of

both.'  'A man, (said he,) should not talk of himself, nor much of

any particular person.  He should take care not to be made a

proverb; and, therefore, should avoid having any one topick of

which people can say, "We shall hear him upon it."  There was a Dr.

Oldfield, who was always talking of the Duke of Marlborough.  He

came into a coffee-house one day, and told that his Grace had

spoken in the House of Lords for half an hour.  "Did he indeed

speak for half an hour?" (said Belehier, the surgeon,)--"Yes."--

"And what did he say of Dr. Oldfield?"--"Nothing"--"Why then, Sir,

he was very ungrateful; for Dr. Oldfield could not have spoken for

a quarter of an hour, without saying something of him."'





* Most likely Boswell himself.--HILL.





I am now to record a very curious incident in Dr. Johnson's Life,

which fell under my own observation; of which pars magna fui, and

which I am persuaded will, with the liberal-minded, be much to his

credit.



My desire of being acquainted with celebrated men of every

description, had made me, much about the same time, obtain an

introduction to Dr. Samuel Johnson and to John Wilkes, Esq.  Two

men more different could perhaps not be selected out of all

mankind.  They had even attacked one another with some asperity in

their writings; yet I lived in habits of friendship with both.  I

could fully relish the excellence of each; for I have ever

delighted in that intellectual chymistry, which can separate good

qualities from evil in the same person.



Sir John Pringle, 'mine own friend and my Father's friend,' between

whom and Dr. Johnson I in vain wished to establish an acquaintance,

as I respected and lived in intimacy with both of them, observed to

me once, very ingeniously, 'It is not in friendship as in

mathematicks, where two things, each equal to a third, are equal

between themselves.  You agree with Johnson as a middle quality,

and you agree with me as a middle quality; but Johnson and I should

not agree.'  Sir John was not sufficiently flexible; so I desisted;

knowing, indeed, that the repulsion was equally strong on the part

of Johnson; who, I know not from what cause, unless his being a

Scotchman, had formed a very erroneous opinion of Sir John.  But I

conceived an irresistible wish, if possible, to bring Dr. Johnson

and Mr. Wilkes together.  How to manage it, was a nice and

difficult matter.



My worthy booksellers and friends, Messieurs Dilly in the Poultry,

at whose hospitable and well-covered table I have seen a greater

number of literary men, than at any other, except that of Sir

Joshua Reynolds, had invited me to meet Mr. Wilkes and some more

gentlemen on Wednesday, May 15.  'Pray (said I,) let us have Dr.

Johnson.'--'What with Mr. Wilkes? not for the world, (said Mr.

Edward Dilly:) Dr. Johnson would never forgive me.'--'Come, (said

I,) if you'll let me negotiate for you, I will be answerable that

all shall go well.'  DILLY.  'Nay, if you will take it upon you, I

am sure I shall be very happy to see them both here.'



Notwithstanding the high veneration which I entertained for Dr.

Johnson, I was sensible that he was sometimes a little actuated by

the spirit of contradiction, and by means of that I hoped I should

gain my point.  I was persuaded that if I had come upon him with a

direct proposal, 'Sir, will you dine in company with Jack Wilkes?'

he would have flown into a passion, and would probably have

answered, 'Dine with Jack Wilkes, Sir!  I'd as soon dine with Jack

Ketch.'  I therefore, while we were sitting quietly by ourselves at

his house in an evening, took occasion to open my plan thus:--'Mr.

Dilly, Sir, sends his respectful compliments to you, and would be

happy if you would do him the honour to dine with him on Wednesday

next along with me, as I must soon go to Scotland.'  JOHNSON.

'Sir, I am obliged to Mr. Dilly.  I will wait upon him--'  BOSWELL.

'Provided, Sir, I suppose, that the company which he is to have, is

agreeable to you.'  JOHNSON.  'What do you mean, Sir?  What do you

take me for?  Do you think I am so ignorant of the world as to

imagine that I am to prescribe to a gentleman what company he is to

have at his table?'  BOSWELL.  'I beg your pardon, Sir, for wishing

to prevent you from meeting people whom you might not like.

Perhaps he may have some of what he calls his patriotick friends

with him.'  Johnson.  'Well, Sir, and what then?  What care I for

his PATRIOTICK FRIENDS?  Poh!'  BOSWELL.  'I should not be

surprized to find Jack Wilkes there.'  Johnson.  'And if Jack

Wilkes SHOULD be there, what is that to ME, Sir?  My dear friend,

let us have no more of this.  I am sorry to be angry with you; but

really it is treating me strangely to talk to me as if I could not

meet any company whatever, occasionally.'  BOSWELL.  'Pray forgive

me, Sir: I meant well.  But you shall meet whoever comes, for me.'

Thus I secured him, and told Dilly that he would find him very well

pleased to be one of his guests on the day appointed.



Upon the much-expected Wednesday, I called on him about half an

hour before dinner, as I often did when we were to dine out

together, to see that he was ready in time, and to accompany him.

I found him buffeting his books, as upon a former occasion, covered

with dust, and making no preparation for going abroad.  'How is

this, Sir? (said I.)  Don't you recollect that you are to dine at

Mr. Dilly's?'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, I did not think of going to Dilly's:

it went out of my head.  I have ordered dinner at home with Mrs.

Williams.'  BOSWELL.  'But, my dear Sir, you know you were engaged

to Mr. Dilly, and I told him so.  He will expect you, and will be

much disappointed if you don't come.'  JOHNSON.  'You must talk to

Mrs. Williams about this.'



Here was a sad dilemma.  I feared that what I was so confident I

had secured would yet be frustrated.  He had accustomed himself to

shew Mrs. Williams such a degree of humane attention, as frequently

imposed some restraint upon him; and I knew that if she should be

obstinate, he would not stir.  I hastened down stairs to the blind

lady's room, and told her I was in great uneasiness, for Dr.

Johnson had engaged to me to dine this day at Mr. Dilly's, but that

he had told me he had forgotten his engagement, and had ordered

dinner at home.  'Yes, Sir, (said she, pretty peevishly,) Dr.

Johnson is to dine at home.'--'Madam, (said I,) his respect for you

is such, that I know he will not leave you unless you absolutely

desire it.  But as you have so much of his company, I hope you will

be good enough to forego it for a day; as Mr. Dilly is a very

worthy man, has frequently had agreeable parties at his house for

Dr. Johnson, and will be vexed if the Doctor neglects him to-day.

And then, Madam, be pleased to consider my situation; I carried the

message, and I assured Mr. Dilly that Dr. Johnson was to come, and

no doubt he has made a dinner, and invited a company, and boasted

of the honour he expected to have.  I shall be quite disgraced if

the Doctor is not there.'  She gradually softened to my

solicitations, which were certainly as earnest as most entreaties

to ladies upon any occasion, and was graciously pleased to empower

me to tell Dr. Johnson, 'That all things considered, she thought he

should certainly go.'  I flew back to him, still in dust, and

careless of what should be the event, 'indifferent in his choice to

go or stay;' but as soon as I had announced to him Mrs. Williams'

consent, he roared, 'Frank, a clean shirt,' and was very soon

drest.  When I had him fairly seated in a hackney-coach with me, I

exulted as much as a fortune-hunter who has got an heiress into a

post-chaise with him to set out for Gretna-Green.



When we entered Mr. Dilly's drawing room, he found himself in the

midst of a company he did not know.  I kept myself snug and silent,

watching how he would conduct himself.  I observed him whispering

to Mr. Dilly, 'Who is that gentleman, Sir?'--'Mr. Arthur Lee.'--

JOHNSON.  'Too, too, too,' (under his breath,) which was one of his

habitual mutterings.  Mr. Arthur Lee could not but be very

obnoxious to Johnson, for he was not only a PATRIOT but an

AMERICAN.  He was afterwards minister from the United States at the

court of Madrid.  'And who is the gentleman in lace?'--'Mr. Wilkes,

Sir.'  This information confounded him still more; he had some

difficulty to restrain himself, and taking up a book, sat down upon

a window-seat and read, or at least kept his eye upon it intently

for some time, till he composed himself.  His feelings, I dare say,

were aukward enough.  But he no doubt recollected his having rated

me for supposing that he could be at all disconcerted by any

company, and he, therefore, resolutely set himself to behave quite

as an easy man of the world, who could adapt himself at once to the

disposition and manners of those whom he might chance to meet.



The cheering sound of 'Dinner is upon the table,' dissolved his

reverie, and we ALL sat down without any symptom of ill humour.

There were present, beside Mr. Wilkes, and Mr. Arthur Lee, who was

an old companion of mine when he studied physick at Edinburgh, Mr.

(now Sir John) Miller, Dr. Lettsom, and Mr. Slater the druggist.

Mr. Wilkes placed himself next to Dr. Johnson, and behaved to him

with so much attention and politeness, that he gained upon him

insensibly.  No man eat more heartily than Johnson, or loved better

what was nice and delicate.  Mr. Wilkes was very assiduous in

helping him to some fine veal.  'Pray give me leave, Sir:--It is

better here--A little of the brown--Some fat, Sir--A little of the

stuffing--Some gravy--Let me have the pleasure of giving you some

butter--Allow me to recommend a squeeze of this orange;--or the

lemon, perhaps, may have more zest.'--'Sir, Sir, I am obliged to

you, Sir,' cried Johnson, bowing, and turning his head to him with

a look for some time of 'surly virtue,' but, in a short while, of

complacency.



Foote being mentioned, Johnson said, 'He is not a good mimick.'

One of the company added, 'A merry Andrew, a buffoon.'  JOHNSON.

'But he has wit too, and is not deficient in ideas, or in fertility

and variety of imagery, and not empty of reading; he has knowledge

enough to fill up his part.  One species of wit he has in an

eminent degree, that of escape.  You drive him into a corner with

both hands; but he's gone, Sir, when you think you have got him--

like an animal that jumps over your head.  Then he has a great

range for wit; he never lets truth stand between him and a jest,

and he is sometimes mighty coarse.  Garrick is under many

restraints from which Foote is free.'  WILKES.  'Garrick's wit is

more like Lord Chesterfield's.'  JOHNSON.  'The first time I was in

company with Foote was at Fitzherbert's.  Having no good opinion of

the fellow, I was resolved not to be pleased; and it is very

difficult to please a man against his will.  I went on eating my

dinner pretty sullenly, affecting not to mind him.  But the dog was

so very comical, that I was obliged to lay down my knife and fork,

throw myself back upon my chair, and fairly laugh it out.  No, Sir,

he was irresistible.  He upon one occasion experienced, in an

extraordinary degree, the efficacy of his powers of entertaining.

Amongst the many and various modes which he tried of getting money,

he became a partner with a small-beer brewer, and he was to have a

share of the profits for procuring customers amongst his numerous

acquaintance.  Fitzherbert was one who took his small-beer; but it

was so bad that the servants resolved not to drink it.  They were

at some loss how to notify their resolution, being afraid of

offending their master, who they knew liked Foote much as a

companion.  At last they fixed upon a little black boy, who was

rather a favourite, to be their deputy, and deliver their

remonstrance; and having invested him with the whole authority of

the kitchen, he was to inform Mr. Fitzherbert, in all their names,

upon a certain day, that they would drink Foote's small-beer no

longer.  On that day Foote happened to dine at Fitzherbert's, and

this boy served at table; he was so delighted with Foote's stories,

and merriment, and grimace, that when he went down stairs, he told

them, "This is the finest man I have ever seen.  I will not deliver

your message.  I will drink his small-beer."'



Somebody observed that Garrick could not have done this.  WILKES.

'Garrick would have made the small-beer still smaller.  He is now

leaving the stage; but he will play Scrub all his life.'  I knew

that Johnson would let nobody attack Garrick but himself, as

Garrick once said to me, and I had heard him praise his liberality;

so to bring out his commendation of his celebrated pupil, I said,

loudly, 'I have heard Garrick is liberal.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir, I

know that Garrick has given away more money than any man in England

that I am acquainted with, and that not from ostentatious views.

Garrick was very poor when he began life; so when he came to have

money, he probably was very unskilful in giving away, and saved

when he should not.  But Garrick began to be liberal as soon as he

could; and I am of opinion, the reputation of avarice which he has

had, has been very lucky for him, and prevented his having many

enemies.  You despise a man for avarice, but do not hate him.

Garrick might have been much better attacked for living with more

splendour than is suitable to a player: if they had had the wit to

have assaulted him in that quarter, they might have galled him

more.  But they have kept clamouring about his avarice, which has

rescued him from much obloquy and envy.'

