





THE LIFE OF SAMUEL JOHNSON, LL.D.


by James Boswell






Had Dr. Johnson written his own life, in conformity with the

opinion which he has given, that every man's life may be best

written by himself; had he employed in the preservation of his own

history, that clearness of narration and elegance of language in

which he has embalmed so many eminent persons, the world would

probably have had the most perfect example of biography that was

ever exhibited.  But although he at different times, in a desultory

manner, committed to writing many particulars of the progress of

his mind and fortunes, he never had persevering diligence enough to

form them into a regular composition.  Of these memorials a few

have been preserved; but the greater part was consigned by him to

the flames, a few days before his death.



As I had the honour and happiness of enjoying his friendship for

upwards of twenty years; as I had the scheme of writing his life

constantly in view; as he was well apprised of this circumstance,

and from time to time obligingly satisfied my inquiries, by

communicating to me the incidents of his early years; as I acquired

a facility in recollecting, and was very assiduous in recording,

his conversation, of which the extraordinary vigour and vivacity

constituted one of the first features of his character; and as I

have spared no pains in obtaining materials concerning him, from

every quarter where I could discover that they were to be found,

and have been favoured with the most liberal communications by his

friends; I flatter myself that few biographers have entered upon

such a work as this, with more advantages; independent of literary

abilities, in which I am not vain enough to compare myself with

some great names who have gone before me in this kind of writing.



Instead of melting down my materials into one mass, and constantly

speaking in my own person, by which I might have appeared to have

more merit in the execution of the work, I have resolved to adopt

and enlarge upon the excellent plan of Mr. Mason, in his Memoirs of

Gray.  Wherever narrative is necessary to explain, connect, and

supply, I furnish it to the best of my abilities; but in the

chronological series of Johnson's life, which I trace as distinctly

as I can, year by year, I produce, wherever it is in my power, his

own minutes, letters or conversation, being convinced that this

mode is more lively, and will make my readers better acquainted

with him, than even most of those were who actually knew him, but

could know him only partially; whereas there is here an

accumulation of intelligence from various points, by which his

character is more fully understood and illustrated.



Indeed I cannot conceive a more perfect mode of writing any man's

life, than not only relating all the most important events of it in

their order, but interweaving what he privately wrote, and said,

and thought; by which mankind are enabled as it were to see him

live, and to 'live o'er each scene' with him, as he actually

advanced through the several stages of his life.  Had his other

friends been as diligent and ardent as I was, he might have been

almost entirely preserved.  As it is, I will venture to say that he

will be seen in this work more completely than any man who has ever

yet lived.



And he will be seen as he really was; for I profess to write, not

his panegyrick, which must be all praise, but his Life; which,

great and good as he was, must not be supposed to be entirely

perfect.  To be as he was, is indeed subject of panegyrick enough

to any man in this state of being; but in every picture there

should be shade as well as light, and when I delineate him without

reserve, I do what he himself recommended, both by his precept and

his example.



I am fully aware of the objections which may be made to the

minuteness on some occasions of my detail of Johnson's

conversation, and how happily it is adapted for the petty exercise

of ridicule, by men of superficial understanding and ludicrous

fancy; but I remain firm and confident in my opinion, that minute

particulars are frequently characteristick, and always amusing,

when they relate to a distinguished man.  I am therefore

exceedingly unwilling that any thing, however slight, which my

illustrious friend thought it worth his while to express, with any

degree of point, should perish.



Of one thing I am certain, that considering how highly the small

portion which we have of the table-talk and other anecdotes of our

celebrated writers is valued, and how earnestly it is regretted

that we have not more, I am justified in preserving rather too many

of Johnson's sayings, than too few; especially as from the

diversity of dispositions it cannot be known with certainty

beforehand, whether what may seem trifling to some, and perhaps to

the collector himself, may not be most agreeable to many; and the

greater number that an authour can please in any degree, the more

pleasure does there arise to a benevolent mind.





Samuel Johnson was born at Lichfield, in Staffordshire, on the 18th

of September, N. S., 1709; and his initiation into the Christian

Church was not delayed; for his baptism is recorded, in the

register of St. Mary's parish in that city, to have been performed

on the day of his birth.  His father is there stiled Gentleman, a

circumstance of which an ignorant panegyrist has praised him for

not being proud; when the truth is, that the appellation of

Gentleman, though now lost in the indiscriminate assumption of

Esquire, was commonly taken by those who could not boast of

gentility.  His father was Michael Johnson, a native of Derbyshire,

of obscure extraction, who settled in Lichfield as a bookseller and

stationer.  His mother was Sarah Ford, descended of an ancient race

of substantial yeomanry in Warwickshire.  They were well advanced

in years when they married, and never had more than two children,

both sons; Samuel, their first born, who lived to be the

illustrious character whose various excellence I am to endeavour to

record, and Nathanael, who died in his twenty-fifth year.



Mr. Michael Johnson was a man of a large and robust body, and of a

strong and active mind; yet, as in the most solid rocks veins of

unsound substance are often discovered, there was in him a mixture

of that disease, the nature of which eludes the most minute

enquiry, though the effects are well known to be a weariness of

life, an unconcern about those things which agitate the greater

part of mankind, and a general sensation of gloomy wretchedness.

From him then his son inherited, with some other qualities, 'a vile

melancholy,' which in his too strong expression of any disturbance

of the mind, 'made him mad all his life, at least not sober.'

Michael was, however, forced by the narrowness of his circumstances

to be very diligent in business, not only in his shop, but by

occasionally resorting to several towns in the neighbourhood, some

of which were at a considerable distance from Lichfield.  At that

time booksellers' shops in the provincial towns of England were

very rare, so that there was not one even in Birmingham, in which

town old Mr. Johnson used to open a shop every market-day.  He was

a pretty good Latin scholar, and a citizen so creditable as to be

made one of the magistrates of Lichfield; and, being a man of good

sense, and skill in his trade, he acquired a reasonable share of

wealth, of which however he afterwards lost the greatest part, by

engaging unsuccessfully in a manufacture of parchment.  He was a

zealous high-church man and royalist, and retained his attachment

to the unfortunate house of Stuart, though he reconciled himself,

by casuistical arguments of expediency and necessity, to take the

oaths imposed by the prevailing power.



Johnson's mother was a woman of distinguished understanding.  I

asked his old school-fellow, Mr. Hector, surgeon of Birmingham, if

she was not vain of her son.  He said, 'she had too much good sense

to be vain, but she knew her son's value.'  Her piety was not

inferiour to her understanding; and to her must be ascribed those

early impressions of religion upon the mind of her son, from which

the world afterwards derived so much benefit.  He told me, that he

remembered distinctly having had the first notice of Heaven, 'a

place to which good people went,' and hell, 'a place to which bad

people went,' communicated to him by her, when a little child in

bed with her; and that it might be the better fixed in his memory,

she sent him to repeat it to Thomas Jackson, their man-servant; he

not being in the way, this was not done; but there was no occasion

for any artificial aid for its preservation.



There is a traditional story of the infant Hercules of toryism, so

curiously characteristick, that I shall not withhold it.  It was

communicated to me in a letter from Miss Mary Adye, of Lichfield:



'When Dr. Sacheverel was at Lichfield, Johnson was not quite three

years old.  My grandfather Hammond observed him at the cathedral

perched upon his father's shoulders, listening and gaping at the

much celebrated preacher.  Mr. Hammond asked Mr. Johnson how he

could possibly think of bringing such an infant to church, and in

the midst of so great a crowd.  He answered, because it was

impossible to keep him at home; for, young as he was, he believed

he had caught the publick spirit and zeal for Sacheverel, and would

have staid for ever in the church, satisfied with beholding him.'



Nor can I omit a little instance of that jealous independence of

spirit, and impetuosity of temper, which never forsook him.  The

fact was acknowledged to me by himself, upon the authority of his

mother.  One day, when the servant who used to be sent to school to

conduct him home, had not come in time, he set out by himself,

though he was then so near-sighted, that he was obliged to stoop

down on his hands and knees to take a view of the kennel before he

ventured to step over it.  His school-mistress, afraid that he

might miss his way, or fall into the kennel, or be run over by a

cart, followed him at some distance.  He happened to turn about and

perceive her.  Feeling her careful attention as an insult to his

manliness, he ran back to her in a rage, and beat her, as well as

his strength would permit.



Of the power of his memory, for which he was all his life eminent

to a degree almost incredible, the following early instance was

told me in his presence at Lichfield, in 1776, by his step-

daughter, Mrs. Lucy Porter, as related to her by his mother.  When

he was a child in petticoats, and had learnt to read, Mrs. Johnson

one morning put the common prayer-book into his hands, pointed to

the collect for the day, and said, 'Sam, you must get this by

heart.'  She went up stairs, leaving him to study it: But by the

time she had reached the second floor, she heard him following her.

'What's the matter?' said she.  'I can say it,' he replied; and

repeated it distinctly, though he could not have read it more than

twice.



But there has been another story of his infant precocity generally

circulated, and generally believed, the truth of which I am to

refute upon his own authority.  It is told, that, when a child of

three years old, he chanced to tread upon a duckling, the eleventh

of a brood, and killed it; upon which, it is said, he dictated to

his mother the following epitaph:





   'Here lies good master duck,

      Whom Samuel Johnson trod on;

    If it had liv'd, it had been GOOD LUCK,

      For then we'd had an ODD ONE.'





There is surely internal evidence that this little composition

combines in it, what no child of three years old could produce,

without an extension of its faculties by immediate inspiration; yet

Mrs. Lucy Porter, Dr. Johnson's stepdaughter, positively maintained

to me, in his presence, that there could be no doubt of the truth

of this anecdote, for she had heard it from his mother.  So

difficult is it to obtain an authentick relation of facts, and such

authority may there be for errour; for he assured me, that his

father made the verses, and wished to pass them for his child's.

He added, 'my father was a foolish old man; that is to say, foolish

in talking of his children.'



Young Johnson had the misfortune to be much afflicted with the

scrophula, or king's evil, which disfigured a countenance naturally

well formed, and hurt his visual nerves so much, that he did not

see at all with one of his eyes, though its appearance was little

different from that of the other.  There is amongst his prayers,

one inscribed 'When, my EYE was restored to its use,' which

ascertains a defect that many of his friends knew he had, though I

never perceived it.  I supposed him to be only near-sighted; and

indeed I must observe, that in no other respect could I discern any

defect in his vision; on the contrary, the force of his attention

and perceptive quickness made him see and distinguish all manner of

objects, whether of nature or of art, with a nicety that is rarely

to be found.  When he and I were travelling in the Highlands of

Scotland, and I pointed out to him a mountain which I observed

resembled a cone, he corrected my inaccuracy, by shewing me, that

it was indeed pointed at the top, but that one side of it was

larger than the other.  And the ladies with whom he was acquainted

agree, that no man was more nicely and minutely critical in the

elegance of female dress.  When I found that he saw the romantick

beauties of Islam, in Derbyshire, much better than I did, I told

him that he resembled an able performer upon a bad instrument.  It

has been said, that he contracted this grievous malady from his

nurse.  His mother yielding to the superstitious notion, which, it

is wonderful to think, prevailed so long in this country, as to the

virtue of the regal touch; a notion, which our kings encouraged,

and to which a man of such inquiry and such judgement as Carte

could give credit; carried him to London, where he was actually

touched by Queen Anne.  Mrs. Johnson indeed, as Mr. Hector informed

me, acted by the advice of the celebrated Sir John Floyer, then a

physician in Lichfield.  Johnson used to talk of this very frankly;

and Mrs. Piozzi has preserved his very picturesque description of

the scene, as it remained upon his fancy.  Being asked if he could

remember Queen Anne, 'He had (he said) a confused, but somehow a

sort of solemn recollection of a lady in diamonds, and a long black

hood.'  This touch, however, was without any effect.  I ventured to

say to him, in allusion to the political principles in which he was

educated, and of which he ever retained some odour, that 'his

mother had not carried him far enough; she should have taken him to

ROME.'



He was first taught to read English by Dame Oliver, a widow, who

kept a school for young children in Lichfield.  He told me she

could read the black letter, and asked him to borrow for her, from

his father, a bible in that character.  When he was going to

Oxford, she came to take leave of him, brought him, in the

simplicity of her kindness, a present of gingerbread, and said, he

was the best scholar she ever had.  He delighted in mentioning this

early compliment: adding, with a smile, that 'this was as high a

proof of his merit as he could conceive.'  His next instructor in

English was a master, whom, when he spoke of him to me, he

familiarly called Tom Brown, who, said he, 'published a spelling-

book, and dedicated it to the UNIVERSE; but, I fear, no copy of it

can now be had.'



He began to learn Latin with Mr. Hawkins, usher, or under-master of

Lichfield school, 'a man (said he) very skilful in his little way.'

With him he continued two years, and then rose to be under the care

of Mr. Hunter, the headmaster, who, according to his account, 'was

very severe, and wrong-headedly severe.  He used (said he) to beat

us unmercifully; and he did not distinguish between ignorance and

negligence; for he would beat a boy equally for not knowing a

thing, as for neglecting to know it.  He would ask a boy a

question; and if he did not answer it, he would beat him, without

considering whether he had an opportunity of knowing how to answer

it.  For instance, he would call up a boy and ask him Latin for a

candlestick, which the boy could not expect to be asked.  Now, Sir,

if a boy could answer every question, there would be no need of a

master to teach him.'



It is, however, but justice to the memory of Mr. Hunter to mention,

that though he might err in being too severe, the school of

Lichfield was very respectable in his time.  The late Dr. Taylor,

Prebendary of Westminster, who was educated under him, told me,

that 'he was an excellent master, and that his ushers were most of

them men of eminence; that Holbrook, one of the most ingenious men,

best scholars, and best preachers of his age, was usher during the

greatest part of the time that Johnson was at school.  Then came

Hague, of whom as much might be said, with the addition that he was

an elegant poet.  Hague was succeeded by Green, afterwards Bishop

of Lincoln, whose character in the learned world is well known.'



Indeed Johnson was very sensible how much he owed to Mr. Hunter.

Mr. Langton one day asked him how he had acquired so accurate a

knowledge of Latin, in which, I believe, he was exceeded by no man

of his time; he said, 'My master whipt me very well.  Without that,

Sir, I should have done nothing.'  He told Mr. Langton, that while

Hunter was flogging his boys unmercifully, he used to say, 'And

this I do to save you from the gallows.'  Johnson, upon all

occasions, expressed his approbation of enforcing instruction by

means of the rod.  'I would rather (said he) have the rod to be the

general terrour to all, to make them learn, than tell a child, if

you do thus, or thus, you will be more esteemed than your brothers

or sisters.  The rod produces an effect which terminates in itself.

A child is afraid of being whipped, and gets his task, and there's

an end on't; whereas, by exciting emulation and comparisons of

superiority, you lay the foundation of lasting mischief; you make

brothers and sisters hate each other.'



That superiority over his fellows, which he maintained with so much

dignity in his march through life, was not assumed from vanity and

ostentation, but was the natural and constant effect of those

extraordinary powers of mind, of which he could not but be

conscious by comparison; the intellectual difference, which in

other cases of comparison of characters, is often a matter of

undecided contest, being as clear in his case as the superiority of

stature in some men above others.  Johnson did not strut or stand

on tiptoe; He only did not stoop.  From his earliest years his

superiority was perceived and acknowledged.  He was from the

beginning [Greek text omitted], a king of men.  His school-fellow,

Mr. Hector, has obligingly furnished me with many particulars of his

boyish days: and assured me that he never knew him corrected at

school, but for talking and diverting other boys from their

business.  He seemed to learn by intuition; for though indolence

and procrastination were inherent in his constitution, whenever he

made an exertion he did more than any one else.  His favourites

used to receive very liberal assistance from him; and such was the

submission and deference with which he was treated, such the desire

to obtain his regard, that three of the boys, of whom Mr. Hector

was sometimes one, used to come in the morning as his humble

attendants, and carry him to school.  One in the middle stooped,

while he sat upon his back, and one on each side supported him; and

thus he was borne triumphant.  Such a proof of the early

predominance of intellectual vigour is very remarkable, and does

honour to human nature.  Talking to me once himself of his being

much distinguished at school, he told me, 'they never thought to

raise me by comparing me to any one; they never said, Johnson is as

good a scholar as such a one; but such a one is as good a scholar

as Johnson; and this was said but of one, but of Lowe; and I do not

think he was as good a scholar.'



He discovered a great ambition to excel, which roused him to

counteract his indolence.  He was uncommonly inquisitive; and his

memory was so tenacious, that he never forgot any thing that he

either heard or read.  Mr. Hector remembers having recited to him

eighteen verses, which, after a little pause, he repeated verbatim,

varying only one epithet, by which he improved the line.



He never joined with the other boys in their ordinary diversions:

his only amusement was in winter, when he took a pleasure in being

drawn upon the ice by a boy barefooted, who pulled him along by a

garter fixed round him; no very easy operation, as his size was

remarkably large.  His defective sight, indeed, prevented him from

enjoying the common sports; and he once pleasantly remarked to me,

'how wonderfully well he had contrived to be idle without them.'

Mr. Hector relates, that 'he could not oblige him more than by

sauntering away the hours of vacation in the fields, during which

he was more engaged in talking to himself than to his companion.'



Dr. Percy, the Bishop of Dromore, who was long intimately

acquainted with him, and has preserved a few anecdotes concerning

him, regretting that he was not a more diligent collector, informs

me, that 'when a boy he was immoderately fond of reading romances

of chivalry, and he retained his fondness for them through life; so

that (adds his Lordship) spending part of a summer at my parsonage

house in the country, he chose for his regular reading the old

Spanish romance of Felixmarte of Hircania, in folio, which he read

quite through.  Yet I have heard him attribute to these extravagant

fictions that unsettled turn of mind which prevented his ever

fixing in any profession.'





1725: AETAT. 16.--After having resided for some time at the house

of his uncle, Cornelius Ford, Johnson was, at the age of fifteen,

removed to the school of Stourbridge, in Worcestershire, of which

Mr. Wentworth was then master.  This step was taken by the advice

of his cousin, the Reverend Mr. Ford, a man in whom both talents

and good dispositions were disgraced by licentiousness, but who was

a very able judge of what was right.  At this school he did not

receive so much benefit as was expected.  It has been said, that he

acted in the capacity of an assistant to Mr. Wentworth, in teaching

the younger boys.  'Mr. Wentworth (he told me) was a very able man,

but an idle man, and to me very severe; but I cannot blame him

much.  I was then a big boy; he saw I did not reverence him; and

that he should get no honour by me.  I had brought enough with me,

to carry me through; and all I should get at his school would be

ascribed to my own labour, or to my former master.  Yet he taught

me a great deal.'



He thus discriminated, to Dr. Percy, Bishop of Dromore, his

progress at his two grammar-schools.  'At one, I learnt much in the

school, but little from the master; in the other, I learnt much

from the master, but little in the school.'



He remained at Stourbridge little more than a year, and then

returned home, where he may be said to have loitered, for two

years, in a state very unworthy his uncommon abilities.  He had

already given several proofs of his poetical genius, both in his

school-exercises and in other occasional compositions.




He had no settled plan of life, nor looked forward at all, but

merely lived from day to day.  Yet he read a great deal in a

desultory manner, without any scheme of study, as chance threw

books in his way, and inclination directed him through them.  He

used to mention one curious instance of his casual reading, when

but a boy.  Having imagined that his brother had hid some apples

behind a large folio upon an upper shelf in his father's shop, he

climbed up to search for them.  There were no apples; but the large

folio proved to be Petrarch, whom he had seen mentioned in some

preface, as one of the restorers of learning.  His curiosity having

been thus excited, he sat down with avidity, and read a great part

of the book.  What he read during these two years he told me, was

not works of mere amusement, 'not voyages and travels, but all

literature, Sir, all ancient writers, all manly: though but little

Greek, only some of Anacreon and Hesiod; but in this irregular

manner (added he) I had looked into a great many books, which were

not commonly known at the Universities, where they seldom read any

books but what are put into their hands by their tutors; so that

when I came to Oxford, Dr. Adams, now master of Pembroke College,

told me I was the best qualified for the University that he had

ever known come there.'



That a man in Mr. Michael Johnson's circumstances should think of

sending his son to the expensive University of Oxford, at his own

charge, seems very improbable.  The subject was too delicate to

question Johnson upon.  But I have been assured by Dr. Taylor that

the scheme never would have taken place had not a gentleman of

Shropshire, one of his schoolfellows, spontaneously undertaken to

support him at Oxford, in the character of his companion; though,

in fact, he never received any assistance whatever from that

gentleman.



He, however, went to Oxford, and was entered a Commoner of Pembroke

College on the 31st of October, 1728, being then in his nineteenth

year.



The Reverend Dr. Adams, who afterwards presided over Pembroke

College with universal esteem, told me he was present, and gave me

some account of what passed on the night of Johnson's arrival at

Oxford.  On that evening, his father, who had anxiously accompanied

him, found means to have him introduced to Mr. Jorden, who was to

be his tutor.



His father seemed very full of the merits of his son, and told the

company he was a good scholar, and a poet, and wrote Latin verses.

His figure and manner appeared strange to them; but he behaved

modestly, and sat silent, till upon something which occurred in the

course of conversation, he suddenly struck in and quoted Macrobius;

and thus he gave the first impression of that more extensive

reading in which he had indulged himself.



His tutor, Mr. Jorden, fellow of Pembroke, was not, it seems, a man

of such abilities as we should conceive requisite for the

instructor of Samuel Johnson, who gave me the following account of

him.  'He was a very worthy man, but a heavy man, and I did not

profit much by his instructions.  Indeed, I did not attend him

much.  The first day after I came to college I waited upon him, and

then staid away four.  On the sixth, Mr. Jorden asked me why I had

not attended.  I answered I had been sliding in Christ-Church

meadow.  And this I said with as much nonchalance as I am now

talking to you.  I had no notion that I was wrong or irreverent to

my tutor.  BOSWELL: 'That, Sir, was great fortitude of mind.'

JOHNSON: 'No, Sir; stark insensibility.'



He had a love and respect for Jorden, not for his literature, but

for his worth.  'Whenever (said he) a young man becomes Jorden's

pupil, he becomes his son.'



Having given a specimen of his poetical powers, he was asked by Mr.

Jorden, to translate Pope's Messiah into Latin verse, as a

Christmas exercise.  He performed it with uncommon rapidity, and in

so masterly a manner, that he obtained great applause from it,

which ever after kept him high in the estimation of his College,

and, indeed, of all the University.



It is said, that Mr. Pope expressed himself concerning it in terms

of strong approbation.  Dr. Taylor told me, that it was first

printed for old Mr. Johnson, without the knowledge of his son, who

was very angry when he heard of it.



The 'morbid melancholy,' which was lurking in his constitution, and

to which we may ascribe those particularities, and that aversion to

regular life, which, at a very early period, marked his character,

gathered such strength in his twentieth year, as to afflict him in

a dreadful manner.  While he was at Lichfield, in the college

vacation of the year 1729, he felt himself overwhelmed with an

horrible hypochondria, with perpetual irritation, fretfulness, and

impatience; and with a dejection, gloom, and despair, which made

existence misery.  From this dismal malady he never afterwards was

perfectly relieved; and all his labours, and all his enjoyments,

were but temporary interruptions of its baleful influence.  He told

Mr. Paradise that he was sometimes so languid and inefficient, that

he could not distinguish the hour upon the town-clock.



Johnson, upon the first violent attack of this disorder, strove to

overcome it by forcible exertions.  He frequently walked to

Birmingham and back again, and tried many other expedients, but all

in vain.  His expression concerning it to me was 'I did not then

know how to manage it.'  His distress became so intolerable, that

he applied to Dr. Swinfen, physician in Lichfield, his god-father,

and put into his hands a state of his case, written in Latin.  Dr.

Swinfen was so much struck with the extraordinary acuteness,

research, and eloquence of this paper, that in his zeal for his

godson he shewed it to several people.  His daughter, Mrs.

Desmoulins, who was many years humanely supported in Dr. Johnson's

house in London, told me, that upon his discovering that Dr.

Swinfen had communicated his case, he was so much offended, that he

was never afterwards fully reconciled to him.  He indeed had good

reason to be offended; for though Dr. Swinfen's motive was good, he

inconsiderately betrayed a matter deeply interesting and of great

delicacy, which had been entrusted to him in confidence; and

exposed a complaint of his young friend and patient, which, in the

superficial opinion of the generality of mankind, is attended with

contempt and disgrace.



To Johnson, whose supreme enjoyment was the exercise of his reason,

the disturbance or obscuration of that faculty was the evil most to

be dreaded.  Insanity, therefore, was the object of his most dismal

apprehension; and he fancied himself seized by it, or approaching

to it, at the very time when he was giving proofs of a more than

ordinary soundness and vigour of judgement.  That his own diseased

imagination should have so far deceived him, is strange; but it is

stranger still that some of his friends should have given credit to

his groundless opinion, when they had such undoubted proofs that it

was totally fallacious; though it is by no means surprising that

those who wish to depreciate him, should, since his death, have

laid hold of this circumstance, and insisted upon it with very

unfair aggravation.



The history of his mind as to religion is an important article.  I

have mentioned the early impressions made upon his tender

imagination by his mother, who continued her pious care with

assiduity, but, in his opinion, not with judgement.  'Sunday (said

he) was a heavy day to me when I was a boy.  My mother confined me

on that day, and made me read "The Whole Duty of Man," from a great

part of which I could derive no instruction.  When, for instance, I

had read the chapter on theft, which from my infancy I had been

taught was wrong, I was no more convinced that theft was wrong than

before; so there was no accession of knowledge.  A boy should be

introduced to such books, by having his attention directed to the

arrangement, to the style, and other excellencies of composition;

that the mind being thus engaged by an amusing variety of objects,

may not grow weary.'



He communicated to me the following particulars upon the subject of

his religious progress.  'I fell into an inattention to religion,

or an indifference about it, in my ninth year.  The church at

Lichfield, in which we had a seat, wanted reparation, so I was to

go and find a seat in other churches; and having bad eyes, and

being awkward about this, I used to go and read in the fields on

Sunday.  This habit continued till my fourteenth year; and still I

find a great reluctance to go to church.  I then became a sort of

lax TALKER against religion, for I did not much THINK against it;

and this lasted till I went to Oxford, where it would not be

SUFFERED.  When at Oxford, I took up Law's Serious Call to a Holy

Life, expecting to find it a dull book (as such books generally

are), and perhaps to laugh at it.  But I found Law quite an

overmatch for me; and this was the first occasion of my thinking in

earnest of religion, after I became capable of rational inquiry.'

From this time forward religion was the predominant object of his

thoughts; though, with the just sentiments of a conscientious

Christian, he lamented that his practice of its duties fell far

short of what it ought to be.



The particular course of his reading while at Oxford, and during

the time of vacation which he passed at home, cannot be traced.

Enough has been said of his irregular mode of study.  He told me

that from his earliest years he loved to read poetry, but hardly

ever read any poem to an end; that he read Shakspeare at a period

so early, that the speech of the ghost in Hamlet terrified him when

he was alone; that Horace's Odes were the compositions in which he

took most delight, and it was long before he liked his Epistles and

Satires.  He told me what he read SOLIDLY at Oxford was Greek; not

the Grecian historians, but Homer and Euripides, and now and then a

little Epigram; that the study of which he was the most fond was

Metaphysicks, but he had not read much, even in that way.  I always

thought that he did himself injustice in his account of what he had

read, and that he must have been speaking with reference to the

vast portion of study which is possible, and to which a few

scholars in the whole history of literature have attained; for when

I once asked him whether a person, whose name I have now forgotten,

studied hard, he answered 'No, Sir; I do not believe he studied

hard.  I never knew a man who studied hard.  I conclude, indeed,

from the effects, that some men have studied hard, as Bentley and

Clarke.'  Trying him by that criterion upon which he formed his

judgement of others, we may be absolutely certain, both from his

writings and his conversation, that his reading was very extensive.

Dr. Adam Smith, than whom few were better judges on this subject,

once observed to me that 'Johnson knew more books than any man

alive.'  He had a peculiar facility in seizing at once what was

valuable in any book, without submitting to the labour of perusing

it from beginning to end.  He had, from the irritability of his

constitution, at all times, an impatience and hurry when he either

read or wrote.  A certain apprehension, arising from novelty, made

him write his first exercise at College twice over; but he never

took that trouble with any other composition; and we shall see that

his most excellent works were struck off at a heat, with rapid

exertion.



No man had a more ardent love of literature, or a higher respect

for it than Johnson.  His apartment in Pembroke College was that

upon the second floor, over the gateway.  The enthusiasts of

learning will ever contemplate it with veneration.  One day, while

he was sitting in it quite alone, Dr. Panting, then master of the

College, whom he called 'a fine Jacobite fellow,' overheard him

uttering this soliloquy in his strong, emphatick voice: 'Well, I

have a mind to see what is done in other places of learning.  I'll

go and visit the Universities abroad.  I'll go to France and Italy.

I'll go to Padua.--And I'll mind my business.  For an Athenian

blockhead is the worst of all blockheads.'



Dr. Adams told me that Johnson, while he was at Pembroke College,

'was caressed and loved by all about him, was a gay and frolicksome

fellow, and passed there the happiest part of his life.'  But this

is a striking proof of the fallacy of appearances, and how little

any of us know of the real internal state even of those whom we see

most frequently; for the truth is, that he was then depressed by

poverty, and irritated by disease.  When I mentioned to him this

account as given me by Dr. Adams, he said; 'Ah, Sir, I was mad and

violent.  It was bitterness which they mistook for frolick.  I was

miserably poor, and I thought to fight my way by my literature and

my wit; so I disregarded all power and all authority.'



The Bishop of Dromore observes in a letter to me,



'The pleasure he took in vexing the tutors and fellows has been

often mentioned.  But I have heard him say, what ought to be

recorded to the honour of the present venerable master of that

College, the Reverend William Adams, D.D., who was then very young,

and one of the junior fellows; that the mild but judicious

expostulations of this worthy man, whose virtue awed him, and whose

learning he revered, made him really ashamed of himself, "though I

fear (said he) I was too proud to own it."



'I have heard from some of his cotemporaries that he was generally

seen lounging at the College gate, with a circle of young students

round him, whom he was entertaining with wit, and keeping from

their studies, if not spiriting them up to rebellion against the

College discipline, which in his maturer years he so much

extolled.'



I do not find that he formed any close intimacies with his fellow-

collegians.  But Dr. Adams told me that he contracted a love and

regard for Pembroke College, which he retained to the last.  A

short time before his death he sent to that College a present of

all his works, to be deposited in their library; and he had

thoughts of leaving to it his house at Lichfield; but his friends

who were about him very properly dissuaded him from it, and he

bequeathed it to some poor relations.  He took a pleasure in

boasting of the many eminent men who had been educated at Pembroke.

In this list are found the names of Mr. Hawkins the Poetry

Professor, Mr. Shenstone, Sir William Blackstone, and others; not

forgetting the celebrated popular preacher, Mr. George Whitefield,

of whom, though Dr. Johnson did not think very highly, it must be

acknowledged that his eloquence was powerful, his views pious and

charitable, his assiduity almost incredible; and, that since his

death, the integrity of his character has been fully vindicated.

Being himself a poet, Johnson was peculiarly happy in mentioning

how many of the sons of Pembroke were poets; adding, with a smile

of sportive triumph, 'Sir, we are a nest of singing birds.'



He was not, however, blind to what he thought the defects of his

own College; and I have, from the information of Dr. Taylor, a very

strong instance of that rigid honesty which he ever inflexibly

preserved.  Taylor had obtained his father's consent to be entered

of Pembroke, that he might be with his schoolfellow Johnson, with

whom, though some years older than himself, he was very intimate.

This would have been a great comfort to Johnson.  But he fairly

told Taylor that he could not, in conscience, suffer him to enter

where he knew he could not have an able tutor.  He then made

inquiry all round the University, and having found that Mr.

Bateman, of Christ Church, was the tutor of highest reputation,

Taylor was entered of that College.  Mr. Bateman's lectures were so

excellent, that Johnson used to come and get them at second-hand

from Taylor, till his poverty being so extreme that his shoes were

worn out, and his feet appeared through them, he saw that this

humiliating circumstance was perceived by the Christ Church men,

and he came no more.  He was too proud to accept of money, and

somebody having set a pair of new shoes at his door, he threw them

away with indignation.  How must we feel when we read such an

anecdote of Samuel Johnson!



The res angusta domi prevented him from having the advantage of a

complete academical education.  The friend to whom he had trusted

for support had deceived him.  His debts in College, though not

great, were increasing; and his scanty remittances from Lichfield,

which had all along been made with great difficulty, could be

supplied no longer, his father having fallen into a state of

insolvency.  Compelled, therefore, by irresistible necessity, he

left the College in autumn, 1731, without a degree, having been a

member of it little more than three years.



And now (I had almost said POOR) Samuel Johnson returned to his

native city, destitute, and not knowing how he should gain even a

decent livelihood.  His father's misfortunes in trade rendered him

unable to support his son; and for some time there appeared no

means by which he could maintain himself.  In the December of this

year his father died.



Johnson was so far fortunate, that the respectable character of his

parents, and his own merit, had, from his earliest years, secured

him a kind reception in the best families at Lichfield.  Among

these I can mention Mr. Howard, Dr. Swinfen, Mr. Simpson, Mr.

Levett, Captain Garrick, father of the great ornament of the

British stage; but above all, Mr. Gilbert Walmsley, Register of the

Prerogative Court of Lichfield, whose character, long after his

decease, Dr. Johnson has, in his Life of Edmund Smith, thus drawn

in the glowing colours of gratitude:



'Of Gilbert Walmsley, thus presented to my mind, let me indulge

myself in the remembrance.  I knew him very early; he was one of

the first friends that literature procured me, and I hope that, at

least, my gratitude made me worthy of his notice.



'He was of an advanced age, and I was only not a boy, yet he never

received my notions with contempt.  He was a whig, with all the

virulence and malevolence of his party; yet difference of opinion

did not keep us apart.  I honoured him and he endured me.



'At this man's table I enjoyed many cheerful and instructive hours,

with companions, such as are not often found--with one who has

lengthened, and one who has gladdened life; with Dr. James, whose

skill in physick will be long remembered; and with David Garrick,

whom I hoped to have gratified with this character of our common

friend.  But what are the hopes of man!  I am disappointed by that

stroke of death, which has eclipsed the gaiety of nations, and

impoverished the publick stock of harmless pleasure.'



In these families he passed much time in his early years.  In most

of them, he was in the company of ladies, particularly at Mr.

Walmsley's, whose wife and sisters-in-law, of the name of Aston,

and daughters of a Baronet, were remarkable for good breeding; so

that the notion which has been industriously circulated and

believed, that he never was in good company till late in life, and,

consequently had been confirmed in coarse and ferocious manners by

long habits, is wholly without foundation.  Some of the ladies have

assured me, they recollected him well when a young man, as

distinguished for his complaisance.



In the forlorn state of his circumstances, he accepted of an offer

to be employed as usher in the school of Market-Bosworth, in

Leicestershire, to which it appears, from one of his little

fragments of a diary, that he went on foot, on the 16th of July.



This employment was very irksome to him in every respect, and he

complained grievously of it in his letters to his friend Mr.

Hector, who was now settled as a surgeon at Birmingham.  The

letters are lost; but Mr. Hector recollects his writing 'that the

poet had described the dull sameness of his existence in these

words, "Vitam continet una dies" (one day contains the whole of my

life); that it was unvaried as the note of the cuckow; and that he

did not know whether it was more disagreeable for him to teach, or

the boys to learn, the grammar rules.'  His general aversion to

this painful drudgery was greatly enhanced by a disagreement

between him and Sir Wolstan Dixey, the patron of the school, in

whose house, I have been told, he officiated as a kind of domestick

chaplain, so far, at least, as to say grace at table, but was

treated with what he represented as intolerable harshness; and,

after suffering for a few months such complicated misery, he

relinquished a situation which all his life afterwards he

recollected with the strongest aversion, and even a degree of

horrour.  But it is probable that at this period, whatever

uneasiness he may have endured, he laid the foundation of much

future eminence by application to his studies.



Being now again totally unoccupied, he was invited by Mr. Hector to

pass some time with him at Birmingham, as his guest, at the house

of Mr. Warren, with whom Mr. Hector lodged and boarded.  Mr. Warren

was the first established bookseller in Birmingham, and was very

attentive to Johnson, who he soon found could be of much service to

him in his trade, by his knowledge of literature; and he even

obtained the assistance of his pen in furnishing some numbers of a

periodical Essay printed in the newspaper, of which Warren was

proprietor.  After very diligent inquiry, I have not been able to

recover those early specimens of that particular mode of writing by

which Johnson afterwards so greatly distinguished himself.



He continued to live as Mr. Hector's guest for about six months,

and then hired lodgings in another part of the town, finding

himself as well situated at Birmingham as he supposed he could be

any where, while he had no settled plan of life, and very scanty

means of subsistence.  He made some valuable acquaintances there,

amongst whom were Mr. Porter, a mercer, whose widow he afterwards

married, and Mr. Taylor, who by his ingenuity in mechanical

inventions, and his success in trade, acquired an immense fortune.

But the comfort of being near Mr. Hector, his old school-fellow and

intimate friend, was Johnson's chief inducement to continue here.



His juvenile attachments to the fair sex were very transient; and

it is certain that he formed no criminal connection whatsoever.

Mr. Hector, who lived with him in his younger days in the utmost

intimacy and social freedom, has assured me, that even at that

ardent season his conduct was strictly virtuous in that respect;

and that though he loved to exhilarate himself with wine, he never

knew him intoxicated but once.



In a man whom religious education has secured from licentious

indulgences, the passion of love, when once it has seized him, is

exceedingly strong; being unimpaired by dissipation, and totally

concentrated in one object.  This was experienced by Johnson, when

he became the fervent admirer of Mrs. Porter, after her first

husband's death.  Miss Porter told me, that when he was first

introduced to her mother, his appearance was very forbidding: he

was then lean and lank, so that his immense structure of bones was

hideously striking to the eye, and the scars of the scrophula were

deeply visible.  He also wore his hair, which was straight and

stiff, and separated behind: and he often had, seemingly,

convulsive starts and odd gesticulations, which tended to excite at

once surprize and ridicule.  Mrs. Porter was so much engaged by his

conversation that she overlooked all these external disadvantages,

and said to her daughter, 'this is the most sensible man that I

ever saw in my life.'



Though Mrs. Porter was double the age of Johnson, and her person

and manner, as described to me by the late Mr. Garrick, were by no

means pleasing to others, she must have had a superiority of

understanding and talents, as she certainly inspired him with a

more than ordinary passion; and she having signified her

willingness to accept of his hand, he went to Lichfield to ask his

mother's consent to the marriage, which he could not but be

conscious was a very imprudent scheme, both on account of their

disparity of years, and her want of fortune.  But Mrs. Johnson knew

too well the ardour of her son's temper, and was too tender a

parent to oppose his inclinations.



I know not for what reason the marriage ceremony was not performed

at Birmingham; but a resolution was taken that it should be at

Derby, for which place the bride and bridegroom set out on

horseback, I suppose in very good humour.  But though Mr. Topham

Beauclerk used archly to mention Johnson's having told him, with

much gravity, 'Sir, it was a love marriage on both sides,' I have

had from my illustrious friend the following curious account of

their journey to church upon the nuptial morn:



9th JULY:--'Sir, she had read the old romances, and had got into

her head the fantastical notion that a woman of spirit should use

her lover like a dog.  So, Sir, at first she told me that I rode

too fast, and she could not keep up with me; and, when I rode a

little slower, she passed me, and complained that I lagged behind.

I was not to be made the slave of caprice; and I resolved to begin

as I meant to end.  I therefore pushed on briskly, till I was

fairly out of her sight.  The road lay between two hedges, so I was

sure she could not miss it; and I contrived that she should soon

come up with me.  When she did, I observed her to be in tears.'



This, it must be allowed, was a singular beginning of connubial

felicity; but there is no doubt that Johnson, though he thus shewed

a manly firmness, proved a most affectionate and indulgent husband

to the last moment of Mrs. Johnson's life: and in his Prayers and

Meditations, we find very remarkable evidence that his regard and

fondness for her never ceased, even after her death.



He now set up a private academy, for which purpose he hired a large

house, well situated near his native city.  In the Gentleman's

Magazine for 1736, there is the following advertisement:



'At Edial, near Lichfield, in Staffordshire, young gentlemen are

boarded and taught the Latin and Greek languages, by SAMUEL

JOHNSON.'



But the only pupils that were put under his care were the

celebrated David Garrick and his brother George, and a Mr. Offely,

a young gentleman of good fortune who died early.  The truth is,

that he was not so well qualified for being a teacher of elements,

and a conductor in learning by regular gradations, as men of

inferiour powers of mind.  His own acquisitions had been made by

fits and starts, by violent irruptions into the regions of

knowledge; and it could not be expected that his impatience would

be subdued, and his impetuosity restrained, so as to fit him for a

quiet guide to novices.



Johnson was not more satisfied with his situation as the master of

an academy, than with that of the usher of a school; we need not

wonder, therefore, that he did not keep his academy above a year

and a half.  From Mr. Garrick's account he did not appear to have

been profoundly reverenced by his pupils.  His oddities of manner,

and uncouth gesticulations, could not but be the subject of

merriment to them; and, in particular, the young rogues used to

listen at the door of his bed-chamber, and peep through the key-

hole, that they might turn into ridicule his tumultuous and awkward

fondness for Mrs. Johnson, whom he used to name by the familiar

appellation of Tetty or Tetsey, which, like Betty or Betsey, is

provincially used as a contraction for Elisabeth, her christian

name, but which to us seems ludicrous, when applied to a woman of

her age and appearance.  Mr. Garrick described her to me as very

fat, with a bosom of more than ordinary protuberance, with swelled

cheeks of a florid red, produced by thick painting, and increased

by the liberal use of cordials; flaring and fantastick in her

dress, and affected both in her speech and her general behaviour.

I have seen Garrick exhibit her, by his exquisite talent of

mimickry, so as to excite the heartiest bursts of laughter; but he,

probably, as is the case in all such representations, considerably

aggravated the picture.



Johnson now thought of trying his fortune in London, the great

field of genius and exertion, where talents of every kind have the

fullest scope, and the highest encouragement.  It is a memorable

circumstance that his pupil David Garrick went thither at the same

time,* with intention to complete his education, and follow the

profession of the law, from which he was soon diverted by his

decided preference for the stage.





* Both of them used to talk pleasantly of this their first journey

to London.  Garrick, evidently meaning to embellish a little, said

one day in my hearing, 'we rode and tied.'  And the Bishop of

Killaloe informed me, that at another time, when Johnson and

Garrick were dining together in a pretty large company, Johnson

humorously ascertaining the chronology of something, expressed

himself thus: 'that was the year when I came to London with two-

pence half-penny in my pocket.'  Garrick overhearing him,

exclaimed, 'eh? what do you say? with two-pence half-penny in your

pocket?'--JOHNsON, 'Why yes; when I came with two-pence half-penny

in MY pocket, and thou, Davy, with three half-pence in thine.'--

BOSWELL.





They were recommended to Mr. Colson, an eminent mathematician and

master of an academy, by the following letter from Mr. Walmsley:





'TO THE REVEREND MR. COLSON.



'Lichfield, March 2,1737.



'Dear Sir, I had the favour of yours, and am extremely obliged to

you; but I cannot say I had a greater affection for you upon it

than I had before, being long since so much endeared to you, as

well by an early friendship, as by your many excellent and valuable

qualifications; and, had I a son of my own, it would be my

ambition, instead of sending him to the University, to dispose of

him as this young gentleman is.



'He, and another neighbour of mine, one Mr. Samuel Johnson, set out

this morning for London together.  Davy Garrick is to be with you

early the next week, and Mr. Johnson to try his fate with a

tragedy, and to see to get himself employed in some translation,

either from the Latin or the French.  Johnson is a very good

scholar and poet, and I have great hopes will turn out a fine

tragedy-writer.  If it should any way lie in your way, doubt not

but you would be ready to recommend and assist your countryman.



'G. WALMSLEY.'





How he employed himself upon his first coming to London is not

particularly known.'





* One curious anecdote was communicated by himself to Mr. John

Nichols.  Mr. Wilcox, the bookseller, on being informed by him that

his intention was to get his livelihood as an authour, eyed his

robust frame attentively, and with a significant look, said, 'You

had better buy a porter's knot.'  He however added, 'Wilcox was one

of my best friends.'--BOSWELL.





He had a little money when he came to town, and he knew how he

could live in the cheapest manner.  His first lodgings were at the

house of Mr. Norris, a staymaker, in Exeter-street, adjoining

Catharine-street, in the Strand.  'I dined (said he) very well for

eight-pence, with very good company, at the Pine Apple in New-

street, just by.  Several of them had travelled.  They expected to

meet every day; but did not know one another's names.  It used to

cost the rest a shilling, for they drank wine; but I had a cut of

meat for six-pence, and bread for a penny, and gave the waiter a

penny; so that I was quite well served, nay, better than the rest,

for they gave the waiter nothing.'  He at this time, I believe,

abstained entirely from fermented liquors: a practice to which he

rigidly conformed for many years together, at different periods of

his life.



His Ofellus in the Art of Living in London, I have heard him

relate, was an Irish painter, whom he knew at Birmingham, and who

had practised his own precepts of oeconomy for several years in the

British capital.  He assured Johnson, who, I suppose, was then

meditating to try his fortune in London, but was apprehensive of

the expence, 'that thirty pounds a year was enough to enable a man

to live there without being contemptible.  He allowed ten pounds

for clothes and linen.  He said a man might live in a garret at

eighteen-pence a week; few people would inquire where he lodged;

and if they did, it was easy to say, "Sir, I am to be found at such

a place."  By spending three-pence in a coffeehouse, he might be

for some hours every day in very good company; he might dine for

six-pence, breakfast on bread and milk for a penny, and do without

supper.  On clean-shirt-day he went abroad, and paid visits.'  I

have heard him more than once talk of this frugal friend, whom he

recollected with esteem and kindness, and did not like to have one

smile at the recital.  'This man (said he, gravely) was a very

sensible man, who perfectly understood common affairs: a man of a

great deal of knowledge of the world, fresh from life, not strained

through books.  He amused himself, I remember, by computing how

much more expence was absolutely necessary to live upon the same

scale with that which his friend described, when the value of money

was diminished by the progress of commerce.  It may be estimated

that double the money might now with difficulty be sufficient.'



Amidst this cold obscurity, there was one brilliant circumstance to

cheer him; he was well acquainted with Mr. Henry Hervey, one of the

branches of the noble family of that name, who had been quartered

at Lichfield as an officer of the army, and had at this time a

house in London, where Johnson was frequently entertained, and had

an opportunity of meeting genteel company.  Not very long before

his death, he mentioned this, among other particulars of his life,

which he was kindly communicating to me; and he described this

early friend, 'Harry Hervey,' thus: 'He was a vicious man, but very

kind to me.  If you call a dog HERVEY, I shall love him.'



He told me he had now written only three acts of his Irene, and

that he retired for some time to lodgings at Greenwich, where he

proceeded in it somewhat further, and used to compose, walking in

the Park; but did not stay long enough at that place to finish it.



In the course of the summer he returned to Lichfield, where he had

left Mrs. Johnson, and there he at last finished his tragedy, which

was not executed with his rapidity of composition upon other

occasions, but was slowly and painfully elaborated.  A few days

before his death, while burning a great mass of papers, he picked

out from among them the original unformed sketch of this tragedy,

in his own hand-writing, and gave it to Mr. Langton, by whose

favour a copy of it is now in my possession.



Johnson's residence at Lichfield, on his return to it at this time,

was only for three months; and as he had as yet seen but a small

part of the wonders of the Metropolis, he had little to tell his

townsmen.  He related to me the following minute anecdote of this

period: 'In the last age, when my mother lived in London, there

were two sets of people, those who gave the wall, and those who

took it; the peaceable and the quarrelsome.  When I returned to

Lichfield, after having been in London, my mother asked me, whether

I was one of those who gave the wall, or those who took it.  NOW it

is fixed that every man keeps to the right; or, if one is taking

the wall, another yields it; and it is never a dispute.'



He now removed to London with Mrs. Johnson; but her daughter, who

had lived with them at Edial, was left with her relations in the

country.  His lodgings were for some time in Woodstock-street, near

Hanover-square, and afterwards in Castle-street, near Cavendish-

square.



His tragedy being by this time, as he thought, completely finished

and fit for the stage, he was very desirous that it should be

brought forward.  Mr. Peter Garrick told me, that Johnson and he

went together to the Fountain tavern, and read it over, and that he

afterwards solicited Mr. Fleetwood, the patentee of Drury-lane

theatre, to have it acted at his house; but Mr. Fleetwood would not

accept it, probably because it was not patronized by some man of

high rank; and it was not acted till 1749, when his friend David

Garrick was manager of that theatre.



The Gentleman's Magazine, begun and carried on by Mr. Edward Cave,

under the name of SYLVANUS URBAN, had attracted the notice and

esteem of Johnson, in an eminent degree, before he came to London

as an adventurer in literature.  He told me, that when he first saw

St. John's Gate, the place where that deservedly popular miscellany

was originally printed, he 'beheld it with reverence.'



It appears that he was now enlisted by Mr. Cave as a regular

coadjutor in his magazine, by which he probably obtained a

tolerable livelihood.  At what time, or by what means, he had

acquired a competent knowledge both of French and Italian, I do not

know; but he was so well skilled in them, as to be sufficiently

qualified for a translator.  That part of his labour which

consisted in emendation and improvement of the productions of other

contributors, like that employed in levelling ground, can be

perceived only by those who had an opportunity of comparing the

original with the altered copy.  What we certainly know to have

been done by him in this way, was the Debates in both houses of

Parliament, under the name of 'The Senate of Lilliput,' sometimes

with feigned denominations of the several speakers, sometimes with

denominations formed of the letters of their real names, in the

manner of what is called anagram, so that they might easily be

decyphered.  Parliament then kept the press in a kind of mysterious

awe, which made it necessary to have recourse to such devices.  In

our time it has acquired an unrestrained freedom, so that the

people in all parts of the kingdom have a fair, open, and exact

report of the actual proceedings of their representatives and

legislators, which in our constitution is highly to be valued;

though, unquestionably, there has of late been too much reason to

complain of the petulance with which obscure scribblers have

presumed to treat men of the most respectable character and

situation.



This important article of the Gentlemen's Magazine was, for several

years, executed by Mr. William Guthrie, a man who deserves to be

respectably recorded in the literary annals of this country.  The

debates in Parliament, which were brought home and digested by

Guthrie, whose memory, though surpassed by others who have since

followed him in the same department, was yet very quick and

tenacious, were sent by Cave to Johnson for his revision; and,

after some time, when Guthrie had attained to greater variety of

employment, and the speeches were more and more enriched by the

accession of Johnson's genius, it was resolved that he should do

the whole himself, from the scanty notes furnished by persons

employed to attend in both houses of Parliament.  Sometimes,

however, as he himself told me, he had nothing more communicated to

him than the names of the several speakers, and the part which they

had taken in the debate.*





* Johnson later told Boswell that 'as soon as he found that the

speeches were thought genuine he determined that he would write no

more of them: for "he would not be accessary to the propagation of

falsehood."  And such was the tenderness of his conscience, that a

short time before his death he expressed his regret for his having

been the authour of fictions which had passed for realities.'--Ed.






But what first displayed his transcendent powers, and 'gave the

world assurance of the MAN,' was his London, a Poem, in Imitation

of the Third Satire of Juvenal: which came out in May this year,

and burst forth with a splendour, the rays of which will for ever

encircle his name.  Boileau had imitated the same satire with great

success, applying it to Paris; but an attentive comparison will

satisfy every reader, that he is much excelled by the English

Juvenal.  Oldham had also imitated it, and applied it to London;

all which performances concur to prove, that great cities, in every

age, and in every country, will furnish similar topicks of satire.

Whether Johnson had previously read Oldham's imitation, I do not

know; but it is not a little remarkable, that there is scarcely any

coincidence found between the two performances, though upon the

very same subject.



Johnson's London was published in May, 1738; and it is remarkable,

that it came out on the same morning with Pope's satire, entitled

'1738;' so that England had at once its Juvenal and Horace as

poetical monitors.  The Reverend Dr. Douglas, now Bishop of

Salisbury, to whom I am indebted for some obliging communications,

was then a student at Oxford, and remembers well the effect which

London produced.  Every body was delighted with it; and there being

no name to it, the first buz of the literary circles was 'here is

an unknown poet, greater even than Pope.'  And it is recorded in

the Gentleman's Magazine of that year, that it 'got to the second

edition in the course of a week.'



One of the warmest patrons of this poem on its first appearance was

General Oglethorpe, whose 'strong benevolence of soul,' was

unabated during the course of a very long life; though it is

painful to think, that he had but too much reason to become cold

and callous, and discontented with the world, from the neglect

which he experienced of his publick and private worth, by those in

whose power it was to gratify so gallant a veteran with marks of

distinction.  This extraordinary person was as remarkable for his

learning and taste, as for his other eminent qualities; and no man

was more prompt, active, and generous, in encouraging merit.  I

have heard Johnson gratefully acknowledge, in his presence, the

kind and effectual support which he gave to his London, though

unacquainted with its authour.



Pope, who then filled the poetical throne without a rival, it may

reasonably be presumed, must have been particularly struck by the

sudden appearance of such a poet; and, to his credit, let it be

remembered, that his feelings and conduct on the occasion were

candid and liberal.  He requested Mr. Richardson, son of the

painter, to endeavour to find out who this new authour was.  Mr.

Richardson, after some inquiry, having informed him that he had

discovered only that his name was Johnson, and that he was some

obscure man, Pope said; 'he will soon be deterre.'  We shall

presently see, from a note written by Pope, that he was himself

afterwards more successful in his inquiries than his friend.



While we admire the poetical excellence of this poem, candour

obliges us to allow, that the flame of patriotism and zeal for

popular resistance with which it is fraught, had no just cause.

There was, in truth, no 'oppression;' the 'nation' was NOT

'cheated.'  Sir Robert Walpole was a wise and a benevolent

minister, who thought that the happiness and prosperity of a

commercial country like ours, would be best promoted by peace,

which he accordingly maintained, with credit, during a very long

period.  Johnson himself afterwards honestly acknowledged the merit

of Walpole, whom he called 'a fixed star;' while he characterised

his opponent, Pitt, as 'a meteor.'  But Johnson's juvenile poem was

naturally impregnated with the fire of opposition, and upon every

account was universally admired.



Though thus elevated into fame, and conscious of uncommon powers,

he had not that bustling confidence, or, I may rather say, that

animated ambition, which one might have supposed would have urged

him to endeavour at rising in life.  But such was his inflexible

dignity of character, that he could not stoop to court the great;

without which, hardly any man has made his way to a high station.

He could not expect to produce many such works as his London, and

he felt the hardships of writing for bread; he was, therefore,

willing to resume the office of a schoolmaster, so as to have a

sure, though moderate income for his life; and an offer being made

to him of the mastership of a school, provided he could obtain the

degree of Master of Arts, Dr. Adams was applied to, by a common

friend, to know whether that could be granted him as a favour from

the University of Oxford.  But though he had made such a figure in

the literary world, it was then thought too great a favour to be

asked.



Pope, without any knowledge of him but from his London, recommended

him to Earl Gower, who endeavoured to procure for him a degree from

Dublin.



It was, perhaps, no small disappointment to Johnson that this

respectable application had not the desired effect; yet how much

reason has there been, both for himself and his country, to rejoice

that it did not succeed, as he might probably have wasted in

obscurity those hours in which he afterwards produced his

incomparable works.



About this time he made one other effort to emancipate himself from

the drudgery of authourship.  He applied to Dr. Adams, to consult

Dr. Smalbroke of the Commons, whether a person might be permitted

to practice as an advocate there, without a doctor's degree in

Civil Law.  'I am (said he) a total stranger to these studies; but

whatever is a profession, and maintains numbers, must be within the

reach of common abilities, and some degree of industry.'  Dr. Adams

was much pleased with Johnson's design to employ his talents in

that manner, being confident he would have attained to great

eminence.



As Mr. Pope's note concerning Johnson, alluded to in a former page,

refers both to his London, and his Marmor Norfolciense, I have

deferred inserting it till now.  I am indebted for it to Dr. Percy,

the Bishop of Dromore, who permitted me to copy it from the

original in his possession.  It was presented to his Lordship by

Sir Joshua Reynolds, to whom it was given by the son of Mr.

Richardson the painter, the person to whom it is addressed.  I have

transcribed it with minute exactness, that the peculiar mode of

writing, and imperfect spelling of that celebrated poet, may be

exhibited to the curious in literature.  It justifies Swift's

epithet of 'Paper-sparing Pope,' for it is written on a slip no

larger than a common message-card, and was sent to Mr. Richardson,

along with the Imitation of Juvenal.





'This is imitated by one Johnson who put in for a Publick-school in

Shropshire, but was disappointed.  He has an infirmity of the

convulsive kind, that attacks him sometimes, so as to make him a

sad Spectacle.  Mr. P. from the Merit of this Work which was all

the knowledge he had of him endeavour'd to serve him without his

own application; & wrote to my Ld gore, but he did not succeed.

Mr. Johnson published afterwds another Poem in Latin with Notes the

whole very Humerous call'd the Norfolk Prophecy.  P.'





Johnson had been told of this note; and Sir Joshua Reynolds

informed him of the compliment which it contained, but, from

delicacy, avoided shewing him the paper itself.  When Sir Joshua

observed to Johnson that he seemed very desirous to see Pope's

note, he answered, 'Who would not be proud to have such a man as

Pope so solicitous in inquiring about him?'



The infirmity to which Mr. Pope alludes, appeared to me also, as I

have elsewhere observed, to be of the convulsive kind, and of the

nature of that distemper called St. Vitus's dance; and in this

opinion I am confirmed by the description which Sydenham gives of

that disease.  'This disorder is a kind of convulsion.  It

manifests itself by halting or unsteadiness of one of the legs,

which the patient draws after him like an ideot.  If the hand of

the same side be applied to the breast, or any other part of the

body, he cannot keep it a moment in the same posture, but it will

be drawn into a different one by a convulsion, notwithstanding all

his efforts to the contrary.'  Sir Joshua Reynolds, however, was of

a different opinion, and favoured me with the following paper.



'Those motions or tricks of Dr. Johnson are improperly called

convulsions.  He could sit motionless, when he was told so to do,

as well as any other man; my opinion is that it proceeded from a

habit which he had indulged himself in, of accompanying his

thoughts with certain untoward actions, and those actions always

appeared to me as if they were meant to reprobate some part of his

past conduct.  Whenever he was not engaged in conversation, such

thoughts were sure to rush into his mind; and, for this reason, any

company, any employment whatever, he preferred to being alone.  The

great business of his life (he said) was to escape from himself;

this disposition he considered as the disease of his mind, which

nothing cured but company.



'One instance of his absence and particularity, as it is

characteristick of the man, may be worth relating.  When he and I

took a journey together into the West, we visited the late Mr.

Banks, of Dorsetshire; the conversation turning upon pictures,

which Johnson could not well see, he retired to a corner of the

room, stretching out his right leg as far as he could reach before

him, then bringing up his left leg, and stretching his right still

further on.  The old gentleman observing him, went up to him, and

in a very courteous manner assured him, that though it was not a

new house, the flooring was perfectly safe.  The Doctor started

from his reverie, like a person waked out of his sleep, but spoke

not a word.'



While we are on this subject, my readers may not be displeased with

another anecdote, communicated to me by the same friend, from the

relation of Mr. Hogarth.



Johnson used to be a pretty frequent visitor at the house of Mr.

Richardson, authour of Clarissa, and other novels of extensive

reputation.  Mr. Hogarth came one day to see Richardson, soon after

the execution of Dr. Cameron, for having taken arms for the house

of Stuart in 1745-6; and being a warm partisan of George the

Second, he observed to Richardson, that certainly there must have

been some very unfavourable circumstances lately discovered in this

particular case, which had induced the King to approve of an

execution for rebellion so long after the time when it was

committed, as this had the appearance of putting a man to death in

cold blood, and was very unlike his Majesty's usual clemency.

While he was talking, he perceived a person standing at a window in

the room, shaking his head, and rolling himself about in a strange

ridiculous manner.  He concluded that he was an ideot, whom his

relations had put under the care of Mr. Richardson, as a very good

man.  To his great surprise, however, this figure stalked forwards

to where he and Mr. Richardson were sitting, and all at once took

up the argument, and burst out into an invective against George the

Second, as one, who, upon all occasions was unrelenting and

barbarous; mentioning many instances, particularly, that when an

officer of high rank had been acquitted by a Court Martial, George

the Second had with his own hand, struck his name off the list.  In

short, he displayed such a power of eloquence, that Hogarth looked

at him with astonishment, and actually imagined that this ideot had

been at the moment inspired.  Neither Hogarth nor Johnson were made

known to each other at this interview.



1740: AETAT. 3l.]--In 1740 he wrote for the Gentleman's Magazine

the 'Preface,' 'Life of Sir Francis Drake,' and the first parts of

those of 'Admiral Blake,' and of 'Philip Baretier,' both which he

finished the following year.  He also wrote an 'Essay on Epitaphs,'

and an 'Epitaph on Philips, a Musician,' which was afterwards

published with some other pieces of his, in Mrs. Williams's

Miscellanies.  This Epitaph is so exquisitely beautiful, that I

remember even Lord Kames, strangely prejudiced as he was against

Dr. Johnson, was compelled to allow it very high praise.  It has

been ascribed to Mr. Garrick, from its appearing at first with the

signature G; but I have heard Mr. Garrick declare, that it was

written by Dr. Johnson, and give the following account of the

manner in which it was composed.  Johnson and he were sitting

together; when, amongst other things, Garrick repeated an Epitaph

upon this Philips by a Dr. Wilkes, in these words:





    'Exalted soul! whose harmony could please

     The love-sick virgin, and the gouty ease;

     Could jarring discord, like Amphion, move

     To beauteous order and harmonious love;

     Rest here in peace, till angels bid thee rise,

     And meet thy blessed Saviour in the skies.'





Johnson shook his head at these common-place funereal lines, and

said to Garrick, 'I think, Davy, I can make a better.'  Then,

stirring about his tea for a little while, in a state of

meditation, he almost extempore produced the following verses:





    'Philips, whose touch harmonious could remove

     The pangs of guilty power or hapless love;

     Rest here, distress'd by poverty no more,

     Here find that calm thou gav'st so oft before;

     Sleep, undisturb'd, within this peaceful shrine,

     Till angels wake thee with a note like thine!'





1742: AETAT. 33.]--In 1742 he wrote . . . 'Proposals for Printing

Bibliotheca Harleiana, or a Catalogue of the Library of the Earl of

Oxford.'  He was employed in this business by Mr. Thomas Osborne

the bookseller, who purchased the library for 13,000l., a sum which

Mr. Oldys says, in one of his manuscripts, was not more than the

binding of the books had cost; yet, as Dr. Johnson assured me, the

slowness of the sale was such, that there was not much gained by

it.  It has been confidently related, with many embellishments,

that Johnson one day knocked Osborne down in his shop, with a

folio, and put his foot upon his neck.  The simple truth I had from

Johnson himself.  'Sir, he was impertinent to me, and I beat him.

But it was not in his shop: it was in my own chamber.'



1744: AETAT. 35.]--He produced one work this year, fully sufficient

to maintain the high reputation which he had acquired.  This was

The Life of Richard Savage; a man, of whom it is difficult to speak

impartially, without wondering that he was for some time the

intimate companion of Johnson; for his character was marked by

profligacy, insolence, and ingratitude: yet, as he undoubtedly had

a warm and vigorous, though unregulated mind, had seen life in all

its varieties, and been much in the company of the statesmen and

wits of his time, he could communicate to Johnson an abundant

supply of such materials as his philosophical curiosity most

eagerly desired; and as Savage's misfortunes and misconduct had

reduced him to the lowest state of wretchedness as a writer for

bread, his visits to St. John's Gate naturally brought Johnson and

him together.



It is melancholy to reflect, that Johnson and Savage were sometimes

in such extreme indigence,* that they could not pay for a lodging;

so that they have wandered together whole nights in the streets.

Yet in these almost incredible scenes of distress, we may suppose

that Savage mentioned many of the anecdotes with which Johnson

afterwards enriched the life of his unhappy companion, and those of

other Poets.





* Soon after Savage's Life was published, Mr. Harte dined with

Edward Cave, and occasionally praised it.  Soon after, meeting him,

Cave said, 'You made a man very happy t'other day.'--'How could

that be.' says Harte; 'nobody was there but ourselves.'  Cave

answered, by reminding him that a plate of victuals was sent behind

a screen, which was to Johnson, dressed so shabbily, that he did

not choose to appear; but on hearing the conversation, was highly

delighted with the encomiums on his book--MALONE.





He told Sir Joshua Reynolds, that one night in particular, when

Savage and he walked round St. James's-square for want of a

lodging, they were not at all depressed by their situation; but in

high spirits and brimful of patriotism, traversed the square for

several hours, inveighed against the minister, and 'resolved they

would stand by their country.'



In Johnson's Life of Savage, although it must be allowed that its

moral is the reverse of--'Respicere exemplar vitae morumque

jubebo,' a very useful lesson is inculcated, to guard men of warm

passions from a too free indulgence of them; and the various

incidents are related in so clear and animated a manner, and

illuminated throughout with so much philosophy, that it is one of

the most interesting narratives in the English language.  Sir

Joshua Reynolds told me, that upon his return from Italy he met

with it in Devonshire, knowing nothing of its authour, and began to

read it while he was standing with his arm leaning against a

chimney-piece.  It seized his attention so strongly, that, not

being able to lay down the book till he had finished it, when he

attempted to move, he found his arm totally benumbed.  The rapidity

with which this work was composed, is a wonderful circumstance.

Johnson has been heard to say, 'I wrote forty-eight of the printed

octavo pages of the Life of Savage at a sitting; but then I sat up

all night.'



It is remarkable, that in this biographical disquisition there

appears a very strong symptom of Johnson's prejudice against

players; a prejudice which may be attributed to the following

causes: first, the imperfection of his organs, which were so

defective that he was not susceptible of the fine impressions which

theatrical excellence produces upon the generality of mankind;

secondly, the cold rejection of his tragedy; and, lastly, the

brilliant success of Garrick, who had been his pupil, who had come

to London at the same time with him, not in a much more prosperous

state than himself, and whose talents he undoubtedly rated low,

compared with his own.  His being outstripped by his pupil in the

race of immediate fame, as well as of fortune, probably made him

feel some indignation, as thinking that whatever might be Garrick's

merits in his art, the reward was too great when compared with what

the most successful efforts of literary labour could attain.  At

all periods of his life Johnson used to talk contemptuously of

players; but in this work he speaks of them with peculiar acrimony;

for which, perhaps, there was formerly too much reason from the

licentious and dissolute manners of those engaged in that

profession.  It is but justice to add, that in our own time such a

change has taken place, that there is no longer room for such an

unfavourable distinction.



His schoolfellow and friend, Dr. Taylor, told me a pleasant

anecdote of Johnson's triumphing over his pupil David Garrick.

When that great actor had played some little time at Goodman's

fields, Johnson and Taylor went to see him perform, and afterwards

passed the evening at a tavern with him and old Giffard.  Johnson,

who was ever depreciating stage-players, after censuring some

mistakes in emphasis which Garrick had committed in the course of

that night's acting, said, 'The players, Sir, have got a kind of

rant, with which they run on, without any regard either to accent

or emphasis.'  Both Garrick and Giffard were offended at this

sarcasm, and endeavoured to refute it; upon which Johnson rejoined,

'Well now, I'll give you something to speak, with which you are

little acquainted, and then we shall see how just my observation

is.  That shall be the criterion.  Let me hear you repeat the ninth

Commandment, "Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy

neighbour."'  Both tried at it, said Dr. Taylor, and both mistook

the emphasis, which should be upon not and false witness.  Johnson

put them right, and enjoyed his victory with great glee.



Johnson's partiality for Savage made him entertain no doubt of his

story, however extraordinary and improbable.  It never occurred to

him to question his being the son of the Countess of Macclesfield,

of whose unrelenting barbarity he so loudly complained, and the

particulars of which are related in so strong and affecting a

manner in Johnson's life of him.  Johnson was certainly well

warranted in publishing his narrative, however offensive it might

be to the lady and her relations, because her alledged unnatural

and cruel conduct to her son, and shameful avowal of guilt, were

stated in a Life of Savage now lying before me, which came out so

early as 1727, and no attempt had been made to confute it, or to

punish the authour or printer as a libeller: but for the honour of

human nature, we should be glad to find the shocking tale not true;

and, from a respectable gentleman connected with the lady's family,

I have received such information and remarks, as joined to my own

inquiries, will, I think, render it at least somewhat doubtful,

especially when we consider that it must have originated from the

person himself who went by the name of Richard Savage.



1746: AETAT. 37.]--It is somewhat curious, that his literary career

appears to have been almost totally suspended in the years 1745 and

1746, those years which were marked by a civil war in Great-

Britain, when a rash attempt was made to restore the House of

Stuart to the throne.  That he had a tenderness for that

unfortunate House, is well known; and some may fancifully imagine,

that a sympathetick anxiety impeded the exertion of his

intellectual powers: but I am inclined to think, that he was,

during this time, sketching the outlines of his great philological

work.



1747: AETAT. 38.]--This year his old pupil and friend, David

Garrick, having become joint patentee and manager of Drury-lane

theatre, Johnson honoured his opening of it with a Prologue, which

for just and manly dramatick criticism, on the whole range of the

English stage, as well as for poetical excellence, is unrivalled.

Like the celebrated Epilogue to the Distressed Mother, it was,

during the season, often called for by the audience.



But the year 1747 is distinguished as the epoch, when Johnson's

arduous and important work, his DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE,

was announced to the world, by the publication of its Plan or

Prospectus.



How long this immense undertaking had been the object of his

contemplation, I do not know.  I once asked him by what means he

had attained to that astonishing knowledge of our language, by

which he was enabled to realise a design of such extent, and

accumulated difficulty.  He told me, that 'it was not the effect of

particular study; but that it had grown up in his mind insensibly.'

I have been informed by Mr. James Dodsley, that several years

before this period, when Johnson was one day sitting in his brother

Robert's shop, he heard his brother suggest to him, that a

Dictionary of the English Language would be a work that would be

well received by the publick; that Johnson seemed at first to catch

at the proposition, but, after a pause, said, in his abrupt

decisive manner, 'I believe I shall not undertake it.'  That he,

however, had bestowed much thought upon the subject, before he

published his Plan, is evident from the enlarged, clear, and

accurate views which it exhibits; and we find him mentioning in

that tract, that many of the writers whose testimonies were to be

produced as authorities, were selected by Pope; which proves that

he had been furnished, probably by Mr. Robert Dodsley, with

whatever hints that eminent poet had contributed towards a great

literary project, that had been the subject of important

consideration in a former reign.



The booksellers who contracted with Johnson, single and unaided,

for the execution of a work, which in other countries has not been

effected but by the co-operating exertions of many, were Mr. Robert

Dodsley, Mr. Charles Hitch, Mr. Andrew Millar, the two Messieurs

Longman, and the two Messieurs Knapton.  The price stipulated was

fifteen hundred and seventy-five pounds.



The Plan, was addressed to Philip Dormer, Earl of Chesterfield,

then one of his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State; a

nobleman who was very ambitious of literary distinction, and who,

upon being informed of the design, had expressed himself in terms

very favourable to its success.  There is, perhaps in every thing

of any consequence, a secret history which it would be amusing to

know, could we have it authentically communicated.  Johnson told

me, 'Sir, the way in which the Plan of my Dictionary came to be

inscribed to Lord Chesterfield, was this: I had neglected to write

it by the time appointed.  Dodsley suggested a desire to have it

addressed to Lord Chesterfield.  I laid hold of this as a pretext

for delay, that it might be better done, and let Dodsley have his

desire.  I said to my friend, Dr. Bathurst, "Now if any good comes

of my addressing to Lord Chesterfield, it will be ascribed to deep

policy, when, in fact, it was only a casual excuse for laziness."'



Dr. Adams found him one day busy at his Dictionary, when the

following dialogue ensued.  'ADAMS.  This is a great work, Sir.

How are you to get all the etymologies?  JOHNSON.  Why, Sir, here

is a shelf with Junius, and Skinner, and others; and there is a

Welch gentleman who has published a collection of Welch proverbs,

who will help me with the Welch.  ADAMS.  But, Sir, how can you do

this in three years?  JOHNSON.  Sir, I have no doubt that I can do

it in three years.  ADAMS.  But the French Academy, which consists

of forty members, took forty years to compile their Dictionary.

JOHNSON.  Sir, thus it is.  This is the proportion.  Let me see;

forty times forty is sixteen hundred.  As three to sixteen hundred,

so is the proportion of an Englishman to a Frenchman.'  With so

much ease and pleasantry could he talk of that prodigious labour

which he had undertaken to execute.



For the mechanical part he employed, as he told me, six amanuenses;

and let it be remembered by the natives of North-Britain, to whom

he is supposed to have been so hostile, that five of them were of

that country.  There were two Messieurs Macbean; Mr. Shiels, who we

shall hereafter see partly wrote the Lives of the Poets to which

the name of Cibber is affixed; Mr. Stewart, son of Mr. George

Stewart, bookseller at Edinburgh; and a Mr. Maitland.  The sixth of

these humble assistants was Mr. Peyton, who, I believe, taught

French, and published some elementary tracts.



To all these painful labourers, Johnson shewed a never-ceasing

kindness, so far as they stood in need of it.  The elder Mr.

Macbean had afterwards the honour of being Librarian to Archibald,

Duke of Argyle, for many years, but was left without a shilling.

Johnson wrote for him a Preface to A System of Ancient Geography;

and, by the favour of Lord Thurlow, got him admitted a poor brother

of the Charterhouse.  For Shiels, who died of a consumption, he had

much tenderness; and it has been thought that some choice sentences

in the Lives of the Poets were supplied by him.  Peyton, when

reduced to penury, had frequent aid from the bounty of Johnson, who

at last was at the expense of burying both him and his wife.



While the Dictionary was going forward, Johnson lived part of the

time in Holborn, part in Gough-square, Fleet-street; and he had an

upper room fitted up like a counting-house for the purpose, in

which he gave to the copyists their several tasks.  The words,

partly taken from other dictionaries, and partly supplied by

himself, having been first written down with spaces left between

them, he delivered in writing their etymologies, definitions, and

various significations.  The authorities were copied from the books

themselves, in which he had marked the passages with a black-lead

pencil, the traces of which could easily be effaced.  I have seen

several of them, in which that trouble had not been taken; so that

they were just as when used by the copyists.  It is remarkable,

that he was so attentive in the choice of the passages in which

words were authorised, that one may read page after page of his

Dictionary with improvement and pleasure; and it should not pass

unobserved, that he has quoted no authour whose writings had a

tendency to hurt sound religion and morality.



The necessary expense of preparing a work of such magnitude for the

press, must have been a considerable deduction from the price

stipulated to be paid for the copy-right.  I understand that

nothing was allowed by the booksellers on that account; and I

remember his telling me, that a large portion of it having by

mistake been written upon both sides of the paper, so as to be

inconvenient for the compositor, it cost him twenty pounds to have

it transcribed upon one side only.



He is now to be considered as 'tugging at his oar,' as engaged in a

steady continued course of occupation, sufficient to employ all his

time for some years; and which was the best preventive of that

constitutional melancholy which was ever lurking about him, ready

to trouble his quiet.  But his enlarged and lively mind could not

be satisfied without more diversity of employment, and the pleasure

of animated relaxation.  He therefore not only exerted his talents

in occasional composition very different from Lexicography, but

formed a club in Ivy-lane, Paternoster-row, with a view to enjoy

literary discussion, and amuse his evening hours.  The members

associated with him in this little society were his beloved friend

Dr. Richard Bathurst, Mr. Hawkesworth, afterwards well known by his

writings, Mr. John Hawkins, an attorney, and a few others of

different professions.



1749: AETAT. 40.]--In January, 1749, he published the Vanity of

human Wishes, being the Tenth Satire of Juvenal imitated.  He, I

believe, composed it the preceding year.  Mrs. Johnson, for the

sake of country air, had lodgings at Hampstead, to which he

resorted occasionally, and there the greatest part, if not the

whole, of this Imitation was written.  The fervid rapidity with

which it was produced, is scarcely credible.  I have heard him say,

that he composed seventy lines of it in one day, without putting

one of them upon paper till they were finished.  I remember when I

once regretted to him that he had not given us more of Juvenal's

Satires, he said he probably should give more, for he had them all

in his head; by which I understood that he had the originals and

correspondent allusions floating in his mind, which he could, when

he pleased, embody and render permanent without much labour.  Some

of them, however, he observed were too gross for imitation.



The profits of a single poem, however excellent, appear to have

been very small in the last reign, compared with what a publication

of the same size has since been known to yield.  I have mentioned,

upon Johnson's own authority, that for his London he had only ten

guineas; and now, after his fame was established, he got for his

Vanity of Human Wishes but five guineas more, as is proved by an

authentick document in my possession.



His Vanity of Human Wishes has less of common life, but more of a

philosophick dignity than his London.  More readers, therefore,

will be delighted with the pointed spirit of London, than with the

profound reflection of The Vanity of Human Wishes.  Garrick, for

instance, observed in his sprightly manner, with more vivacity than

regard to just discrimination, as is usual with wits: 'When Johnson

lived much with the Herveys, and saw a good deal of what was

passing in life, he wrote his London, which is lively and easy.

When he became more retired, he gave us his Vanity of Human Wishes,

which is as hard as Greek.  Had he gone on to imitate another

satire, it would have been as hard as Hebrew.'



Garrick being now vested with theatrical power by being manager of

Drury-lane theatre, he kindly and generously made use of it to

bring out Johnson's tragedy, which had been long kept back for want

of encouragement.  But in this benevolent purpose he met with no

small difficulty from the temper of Johnson, which could not brook

that a drama which he had formed with much study, and had been

obliged to keep more than the nine years of Horace, should be

revised and altered at the pleasure of an actor.  Yet Garrick knew

well, that without some alterations it would not be fit for the

stage.  A violent dispute having ensued between them, Garrick

applied to the Reverend Dr. Taylor to interpose.  Johnson was at

first very obstinate.  'Sir, (said he) the fellow wants me to make

Mahomet run mad, that he may have an opportunity of tossing his

hands and kicking his heels.'  He was, however, at last, with

difficulty, prevailed on to comply with Garrick's wishes, so as to

allow of some changes; but still there were not enough.



Dr. Adams was present the first night of the representation of

Irene, and gave me the following account: 'Before the curtain drew

up, there were catcalls whistling, which alarmed Johnson's friends.

The Prologue, which was written by himself in a manly strain,

soothed the audience, and the play went off tolerably, till it came

to the conclusion, when Mrs. Pritchard, the heroine of the piece,

was to be strangled upon the stage, and was to speak two lines with

the bowstring round her neck.  The audience cried out "Murder!

Murder!"  She several times attempted to speak; but in vain.  At

last she was obliged to go off the stage alive.'  This passage was

afterwards struck out, and she was carried off to be put to death

behind the scenes, as the play now has it.  The Epilogue, as

Johnson informed me, was written by Sir William Yonge.  I know not

how his play came to be thus graced by the pen of a person then so

eminent in the political world.



Notwithstanding all the support of such performers as Garrick,

Barry, Mrs. Cibber, Mrs. Pritchard, and every advantage of dress

and decoration, the tragedy of Irene did not please the publick.

Mr. Garrick's zeal carried it through for nine nights, so that the

authour had his three nights' profits; and from a receipt signed by

him, now in the hands of Mr. James Dodsley, it appears that his

friend Mr. Robert Dodsley gave him one hundred pounds for the copy,

with his usual reservation of the right of one edition.



When asked how he felt upon the ill success of his tragedy, he

replied, 'Like the Monument;' meaning that he continued firm and

unmoved as that column.  And let it be remembered, as an admonition

to the genus irritabile of dramatick writers, that this great man,

instead of peevishly complaining of the bad taste of the town,

submitted to its decision without a murmur.  He had, indeed, upon

all occasions, a great deference for the general opinion: 'A man

(said he) who writes a book, thinks himself wiser or wittier than

the rest of mankind; he supposes that he can instruct or amuse

them, and the publick to whom he appeals, must, after all, be the

judges of his pretensions.'



On occasion of his play being brought upon the stage, Johnson had a

fancy that as a dramatick authour his dress should be more gay than

what he ordinarily wore; he therefore appeared behind the scenes,

and even in one of the side boxes, in a scarlet waistcoat, with

rich gold lace, and a gold-laced hat.  He humourously observed to

Mr. Langton, 'that when in that dress he could not treat people

with the same ease as when in his usual plain clothes.'  Dress

indeed, we must allow, has more effect even upon strong minds than

one should suppose, without having had the experience of it.  His

necessary attendance while his play was in rehearsal, and during

its performance, brought him acquainted with many of the performers

of both sexes, which produced a more favourable opinion of their

profession than he had harshly expressed in his Life of Savage.

With some of them he kept up an acquaintance as long as he and they

lived, and was ever ready to shew them acts of kindness.  He for a

considerable time used to frequent the Green Room, and seemed to

take delight in dissipating his gloom, by mixing in the sprightly

chit-chat of the motley circle then to be found there.  Mr. David

Hume related to me from Mr. Garrick, that Johnson at last denied

himself this amusement, from considerations of rigid virtue;

saying, 'I'll come no more behind your scenes, David; for the silk

stockings and white bosoms of your actresses excite my amorous

propensities.'



1750: AETAT. 41.]--In 1750 he came forth in the character for which

he was eminently qualified, a majestick teacher of moral and

religious wisdom.  The vehicle which he chose was that of a

periodical paper, which he knew had been, upon former occasions,

employed with great success.  The Tatler, Spectator, and Guardian,

were the last of the kind published in England, which had stood the

test of a long trial; and such an interval had now elapsed since

their publication, as made him justly think that, to many of his

readers, this form of instruction would, in some degree, have the

advantage of novelty.  A few days before the first of his Essays

came out, there started another competitor for fame in the same

form, under the title of The Tatler Revived, which I believe was

'born but to die.'  Johnson was, I think, not very happy in the

choice of his title, The Rambler, which certainly is not suited to

a series of grave and moral discourses; which the Italians have

literally, but ludicrously translated by Il Vagabondo; and which

has been lately assumed as the denomination of a vehicle of

licentious tales, The Rambler's Magazine.  He gave Sir Joshua

Reynolds the following account of its getting this name: 'What MUST

be done, Sir, WILL be done.  When I was to begin publishing that

paper, I was at a loss how to name it.  I sat down at night upon my

bedside, and resolved that I would not go to sleep till I had fixed

its title.  The Rambler seemed the best that occurred, and I took

it.'



With what devout and conscientious sentiments this paper was

undertaken, is evidenced by the following prayer, which he composed

and offered up on the occasion: 'Almighty GOD, the giver of all

good things, without whose help all labour is ineffectual, and

without whose grace all wisdom is folly; grant, I beseech Thee,

that in this undertaking thy Holy Spirit may not be with-held from

me, but that I may promote thy glory, and the salvation of myself

and others: grant this, O LORD, for the sake of thy son JESUS

CHRIST.  Amen.'



The first paper of The Rambler was published on Tuesday the 20th of

March, 1750; and its authour was enabled to continue it, without

interruption, every Tuesday and Friday, till Saturday the 17th of

March, 1752, on which day it closed.  This is a strong confirmation

of the truth of a remark of his, which I have had occasion to quote

elsewhere, that 'a man may write at any time, if he will set

himself doggedly to it;' for, notwithstanding his constitutional

indolence, his depression of spirits, and his labour in carrying on

his Dictionary, he answered the stated calls of the press twice a

week from the stores of his mind, during all that time.



Posterity will be astonished when they are told, upon the authority

of Johnson himself, that many of these discourses, which we should

suppose had been laboured with all the slow attention of literary

leisure, were written in haste as the moment pressed, without even

being read over by him before they were printed.  It can be

accounted for only in this way; that by reading and meditation, and

a very close inspection of life, he had accumulated a great fund of

miscellaneous knowledge, which, by a peculiar promptitude of mind,

was ever ready at his call, and which he had constantly accustomed

himself to clothe in the most apt and energetick expression.  Sir

Joshua Reynolds once asked him by what means he had attained his

extraordinary accuracy and flow of language.  He told him, that he

had early laid it down as a fixed rule to do his best on every

occasion, and in every company; to impart whatever he knew in the

most forcible language he could put it in; and that by constant

practice, and never suffering any careless expressions to escape

him, or attempting to deliver his thoughts without arranging them

in the clearest manner, it became habitual to him.



As The Rambler was entirely the work of one man, there was, of

course, such a uniformity in its texture, as very much to exclude

the charm of variety; and the grave and often solemn cast of

thinking, which distinguished it from other periodical papers, made

it, for some time, not generally liked.  So slowly did this

excellent work, of which twelve editions have now issued from the

press, gain upon the world at large, that even in the closing

number the authour says, 'I have never been much a favourite of the

publick.'



Johnson told me, with an amiable fondness, a little pleasing

circumstance relative to this work.  Mrs. Johnson, in whose

judgement and taste he had great confidence, said to him, after a

few numbers of The Rambler had come out, 'I thought very well of

you before; but I did not imagine you could have written any thing

equal to this.'  Distant praise, from whatever quarter, is not so

delightful as that of a wife whom a man loves and esteems.  Her

approbation may be said to 'come home to his bosom;' and being so

near, its effect is most sensible and permanent.



Mr. James Elphinston, who has since published various works, and

who was ever esteemed by Johnson as a worthy man, happened to be in

Scotland while The Rambler was coming out in single papers at

London.  With a laudable zeal at once for the improvement of his

countrymen, and the reputation of his friend, he suggested and took

the charge of an edition of those Essays at Edinburgh, which

followed progressively the London publication.



This year he wrote to the same gentleman upon a mournful occasion.





'To MR. JAMES ELPHINSTON.



September 25, 1750.



'DEAR SIR, You have, as I find by every kind of evidence, lost an

excellent mother; and I hope you will not think me incapable of

partaking of your grief.  I have a mother, now eighty-two years of

age, whom, therefore, I must soon lose, unless it please GOD that

she rather should mourn for me.  I read the letters in which you

relate your mother's death to Mrs. Strahan, and think I do myself

honour, when I tell you that I read them with tears; but tears are

neither to YOU nor to ME of any further use, when once the tribute

of nature has been paid.  The business of life summons us away from

useless grief, and calls us to the exercise of those virtues of

which we are lamenting our deprivation.  The greatest benefit which

one friend can confer upon another, is to guard, and excite, and

elevate his virtues.  This your mother will still perform, if you

diligently preserve the memory of her life, and of her death: a

life, so far as I can learn, useful, wise, and innocent; and a

death resigned, peaceful, and holy.  I cannot forbear to mention,

that neither reason nor revelation denies you to hope, that you may

increase her happiness by obeying her precepts; and that she may,

in her present state, look with pleasure upon every act of virtue

to which her instructions or example have contributed.  Whether

this be more than a pleasing dream, or a just opinion of separate

spirits, is, indeed, of no great importance to us, when we consider

ourselves as acting under the eye of GOD: yet, surely, there is

something pleasing in the belief, that our separation from those

whom we love is merely corporeal; and it may be a great incitement

to virtuous friendship, if it can be made probable, that that union

that has received the divine approbation shall continue to

eternity.



'There is one expedient by which you may, in some degree, continue

her presence.  If you write down minutely what you remember of her

from your earliest years, you will read it with great pleasure, and

receive from it many hints of soothing recollection, when time

shall remove her yet farther from you, and your grief shall be

matured to veneration.  To this, however painful for the present, I

cannot but advise you, as to a source of comfort and satisfaction

in the time to come; for all comfort and all satisfaction is

sincerely wished you by, dear Sir, your most obliged, most

obedient, and most humble servant,



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





The Rambler has increased in fame as in age.  Soon after its first

folio edition was concluded, it was published in six duodecimo

volumes; and its authour lived to see ten numerous editions of it

in London, beside those of Ireland and Scotland.



The style of Johnson was, undoubtedly, much formed upon that of the

great writers in the last century, Hooker, Bacon, Sanderson,

Hakewell, and others; those 'GIANTS,' as they were well

characterised by A GREAT PERSONAGE, whose authority, were I to name

him, would stamp a reverence on the opinion.



Johnson assured me, that he had not taken upon him to add more than

four or five words to the English language, of his own formation;

and he was very much offended at the general licence, by no means

'modestly taken' in his time not only to coin new words, but to use

many words in senses quite different from their established

meaning, and those frequently very fantastical.



Sir Thomas Brown, whose life Johnson wrote, was remarkably fond of

Anglo-Latin diction; and to his example we are to ascribe Johnson's

sometimes indulging himself in this kind of phraseology.  Johnson's

comprehension of mind was the mould for his language.  Had his

conceptions been narrower, his expression would have been easier.

His sentences have a dignified march; and, it is certain, that his

example has given a general elevation to the language of his

country, for many of our best writers have approached very near to

him; and, from the influence which he has had upon our composition,

scarcely any thing is written now that is not better expressed than

was usual before he appeared to lead the national taste.



Though The Rambler was not concluded till the year 1752, I shall,

under this year, say all that I have to observe upon it.  Some of

the translations of the mottos by himself are admirably done.  He

acknowledges to have received 'elegant translations' of many of

them from Mr. James Elphinston; and some are very happily

translated by a Mr. F. Lewis, of whom I never heard more, except

that Johnson thus described him to Mr. Malone: 'Sir, he lived in

London, and hung loose upon society.'



His just abhorrence of Milton's political notions was ever strong.

But this did not prevent his warm admiration of Milton's great

poetical merit, to which he has done illustrious justice, beyond

all who have written upon the subject.  And this year he not only

wrote a Prologue, which was spoken by Mr. Garrick before the acting

of Comus at Drury-lane theatre, for the benefit of Milton's grand-

daughter, but took a very zealous interest in the success of the

charity.



1751: AETAT. 42.]--In 1751 we are to consider him as carrying on

both his Dictionary and Rambler.



Though Johnson's circumstances were at this time far from being

easy, his humane and charitable disposition was constantly exerting

itself.  Mrs. Anna Williams, daughter of a very ingenious Welsh

physician, and a woman of more than ordinary talents and

literature, having come to London in hopes of being cured of a

cataract in both her eyes, which afterwards ended in total

blindness, was kindly received as a constant visitor at his house

while Mrs. Johnson lived; and after her death, having come under

his roof in order to have an operation upon her eyes performed with

more comfort to her than in lodgings, she had an apartment from him

during the rest of her life, at all times when he had a house.



1752: AETAT. 43.]--In 1752 he was almost entirely occupied with his

Dictionary.  The last paper of his Rambler was published March 2,

this year; after which, there was a cessation for some time of any

exertion of his talents as an essayist.  But, in the same year, Dr.

Hawkesworth, who was his warm admirer, and a studious imitator of

his style, and then lived in great intimacy with him, began a

periodical paper, entitled The Adventurer, in connection with other

gentlemen, one of whom was Johnson's much-beloved friend, Dr.

Bathurst; and, without doubt, they received many valuable hints

from his conversation, most of his friends having been so assisted

in the course of their works.



That there should be a suspension of his literary labours during a

part of the year 1752, will not seem strange, when it is considered

that soon after closing his Rambler, he suffered a loss which,

there can be no doubt, affected him with the deepest distress.  For

on the 17th of March, O.S., his wife died.



The following very solemn and affecting prayer was found after Dr.

Johnson's decease, by his servant, Mr. Francis Barber, who

delivered it to my worthy friend the Reverend Mr. Strahan, Vicar of

Islington, who at my earnest request has obligingly favoured me

with a copy of it, which he and I compared with the original:





'April 26, 1752, being after 12 at Night of the 25th.



'O Lord! Governour of heaven and earth, in whose hands are embodied

and departed Spirits, if thou hast ordained the Souls of the Dead

to minister to the Living, and appointed my departed Wife to have

care of me, grant that I may enjoy the good effects of her

attention and ministration, whether exercised by appearance,

impulses, dreams or in any other manner agreeable to thy

Government.  Forgive my presumption, enlighten my ignorance, and

however meaner agents are employed, grant me the blessed influences

of thy holy Spirit, through Jesus Christ our Lord.  Amen.'





That his love for his wife was of the most ardent kind, and, during

the long period of fifty years, was unimpaired by the lapse of

time, is evident from various passages in the series of his Prayers

and Meditations, published by the Reverend Mr. Strahan, as well as

from other memorials, two of which I select, as strongly marking

the tenderness and sensibility of his mind.



'March 28, 1753.  I kept this day as the anniversary of my Tetty's

death, with prayer and tears in the morning.  In the evening I

prayed for her conditionally, if it were lawful.'



'April 23, 1753.  I know not whether I do not too much indulge the

vain longings of affection; but I hope they intenerate my heart,

and that when I die like my Tetty, this affection will be

acknowledged in a happy interview, and that in the mean time I am

incited by it to piety.  I will, however, not deviate too much from

common and received methods of devotion.'





Her wedding ring, when she became his wife, was, after her death,

preserved by him, as long as he lived, with an affectionate care,

in a little round wooden box, in the inside of which he pasted a

slip of paper, thus inscribed by him in fair characters, as

follows:





        'Eheu!

     Eliz. Johnson

    Nupta Jul. 9 1736,

     Mortua, eheu!

    Mart. 17 1752.'





After his death, Mr. Francis Barber, his faithful servant and

residuary legatee, offered this memorial of tenderness to Mrs. Lucy

Porter, Mrs. Johnson's daughter; but she having declined to accept

of it, he had it enamelled as a mourning ring for his old master,

and presented it to his wife, Mrs. Barber, who now has it.



I have, indeed, been told by Mrs. Desmoulins, who, before her

marriage, lived for some time with Mrs. Johnson at Hampstead, that

she indulged herself in country air and nice living, at an

unsuitable expense, while her husband was drudging in the smoke of

London, and that she by no means treated him with that complacency

which is the most engaging quality in a wife.  But all this is

perfectly compatible with his fondness for her, especially when it

is remembered that he had a high opinion of her understanding, and

that the impressions which her beauty, real or imaginary, had

originally made upon his fancy, being continued by habit, had not

been effaced, though she herself was doubtless much altered for the

worse.  The dreadful shock of separation took place in the night;

and he immediately dispatched a letter to his friend, the Reverend

Dr. Taylor, which, as Taylor told me, expressed grief in the

strongest manner he had ever read; so that it is much to be

regretted it has not been preserved.  The letter was brought to Dr.

Taylor, at his house in the Cloisters, Westminster, about three in

the morning; and as it signified an earnest desire to see him, he

got up, and went to Johnson as soon as he was dressed, and found

him in tears and in extreme agitation.  After being a little while

together, Johnson requested him to join with him in prayer.  He

then prayed extempore, as did Dr. Taylor; and thus, by means of

that piety which was ever his primary object, his troubled mind

was, in some degree, soothed and composed.



The next day he wrote as follows:





'To THE REVEREND DR. TAYLOR.



'DEAR SIR,--Let me have your company and instruction.  Do not live

away from me.  My distress is great.



'Pray desire Mrs. Taylor to inform me what mourning I should buy

for my mother and Miss Porter, and bring a note in writing with

you.



'Remember me in your prayers, for vain is the help of man.  I am,

dear Sir, &c.



'March 18, 1752.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





That his sufferings upon the death of his wife were severe, beyond

what are commonly endured, I have no doubt, from the information of

many who were then about him, to none of whom I give more credit

than to Mr. Francis Barber, his faithful negro servant, who came

into his family about a fortnight after the dismal event.  These

sufferings were aggravated by the melancholy inherent in his

constitution; and although he probably was not oftener in the wrong

than she was, in the little disagreements which sometimes troubled

his married state, during which, he owned to me, that the gloomy

irritability of his existence was more painful to him than ever, he

might very naturally, after her death, be tenderly disposed to

charge himself with slight omissions and offences, the sense of

which would give him much uneasiness.  Accordingly we find, about a

year after her decease, that he thus addressed the Supreme Being:

'O LORD, who givest the grace of repentance, and hearest the

prayers of the penitent, grant that by true contrition I may obtain

forgiveness of all the sins committed, and of all duties neglected

in my union with the wife whom thou hast taken from me; for the

neglect of joint devotion, patient exhortation, and mild

instruction.'  The kindness of his heart, notwithstanding the

impetuosity of his temper, is well known to his friends; and I

cannot trace the smallest foundation for the following dark and

uncharitable assertion by Sir John Hawkins: 'The apparition of his

departed wife was altogether of the terrifick kind, and hardly

afforded him a hope that she was in a state of happiness.'  That

he, in conformity with the opinion of many of the most able,

learned, and pious Christians in all ages, supposed that there was

a middle state after death, previous to the time at which departed

souls are finally received to eternal felicity, appears, I think,

unquestionably from his devotions: 'And, O LORD, so far as it may

be lawful in me, I commend to thy fatherly goodness the soul of my

departed wife; beseeching thee to grant her whatever is best in her

present state, and finally to receive her to eternal happiness.'

But this state has not been looked upon with horrour, but only as

less gracious.



He deposited the remains of Mrs. Johnson in the church of Bromley,

in Kent, to which he was probably led by the residence of his

friend Hawkesworth at that place.  The funeral sermon which he

composed for her, which was never preached, but having been given

to Dr. Taylor, has been published since his death, is a performance

of uncommon excellence, and full of rational and pious comfort to

such as are depressed by that severe affliction which Johnson felt

when he wrote it.  When it is considered that it was written in

such an agitation of mind, and in the short interval between her

death and burial, it cannot be read without wonder.



From Mr. Francis Barber I have had the following authentick and

artless account of the situation in which he found him recently

after his wife's death:



'He was in great affliction.  Mrs. Williams was then living in his

house, which was in Gough-square.  He was busy with the Dictionary.

Mr. Shiels, and some others of the gentlemen who had formerly

written for him, used to come about him.  He had then little for

himself, but frequently sent money to Mr. Shiels when in distress.

The friends who visited him at that time, were chiefly Dr.

Bathurst, and Mr. Diamond, an apothecary in Cork-street,

Burlington-gardens, with whom he and Mrs. Williams generally dined

every Sunday.  There was a talk of his going to Iceland with him,

which would probably have happened had he lived.  There were also

Mr. Cave, Dr. Hawkesworth, Mr. Ryland, merchant on Tower Hill, Mrs.

Masters, the poetess, who lived with Mr. Cave, Mrs. Carter, and

sometimes Mrs. Macaulay, also Mrs. Gardiner, wife of a tallow-

chandler on Snow-hill, not in the learned way, but a worthy good

woman; Mr. (now Sir Joshua) Reynolds; Mr. Millar, Mr. Dodsley, Mr.

Bouquet, Mr. Payne of Paternoster-row, booksellers; Mr. Strahan,

the printer; the Earl of Orrery, Lord Southwell, Mr. Garrick.'



Many are, no doubt, omitted in this catalogue of his friends, and,

in particular, his humble friend Mr. Robert Levet, an obscure

practiser in physick amongst the lower people, his fees being

sometimes very small sums, sometimes whatever provisions his

patients could afford him; but of such extensive practice in that

way, that Mrs. Williams has told me, his walk was from Hounsditch

to Marybone.  It appears from Johnson's diary that their

acquaintance commenced about the year 1746; and such was Johnson's

predilection for him, and fanciful estimation of his moderate

abilities, that I have heard him say he should not be satisfied,

though attended by all the College of Physicians, unless he had Mr.

Levet with him.  Ever since I was acquainted with Dr. Johnson, and

many years before, as I have been assured by those who knew him

earlier, Mr. Levet had an apartment in his house, or his chambers,

and waited upon him every morning, through the whole course of his

late and tedious breakfast.  He was of a strange grotesque

appearance, stiff and formal in his manner, and seldom said a word

while any company was present.



The circle of his friends, indeed, at this time was extensive and

various, far beyond what has been generally imagined.  To trace his

acquaintance with each particular person, if it could be done,

would be a task, of which the labour would not be repaid by the

advantage.  But exceptions are to be made; one of which must be a

friend so eminent as Sir Joshua Reynolds, who was truly his dulce

decus, and with whom he maintained an uninterrupted intimacy to the

last hour of his life.  When Johnson lived in Castle-street,

Cavendish-square, he used frequently to visit two ladies, who lived

opposite to him, Miss Cotterells, daughters of Admiral Cotterell.

Reynolds used also to visit there, and thus they met.  Mr.

Reynolds, as I have observed above, had, from the first reading of

his Life of Savage, conceived a very high admiration of Johnson's

powers of writing.  His conversation no less delighted him; and he

cultivated his acquaintance with the laudable zeal of one who was

ambitious of general improvement.  Sir Joshua, indeed, was lucky

enough at their very first meeting to make a remark, which was so

much above the common-place style of conversation, that Johnson at

once perceived that Reynolds had the habit of thinking for himself.

The ladies were regretting the death of a friend, to whom they owed

great obligations; upon which Reynolds observed, 'You have,

however, the comfort of being relieved from a burthen of

gratitude.'  They were shocked a little at this alleviating

suggestion, as too selfish; but Johnson defended it in his clear

and forcible manner, and was much pleased with the MIND, the fair

view of human nature, which it exhibited, like some of the

reflections of Rochefaucault.  The consequence was, that he went

home with Reynolds, and supped with him.



Sir Joshua told me a pleasant characteristical anecdote of Johnson

about the time of their first acquaintance.  When they were one

evening together at the Miss Cotterells', the then Duchess of

Argyle and another lady of high rank came in.  Johnson thinking

that the Miss Cotterells were too much engrossed by them, and that

he and his friend were neglected, as low company of whom they were

somewhat ashamed, grew angry; and resolving to shock their supposed

pride, by making their great visitors imagine that his friend and

he were low indeed, he addressed himself in a loud tone to Mr.

Reynolds, saying, 'How much do you think you and I could get in a

week, if we were to WORK AS HARD as we could?'--as if they had been

common mechanicks.



His acquaintance with Bennet Langton, Esq. of Langton, in

Lincolnshire, another much valued friend, commenced soon after the

conclusion of his Rambler; which that gentleman, then a youth, had

read with so much admiration, that he came to London chiefly with

the view of endeavouring to be introduced to its authour.  By a

fortunate chance he happened to take lodgings in a house where Mr.

Levet frequently visited; and having mentioned his wish to his

landlady, she introduced him to Mr. Levet, who readily obtained

Johnson's permission to bring Mr. Langton to him; as, indeed,

Johnson, during the whole course of his life, had no shyness, real

or affected, but was easy of access to all who were properly

recommended, and even wished to see numbers at his levee, as his

morning circle of company might, with strict propriety, be called.

Mr. Langton was exceedingly surprised when the sage first appeared.

He had not received the smallest intimation of his figure, dress,

or manner.  From perusing his writings, he fancied he should see a

decent, well-drest, in short, remarkably decorous philosopher.

Instead of which, down from his bed-chamber, about noon, came, as

newly risen, a huge uncouth figure, with a little dark wig which

scarcely covered his head, and his clothes hanging loose about him.

But his conversation was so rich, so animated, and so forcible, and

his religious and political notions so congenial with those in

which Langton had been educated, that he conceived for him that

veneration and attachment which he ever preserved.  Johnson was not

the less ready to love Mr. Langton, for his being of a very ancient

family; for I have heard him say, with pleasure, 'Langton, Sir, has

a grant of free warren from Henry the Second; and Cardinal Stephen

Langton, in King John's reign, was of this family.'



Mr. Langton afterwards went to pursue his studies at Trinity

College, Oxford, where he formed an acquaintance with his fellow

student, Mr. Topham Beauclerk; who, though their opinions and modes

of life were so different, that it seemed utterly improbable that

they should at all agree, had so ardent a love of literature, so

acute an understanding, such elegance of manners, and so well

discerned the excellent qualities of Mr. Langton, a gentleman

eminent not only for worth and learning, but for an inexhaustible

fund of entertaining conversation, that they became intimate

friends.



Johnson, soon after this acquaintance began, passed a considerable

time at Oxford.  He at first thought it strange that Langton should

associate so much with one who had the character of being loose,

both in his principles and practice; but, by degrees, he himself

was fascinated.  Mr. Beauclerk's being of the St. Alban's family,

and having, in some particulars, a resemblance to Charles the

Second, contributed, in Johnson's imagination, to throw a lustre

upon his other qualities; and, in a short time, the moral, pious

Johnson, and the gay, dissipated Beauclerk, were companions.  'What

a coalition! (said Garrick, when he heard of this;) I shall have my

old friend to bail out of the Round-house.'  But I can bear

testimony that it was a very agreeable association.  Beauclerk was

too polite, and valued learning and wit too much, to offend Johnson

by sallies of infidelity or licentiousness; and Johnson delighted

in the good qualities of Beauclerk, and hoped to correct the evil.

Innumerable were the scenes in which Johnson was amused by these

young men.  Beauclerk could take more liberty with him, than any

body with whom I ever saw him; but, on the other hand, Beauclerk

was not spared by his respectable companion, when reproof was

proper.  Beauclerk had such a propensity to satire, that at one

time Johnson said to him, 'You never open your mouth but with

intention to give pain; and you have often given me pain, not from

the power of what you said, but from seeing your intention.'  At

another time applying to him, with a slight alteration, a line of

Pope, he said,





    'Thy love of folly, and thy scorn of fools--





Every thing thou dost shews the one, and every thing thou say'st

the other.'  At another time he said to him, 'Thy body is all vice,

and thy mind all virtue.'  Beauclerk not seeming to relish the

compliment, Johnson said, 'Nay, Sir, Alexander the Great, marching

in triumph into Babylon, could not have desired to have had more

said to him.'



Johnson was some time with Beauclerk at his house at Windsor, where

he was entertained with experiments in natural philosophy.  One

Sunday, when the weather was very fine, Beauclerk enticed him,

insensibly, to saunter about all the morning.  They went into a

church-yard, in the time of divine service, and Johnson laid

himself down at his ease upon one of the tomb-stones.  'Now, Sir,

(said Beauclerk) you are like Hogarth's Idle Apprentice.'  When

Johnson got his pension, Beauclerk said to him, in the humorous

phrase of Falstaff, 'I hope you'll now purge and live cleanly like

a gentleman.'



One night when Beauclerk and Langton had supped at a tavern in

London, and sat till about three in the morning, it came into their

heads to go and knock up Johnson, and see if they could prevail on

him to join them in a ramble.  They rapped violently at the door of

his chambers in the Temple, till at last he appeared in his shirt,

with his little black wig on the top of his head, instead of a

nightcap, and a poker in his hand, imagining, probably, that some

ruffians were coming to attack him.  When he discovered who they

were, and was told their errand, he smiled, and with great good

humour agreed to their proposal: 'What, is it you, you dogs!  I'll

have a frisk with you.'  He was soon drest, and they sallied forth

together into Covent-Garden, where the greengrocers and fruiterers

were beginning to arrange their hampers, just come in from the

country.  Johnson made some attempts to help them; but the honest

gardeners stared so at his figure and manner, and odd interference,

that he soon saw his services were not relished.  They then

repaired to one of the neighbouring taverns, and made a bowl of

that liquor called Bishop, which Johnson had always liked; while in

joyous contempt of sleep, from which he had been roused, he

repeated the festive lines,





    'Short, O short then be thy reign,

     And give us to the world again!'





They did not stay long, but walked down to the Thames, took a boat,

and rowed to Billingsgate.  Beauclerk and Johnson were so well

pleased with their amusement, that they resolved to persevere in

dissipation for the rest of the day: but Langton deserted them,

being engaged to breakfast with some young Ladies.  Johnson scolded

him for 'leaving his social friends, to go and sit with a set of

wretched UN-IDEA'D girls.'  Garrick being told of this ramble, said

to him smartly, 'I heard of your frolick t'other night.  You'll be

in the Chronicle.'  Upon which Johnson afterwards observed, 'HE

durst not do such a thing.  His WIFE would not LET him!'



1753: AETAT. 44.]--He entered upon this year 1753 with his usual

piety, as appears from the following prayer, which I transcribed

from that part of his diary which he burnt a few days before his

death:



'Jan. 1, 1753, N.S.  which I shall use for the future.



'Almighty God, who hast continued my life to this day, grant that,

by the assistance of thy Holy Spirit, I may improve the time which

thou shalt grant me, to my eternal salvation.  Make me to remember,

to thy glory, thy judgements and thy mercies.  Make me so to

consider the loss of my wife, whom thou hast taken from me, that it

may dispose me, by thy grace, to lead the residue of my life in thy

fear.  Grant this, O LORD, for JESUS CHRIST'S sake.  Amen.'



He now relieved the drudgery of his Dictionary, and the melancholy

of his grief, by taking an active part in the composition of The

Adventurer, in which he began to write April 10.



In one of the books of his diary I find the following entry:



'Apr. 3, 1753.  I began the second vol. of my Dictionary, room

being left in the first for Preface, Grammar, and History, none of

them yet begun.



'O God, who hast hitherto supported me, enable me to proceed in

this labour, and in the whole task of my present state; that when I

shall render up, at the last day, an account of the talent

committed to me, I may receive pardon, for the sake of JESUS

CHRIST.  Amen.'



1754: AETAT. 45.]--The Dictionary, we may believe, afforded Johnson

full occupation this year.  As it approached to its conclusion, he

probably worked with redoubled vigour, as seamen increase their

exertion and alacrity when they have a near prospect of their

haven.



Lord Chesterfield, to whom Johnson had paid the high compliment of

addressing to his Lordship the Plan of his Dictionary, had behaved

to him in such a manner as to excite his contempt and indignation.

The world has been for many years amused with a story confidently

told, and as confidently repeated with additional circumstances,

that a sudden disgust was taken by Johnson upon occasion of his

having been one day kept long in waiting in his Lordship's

antechamber, for which the reason assigned was, that he had company

with him; and that at last, when the door opened, out walked Colley

Cibber; and that Johnson was so violently provoked when he found

for whom he had been so long excluded, that he went away in a

passion, and never would return.  I remember having mentioned this

story to George Lord Lyttelton, who told me, he was very intimate

with Lord Chesterfield; and holding it as a well-known truth,

defended Lord Chesterfield, by saying, that 'Cibber, who had been

introduced familiarly by the back-stairs, had probably not been

there above ten minutes.'  It may seem strange even to entertain a

doubt concerning a story so long and so widely current, and thus

implicitly adopted, if not sanctioned, by the authority which I

have mentioned; but Johnson himself assured me, that there was not

the least foundation for it.  He told me, that there never was any

particular incident which produced a quarrel between Lord

Chesterfield and him; but that his Lordship's continued neglect was

the reason why he resolved to have no connection with him.  When

the Dictionary was upon the eve of publication, Lord Chesterfield,

who, it is said, had flattered himself with expectations that

Johnson would dedicate the work to him, attempted, in a courtly

manner, to sooth, and insinuate himself with the Sage, conscious,

as it should seem, of the cold indifference with which he had

treated its learned authour; and further attempted to conciliate

him, by writing two papers in The World, in recommendation of the

work; and it must be confessed, that they contain some studied

compliments, so finely turned, that if there had been no previous

offence, it is probable that Johnson would have been highly

delighted.*  Praise, in general, was pleasing to him; but by praise

from a man of rank and elegant accomplishments, he was peculiarly

gratified.





* Boswell could not have read the second paper carefully.  It is

silly and indecent and was certain to offend Johnson.--ED.





This courtly device failed of its effect.  Johnson, who thought

that 'all was false and hollow,' despised the honeyed words, and

was even indignant that Lord Chesterfield should, for a moment,

imagine that he could be the dupe of such an artifice.  His

expression to me concerning Lord Chesterfield, upon this occasion,

was, 'Sir, after making great professions, he had, for many years,

taken no notice of me; but when my Dictionary was coming out, he

fell a scribbling in The World about it.  Upon which, I wrote him a

letter expressed in civil terms, but such as might shew him that I

did not mind what he said or wrote, and that I had done with him.'



This is that celebrated letter of which so much has been said, and

about which curiosity has been so long excited, without being

gratified.  I for many years solicited Johnson to favour me with a

copy of it, that so excellent a composition might not be lost to

posterity.  He delayed from time to time to give it me; till at

last in 1781, when we were on a visit at Mr. Dilly's, at Southill

in Bedfordshire, he was pleased to dictate it to me from memory.

He afterwards found among his papers a copy of it, which he had

dictated to Mr. Baretti, with its title and corrections, in his own

handwriting.  This he gave to Mr. Langton; adding that if it were

to come into print, he wished it to be from that copy.  By Mr.

Langton's kindness, I am enabled to enrich my work with a perfect

transcript of what the world has so eagerly desired to see.





'TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE EARL OR CHESTERFIELD



'February 7, 1755.



'MY LORD, I have been lately informed, by the proprietor of The

World, that two papers, in which my Dictionary is recommended to

the publick, were written by your Lordship.  To be so

distinguished, is an honour, which, being very little accustomed to

favours from the great, I know not well how to receive, or in what

terms to acknowledge.



'When, upon some slight encouragement, I first visited your

Lordship, I was overpowered, like the rest of mankind, by the

enchantment of your address; and could not forbear to wish that I

might boast myself Le vainqueur du vainqueur de la terre;--that I

might obtain that regard for which I saw the world contending; but

I found my attendance so little encouraged, that neither pride nor

modesty would suffer me to continue it.  When I had once addressed

your Lordship in publick, I had exhausted all the art of pleasing

which a retired and uncourtly scholar can possess.  I had done all

that I could; and no man is well pleased to have his all neglected,

be it ever so little.



'Seven years, my Lord, have now past, since I waited in your

outward rooms, or was repulsed from your door; during which time I

have been pushing on my work through difficulties, of which it is

useless to complain, and have brought it, at last, to the verge of

publication, without one act of assistance, one word of

encouragement, or one smile of favour.  Such treatment I did not

expect, for I never had a Patron before.



'The shepherd in Virgil grew at last acquainted with Love, and

found him a native of the rocks.



'Is not a Patron, my Lord, one who looks with unconcern on a man

struggling for life in the water, and, when he has reached ground,

encumbers him with help?  The notice which you have been pleased to

take of my labours, had it been early, had been kind; but it has

been delayed till I am indifferent, and cannot enjoy it; till I am

solitary, and cannot impart it; till I am known, and do not want

it.  I hope it is no very cynical asperity not to confess

obligations where no benefit has been received, or to be unwilling

that the Publick should consider me as owing that to a Patron,

which Providence has enabled me to do for myself.



'Having carried on my work thus far with so little obligation to

any favourer of learning, I shall not be disappointed though I

should conclude it, if less be possible, with less; for I have been

long wakened from that dream of hope, in which I once boasted

myself with so much exultation, my Lord, your Lordship's most

humble, most obedient servant,



'SAM JOHNSON.'





'While this was the talk of the town, (says Dr. Adams, in a letter

to me) I happened to visit Dr. Warburton, who finding that I was

acquainted with Johnson, desired me earnestly to carry his

compliments to him, and to tell him that he honoured him for his

manly behaviour in rejecting these condescensions of Lord

Chesterfield, and for resenting the treatment he had received from

him, with a proper spirit.  Johnson was visibly pleased with this

compliment, for he had always a high opinion of Warburton.  Indeed,

the force of mind which appeared in this letter, was congenial with

that which Warburton himself amply possessed.'



There is a curious minute circumstance which struck me, in

comparing the various editions of Johnson's imitations of Juvenal.

In the tenth Satire, one of the couplets upon the vanity of wishes

even for literary distinction stood thus:





    'Yet think what ills the scholar's life assail,

     Pride, envy, want, the GARRET, and the jail.'





But after experiencing the uneasiness which Lord Chesterfield's

fallacious patronage made him feel, he dismissed the word garret

from the sad group, and in all the subsequent editions the line

stands





    'Pride, envy, want, the PATRON, and the jail.'





That Lord Chesterfield must have been mortified by the lofty

contempt, and polite, yet keen satire with which Johnson exhibited

him to himself in this letter, it is impossible to doubt.  He,

however, with that glossy duplicity which was his constant study,

affected to he quite unconcerned.  Dr. Adams mentioned to Mr.

Robert Dodsley that he was sorry Johnson had written his letter to

Lord Chesterfield.  Dodsley, with the true feelings of trade, said

'he was very sorry too; for that he had a property in the

Dictionary, to which his Lordship's patronage might have been of

consequence.'  He then told Dr. Adams, that Lord Chesterfield had

shewn him the letter.  'I should have imagined (replied Dr. Adams)

that Lord Chesterfield would have concealed it.'  'Poh! (said

Dodsley) do you think a letter from Johnson could hurt Lord

Chesterfield?  Not at all, Sir.  It lay upon his table; where any

body might see it.  He read it to me; said, "this man has great

powers," pointed out the severest passages, and observed how well

they were expressed.'  This air of indifference, which imposed upon

the worthy Dodsley, was certainly nothing but a specimen of that

dissimulation which Lord Chesterfield inculcated as one of the most

essential lessons for the conduct of life.  His Lordship

endeavoured to justify himself to Dodsley from the charges brought

against him by Johnson; but we may judge of the flimsiness of his

defence, from his having excused his neglect of Johnson, by saying

that 'he had heard he had changed his lodgings, and did not know

where he lived;' as if there could have been the smallest

difficulty to inform himself of that circumstance, by inquiring in

the literary circle with which his Lordship was well acquainted,

and was, indeed, himself one of its ornaments.



Dr. Adams expostulated with Johnson, and suggested, that his not

being admitted when he called on him, was, probably, not to be

imputed to Lord Chesterfield; for his Lordship had declared to

Dodsley, that 'he would have turned off the best servant he ever

had, if he had known that he denied him to a man who would have

been always more than welcome;' and, in confirmation of this, he

insisted on Lord Chesterfield's general affability and easiness of

access, especially to literary men.  'Sir (said Johnson) that is

not Lord Chesterfield; he is the proudest man this day existing.'

'No, (said Dr. Adams) there is one person, at least, as proud; I

think, by your own account, you are the prouder man of the two.'

'But mine (replied Johnson, instantly) was DEFENSIVE pride.'  This,

as Dr. Adams well observed, was one of those happy turns for which

he was so remarkably ready.



Johnson having now explicitly avowed his opinion of Lord

Chesterfield, did not refrain from expressing himself concerning

that nobleman with pointed freedom: 'This man (said he) I thought

had been a Lord among wits; but, I find, he is only a wit among

Lords!'  And when his Letters to his natural son were published, he

observed, that 'they teach the morals of a whore, and the manners

of a dancing master.'



On the 6th of March came out Lord Bolingbroke's works, published by

Mr. David Mallet.  The wild and pernicious ravings, under the name

of Philosophy, which were thus ushered into the world, gave great

offence to all well-principled men.  Johnson, hearing of their

tendency, which nobody disputed, was roused with a just

indignation, and pronounced this memorable sentence upon the noble

authour and his editor.  'Sir, he was a scoundrel, and a coward: a

scoundrel, for charging a blunderbuss against religion and

morality; a coward, because he had not resolution to fire it off

himself, but left half a crown to a beggarly Scotchman, to draw the

trigger after his death!'



Johnson this year found an interval of leisure to make an excursion

to Oxford, for the purpose of consulting the libraries there.



Of his conversation while at Oxford at this time, Mr. Warton

preserved and communicated to me the following memorial, which,

though not written with all the care and attention which that

learned and elegant writer bestowed on those compositions which he

intended for the publick eye, is so happily expressed in an easy

style, that I should injure it by any alteration:



'When Johnson came to Oxford in 1754, the long vacation was

beginning, and most people were leaving the place.  This was the

first time of his being there, after quitting the University.  The

next morning after his arrival, he wished to see his old College,

Pembroke.  I went with him.  He was highly pleased to find all the

College-servants which he had left there still remaining,

particularly a very old butler; and expressed great satisfaction at

being recognised by them, and conversed with them familiarly.  He

waited on the master, Dr. Radcliffe, who received him very coldly.

Johnson at least expected, that the master would order a copy of

his Dictionary, now near publication: but the master did not choose

to talk on the subject, never asked Johnson to dine, nor even to

visit him, while he stayed at Oxford.  After we had left the

lodgings, Johnson said to me, "THERE lives a man, who lives by the

revenues of literature, and will not move a finger to support it.

If I come to live at Oxford, I shall take up my abode at Trinity."

We then called on the Reverend Mr. Meeke, one of the fellows, and

of Johnson's standing.  Here was a most cordial greeting on both

sides.  On leaving him, Johnson said, "I used to think Meeke had

excellent parts, when we were boys together at the College: but,

alas!





     'Lost in a convent's solitary gloom!'





I remember, at the classical lecture in the Hall, I could not bear

Meeke's superiority, and I tried to sit as far from him as I could,

that I might not hear him construe."



'As we were leaving the College, he said, "Here I translated Pope's

Messiah.  Which do you think is the best line in it?--My own

favourite is,





     'Vallis aromaticas fundit Saronica nubes.'"





I told him, I thought it a very sonorous hexameter.  I did not tell

him, it was not in the Virgilian style.  He much regretted that his

FIRST tutor was dead; for whom he seemed to retain the greatest

regard.  He said, "I once had been a whole morning sliding in

Christ-Church Meadow, and missed his lecture in logick.  After

dinner, he sent for me to his room.  I expected a sharp rebuke for

my idleness, and went with a beating heart.  When we were seated,

he told me he had sent for me to drink a glass of wine with him,

and to tell me, he was NOT angry with me for missing his lecture.

This was, in fact, a most severe reprimand.  Some more of the boys

were then sent for, and we spent a very pleasant afternoon."

Besides Mr. Meeke, there was only one other Fellow of Pembroke now

resident: from both of whom Johnson received the greatest

civilities during this visit, and they pressed him very much to

have a room in the College.



'In the course of this visit (1754), Johnson and I walked, three or

four times, to Ellsfield, a village beautifully situated about

three miles from Oxford, to see Mr. Wise, Radclivian librarian,

with whom Johnson was much pleased.  At this place, Mr. Wise had

fitted up a house and gardens, in a singular manner, but with great

taste.  Here was an excellent library; particularly, a valuable

collection of books in Northern literature, with which Johnson was

often very busy.  One day Mr. Wise read to us a dissertation which

he was preparing for the press, intitled, "A History and Chronology

of the fabulous Ages."  Some old divinities of Thrace, related to

the Titans, and called the CABIRI, made a very important part of

the theory of this piece; and in conversation afterwards, Mr. Wise

talked much of his CABIRI.  As we returned to Oxford in the

evening, I out-walked Johnson, and he cried out Sufflamina, a Latin

word which came from his mouth with peculiar grace, and was as much

as to say, Put on your drag chain.  Before we got home, I again

walked too fast for him; and he now cried out, "Why, you walk as if

you were pursued by all the CABIRI in a body."  In an evening, we

frequently took long walks from Oxford into the country, returning

to supper.  Once, in our way home, we viewed the ruins of the

abbies of Oseney and Rewley, near Oxford.  After at least half an

hour's silence, Johnson said, "I viewed them with indignation!"  We

had then a long conversation on Gothick buildings; and in talking

of the form of old halls, he said, "In these halls, the fire place

was anciently always in the middle of the room, till the Whigs

removed it on one side."--About this time there had been an

execution of two or three criminals at Oxford on a Monday.  Soon

afterwards, one day at dinner, I was saying that Mr. Swinton the

chaplain of the gaol, and also a frequent preacher before the

University, a learned man, but often thoughtless and absent,

preached the condemnation-sermon on repentance, before the

convicts, on the preceding day, Sunday; and that in the close he

told his audience, that he should give them the remainder of what

he had to say on the subject, the next Lord's Day.  Upon which, one

of our company, a Doctor of Divinity, and a plain matter-of-fact

man, by way of offering an apology for Mr. Swinton, gravely

remarked, that he had probably preached the same sermon before the

University: "Yes, Sir, (says Johnson) but the University were not

to be hanged the next morning."



'I forgot to observe before, that when he left Mr. Meeke, (as I

have told above) he added, "About the same time of life, Meeke was

left behind at Oxford to feed on a Fellowship, and I went to London

to get my living: now, Sir, see the difference of our literary

characters!"'



The degree of Master of Arts, which, it has been observed, could

not be obtained for him at an early period of his life, was now

considered as an honour of considerable importance, in order to

grace the title-page of his Dictionary; and his character in the

literary world being by this time deservedly high, his friends

thought that, if proper exertions were made, the University of

Oxford would pay him the compliment.





To THE REVEREND THOMAS WARTON.



'DEAR SIR,--I am extremely sensible of the favour done me, both by

Mr. Wise and yourself.  The book* cannot, I think, be printed in

less than six weeks, nor probably so soon; and I will keep back the

title-page, for such an insertion as you seem to promise me. . . .



'I had lately the favour of a letter from your brother, with some

account of poor Collins, for whom I am much concerned.  I have a

notion, that by very great temperance, or more properly abstinence,

he may yet recover. . . .



'You know poor Mr. Dodsley has lost his wife; I believe he is much

affected.  I hope he will not suffer so much as I yet suffer for

the loss of mine.



[Greek text omitted]



I have ever since seemed to myself broken off from mankind; a kind

of solitary wanderer in the wild of life, without any direction, or

fixed point of view: a gloomy gazer on a world to which I have

little relation.  Yet I would endeavour, by the help of you and

your brother, to supply the want of closer union, by friendship:

and hope to have long the pleasure of being, dear Sir, most

affectionately your's,



'[London.] Dec. 21, 1754.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





* 'His Dictionary'--WARTON.





1755: AETAT. 46.]--In 1755 we behold him to great advantage; his

degree of Master of Arts conferred upon him, his Dictionary

published, his correspondence animated, his benevolence exercised.



Mr. Charles Burney, who has since distinguished himself so much in

the science of Musick, and obtained a Doctor's degree from the

University of Oxford, had been driven from the capital by bad

health, and was now residing at Lynne Regis, in Norfolk.  He had

been so much delighted with Johnson's Rambler and the Plan of his

Dictionary, that when the great work was announced in the news-

papers as nearly finished,' he wrote to Dr. Johnson, begging to be

informed when and in what manner his Dictionary would be published;

intreating, if it should be by subscription, or he should have any

books at his own disposal, to be favoured with six copies for

himself and friends.



In answer to this application, Dr. Johnson wrote the following

letter, of which (to use Dr. Burney's own words) 'if it be

remembered that it was written to an obscure young man, who at this

time had not much distinguished himself even in his own profession,

but whose name could never have reached the authour of The Rambler,

the politeness and urbanity may be opposed to some of the stories

which have been lately circulated of Dr. Johnson's natural rudeness

and ferocity.'





'TO MR. BURNEY, IN LYNNE REGIS, NORFOLK.



'SIR,--If you imagine that by delaying my answer I intended to shew

any neglect of the notice with which you have favoured me, you will

neither think justly of yourself nor of me.  Your civilities were

offered with too much elegance not to engage attention; and I have

too much pleasure in pleasing men like you, not to feel very

sensibly the distinction which you have bestowed upon me.



'Few consequences of my endeavours to please or to benefit mankind

have delighted me more than your friendship thus voluntarily

offered, which now I have it I hope to keep, because I hope to

continue to deserve it.



'I have no Dictionaries to dispose of for myself, but shall be glad

to have you direct your friends to Mr. Dodsley, because it was by

his recommendation that I was employed in the work.



'When you have leisure to think again upon me, let me be favoured

with another letter; and another yet, when you have looked into my

Dictionary.  If you find faults, I shall endeavour to mend them; if

you find none, I shall think you blinded by kind partiality: but to

have made you partial in his favour, will very much gratify the

ambition of, Sir, your most obliged and most humble servant,



'SAM. JOHNSON.'



'Gough-square, Fleet-street, April 8,1755.'





The Dictionary, with a Grammar and History of the English Language,

being now at length published, in two volumes folio, the world

contemplated with wonder so stupendous a work achieved by one man,

while other countries had thought such undertakings fit only for

whole academies.  Vast as his powers were, I cannot but think that

his imagination deceived him, when he supposed that by constant

application he might have performed the task in three years.



The extensive reading which was absolutely necessary for the

accumulation of authorities, and which alone may account for

Johnson's retentive mind being enriched with a very large and

various store of knowledge and imagery, must have occupied several

years.  The Preface furnishes an eminent instance of a double

talent, of which Johnson was fully conscious.  Sir Joshua Reynolds

heard him say, 'There are two things which I am confident I can do

very well: one is an introduction to any literary work, stating

what it is to contain, and how it should be executed in the most

perfect manner; the other is a conclusion, shewing from various

causes why the execution has not been equal to what the authour

promised to himself and to the publick.'



A few of his definitions must be admitted to be erroneous.  Thus,

Windward and Leeward, though directly of opposite meaning, are

defined identically the same way; as to which inconsiderable specks

it is enough to observe, that his Preface announces that he was

aware there might be many such in so immense a work; nor was he at

all disconcerted when an instance was pointed out to him.  A lady

once asked him how he came to define Pastern the KNEE of a horse:

instead of making an elaborate defence, as she expected, he at once

answered, 'Ignorance, madam, pure ignorance.'  His definition of

Network* has been often quoted with sportive malignity, as

obscuring a thing in itself very plain.  But to these frivolous

censures no other answer is necessary than that with which we are

furnished by his own Preface.





* Any thing reticulated or decussated, at equal distances, with

interstices between the intersections.'--ED.





His introducing his own opinions, and even prejudices, under

general definitions of words, while at the same time the original

meaning of the words is not explained, as his Tory, Whig, Pension,

Oats, Excise,* and a few more, cannot be fully defended, and must

be placed to the account of capricious and humorous indulgence.

Talking to me upon this subject when we were at Ashbourne in 1777,

he mentioned a still stronger instance of the predominance of his

private feelings in the composition of this work, than any now to

be found in it.  'You know, Sir, Lord Gower forsook the old

Jacobite interest.  When I came to the word Renegado, after telling

that it meant "one who deserts to the enemy, a revolter," I added,

Sometimes we say a GOWER.  Thus it went to the press; but the

printer had more wit than I, and struck it out.'





* Tory.  'One who adheres to the ancient constitution or the state

and the apostolical hierarchy of the church or England, opposed to

a whig.'  Whig.  'The name of a faction.'  Pension.  'An allowance

made to any one without an equivalent.  In England it is generally

understood to mean pay given to a state hireling for treason to his

country.'  Oats.  'A grain which in England is generally given to

horses, but in Scotland supports the people.'  Excise.  'A hateful

tax levied upon commodities, and adjudged not by the common judges

of property, but wretches hired by those to whom excise is paid.'--

ED.





Let it, however, be remembered, that this indulgence does not

display itself only in sarcasm towards others, but sometimes in

playful allusion to the notions commonly entertained of his own

laborious task.  Thus: 'Grub-street, the name of a street in

London, much inhabited by writers of small histories, dictionaries,

and temporary poems; whence any mean production is called Grub-

street.'--'Lexicographer, a writer of dictionaries, a harmless

drudge.'



It must undoubtedly seem strange, that the conclusion of his

Preface should be expressed in terms so desponding, when it is

considered that the authour was then only in his forty-sixth year.

But we must ascribe its gloom to that miserable dejection of

spirits to which he was constitutionally subject, and which was

aggravated by the death of his wife two years before.  I have heard

it ingeniously observed by a lady of rank and elegance, that 'his

melancholy was then at its meridian.'  It pleased GOD to grant him

almost thirty years of life after this time; and once, when he was

in a placid frame of mind, he was obliged to own to me that he had

enjoyed happier days, and had many more friends, since that gloomy

hour than before.



It is a sad saying, that 'most of those whom he wished to please

had sunk into the grave;' and his case at forty-five was singularly

unhappy, unless the circle of his friends was very narrow.  He said

to Sir Joshua Reynolds, 'If a man does not make new acquaintance as

he advances through life, he will soon find himself left alone.  A

man, Sir, should keep his friendship in constant repair.'



In July this year he had formed some scheme of mental improvement,

the particular purpose of which does not appear.  But we find in

his Prayers and Meditations, p. 25, a prayer entitled 'On the Study

of Philosophy, as an Instrument of living;' and after it follows a

note, 'This study was not pursued.'



On the 13th of the same month he wrote in his Journal the following

scheme of life, for Sunday:



'Having lived' (as he with tenderness of conscience expresses

himself) 'not without an habitual reverence for the Sabbath, yet

without that attention to its religious duties which Christianity

requires;



'1.  To rise early, and in order to it, to go to sleep early on

Saturday.



'2.  To use some extraordinary devotion in the morning.



'3.  To examine the tenour of my life, and particularly the last.

week; and to mark my advances in religion, or recession from it.



'4.  To read the Scripture methodically with such helps as are at

hand.



'5.  To go to church twice.



'6.  To read books of Divinity, either speculative or practical.



'7.  To instruct my family.



'8.  To wear off by meditation any worldly soil contracted in the

week.'



1756: AETAT. 47.]--In 1756 Johnson found that the great fame of his

Dictionary had not set him above the necessity of 'making provision

for the day that was passing over him.'  No royal or noble patron

extended a munificent hand to give independence to the man who had

conferred stability on the language of his country.  We may feel

indignant that there should have been such unworthy neglect; but we

must, at the same time, congratulate ourselves, when we consider

that to this very neglect, operating to rouse the natural indolence

of his constitution, we owe many valuable productions, which

otherwise, perhaps, might never have appeared.



He had spent, during the progress of the work, the money for which

he had contracted to write his Dictionary.  We have seen that the

reward of his labour was only fifteen hundred and seventy-five

pounds; and when the expence of amanuenses and paper, and other

articles are deducted, his clear profit was very inconsiderable.  I

once said to him, 'I am sorry, Sir, you did not get more for your

Dictionary.'  His answer was, 'I am sorry, too.  But it was very

well.  The booksellers are generous, liberal-minded men.'  He, upon

all occasions, did ample justice to their character in this

respect.  He considered them as the patrons of literature; and,

indeed, although they have eventually been considerable gainers by

his Dictionary, it is to them that we owe its having been

undertaken and carried through at the risk of great expence, for

they were not absolutely sure of being indemnified.



He this year resumed his scheme of giving an edition of Shakspeare

with notes.*  He issued Proposals of considerable length, in which

he shewed that he perfectly well knew what a variety of research

such an undertaking required; but his indolence prevented him from

pursuing it with that diligence which alone can collect those

scattered facts that genius, however acute, penetrating, and

luminous, cannot discover by its own force.  It is remarkable, that

at this time his fancied activity was for the moment so vigorous,

that he promised his work should be published before Christmas,

1757.  Yet nine years elapsed before it saw the light.  His throes

in bringing it forth had been severe and remittent; and at last we

may almost conclude that the Caesarian operation was performed by

the knife of Churchill, whose upbraiding satire, I dare say, made

Johnson's friends urge him to dispatch.





    'He for subscribers bates his hook,

     And takes your cash; but where's the book?

     No matter where; wise fear, you know,

     Forbids the robbing of a foe;

     But what, to serve our private ends,

     Forbids the cheating of our friends?'





* First proposed in 1745--ED.





About this period he was offered a living of considerable value in

Lincolnshire, if he were inclined to enter into holy orders.  It

was a rectory in the gift of Mr. Langton, the father of his much

valued friend.  But he did not accept of it; partly I believe from

a conscientious motive, being persuaded that his temper and habits

rendered him unfit for that assiduous and familiar instruction of

the vulgar and ignorant which he held to be an essential duty in a

clergyman; and partly because his love of a London life was so

strong, that he would have thought himself an exile in any other

place, particularly if residing in the country.  Whoever would wish

to see his thoughts upon that subject displayed in their full

force, may peruse The Adventurer, Number 126.



1757: AETAT. 48.]--MR. BURNEY having enclosed to him an extract

from the review of his Dictionary in the Bibliotheque des Savans,

and a list of subscribers to his Shakspeare, which Mr. Burney had

procured in Norfolk, he wrote the following answer:





'TO MR. BURNEY, IN LYNNE, NORFOLK.



'SIR,--That I may shew myself sensible of your favours, and not

commit the same fault a second time, I make haste to answer the

letter which I received this morning.  The truth is, the other

likewise was received, and I wrote an answer; but being desirous to

transmit you some proposals and receipts, I waited till I could

find a convenient conveyance, and day was passed after day, till

other things drove it from my thoughts; yet not so, but that I

remember with great pleasure your commendation of my Dictionary.

Your praise was welcome, not only because I believe it was sincere,

but because praise has been very scarce.  A man of your candour

will be surprised when I tell you, that among all my acquaintance

there were only two, who upon the publication of my book did not

endeavour to depress me with threats of censure from the publick,

or with objections learned from those who had learned them from my

own Preface.  Your's is the only letter of goodwill that I have

received; though, indeed, I am promised something of that sort from

Sweden.



'How my new edition will be received I know not; the subscription

has not been very successful.  I shall publish about March.



'If you can direct me how to send proposals, I should wish that

they were in such hands.



'I remember, Sir, in some of the first letters with which you

favoured me, you mentioned your lady.  May I enquire after her?  In

return for the favours which you have shewn me, it is not much to

tell you, that I wish you and her all that can conduce to your

happiness.  I am, Sir, your most obliged, and most humble servant,



SAM. JOHNSON.'



'Gough-square, Dec. 24, 1757.'





In 1758 we find him, it should seem, in as easy and pleasant a

state of existence, as constitutional unhappiness ever permitted

him to enjoy.





'TO BENNET LANGTON, ESQ., AT LANGTON, LINCOLNSHIRE.



'DEAREST SIR,--I must indeed have slept very fast, not to have been

awakened by your letter.  None of your suspicions are true; I am

not much richer than when you left me; and, what is worse, my

omission of an answer to your first letter, will prove that I am

not much wiser.  But I go on as I formerly did, designing to be

some time or other both rich and wise; and yet cultivate neither

mind nor fortune.  Do you take notice of my example, and learn the

danger of delay.  When I was as you are now, towering in the

confidence of twenty-one, little did I suspect that I should be at

forty-nine, what I now am.



'But you do not seem to need my admonition.  You are busy in

acquiring and in communicating knowledge, and while you are

studying, enjoy the end of study, by making others wiser and

happier.  I was much pleased with the tale that you told me of

being tutour to your sisters.  I, who have no sisters nor brothers,

look with some degree of innocent envy on those who may be said to

be born to friends; and cannot see, without wonder, how rarely that

native union is afterwards regarded.  It sometimes, indeed,

happens, that some supervenient cause of discord may overpower this

original amity; but it seems to me more frequently thrown away with

levity, or lost by negligence, than destroyed by injury or

violence.  We tell the ladies that good wives make good husbands; I

believe it is a more certain position that good brothers make good

sisters.



'I am satisfied with your stay at home, as Juvenal with his

friend's retirement to Cumae: I know that your absence is best,

though it be not best for me.





    'Quamvis digressu veteris confusus amici,

     Laudo tamen vacuis quod sedem figere Cumis

     Destinet, atque unum civem donare Sibylloe.'





'Langton is a good Cumae, but who must be Sibylla?  Mrs. Langton is

as wise as Sibyl, and as good; and will live, if my wishes can

prolong life, till she shall in time be as old.  But she differs in

this, that she has not scattered her precepts in the wind, at least

not those which she bestowed upon you.



'The two Wartons just looked into the town, and were taken to see

Cleone, where, David* says, they were starved for want of company

to keep them warm.  David and Doddy** have had a new quarrel, and,

I think, cannot conveniently quarrel any more.  Cleone was well

acted by all the characters, but Bellamy left nothing to be

desired.  I went the first night, and supported it, as well as I

might; for Doddy, you know, is my patron, and I would not desert

him.  The play was very well received.  Doddy, after the danger was

over, went every night to the stage-side, and cried at the distress

of poor Cleone.





* Mr. Garrick--BOSWELL.



** Mr. Dodsley, the Authour of Cleone.--BOSWELL.





'I have left off housekeeping, and therefore made presents of the

game which you were pleased to send me.  The pheasant I gave to Mr.

Richardson,* the bustard to Dr. Lawrence, and the pot I placed with

Miss Williams, to be eaten by myself.  She desires that her

compliments and good wishes may be accepted by the family; and I

make the same request for myself.





* Mr. Samuel Richardson, authour of Clarissa.--BOSWELL.





'Mr. Reynolds has within these few days raised his price to twenty

guineas a head, and Miss is much employed in miniatures.  I know

not any body [else] whose prosperity has increased since you left

them.



'Murphy is to have his Orphan of China acted next month; and is

therefore, I suppose, happy.  I wish I could tell you of any great

good to which I was approaching, but at present my prospects do not

much delight me; however, I am always pleased when I find that you,

dear Sir, remember, your affectionate, humble servant,



SAM. JOHNSON.'



'Jan. 9, 1758.'





Dr. Burney has kindly favoured me with the following memorandum,

which I take the liberty to insert in his own genuine easy style.

I love to exhibit sketches of my illustrious friend by various

eminent hands.



'Soon after this, Mr. Burney, during a visit to the capital, had an

interview with him in Gough-square, where he dined and drank tea

with him, and was introduced to the acquaintance of Mrs. Williams.

After dinner, Mr. Johnson proposed to Mr. Burney to go up with him

into his garret, which being accepted, he there found about five or

six Greek folios, a deal writing-desk, and a chair and a half.

Johnson giving to his guest the entire seat, tottered himself on

one with only three legs and one arm.  Here he gave Mr. Burney Mrs.

Williams's history, and shewed him some volumes of his Shakspeare

already printed, to prove that he was in earnest.  Upon Mr.

Burney's opening the first volume, at the Merchant of Venice, he

observed to him, that he seemed to be more severe on Warburton than

Theobald.  "O poor Tib.! (said Johnson) he was ready knocked down

to my hands; Warburton stands between me and him."  "But, Sir,

(said Mr. Burney,) you'll have Warburton upon your bones, won't

you?"  "No, Sir; he'll not come out: he'll only growl in his den."

"But you think, Sir, that Warburton is a superiour critick to

Theobald?"  "O Sir he'd make two-and-fifty Theobalds, cut into

slices!  The worst of Warburton is, that he has a rage for saying

something, when there's nothing to be said."  Mr. Burney then asked

him whether he had seen the letter which Warburton had written in

answer to a pamphlet addressed "To the most impudent Man alive."

He answered in the negative.  Mr. Burney told him it was supposed

to be written by Mallet.  The controversey now raged between the

friends of Pope and Bolingbroke; and Warburton and Mallet were the

leaders of the several parties.  Mr. Burney asked him then if he

had seen Warburton's book against Bolingbroke's Philosophy?  "No,

Sir, I have never read Bolingbroke's impiety, and therefore am not

interested about its confutation."'



On the fifteenth of April he began a new periodical paper, entitled

The Idler, which came out every Saturday in a weekly news-paper,

called The Universal Chronicle, or Weekly Gazette, published by

Newbery.  These essays were continued till April 5, 1760.  Of one

hundred and three, their total number, twelve were contributed by

his friends.



The Idler is evidently the work of the same mind which produced The

Rambler, but has less body and more spirit.  It has more variety of

real life, and greater facility of language.  He describes the

miseries of idleness, with the lively sensations of one who has

felt them; and in his private memorandums while engaged in it, we

find 'This year I hope to learn diligence.'  Many of these

excellent essays were written as hastily as an ordinary letter.

Mr. Langton remembers Johnson, when on a visit at Oxford, asking

him one evening how long it was till the post went out; and on

being told about half an hour, he exclaimed, 'then we shall do very

well.'  He upon this instantly sat down and finished an Idler,

which it was necessary should be in London the next day.  Mr.

Langton having signified a wish to read it, 'Sir, (said he) you

shall not do more than I have done myself.'  He then folded it up

and sent it off.



1759: AETAT. 50.]--In 1759, in the month of January, his mother

died at the great age of ninety, an event which deeply affected

him; not that 'his mind had acquired no firmness by the

contemplation of mortality;' but that his reverential affection for

her was not abated by years, as indeed he retained all his tender

feelings even to the latest period of his life.  I have been told

that he regretted much his not having gone to visit his mother for

several years, previous to her death.  But he was constantly

engaged in literary labours which confined him to London; and

though he had not the comfort of seeing his aged parent, he

contributed liberally to her support.



Soon after this event, he wrote his Rasselas, Prince of Abyssinia;

concerning the publication of which Sir John Hawkins guesses

vaguely and idly, instead of having taken the trouble to inform

himself with authentick precision.  Not to trouble my readers with

a repetition of the Knight's reveries, I have to mention, that the

late Mr. Strahan the printer told me, that Johnson wrote it, that

with the profits he might defray the expence of his mother's

funeral, and pay some little debts which she had left.  He told Sir

Joshua Reynolds that he composed it in the evenings of one week,

sent it to the press in portions as it was written, and had never

since read it over.  Mr. Strahan, Mr. Johnston, and Mr. Dodsley

purchased it for a hundred pounds, but afterwards paid him twenty-

five pounds more, when it came to a second edition.



Voltaire's Candide, written to refute the system of Optimism, which

it has accomplished with brilliant success, is wonderfully similar

in its plan and conduct to Johnson's Rasselas; insomuch, that I

have heard Johnson say, that if they had not been published so

closely one after the other that there was not time for imitation,

it would have been in vain to deny that the scheme of that which

came latest was taken from the other.  Though the proposition

illustrated by both these works was the same, namely, that in our

present state there is more evil than good, the intention of the

writers was very different.  Voltaire, I am afraid, meant only by

wanton profaneness to obtain a sportive victory over religion, and

to discredit the belief of a superintending Providence; Johnson

meant, by shewing the unsatisfactory nature of things temporal, to

direct the hopes of man to things eternal.  Rasselas, as was

observed to me by a very accomplished lady, may be considered as a

more enlarged and more deeply philosophical discourse in prose,

upon the interesting truth, which in his Vanity of Human Wishes he

had so successfully enforced in verse.



I would ascribe to this year the following letter to a son of one

of his early friends at Lichfield, Mr. Joseph Simpson, Barrister,

and authour of a tract entitled Reflections on the Study of the

Law.





'TO JOSEPH SIMPSON, ESQ.



'DEAR SIR,--Your father's inexorability not only grieves but amazes

me: he is your father; he was always accounted a wise man; nor do I

remember any thing to the disadvantage of his good-nature; but in

his refusal to assist you there is neither good-nature, fatherhood,

nor wisdom.  It is the practice of good-nature to overlook faults

which have already, by the consequences, punished the delinquent.

It is natural for a father to think more favourably than others of

his children; and it is always wise to give assistance while a

little help will prevent the necessity of greater.



'If you married imprudently, you miscarried at your own hazard, at

an age when you had a right of choice.  It would be hard if the man

might not choose his own wife, who has a right to plead before the

Judges of his country.



'If your imprudence has ended in difficulties and inconveniences,

you are yourself to support them; and, with the help of a little

better health, you would support them and conquer them.  Surely,

that want which accident and sickness produces, is to be supported

in every region of humanity, though there were neither friends nor

fathers in the world.  You have certainly from your father the

highest claim of charity, though none of right; and therefore I

would counsel you to omit no decent nor manly degree of

importunity.  Your debts in the whole are not large, and of the

whole but a small part is troublesome.  Small debts are like small

shot; they are rattling on every side, and can scarcely be escaped

without a wound: great debts are like cannon; of loud noise, but

little danger.  You must, therefore, be enabled to discharge petty

debts, that you may have leisure, with security to struggle with

the rest.  Neither the great nor little debts disgrace you.  I am

sure you have my esteem for the courage with which you contracted

them, and the spirit with which you endure them.  I wish my esteem

could be of more use.  I have been invited, or have invited myself,

to several parts of the kingdom; and will not incommode my dear

Lucy by coming to Lichfield, while her present lodging is of any

use to her.  I hope, in a few days, to be at leisure, and to make

visits.  Whither I shall fly is matter of no importance.  A man

unconnected is at home every where; unless he may be said to be at

home no where.  I am sorry, dear Sir, that where you have parents,

a man of your merits should not have an home.  I wish I could give

it you.  I am, my dear Sir, affectionately yours,



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





He now refreshed himself by an excursion to Oxford, of which the

following short characteristical notice, in his own words, is

preserved



'* * * is now making tea for me.  I have been in my gown ever since

I came here.  It was, at my first coming, quite new and handsome.

I have swum thrice, which I had disused for many years.  I have

proposed to Vansittart, climbing over the wall, but he has refused

me.  And I have clapped my hands till they are sore, at Dr. King's

speech.'



His negro servant, Francis Barber, having left him, and been some

time at sea, not pressed as has been supposed, but with his own

consent, it appears from a letter to John Wilkes, Esq., from Dr.

Smollet, that his master kindly interested himself in procuring his

release from a state of life of which Johnson always expressed the

utmost abhorrence.  He said, 'No man will be a sailor who has

contrivance enough to get himself into a jail; for being in a ship

is being in a jail, with the chance of being drowned.'  And at

another time, 'A man in a jail has more room, better food, and

commonly better company.'  The letter was as follows:--





'Chelsea, March 16, 1759.



'DEAR SIR, I am again your petitioner, in behalf of that great CHAM

of literature, Samuel Johnson.  His black servant, whose name is

Francis Barber, has been pressed on board the Stag Frigate, Captain

Angel, and our lexicographer is in great distress.  He says the boy

is a sickly lad, of a delicate frame, and particularly subject to a

malady in his throat, which renders him very unfit for his

Majesty's service.  You know what manner of animosity the said

Johnson has against you; and I dare say you desire no other

opportunity of resenting it than that of laying him under an

obligation.  He was humble enough to desire my assistance on this

occasion, though he and I were never cater-cousins; and I gave him

to understand that I would make application to my friend Mr.

Wilkes, who, perhaps, by his interest with Dr. Hay and Mr. Elliot,

might be able to procure the discharge of his lacquey.  It would be

superfluous to say more on the subject, which I leave to your own

consideration; but I cannot let slip this opportunity of declaring

that I am, with the most inviolable esteem and attachment, dear

Sir, your affectionate, obliged, humble servant,



'T. SMOLLET.'





Mr. Wilkes, who upon all occasions has acted, as a private

gentleman, with most polite liberality, applied to his friend Sir

George Hay, then one of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty;

and Francis Barber was discharged, as he has told me, without any

wish of his own.  He found his old master in Chambers in the Inner

Temple, and returned to his service.



1760: AETAT. 51.]--I take this opportunity to relate the manner in

which an acquaintance first commenced between Dr. Johnson and Mr.

Murphy.  During the publication of The Gray's-Inn Journal, a

periodical paper which was successfully carried on by Mr. Murphy

alone, when a very young man, he happened to be in the country with

Mr. Foote; and having mentioned that he was obliged to go to London

in order to get ready for the press one of the numbers of that

Journal, Foote said to him, 'You need not go on that account.  Here

is a French magazine, in which you will find a very pretty oriental

tale; translate that, and send it to your printer.'  Mr. Murphy

having read the tale, was highly pleased with it, and followed

Foote's advice.  When he returned to town, this tale was pointed

out to him in The Rambler, from whence it had been translated into

the French magazine.  Mr. Murphy then waited upon Johnson, to

explain this curious incident.  His talents, literature, and

gentleman-like manners, were soon perceived by Johnson, and a

friendship was formed which was never broken.



1762: AETAT. 53.]--A lady having at this time solicited him to

obtain the Archbishop of Canterbury's patronage to have her son

sent to the University, one of those solicitations which are too

frequent, where people, anxious for a particular object, do not

consider propriety, or the opportunity which the persons whom they

solicit have to assist them, he wrote to her the following answer,

with a copy of which I am favoured by the Reverend Dr. Farmer,

Master of Emanuel College, Cambridge.





'MADAM,--I hope you will believe that my delay in answering your

letter could proceed only from my unwillingness to destroy any hope

that you had formed.  Hope is itself a species of happiness, and,

perhaps, the chief happiness which this world affords: but, like

all other pleasures immoderately enjoyed, the excesses of hope must

be expiated by pain; and expectations improperly indulged, must end

in disappointment.  If it be asked, what is the improper

expectation which it is dangerous to indulge, experience will

quickly answer, that it is such expectation as is dictated not by

reason, but by desire; expectation raised, not by the common

occurrences of life, but by the wants of the expectant; an

expectation that requires the common course of things to be

changed, and the general rules of action to be broken.



'When you made your request to me, you should have considered,

Madam, what you were asking.  You ask me to solicit a great man, to

whom I never spoke, for a young person whom I had never seen, upon

a supposition which I had no means of knowing to be true.  There is

no reason why, amongst all the great, I should chuse to supplicate

the Archbishop, nor why, among all the possible objects of his

bounty, the Archbishop should chuse your son.  I know, Madam, how

unwillingly conviction is admitted, when interest opposes it; but

surely, Madam, you must allow, that there is no reason why that

should be done by me, which every other man may do with equal

reason, and which, indeed no man can do properly, without some very

particular relation both to the Archbishop and to you.  If I could

help you in this exigence by any proper means, it would give me

pleasure; but this proposal is so very remote from all usual

methods, that I cannot comply with it, but at the risk of such

answer and suspicions as I believe you do not wish me to undergo.



'I have seen your son this morning; he seems a pretty youth, and

will, perhaps, find some better friend than I can procure him; but,

though he should at last miss the University, he may still be wise,

useful, and happy.  I am, Madam, your most humble servant,



'June 8, 1762.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





'TO MR. JOSEPH BARETTI, AT MILAN.



'London, July 20, 1762.



'SIR, However justly you may accuse me for want of punctuality in

correspondence, I am not so far lost in negligence as to omit the

opportunity of writing to you, which Mr. Beauclerk's passage

through Milan affords me.



'I suppose you received the Idlers, and I intend that you shall

soon receive Shakspeare, that you may explain his works to the

ladies of Italy, and tell them the story of the editor, among the

other strange narratives with which your long residence in this

unknown region has supplied you.



'As you have now been long away, I suppose your curiosity may pant

for some news of your old friends.  Miss Williams and I live much

as we did.  Miss Cotterel still continues to cling to Mrs. Porter,

and Charlotte is now big of the fourth child.  Mr. Reynolds gets

six thousands a year.  Levet is lately married, not without much

suspicion that he has been wretchedly cheated in his match.  Mr.

Chambers is gone this day, for the first time, the circuit with the

Judges.  Mr. Richardson is dead of an apoplexy, and his second

daughter has married a merchant.



'My vanity, or my kindness, makes me flatter myself, that you would

rather hear of me than of those whom I have mentioned; but of

myself I have very little which I care to tell.  Last winter I went

down to my native town, where I found the streets much narrower and

shorter than I thought I had left them, inhabited by a new race of

people, to whom I was very little known.  My play-fellows were

grown old, and forced me to suspect that I was no longer young.  My

only remaining friend has changed his principles, and was become

the tool of the predominant faction.  My daughter-in-law, from whom

I expected most, and whom I met with sincere benevolence, has lost

the beauty and gaiety of youth, without having gained much of the

wisdom of age.  I wandered about for five days, and took the first

convenient opportunity of returning to a place, where, if there is

not much happiness, there is, at least, such a diversity of good

and evil, that slight vexations do not fix upon the heart. . . .



'May you, my Baretti, be very happy at Milan, or some other place

nearer to, Sir, your most affectionate humble servant,



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





The accession of George the Third to the throne of these kingdoms,

opened a new and brighter prospect to men of literary merit, who

had been honoured with no mark of royal favour in the preceding

reign.  His present Majesty's education in this country, as well as

his taste and beneficence, prompted him to be the patron of science

and the arts; and early this year Johnson, having been represented

to him as a very learned and good man, without any certain

provision, his Majesty was pleased to grant him a pension of three

hundred pounds a year.  The Earl of Bute, who was then Prime

Minister, had the honour to announce this instance of his

Sovereign's bounty, concerning which, many and various stories, all

equally erroneous, have been propagated: maliciously representing

it as a political bribe to Johnson, to desert his avowed

principles, and become the tool of a government which he held to be

founded in usurpation.  I have taken care to have it in my power to

refute them from the most authentick information.  Lord Bute told

me, that Mr. Wedderburne, now Lord Loughborough, was the person who

first mentioned this subject to him.  Lord Loughborough told me,

that the pension was granted to Johnson solely as the reward of his

literary merit, without any stipulation whatever, or even tacit

understanding that he should write for administration.  His

Lordship added, that he was confident the political tracts which

Johnson afterwards did write, as they were entirely consonant with

his own opinions, would have been written by him though no pension

had been granted to him.



Mr. Thomas Sheridan and Mr. Murphy, who then lived a good deal both

with him and Mr. Wedderburne, told me, that they previously talked

with Johnson upon this matter, and that it was perfectly understood

by all parties that the pension was merely honorary.  Sir Joshua

Reynolds told me, that Johnson called on him after his majesty's

intention had been notified to him, and said he wished to consult

his friends as to the propriety of his accepting this mark of the

royal favour, after the definitions which he had given in his

Dictionary of pension and pensioners.  He said he would not have

Sir Joshua's answer till next day, when he would call again, and

desired he might think of it.  Sir Joshua answered that he was

clear to give his opinion then, that there could be no objection to

his receiving from the King a reward for literary merit; and that

certainly the definitions in his Dictionary were not applicable to

him.  Johnson, it should seem, was satisfied, for he did not call

again till he had accepted the pension, and had waited on Lord Bute

to thank him.  He then told Sir Joshua that Lord Bute said to him

expressly, 'It is not given you for anything you are to do, but for

what you have done.'  His Lordship, he said, behaved in the

handsomest manner, he repeated the words twice, that he might be

sure Johnson heard them, and thus set his mind perfectly at ease.

This nobleman, who has been so virulently abused, acted with great

honour in this instance and displayed a mind truly liberal.  A

minister of a more narrow and selfish disposition would have

availed himself of such an opportunity to fix an implied obligation

on a man of Johnson's powerful talents to give him his support.



Mr. Murphy and the late Mr. Sheridan severally contended for the

distinction of having been the first who mentioned to Mr.

Wedderburne that Johnson ought to have a pension.  When I spoke of

this to Lord Loughborough, wishing to know if he recollected the

prime mover in the business, he said, 'All his friends assisted:'

and when I told him that Mr. Sheridan strenuously asserted his

claim to it, his Lordship said, 'He rang the bell.'  And it is but

just to add, that Mr. Sheridan told me, that when he communicated

to Dr. Johnson that a pension was to be granted him, he replied in

a fervour of gratitude, 'The English language does not afford me

terms adequate to my feelings on this occasion.  I must have

recourse to the French.  I am penetre with his Majesty's goodness.'

When I repeated this to Dr. Johnson, he did not contradict it.



This year his friend Sir Joshua Reynolds paid a visit of some weeks

to his native country, Devonshire, in which he was accompanied by

Johnson, who was much pleased with this jaunt, and declared he had

derived from it a great accession of new ideas.  He was entertained

at the seats of several noblemen and gentlemen in the West of

England; but the greatest part of the time was passed at Plymouth,

where the magnificence of the navy, the ship-building and all its

circumstances, afforded him a grand subject of contemplation.  The

Commissioner of the Dock-yard paid him the compliment of ordering

the yacht to convey him and his friend to the Eddystone, to which

they accordingly sailed.  But the weather was so tempestuous that

they could not land.



Reynolds and he were at this time the guests of Dr. Mudge, the

celebrated surgeon, and now physician of that place, not more

distinguished for quickness of parts and variety of knowledge, than

loved and esteemed for his amiable manners; and here Johnson formed

an acquaintance with Dr. Mudge's father, that very eminent divine,

the Reverend Zachariah Mudge, Prebendary of Exeter, who was

idolised in the west, both for his excellence as a preacher and the

uniform perfect propriety of his private conduct.  He preached a

sermon purposely that Johnson might hear him; and we shall see

afterwards that Johnson honoured his memory by drawing his

character.  While Johnson was at Plymouth, he saw a great many of

its inhabitants, and was not sparing of his very entertaining

conversation.  It was here that he made that frank and truly

original confession, that 'ignorance, pure ignorance,' was the

cause of a wrong definition in his Dictionary of the word pastern,

to the no small surprise of the Lady who put the question to him;

who having the most profound reverence for his character, so as

almost to suppose him endowed with infallibility, expected to hear

an explanation (of what, to be sure, seemed strange to a common

reader,) drawn from some deep-learned source with which she was

unacquainted.



Sir Joshua Reynolds, to whom I was obliged for my information

concerning this excursion, mentions a very characteristical

anecdote of Johnson while at Plymouth.  Having observed that in

consequence of the Dock-yard a new town had arisen about two miles

off as a rival to the old; and knowing from his sagacity, and just

observation of human nature, that it is certain if a man hates at

all, he will hate his next neighbour; he concluded that this new

and rising town could not but excite the envy and jealousy of the

old, in which conjecture he was very soon confirmed; he therefore

set himself resolutely on the side of the old town, the established

town, in which his lot was cast, considering it as a kind of duty

to stand by it.  He accordingly entered warmly into its interests,

and upon every occasion talked of the dockers, as the inhabitants

of the new town were called, as upstarts and aliens.  Plymouth is

very plentifully supplied with water by a river brought into it

from a great distance, which is so abundant that it runs to waste

in the town.  The Dock, or New-town, being totally destitute of

water, petitioned Plymouth that a small portion of the conduit

might be permitted to go to them, and this was now under

consideration.  Johnson, affecting to entertain the passions of the

place, was violent in opposition; and, half-laughing at himself for

his pretended zeal where he had no concern, exclaimed, 'No, no! I

am against the dockers; I am a Plymouth man.  Rogues! let them die

of thirst.  They shall not have a drop!'



1763: AETAT. 54.]--This is to me a memorable year; for in it I had

the happiness to obtain the acquaintance of that extraordinary man

whose memoirs I am now writing; an acquaintance which I shall ever

esteem as one of the most fortunate circumstances in my life.

Though then but two-and-twenty, I had for several years read his

works with delight and instruction, and had the highest reverence

for their authour, which had grown up in my fancy into a kind of

mysterious veneration, by figuring to myself a state of solemn

elevated abstraction, in which I supposed him to live in the

immense metropolis of London.  Mr. Gentleman, a native of Ireland,

who passed some years in Scotland as a player, and as an instructor

in the English language, a man whose talents and worth were

depressed by misfortunes, had given me a representation of the

figure and manner of DICTIONARY JOHNSON! as he was then generally

called; and during my first visit to London, which was for three

months in 1760, Mr. Derrick the poet, who was Gentleman's friend

and countryman, flattered me with hopes that he would introduce me

to Johnson, an honour of which I was very ambitious.  But he never

found an opportunity; which made me doubt that he had promised to

do what was not in his power; till Johnson some years afterwards

told me, 'Derrick, Sir, might very well have introduced you.  I had

a kindness for Derrick, and am sorry he is dead.'



In the summer of 1761 Mr. Thomas Sheridan was at Edinburgh, and

delivered lectures upon the English Language and Publick Speaking

to large and respectable audiences.  I was often in his company,

and heard him frequently expatiate upon Johnson's extraordinary

knowledge, talents, and virtues, repeat his pointed sayings,

describe his particularities, and boast of his being his guest

sometimes till two or three in the morning.  At his house I hoped

to have many opportunities of seeing the sage, as Mr. Sheridan

obligingly assured me I should not be disappointed.



When I returned to London in the end of 1762, to my surprise and

regret I found an irreconcilable difference had taken place between

Johnson and Sheridan.  A pension of two hundred pounds a year had

been given to Sheridan.  Johnson, who, as has been already

mentioned, thought slightingly of Sheridan's art, upon hearing that

he was also pensioned, exclaimed, 'What! have they given HIM a

pension?  Then it is time for me to give up mine.'



Johnson complained that a man who disliked him repeated his sarcasm

to Mr. Sheridan, without telling him what followed, which was, that

after a pause he added, 'However, I am glad that Mr. Sheridan has a

pension, for he is a very good man.'  Sheridan could never forgive

this hasty contemptuous expression.  It rankled in his mind; and

though I informed him of all that Johnson said, and that he would

be very glad to meet him amicably, he positively declined repeated

offers which I made, and once went off abruptly from a house where

he and I were engaged to dine, because he was told that Dr. Johnson

was to be there.



This rupture with Sheridan deprived Johnson of one of his most

agreeable resources for amusement in his lonely evenings; for

Sheridan's well-informed, animated, and bustling mind never

suffered conversation to stagnate; and Mrs. Sheridan was a most

agreeable companion to an intellectual man.  She was sensible,

ingenious, unassuming, yet communicative.  I recollect, with

satisfaction, many pleasing hours which I passed with her under the

hospitable roof of her husband, who was to me a very kind friend.

Her novel, entitled Memoirs of Miss Sydney Biddulph, contains an

excellent moral while it inculcates a future state of retribution;

and what it teaches is impressed upon the mind by a series of as

deep distress as can affect humanity, in the amiable and pious

heroine who goes to her grave unrelieved, but resigned, and full of

hope of 'heaven's mercy.'  Johnson paid her this high compliment

upon it: 'I know not, Madam, that you have a right, upon moral

principles, to make your readers suffer so much.'



Mr. Thomas Davies the actor, who then kept a bookseller's shop in

Russel-street, Covent-garden, told me that Johnson was very much

his friend, and came frequently to his house, where he more than

once invited me to meet him; but by some unlucky accident or other

he was prevented from coming to us.



Mr. Thomas Davies was a man of good understanding and talents, with

the advantage of a liberal education.  Though somewhat pompous, he

was an entertaining companion; and his literary performances have

no inconsiderable share of merit.  He was a friendly and very

hospitable man.  Both he and his wife, (who has been celebrated for

her beauty,) though upon the stage for many years, maintained an

uniform decency of character; and Johnson esteemed them, and lived

in as easy an intimacy with them, as with any family which he used

to visit.  Mr. Davies recollected several of Johnson's remarkable

sayings, and was one of the best of the many imitators of his voice

and manner, while relating them.  He increased my impatience more

and more to see the extraordinary man whose works I highly valued,

and whose conversation was reported to be so peculiarly excellent.



At last, on Monday the 16th of May, when I was sitting in Mr.

Davies's back-parlour, after having drunk tea with him and Mrs.

Davies, Johnson unexpectedly came into the shop; and Mr. Davies

having perceived him through the glass-door in the room in which we

were sitting, advancing towards us,--he announced his aweful

approach to me, somewhat in the manner of an actor in the part of

Horatio, when he addresses Hamlet on the appearance of his father's

ghost, 'Look, my Lord, it comes.'  I found that I had a very

perfect idea of Johnson's figure, from the portrait of him painted

by Sir Joshua Reynolds soon after he had published his Dictionary,

in the attitude of sitting in his easy chair in deep meditation,

which was the first picture his friend did for him, which Sir

Joshua very kindly presented to me, and from which an engraving has

been made for this work.  Mr. Davies mentioned my name, and

respectfully introduced me to him.  I was much agitated; and

recollecting his prejudice against the Scotch, of which I had heard

much, I said to Davies, 'Don't tell where I come from.'--'From

Scotland,' cried Davies roguishly.  'Mr. Johnson, (said I) I do

indeed come from Scotland, but I cannot help it.'  I am willing to

flatter myself that I meant this as light pleasantry to sooth and

conciliate him, and not as an humiliating abasement at the expence

of my country.  But however that might be, this speech was somewhat

unlucky; for with that quickness of wit for which he was so

remarkable, he seized the expression 'come from Scotland,' which I

used in the sense of being of that country; and, as if I had said

that I had come away from it, or left it, retorted, 'That, Sir, I

find, is what a very great many of your countrymen cannot help.'

This stroke stunned me a good deal; and when we had sat down, I

felt myself not a little embarrassed, and apprehensive of what

might come next.  He then addressed himself to Davies: 'What do you

think of Garrick?  He has refused me an order for the play for Miss

Williams, because he knows the house will be full, and that an

order would be worth three shillings.'  Eager to take any opening

to get into conversation with him, I ventured to say, 'O, Sir, I

cannot think Mr. Garrick would grudge such a trifle to you.'  'Sir,

(said he, with a stern look,) I have known David Garrick longer

than you have done: and I know no right you have to talk to me on

the subject.'  Perhaps I deserved this check; for it was rather

presumptuous in me, an entire stranger, to express any doubt of the

justice of his animadversion upon his old acquaintance and pupil.*

I now felt myself much mortified, and began to think that the hope

which I had long indulged of obtaining his acquaintance was

blasted.  And, in truth, had not my ardour been uncommonly strong,

and my resolution uncommonly persevering, so rough a reception

might have deterred me for ever from making any further attempts.

Fortunately, however, I remained upon the field not wholly

discomfited.





* That this was a momentary sally against Garrick there can be no

doubt; for at Johnson's desire he had, some years before, given a

benefit-night at his theatre to this very person, by which she had

got two hundred pounds.  Johnson, indeed, upon all other occasions,

when I was in his company praised the very liberal charity of

Garrick.  I once mentioned to him, 'It is observed, Sir, that you

attack Garrick yourself, but will suffer nobody else to do it.'

Johnson, (smiling) 'Why, Sir, that is true.'--BOSWELL.





I was highly pleased with the extraordinary vigour of his

conversation, and regretted that I was drawn away from it by an

engagement at another place.  I had, for a part of the evening,

been left alone with him, and had ventured to make an observation

now and then, which he received very civilly; so that I was

satisfied that though there was a roughness in his manner, there

was no ill-nature in his disposition.  Davies followed me to the

door, and when I complained to him a little of the hard blows which

the great man had given me, he kindly took upon him to console me

by saying, 'Don't be uneasy.  I can see he likes you very well.'
