




( Part Five )



What I have preserved of his conversation during the remainder of

my stay in London at this time, is only what follows: I told him

that when I objected to keeping company with a notorious infidel, a

celebrated friend of ours said to me, 'I do not think that men who

live laxly in the world, as you and I do, can with propriety assume

such an authority.  Dr. Johnson may, who is uniformly exemplary in

his conduct.  But it is not very consistent to shun an infidel to-

day, and get drunk to-morrow.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, this is sad

reasoning.  Because a man cannot be right in all things, is he to

be right in nothing?  Because a man sometimes gets drunk, is he

therefore to steal?  This doctrine would very soon bring a man to

the gallows.'



He, I know not why, shewed upon all occasions an aversion to go to

Ireland, where I proposed to him that we should make a tour.

JOHNSON.  'It is the last place where I should wish to travel.'

BOSWELL.  'Should you not like to see Dublin, Sir?'  JOHNSON.  'No,

Sir!  Dublin is only a worse capital.'  BOSWELL.  'Is not the

Giant's-Causeway worth seeing?'  JOHNSON.  'Worth seeing? yes; but

not worth going to see.'



Yet he had a kindness for the Irish nation, and thus generously

expressed himself to a gentleman from that country, on the subject

of an UNION which artful Politicians have often had in view--'Do

not make an union with us, Sir.  We should unite with you, only to

rob you.  We should have robbed the Scotch, if they had had any

thing of which we could have robbed them.'



Of an acquaintance of ours, whose manners and every thing about

him, though expensive, were coarse, he said, 'Sir, you see in him

vulgar prosperity.'



A foreign minister of no very high talents, who had been in his

company for a considerable time quite overlooked, happened luckily

to mention that he had read some of his Rambler in Italian, and

admired it much.  This pleased him greatly; he observed that the

title had been translated, Il Genio errante, though I have been

told it was rendered more ludicrously, Il Vagabondo; and finding

that this minister gave such a proof of his taste, he was all

attention to him, and on the first remark which he made, however

simple, exclaimed, 'The Ambassadour says well--His Excellency

observes--'  And then he expanded and enriched the little that had

been said, in so strong a manner, that it appeared something of

consequence.  This was exceedingly entertaining to the company who

were present, and many a time afterwards it furnished a pleasant

topick of merriment: 'The Ambassadour says well,' became a

laughable term of applause, when no mighty matter had been

expressed.



I left London on Monday, October 15, and accompanied Colonel Stuart

to Chester, where his regiment was to lye for some time.



1780: AETAT. 71.]--In 1780, the world was kept in impatience for

the completion of his Lives of the Poets, upon which he was

employed so far as his indolence allowed him to labour.



His friend Dr. Lawrence having now suffered the greatest affliction

to which a man is liable, and which Johnson himself had felt in the

most severe manner; Johnson wrote to him in an admirable strain of

sympathy and pious consolation.





'TO DR. LAWRENCE.



'DEAR SIR,--At a time when all your friends ought to shew their

kindness, and with a character which ought to make all that know

you your friends, you may wonder that you have yet heard nothing

from me.



'I have been hindered by a vexatious and incessant cough, for which

within these ten days I have been bled once, fasted four or five

times, taken physick five times, and opiates, I think, six.  This

day it seems to remit.



'The loss, dear Sir, which you have lately suffered, I felt many

years ago, and know therefore how much has been taken from you, and

how little help can be had from consolation.  He that outlives a

wife whom he has long loved, sees himself disjoined from the only

mind that has the same hopes, and fears, and interest; from the

only companion with whom he has shared much good or evil; and with

whom he could set his mind at liberty, to retrace the past or

anticipate the future.  The continuity of being is lacerated; the

settled course of sentiment and action is stopped; and life stands

suspended and motionless, till it is driven by external causes into

a new channel.  But the time of suspense is dreadful.



'Our first recourse in this distressed solitude, is, perhaps for

want of habitual piety, to a gloomy acquiescence in necessity.  Of

two mortal beings, one must lose the other; but surely there is a

higher and better comfort to be drawn from the consideration of

that Providence which watches over all, and a belief that the

living and the dead are equally in the hands of God, who will

reunite those whom he has separated; or who sees that it is best

not to reunite.  I am, dear Sir, your most affectionate, and most

humble servant,



'January 20, 1780.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





On the 2nd of May I wrote to him, and requested that we might have

another meeting somewhere in the North of England, in the autumn of

this year.



From Mr. Langton I received soon after this time a letter, of which

I extract a passage, relative both to Mr. Beauclerk and Dr.

Johnson.



'The melancholy information you have received concerning Mr.

Beauclerk's death is true.  Had his talents been directed in any

sufficient degree as they ought, I have always been strongly of

opinion that they were calculated to make an illustrious figure;

and that opinion, as it had been in part formed upon Dr. Johnson's

judgment, receives more and more confirmation by hearing what,

since his death, Dr. Johnson has said concerning them; a few

evenings ago, he was at Mr. Vesey's, where Lord Althorpe, who was

one of a numerous company there, addressed Dr. Johnson on the

subject of Mr. Beauclerk's death, saying, "Our CLUB has had a great

loss since we met last."  He replied, "A loss, that perhaps the

whole nation could not repair!"  The Doctor then went on to speak

of his endowments, and particularly extolled the wonderful ease

with which he uttered what was highly excellent.  He said, that "no

man ever was so free when he was going to say a good thing, from a

LOOK that expressed that it was coming; or, when he had said it,

from a look that expressed that it had come."  At Mr. Thrale's,

some days before when we were talking on the same subject, he said,

referring to the same idea of his wonderful facility, "That

Beauclerk's talents were those which he had felt himself more

disposed to envy, than those of any whom he had known."



'On the evening I have spoken of above, at Mr. Vesey's, you would

have been much gratified, as it exhibited an instance of the high

importance in which Dr. Johnson's character is held, I think even

beyond any I ever before was witness to.  The company consisted

chiefly of ladies, among whom were the Duchess Dowager of Portland,

the Duchess of Beaufort, whom I suppose from her rank I must name

before her mother Mrs. Boscawen, and her elder sister Mrs. Lewson,

who was likewise there; Lady Lucan, Lady Clermont, and others of

note both for their station and understandings.  Among the

gentlemen were Lord Althorpe, whom I have before named, Lord

Macartney, Sir Joshua Reynolds, Lord Lucan, Mr. Wraxal, whose book

you have probably seen, The Tour to the Northern Parts of Europe; a

very agreeable ingenious man; Dr. Warren, Mr. Pepys, the Master in

Chancery, whom I believe you know, and Dr. Barnard, the Provost of

Eton.  As soon as Dr. Johnson was come in and had taken a chair,

the company began to collect round him, till they became not less

than four, if not five, deep; those behind standing, and listening

over the heads of those that were sitting near him.  The

conversation for some time was chiefly between Dr. Johnson and the

Provost of Eton, while the others contributed occasionally their

remarks.'



On his birth-day, Johnson has this note: 'I am now beginning the

seventy-second year of my life, with more strength of body, and

greater vigour of mind, than I think is common at that age.'  But

still he complains of sleepless nights and idle days, and

forgetfulness, or neglect of resolutions.  He thus pathetically

expresses himself,--'Surely I shall not spend my whole life with my

own total disapprobation.'



Mr. Macbean, whom I have mentioned more than once, as one of

Johnson's humble friends, a deserving but unfortunate man, being

now oppressed by age and poverty, Johnson solicited the Lord

Chancellor Thurlow, to have him admitted into the Charterhouse.  I

take the liberty to insert his Lordship's answer, as I am eager to

embrace every occasion of augmenting the respectable notion which

should ever be entertained of my illustrious friend:--





'TO DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON.



'London, October 24, 1780.



'SIR,



'I have this moment received your letter, dated the 19th, and

returned from Bath.



'In the beginning of the summer I placed one in the Chartreux,

without the sanction of a recommendation so distinct and so

authoritative as yours of Macbean; and I am afraid, that according

to the establishment of the House, the opportunity of making the

charity so good amends will not soon recur.  But whenever a vacancy

shall happen, if you'll favour me with notice of it, I will try to

recommend him to the place, even though it should not be my turn to

nominate.  I am, Sir, with great regard, your most faithful and

obedient servant,



'THURLOW.'





Being disappointed in my hopes of meeting Johnson this year, so

that I could hear none of his admirable sayings, I shall compensate

for this want by inserting a collection of them, for which I am

indebted to my worthy friend Mr. Langton, whose kind communications

have been separately interwoven in many parts of this work.  Very

few articles of this collection were committed to writing by

himself, he not having that habit; which he regrets, and which

those who know the numerous opportunities he had of gathering the

rich fruits of Johnsonian wit and wisdom, must ever regret.  I

however found, in conversations with him, that a good store of

Johnsoniana was treasured in his mind; and I compared it to

Herculaneum, or some old Roman field, which when dug, fully rewards

the labour employed.  The authenticity of every article is

unquestionable.  For the expression, I, who wrote them down in his

presence, am partly answerable.



'There is nothing more likely to betray a man into absurdity than

CONDESCENSION; when he seems to suppose his understanding too

powerful for his company.'



'Having asked Mr. Langton if his father and mother had sat for

their pictures, which he thought it right for each generation of a

family to do, and being told they had opposed it, he said, "Sir,

among the anfractuosities of the human mind, I know not if it may

not be one, that there is a superstitious reluctance to sit for a

picture."'



'John Gilbert Cooper related, that soon after the publication of

his Dictionary, Garrick being asked by Johnson what people said of

it, told him, that among other animadversions, it was objected that

he cited authorities which were beneath the dignity of such a work,

and mentioned Richardson.  "Nay, (said Johnson,) I have done worse

than that: I have cited THEE, David."'



'When in good humour he would talk of his own writings with a

wonderful frankness and candour, and would even criticise them with

the closest severity.  One day, having read over one of his

Ramblers, Mr. Langton asked him, how he liked that paper; he shook

his head, and answered, "too wordy."  At another time, when one was

reading his tragedy of Irene to a company at a house in the

country, he left the room; and somebody having asked him the reason

of this, he replied, "Sir, I thought it had been better."'



'He related, that he had once in a dream a contest of wit with some

other person, and that he was very much mortified by imagining that

his opponent had the better of him.  "Now, (said he,) one may mark

here the effect of sleep in weakening the power of reflection; for

had not my judgement failed me, I should have seen, that the wit of

this supposed antagonist, by whose superiority I felt myself

depressed, was as much furnished by me, as that which I thought I

had been uttering in my own character."'



'Of Sir Joshua Reynolds, he said, "Sir, I know no man who has

passed through life with more observation than Reynolds."'



'He repeated to Mr. Langton, with great energy, in the Greek, our

SAVIOUR'S gracious expression concerning the forgiveness of Mary

Magdalen, '[Greek text omitted].  "Thy faith hath saved thee; go in

peace."  He said, "the manner of this dismission is exceedingly

affecting."'



'Talking of the Farce of High Life below Stairs, he said, "Here is

a Farce, which is really very diverting when you see it acted; and

yet one may read it, and not know that one has been reading any

thing at all."'



'He used at one time to go occasionally to the green room of Drury-

lane Theatre, where he was much regarded by the players, and was

very easy and facetious with them.  He had a very high opinion of

Mrs. Clive's comick powers, and conversed more with her than with

any of them.  He said, "Clive, Sir, is a good thing to sit by; she

always understands what you say."  And she said of him, "I love to

sit by Dr. Johnson; he always entertains me."  One night, when The

Recruiting Officer was acted, he said to Mr. Holland, who had been

expressing an apprehension that Dr. Johnson would disdain the works

of Farquhar; "No, Sir, I think Farquhar a man whose writings have

considerable merit."'



'His friend Garrick was so busy in conducting the drama, that they

could not have so much intercourse as Mr. Garrick used to profess

an anxious wish that there should be.  There might, indeed, be

something in the contemptuous severity as to the merit of acting,

which his old preceptor nourished in himself, that would mortify

Garrick after the great applause which he received from the

audience.  For though Johnson said of him, "Sir, a man who has a

nation to admire him every night, may well be expected to be

somewhat elated;" yet he would treat theatrical matters with a

ludicrous slight.  He mentioned one evening, "I met David coming

off the stage, drest in a woman's riding-hood, when he acted in The

Wonder; I came full upon him, and I believe he was not pleased."'



'Once he asked Tom Davies, whom he saw drest in a fine suit of

clothes, "And what art thou to-night?"  Tom answered, "The Thane of

Ross;" (which it will be recollected is a very inconsiderable

character.) "O brave!" said Johnson.



'Of Mr. Longley, at Rochester, a gentleman of very considerable

learning, whom Dr. Johnson met there, he said, "My heart warms

towards him.  I was surprised to find in him such a nice

acquaintance with the metre in the learned languages; though I was

somewhat mortified that I had it not so much to myself, as I should

have thought."'



'Talking of the minuteness with which people will record the

sayings of eminent persons, a story was told, that when Pope was on

a visit to Spence at Oxford, as they looked from the window they

saw a Gentleman Commoner, who was just come in from riding, amusing

himself with whipping at a post.  Pope took occasion to say, "That

young gentleman seems to have little to do."  Mr. Beauclerk

observed, "Then, to be sure, Spence turned round and wrote that

down;" and went on to say to Dr. Johnson, "Pope, Sir, would have

said the same of you, if he had seen you distilling."  JOHNSON.

"Sir, if Pope had told me of my distilling, I would have told him

of his grotto."'



'He would allow no settled indulgence of idleness upon principle,

and always repelled every attempt to urge excuses for it.  A friend

one day suggested, that it was not wholesome to study soon after

dinner.  JOHNSON.  "Ah, Sir, don't give way to such a fancy.  At

one time of my life I had taken it into my head that it was not

wholesome to study between breakfast and dinner."'



'Dr. Goldsmith, upon occasion of Mrs. Lennox's bringing out a play,

said to Dr. Johnson at THE CLUB, that a person had advised him to

go and hiss it, because she had attacked Shakspeare in her book

called Shakspeare Illustrated.  JOHNSON.  "And did not you tell him

he was a rascal?"  GOLDSMITH.  "No, Sir, I did not.  Perhaps he

might not mean what he said."  JOHNSON.  "Nay, Sir, if he lied, it

is a different thing."  Colman slily said, (but it is believed Dr.

Johnson did not hear him,) "Then the proper expression should have

been,--Sir, if you don't lie, you're a rascal."'



'His affection for Topham Beauclerk was so great, that when

Beauclerk was labouring under that severe illness which at last

occasioned his death, Johnson said, (with a voice faultering with

emotion,) "Sir, I would walk to the extent of the diameter of the

earth to save Beauclerk."'



'Johnson was well acquainted with Mr. Dossie, authour of a treatise

on Agriculture; and said of him, "Sir, of the objects which the

Society of Arts have chiefly in view, the chymical effects of

bodies operating upon other bodies, he knows more than almost any

man."  Johnson, in order to give Mr. Dossie his vote to be a member

of this Society, paid up an arrear which had run on for two years.

On this occasion he mentioned a circumstance as characteristick of

the Scotch.  "One of that nation, (said he,) who had been a

candidate, against whom I had voted, came up to me with a civil

salutation.  Now, Sir, this is their way.  An Englishman would have

stomached it, and been sulky, and never have taken further notice

of you; but a Scotchman, Sir, though you vote nineteen times

against him, will accost you with equal complaisance after each

time, and the twentieth time, Sir, he will get your vote."'



'Talking on the subject of toleration, one day when some friends

were with him in his study, he made his usual remark, that the

State has a right to regulate the religion of the people, who are

the children of the State.  A clergyman having readily acquiesced

in this, Johnson, who loved discussion, observed, "But, Sir, you

must go round to other States than your own.  You do not know what

a Bramin has to say for himself.  In short, Sir, I have got no

further than this: Every man has a right to utter what he thinks

truth, and every other man has a right to knock him down for it.

Martyrdom is the test."'



'Goldsmith one day brought to THE CLUB a printed Ode, which he,

with others, had been hearing read by its authour in a publick room

at the rate of five shillings each for admission.  One of the

company having read it aloud, Dr. Johnson said, "Bolder words and

more timorous meaning, I think never were brought together."



'Talking of Gray's Odes, he said, "They are forced plants raised in

a hot-bed; and they are poor plants; they are but cucumbers after

all."  A gentleman present, who had been running down Ode-writing

in general, as a bad species of poetry, unluckily said, "Had they

been literally cucumbers, they had been better things than Odes."--

"Yes, Sir, (said Johnson,) for a HOG."'



'It is very remarkable, that he retained in his memory very slight

and trivial, as well as important things.  As an instance of this,

it seems that an inferiour domestick of the Duke of Leeds had

attempted to celebrate his Grace's marriage in such homely rhimes

as he could make; and this curious composition having been sung to

Dr. Johnson he got it by heart, and used to repeat it in a very

pleasant manner.  Two of the stanzas were these:--





    "When the Duke of Leeds shall married be

     To a fine young lady of high quality,

     How happy will that gentlewoman be

     In his Grace of Leeds's good company.



     She shall have all that's fine and fair,

     And the best of silk and satin shall wear;

     And ride in a coach to take the air,

     And have a house in St. James's-square."





To hear a man, of the weight and dignity of Johnson, repeating such

humble attempts at poetry, had a very amusing effect.  He, however,

seriously observed of the last stanza repeated by him, that it

nearly comprized all the advantages that wealth can give.



'An eminent foreigner, when he was shewn the British Museum, was

very troublesome with many absurd inquiries.  "Now there, Sir,

(said he,) is the difference between an Englishman and a Frenchman.

A Frenchman must be always talking, whether he knows any thing of

the matter or not; an Englishman is content to say nothing, when he

has nothing to say."



'His unjust contempt for foreigners was, indeed, extreme.  One

evening, at old Slaughter's coffee-house, when a number of them

were talking loud about little matters, he said, "Does not this

confirm old Meynell's observation--For any thing I see, foreigners

are fools."'



'He said, that once, when he had a violent tooth-ache, a Frenchman

accosted him thus:--"Ah, Monsieur vous etudiez trop."'



'Colman, in a note on his translation of Terence, talking of

Shakspeare's learning, asks, "What says Farmer to this?  What says

Johnson?"  Upon this he observed, "Sir, let Farmer answer for

himself: I never engaged in this controversy.  I always said,

Shakspeare had Latin enough to grammaticise his English."'



'A clergyman, whom he characterised as one who loved to say little

oddities, was affecting one day, at a Bishop's table, a sort of

slyness and freedom not in character, and repeated, as if part of

The Old Man's Wish, a song by Dr. Walter Pope, a verse bordering on

licentiousness.  Johnson rebuked him in the finest manner, by first

shewing him that he did not know the passage he was aiming at, and

thus humbling him:



"Sir, that is not the song: it is thus."  And he gave it right.

Then looking stedfastly on him, "Sir, there is a part of that song

which I should wish to exemplify in my own life:--





    "May I govern my passions with absolute sway!"'





'He used frequently to observe, that men might be very eminent in a

profession, without our perceiving any particular power of mind in

them in conversation.  "It seems strange (said he,) that a man

should see so far to the right, who sees so short a way to the

left.  Burke is the only man whose common conversation corresponds

with the general fame which he has in the world.  Take up whatever

topick you please, he is ready to meet you."'



'Mr. Langton, when a very young man, read Dodsley's Cleone, a

Tragedy, to him, not aware of his extreme impatience to be read to.

As it went on he turned his face to the back of his chair, and put

himself into various attitudes, which marked his uneasiness.  At

the end of an act, however, he said, "Come let's have some more,

let's go into the slaughter-house again, Lanky.  But I am afraid

there is more blood than brains."



'Snatches of reading (said he,) will not make a Bentley or a

Clarke.  They are, however, in a certain degree advantageous.  I

would put a child into a library (where no unfit books are) and let

him read at his choice.  A child should not be discouraged from

reading any thing that he takes a liking to, from a notion that it

is above his reach.  If that be the ease, the child will soon find

it out and desist; if not, he of course gains the instruction;

which is so much the more likely to come, from the inclination with

which he takes up the study.'



'A gentleman who introduced his brother to Dr. Johnson was earnest

to recommend him to the Doctor's notice, which he did by saying,

"When we have sat together some time, you'll find my brother grow

very entertaining."--"Sir, (said Johnson,) I can wait."'



'In the latter part of his life, in order to satisfy himself

whether his mental faculties were impaired, he resolved that he

would try to learn a new language, and fixed upon the Low Dutch,

for that purpose, and this he continued till he had read about one

half of Thomas a Kempis; and finding that there appeared no

abatement of his power of acquisition, he then desisted, as

thinking the experiment had been duly tried.'



'Mr. Langton and he having gone to see a Freemason's funeral

procession, when they were at Rochester, and some solemn musick

being played on French horns, he said, "This is the first time that

I have ever been affected by musical sounds;" adding, "that the

impression made upon him was of a melancholy kind."  Mr. Langton

saying, that this effect was a fine one,--JOHNSON.  "Yes, if it

softens the mind, so as to prepare it for the reception of salutary

feelings, it may be good: but inasmuch as it is melancholy per se,

it is bad."'



'Goldsmith had long a visionary project, that some time or other

when his circumstances should be easier, he would go to Aleppo, in

order to acquire a knowledge as far as might be of any arts

peculiar to the East, and introduce them into Britain.  When this

was talked of in Dr. Johnson's company, he said, "Of all men

Goldsmith is the most unfit to go out upon such an inquiry; for he

is utterly ignorant of such arts as we already possess, and

consequently could not know what would be accessions to our present

stock of mechanical knowledge.  Sir, he would bring home a grinding

barrow, which you see in every street in London, and think that he

had furnished a wonderful improvement."'



'Greek, Sir, (said he,) is like lace; every man gets as much of it

as he can.'



'Johnson one day gave high praise to Dr. Bentley's verses in

Dodsley's Collection, which he recited with his usual energy.  Dr.

Adam Smith, who was present, observed in his decisive professorial

manner, "Very well--Very well."  Johnson however added, "Yes, they

ARE very well, Sir; but you may observe in what manner they are

well.  They are the forcible verses of a man of a strong mind, but

not accustomed to write verse; for there is some uncouthness in the

expression."'



'Drinking tea one day at Garrick's with Mr. Langton, he was

questioned if he was not somewhat of a heretick as to Shakspeare;

said Garrick, "I doubt he is a little of an infidel."--"Sir, (said

Johnson,) I will stand by the lines I have written on Shakspeare in

my Prologue at the opening of your Theatre."  Mr. Langton

suggested, that in the line





    "And panting Time toil'd after him in vain,"





Johnson might have had in his eye the passage in The Tempest, where

Prospero says of Miranda,





    "-----She will outstrip all praise,

     And make it halt behind her."





Johnson said nothing.  Garrick then ventured to observe, "I do not

think that the happiest line in the praise of Shakspeare."  Johnson

exclaimed (smiling,) "Prosaical rogues! next time I write, I'll

make both time and space pant."'



'It is well known that there was formerly a rude custom for those

who were sailing upon the Thames, to accost each other as they

passed, in the most abusive language they could invent, generally,

however, with as much satirical humour as they were capable of

producing.  Addison gives a specimen of this ribaldry, in Number

383 of The Spectator, when Sir Roger de Coverly and he are going to

Spring-garden.  Johnson was once eminently successful in this

species of contest; a fellow having attacked him with some coarse

raillery, Johnson answered him thus, "Sir, your wife, under

pretence of keeping a bawdy-house, is a receiver of stolen goods."

One evening when he and Mr. Burke and Mr. Langton were in company

together, and the admirable scolding of Timon of Athens was

mentioned, this instance of Johnson's was quoted, and thought to

have at least equal excellence.'



'As Johnson always allowed the extraordinary talents of Mr. Burke,

so Mr. Burke was fully sensible of the wonderful powers of Johnson.

Mr. Langton recollects having passed an evening with both of them,

when Mr. Burke repeatedly entered upon topicks which it was evident

he would have illustrated with extensive knowledge and richness of

expression; but Johnson always seized upon the conversation, in

which, however, he acquitted himself in a most masterly manner.  As

Mr. Burke and Mr. Langton were walking home, Mr. Burke observed

that Johnson had been very great that night; Mr. Langton joined in

this, but added, he could have wished to hear more from another

person; (plainly intimating that he meant Mr. Burke.) "O, no (said

Mr. Burke,) it is enough for me to have rung the bell to him."'



'Beauclerk having observed to him of one of their friends, that he

was aukward at counting money, "Why, Sir, (said Johnson,) I am

likewise aukward at counting money.  But then, Sir, the reason is

plain; I have had very little money to count."'



'Goldsmith, upon being visited by Johnson one day in the Temple,

said to him with a little jealousy of the appearance of his

accommodation, "I shall soon be in better chambers than these."

Johnson at the same time checked him and paid him a handsome

compliment, implying that a man of his talents should be above

attention to such distinctions,--"Nay, Sir, never mind that.  Nil

te quaesiveris extra."'



'When Mr. Vesey was proposed as a member of The LITERARY CLUB, Mr.

Burke began by saying that he was a man of gentle manners.  "Sir,

(said Johnson,) you need say no more.  When you have said a man of

gentle manners; you have said enough."'



'The late Mr. Fitzherbert told Mr. Langton that Johnson said to

him, "Sir, a man has no more right to SAY an uncivil thing, than to

ACT one; no more right to say a rude thing to another than to knock

him down"'



'Richardson had little conversation, except about his own works, of

which Sir Joshua Reynolds said he was always willing to talk, and

glad to have them introduced.  Johnson when he carried Mr. Langton

to see him, professed that he could bring him out into

conversation, and used this allusive expression, "Sir, I can make

him REAR."  But he failed; for in that interview Richardson said

little else than that there lay in the room a translation of his

Clarissa into German.'



'Once when somebody produced a newspaper in which there was a

letter of stupid abuse of Sir Joshua Reynolds, of which Johnson

himself came in for a share,--"Pray," said he, "let us have it read

aloud from beginning to end;" which being done, he with a ludicrous

earnestness, and not directing his look to any particular person,

called out, "Are we alive after all this satire!"'



'Of Dr. Goldsmith he said, "No man was more foolish when he had not

a pen in his hand, or more wise when he had."'



'An observation of Bathurst's may be mentioned, which Johnson

repeated, appearing to acknowledge it to be well founded, namely,

it was somewhat remarkable how seldom, on occasion of coming into

the company of any new person, one felt any wish or inclination to

see him again.'



1781: AETAT. 72.]--In 1781 Johnson at last completed his Lives of

the Poets, of which he gives this account: 'Some time in March I

finished the Lives of the Poets, which I wrote in my usual way,

dilatorily and hastily, unwilling to work, and working with vigour

and haste.'  In a memorandum previous to this, he says of them:

'Written, I hope, in such a manner as may tend to the promotion of

piety.'



The booksellers, justly sensible of the great additional value of

the copy-right, presented him with another hundred pounds, over and

above two hundred, for which his agreement was to furnish such

prefaces as he thought fit.



As he was so good as to make me a present of the greatest part of

the original and indeed only manuscript of this admirable work, I

have an opportunity of observing with wonder, the correctness with

which he rapidly struck off such glowing composition.



The Life of COWLEY he himself considered as the best of the whole,

on account of the dissertation which it contains on the

Metaphysical Poets.



While the world in general was filled with admiration of Johnson's

Lives of the Poets, there were narrow circles in which prejudice

and resentment were fostered, and from which attacks of different

sorts issued against him.  By some violent Whigs he was arraigned

of injustice to Milton; by some Cambridge men of depreciating Gray;

and his expressing with a dignified freedom what he really thought

of George, Lord Lyttelton, gave offence to some of the friends of

that nobleman, and particularly produced a declaration of war

against him from Mrs. Montagu, the ingenious Essayist on

Shakspeare, between whom and his Lordship a commerce of reciprocal

compliments had long been carried on.  In this war the smaller

powers in alliance with him were of course led to engage, at least

on the defensive, and thus I for one was excluded from the

enjoyment of 'A Feast of Reason,' such as Mr. Cumberland has

described, with a keen, yet just and delicate pen, in his Observer.

These minute inconveniences gave not the least disturbance to

Johnson.  He nobly said, when I talked to him of the feeble, though

shrill outcry which had been raised, 'Sir, I considered myself as

entrusted with a certain portion of truth.  I have given my opinion

sincerely; let them shew where they think me wrong.'



I wrote to him in February, complaining of having been troubled by

a recurrence of the perplexing question of Liberty and Necessity;--

and mentioning that I hoped soon to meet him again in London.





'TO JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.



'DEAR SIR,--I hoped you had got rid of all this hypocrisy of

misery.  What have you to do with Liberty and Necessity?  Or what

more than to hold your tongue about it?  Do not doubt but I shall

be most heartily glad to see you here again, for I love every part

about you but your affectation of distress.



'I have at last finished my Lives, and have laid up for you a load

of copy, all out of order, so that it will amuse you a long time to

set it right.  Come to me, my dear Bozzy, and let us be as happy as

we can.  We will go again to the Mitre, and talk old times over.  I

am, dear Sir, yours affectionately,



'March 14, 1781.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





On Monday, March 19, I arrived in London, and on Tuesday, the 20th,

met him in Fleet-street, walking, or rather indeed moving along;

for his peculiar march is thus described in a very just and

picturesque manner, in a short Life of him published very soon

after his death:--'When he walked the streets, what with the

constant roll of his head, and the concomitant motion of his body,

he appeared to make his way by that motion, independent of his

feet.'  That he was often much stared at while he advanced in this

manner, may easily be believed; but it was not safe to make sport

of one so robust as he was.  Mr. Langton saw him one day, in a fit

of absence, by a sudden start, drive the load off a porter's back,

and walk forward briskly, without being conscious of what he had

done.  The porter was very angry, but stood still, and eyed the

huge figure with much earnestness, till he was satisfied that his

wisest course was to be quiet, and take up his burthen again.



Our accidental meeting in the street after a long separation was a

pleasing surprize to us both.  He stepped aside with me into

Falcon-court, and made kind inquiries about my family, and as we

were in a hurry going different ways, I promised to call on him

next day; he said he was engaged to go out in the morning.  'Early,

Sir?' said I.  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, a London morning does not go

with the sun.'



I waited on him next evening, and he gave me a great portion of his

original manuscript of his Lives of the Poets, which he had

preserved for me.



I found on visiting his friend, Mr. Thrale, that he was now very

ill, and had removed, I suppose by the solicitation of Mrs. Thrale,

to a house in Grosvenor-square.  I was sorry to see him sadly

changed in his appearance.



He told me I might now have the pleasure to see Dr. Johnson drink

wine again, for he had lately returned to it.  When I mentioned

this to Johnson, he said, 'I drink it now sometimes, but not

socially.'  The first evening that I was with him at Thrale's, I

observed he poured a large quantity of it into a glass, and

swallowed it greedily.  Every thing about his character and manners

was forcible and violent; there never was any moderation; many a

day did he fast, many a year did he refrain from wine; but when he

did eat, it was voraciously; when he did drink wine, it was

copiously.  He could practise abstinence, but not temperance.



Mrs. Thrale and I had a dispute, whether Shakspeare or Milton had

drawn the most admirable picture of a man.*  I was for Shakspeare;

Mrs. Thrale for Milton; and after a fair hearing, Johnson decided

for my opinion.





* The passages considered, according to Boswell's note, were the

portrait of Hamlet's father (Ham. 3. 4. 55-62), and the portrait of

Adam (P. L. 4. 300-303).--ED.





I told him of one of Mr. Burke's playful sallies upon Dean Marlay:

'I don't like the Deanery of Ferns, it sounds so like a BARREN

title.'--'Dr. HEATH should have it;' said I.  Johnson laughed, and

condescending to trifle in the same mode of conceit, suggested Dr.

MOSS.



He said, 'Mrs. Montagu has dropt me.  Now, Sir, there are people

whom one should like very well to drop, but would not wish to be

dropped by.'  He certainly was vain of the society of ladies, and

could make himself very agreeable to them, when he chose it; Sir

Joshua Reynolds agreed with me that he could.  Mr. Gibbon, with his

usual sneer, controverted it, perhaps in resentment of Johnson's

having talked with some disgust of his ugliness, which one would

think a PHILOSOPHER would not mind.  Dean Marlay wittily observed,

'A lady may be vain, when she can turn a wolf-dog into a lap-dog.'



His notion of the duty of a member of Parliament, sitting upon an

election-committee, was very high; and when he was told of a

gentleman upon one of those committees, who read the newspapers

part of the time, and slept the rest, while the merits of a vote

were examined by the counsel; and as an excuse, when challenged by

the chairman for such behaviour, bluntly answered, 'I had made up

my mind upon that case.'--Johnson, with an indignant contempt,

said, 'If he was such a rogue as to make up his mind upon a case

without hearing it, he should not have been such a fool as to tell

it.'  'I think (said Mr. Dudley Long, now North,) the Doctor has

pretty plainly made him out to be both rogue and fool.'



Johnson's profound reverence for the Hierarchy made him expect from

bishops the highest degree of decorum; he was offended even at

their going to taverns; 'A bishop (said he,) has nothing to do at a

tippling-house.  It is not indeed immoral in him to go to a tavern;

neither would it be immoral in him to whip a top in Grosvenor-

square.  But, if he did, I hope the boys would fall upon him, and

apply the whip to HIM.  There are gradations in conduct; there is

morality,--decency,--propriety.  None of these should be violated

by a bishop.  A bishop should not go to a house where he may meet a

young fellow leading out a wench.'  BOSWELL.  'But, Sir, every

tavern does not admit women.'  JOHNSON.  'Depend upon it, Sir, any

tavern will admit a well-drest man and a well-drest woman; they

will not perhaps admit a woman whom they see every night walking by

their door, in the street.  But a well-drest man may lead in a

well-drest woman to any tavern in London.  Taverns sell meat and

drink, and will sell them to any body who can eat and can drink.

You may as well say that a mercer will not sell silks to a woman of

the town.'



He also disapproved of bishops going to routs, at least of their

staying at them longer than their presence commanded respect.  He

mentioned a particular bishop.  'Poh! (said Mrs. Thrale,) the

Bishop of ------ is never minded at a rout.'  BOSWELL.  'When a

bishop places himself in a situation where he has no distinct

character, and is of no consequence, he degrades the dignity of his

order.'  JOHNSON.  'Mr. Boswell, Madam has said it as correctly as

it could be.'



Johnson and his friend, Beauclerk, were once together in company

with several clergymen, who thought that they should appear to

advantage, by assuming the lax jollity of men of the world; which,

as it may be observed in similar cases, they carried to noisy

excess.  Johnson, who they expected would be ENTERTAINED, sat grave

and silent for some time; at last, turning to Beauclerk, he said,

by no means in a whisper, 'This merriment of parsons is mighty

offensive.'



On Friday, March 30, I dined with him at Sir Joshua Reynolds's,

with the Earl of Charlemont, Sir Annesley Stewart, Mr. Eliot of

Port-Eliot, Mr. Burke, Dean Marlay, Mr. Langton; a most agreeable

day, of which I regret that every circumstance is not preserved;

but it is unreasonable to require such a multiplication of

felicity.



Mr. Eliot mentioned a curious liquor peculiar to his country, which

the Cornish fishermen drink.  They call it Mahogany; and it is made

of two parts gin, and one part treacle, well beaten together.  I

begged to have some of it made, which was done with proper skill by

Mr. Eliot.  I thought it very good liquor; and said it was a

counterpart of what is called Athol Porridge in the Highlands of

Scotland, which is a mixture of whisky and honey.  Johnson said,

'that must be a better liquor than the Cornish, for both its

component parts are better.'  He also observed, 'Mahogany must be a

modern name; for it is not long since the wood called mahogany was

known in this country.'  I mentioned his scale of liquors;--claret

for boys,--port for men,--brandy for heroes.  'Then (said Mr.

Burke,) let me have claret: I love to be a boy; to have the

careless gaiety of boyish days.'  JOHNSON.  'I should drink claret

too, if it would give me that; but it does not: it neither makes

boys men, nor men boys.  You'll be drowned by it, before it has any

effect upon you.'



I ventured to mention a ludicrous paragraph in the newspapers, that

Dr. Johnson was learning to dance of Vestris.  Lord Charlemont,

wishing to excite him to talk, proposed in a whisper, that he

should be asked, whether it was true.  'Shall I ask him?' said his

Lordship.  We were, by a great majority, clear for the experiment.

Upon which his Lordship very gravely, and with a courteous air

said, 'Pray, Sir, is it true that you are taking lessons of

Vestris?'  This was risking a good deal, and required the boldness

of a General of Irish Volunteers to make the attempt.  Johnson was

at first startled, and in some heat answered, 'How can your

Lordship ask so simple a question?'  But immediately recovering

himself, whether from unwillingness to be deceived, or to appear

deceived, or whether from real good humour, he kept up the joke:

'Nay, but if any body were to answer the paragraph, and contradict

it, I'd have a reply, and would say, that he who contradicted it

was no friend either to Vestris or me.  For why should not Dr.

Johnson add to his other powers a little corporeal agility?

Socrates learnt to dance at an advanced age, and Cato learnt Greek

at an advanced age.  Then it might proceed to say, that this

Johnson, not content with dancing on the ground, might dance on the

rope; and they might introduce the elephant dancing on the rope.'



On Sunday, April 1, I dined with him at Mr. Thrale's, with Sir

Philip Jennings Clerk and Mr. Perkins, who had the superintendence

of Mr. Thrale's brewery, with a salary of five hundred pounds a

year.  Sir Philip had the appearance of a gentleman of ancient

family, well advanced in life.  He wore his own white hair in a bag

of goodly size, a black velvet coat, with an embroidered waistcoat,

and very rich laced ruffles; which Mrs. Thrale said were old

fashioned, but which, for that reason, I thought the more

respectable, more like a Tory; yet Sir Philip was then in

Opposition in Parliament.  'Ah, Sir, (said Johnson,) ancient

ruffles and modern principles do not agree.'  Sir Philip defended

the Opposition to the American war ably and with temper, and I

joined him.  He said, the majority of the nation was against the

ministry.  JOHNSON.  'I, Sir, am against the ministry; but it is

for having too little of that, of which Opposition thinks they have

too much.  Were I minister, if any man wagged his finger against

me, he should be turned out; for that which it is in the power of

Government to give at pleasure to one or to another, should be

given to the supporters of Government.  If you will not oppose at

the expence of losing your place, your opposition will not be

honest, you will feel no serious grievance; and the present

opposition is only a contest to get what others have.  Sir Robert

Walpole acted as I would do.  As to the American war, the SENSE of

the nation is WITH the ministry.  The majority of those who can

UNDERSTAND is with it; the majority of those who can only HEAR, is

against it; and as those who can only hear are more numerous than

those who can understand, and Opposition is always loudest, a

majority of the rabble will be for Opposition.'



This boisterous vivacity entertained us; but the truth in my

opinion was, that those who could understand the best were against

the American war, as almost every man now is, when the question has

been coolly considered.



Mrs. Thrale gave high praise to Mr. Dudley Long, (now North).

JOHNSON.  'Nay, my dear lady, don't talk so.  Mr. Long's character

is very SHORT.  It is nothing.  He fills a chair.  He is a man of

genteel appearance, and that is all. I know nobody who blasts by

praise as you do: for whenever there is exaggerated praise, every

body is set against a character.  They are provoked to attack it.

Now there is Pepys; you praised that man with such disproportion,

that I was incited to lessen him, perhaps more than he deserves.

His blood is upon your head.  By the same principle, your malice

defeats itself; for your censure is too violent.  And yet, (looking

to her with a leering smile,) she is the first woman in the world,

could she but restrain that wicked tongue of hers;--she would be

the only woman, could she but command that little whirligig.'



Upon the subject of exaggerated praise I took the liberty to say,

that I thought there might be very high praise given to a known

character which deserved it, and therefore it would not be

exaggerated.  Thus, one might say of Mr. Edmund Burke, He is a very

wonderful man.  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir, you would not be safe if

another man had a mind perversely to contradict.  He might answer,

"Where is all the wonder?  Burke is, to be sure, a man of uncommon

abilities, with a great quantity of matter in his mind, and a great

fluency of language in his mouth.  But we are not to be stunned and

astonished by him."  So you see, Sir, even Burke would suffer, not

from any fault of his own, but from your folly.'



Mrs. Thrale mentioned a gentleman who had acquired a fortune of

four thousand a year in trade, but was absolutely miserable,

because he could not talk in company; so miserable, that he was

impelled to lament his situation in the street to ******, whom he

hates, and who he knows despises him.  'I am a most unhappy man,

(said he).  I am invited to conversations.  I go to conversations;

but, alas! I have no conversation.'  JOHNSON.  'Man commonly cannot

be successful in different ways.  This gentleman has spent, in

getting four thousand pounds a year, the time in which he might

have learnt to talk; and now he cannot talk.'  Mr. Perkins made a

shrewd and droll remark: 'If he had got his four thousand a year as

a mountebank, he might have learnt to talk at the same time that he

was getting his fortune.'



Some other gentlemen came in.  The conversation concerning the

person whose character Dr. Johnson had treated so slightingly, as

he did not know his merit, was resumed.  Mrs. Thrale said, 'You

think so of him, Sir, because he is quiet, and does not exert

himself with force.  You'll be saying the same thing of Mr. *****

there, who sits as quiet--.'  This was not well-bred; and Johnson

did not let it pass without correction.  'Nay, Madam, what right

have you to talk thus?  Both Mr. ***** and I have reason to take it

ill.  You may talk so of Mr. *****; but why do you make me do it?

Have I said anything against Mr. *****?  You have set him, that I

might shoot him: but I have not shot him.'



One of the gentlemen said, he had seen three folio volumes of Dr.

Johnson's sayings collected by me.  'I must put you right, Sir,

(said I,) for I am very exact in authenticity.  You could not see

folio volumes, for I have none: you might have seen some in quarto

and octavo.  This is inattention which one should guard against.'

JOHNSON.  'Sir, it is a want of concern about veracity.  He does

not know that he saw any volumes.  If he had seen them he could

have remembered their size.'



Mr. Thrale appeared very lethargick to-day.  I saw him again on

Monday evening, at which time he was not thought to be in immediate

danger; but early in the morning of Wednesday, the 4th, he expired.

Johnson was in the house, and thus mentions the event: 'I felt

almost the last flutter of his pulse, and looked for the last time

upon the face that for fifteen years had never been turned upon me

but with respect and benignity.'  Upon that day there was a Call of

The LITERARY CLUB; but Johnson apologised for his absence by the

following note:--



'MR. JOHNSON knows that Sir Joshua Reynolds and the other gentlemen

will excuse his incompliance with the call, when they are told that

Mr. Thrale died this morning.--Wednesday.'



Mr. Thrale's death was a very essential loss to Johnson, who,

although he did not foresee all that afterwards happened, was

sufficiently convinced that the comforts which Mr. Thrale's family

afforded him, would now in a great measure cease.  He, however,

continued to shew a kind attention to his widow and children as

long as it was acceptable; and he took upon him, with a very

earnest concern, the office of one of his executors, the importance

of which seemed greater than usual to him, from his circumstances

having been always such, that he had scarcely any share in the real

business of life.  His friends of THE CLUB were in hopes that Mr.

Thrale might have made a liberal provision for him for his life,

which, as Mr. Thrale left no son, and a very large fortune, it

would have been highly to his honour to have done; and, considering

Dr. Johnson's age, could not have been of long duration; but he

bequeathed him only two hundred pounds, which was the legacy given

to each of his executors.  I could not but be somewhat diverted by

hearing Johnson talk in a pompous manner of his new office, and

particularly of the concerns of the brewery, which it was at last

resolved should be sold.  Lord Lucan tells a very good story,

which, if not precisely exact, is certainly characteristical: that

when the sale of Thrale's brewery was going forward, Johnson

appeared bustling about, with an ink-horn and pen in his button-

hole, like an excise-man; and on being asked what he really

considered to be the value of the property which was to be disposed

of, answered, 'We are not here to sell a parcel of boilers and

vats, but the potentiality of growing rich, beyond the dreams of

avarice.'



On Friday, April 6, he carried me to dine at a club, which, at his

desire, had been lately formed at the Queen's Arms, in St. Paul's

Church-yard.  He told Mr. Hoole, that he wished to have a City

Club, and asked him to collect one; but, said he, 'Don't let them

be PATRIOTS.'  The company were to-day very sensible, well-behaved

men.



On Friday, April 13, being Good-Friday, I went to St. Clement's

church with him as usual.  There I saw again his old fellow-

collegian, Edwards, to whom I said, 'I think, Sir, Dr. Johnson and

you meet only at Church.'--'Sir, (said he,) it is the best place we

can meet in, except Heaven, and I hope we shall meet there too.'

Dr. Johnson told me, that there was very little communication

between Edwards and him, after their unexpected renewal of

acquaintance.  'But, (said he, smiling), he met me once, and said,

"I am told you have written a very pretty book called The Rambler."

I was unwilling that he should leave the world in total darkness,

and sent him a set.'



Mr. Berrenger visited him to-day, and was very pleasing. We talked

of an evening society for conversation at a house in town, of which

we were all members, but of which Johnson said, 'It will never do,

Sir.  There is nothing served about there, neither tea, nor coffee,

nor lemonade, nor any thing whatever; and depend upon it, Sir, a

man does not love to go to a place from whence he comes out exactly

as he went in.'  I endeavoured, for argument's sake, to maintain

that men of learning and talents might have very good intellectual

society, without the aid of any little gratifications of the

senses.  Berrenger joined with Johnson, and said, that without

these any meeting would be dull and insipid.  He would therefore

have all the slight refreshments; nay, it would not be amiss to

have some cold meat, and a bottle of wine upon a side-board.  'Sir,

(said Johnson to me, with an air of triumph,) Mr. Berrenger knows

the world.  Every body loves to have good things furnished to them

without any trouble.  I told Mrs. Thrale once, that as she did not

choose to have card tables, she should have a profusion of the best

sweetmeats, and she would be sure to have company enough come to

her.'



On Sunday, April 15, being Easter-day, after solemn worship in St.

Paul's church, I found him alone; Dr. Scott of the Commons came in.



We talked of the difference between the mode of education at

Oxford, and that in those Colleges where instruction is chiefly

conveyed by lectures.  JOHNSON.  'Lectures were once useful; but

now, when all can read, and books are so numerous, lectures are

unnecessary.  If your attention fails, and you miss a part of a

lecture, it is lost; you cannot go back as you do upon a book.'

Dr. Scott agreed with him.  'But yet (said I), Dr. Scott, you

yourself gave lectures at Oxford.'  He smiled.  'You laughed (then

said I,) at those who came to you.'



Dr. Scott left us, and soon afterwards we went to dinner.  Our

company consisted of Mrs. Williams, Mrs. Desmoulins, Mr. Levett,

Mr. Allen, the printer, and Mrs. Hall, sister of the Reverend Mr.

John Wesley, and resembling him, as I thought, both in figure and

manner.  Johnson produced now, for the first time, some handsome

silver salvers, which he told me he had bought fourteen years ago;

so it was a great day.  I was not a little amused by observing

Allen perpetually struggling to talk in the manner of Johnson, like

the little frog in the fable blowing himself up to resemble the

stately ox.



He mentioned a thing as not unfrequent, of which I had never heard

before,--being CALLED, that is, hearing one's name pronounced by

the voice of a known person at a great distance, far beyond the

possibility of being reached by any sound uttered by human organs.

'An acquaintance, on whose veracity I can depend, told me, that

walking home one evening to Kilmarnock, he heard himself called

from a wood, by the voice of a brother who had gone to America; and

the next packet brought accounts of that brother's death.'  Macbean

asserted that this inexplicable CALLING was a thing very well

known.  Dr. Johnson said, that one day at Oxford, as he was turning

the key of his chamber, he heard his mother distinctly call SAM.

She was then at Lichfleld; but nothing ensued.  This phaenomenon

is, I think, as wonderful as any other mysterious fact, which many

people are very slow to believe, or rather, indeed, reject with an

obstinate contempt.



Some time after this, upon his making a remark which escaped my

attention, Mrs. Williams and Mrs. Hall were both together striving

to answer him.  He grew angry, and called out loudly, 'Nay, when

you both speak at once, it is intolerable.'  But checking himself,

and softening, he said, 'This one may say, though you ARE ladies.'

Then he brightened into gay humour, and addressed them in the words

of one of the songs in The Beggar's Opera:--





    'But two at a time there's no mortal can bear.'





'What, Sir, (said I,) are you going to turn Captain Macheath?'

There was something as pleasantly ludicrous in this scene as can be

imagined.  The contrast between Macheath, Polly, and Lucy--and Dr.

Samuel Johnson, blind, peevish Mrs. Williams, and lean, lank,

preaching Mrs. Hall, was exquisite.



On Friday, April 20, I spent with him one of the happiest days that

I remember to have enjoyed in the whole course of my life.  Mrs.

Garrick, whose grief for the loss of her husband was, I believe, as

sincere as wounded affection and admiration could produce, had this

day, for the first time since his death, a select party of his

friends to dine with her.  The company was Miss Hannah More, who

lived with her, and whom she called her Chaplain; Mrs. Boscawen,

Mrs. Elizabeth Carter, Sir Joshua Reynolds, Dr. Burney, Dr.

Johnson, and myself.  We found ourselves very elegantly entertained

at her house in the Adelphi, where I have passed many a pleasing

hour with him 'who gladdened life.'  She looked well, talked of her

husband with complacency, and while she cast her eyes on his

portrait, which hung over the chimney-piece, said, that 'death was

now the most agreeable object to her.'  The very semblance of David

Garrick was cheering.



We were all in fine spirits; and I whispered to Mrs. Boscawen, 'I

believe this is as much as can be made of life.'  In addition to a

splendid entertainment, we were regaled with Lichfield ale, which

had a peculiar appropriated value.  Sir Joshua, and Dr. Burney, and

I, drank cordially of it to Dr. Johnson's health; and though he

would not join us, he as cordially answered, 'Gentlemen, I wish you

all as well as you do me.'



The general effect of this day dwells upon my mind in fond

remembrance; but I do not find much conversation recorded.  What I

have preserved shall be faithfully given.



One of the company mentioned Mr. Thomas Hollis, the strenuous Whig,

who used to send over Europe presents of democratical books, with

their boards stamped with daggers and caps of liberty.  Mrs. Carter

said, 'He was a bad man.  He used to talk uncharitably.'  JOHNSON.

'Poh! poh!  Madam; who is the worse for being talked of

uncharitably?  Besides, he was a dull poor creature as ever lived:

and I believe he would not have done harm to a man whom he knew to

be of very opposite principles to his own.  I remember once at the

Society of Arts, when an advertisement was to be drawn up, he

pointed me out as the man who could do it best.  This, you will

observe, was kindness to me.  I however slipt away, and escaped

it.'



Mrs. Carter having said of the same person, 'I doubt he was an

Atheist.'  JOHNSON.  'I don't know that.  He might perhaps have

become one, if he had had time to ripen, (smiling.)  He might have

EXUBERATED into an Atheist.'



Sir Joshua Reynolds praised Mudge's Sermons.  JOHNSON.  'Mudge's

Sermons are good, but not practical.  He grasps more sense than he

can hold; he takes more corn than he can make into meal; he opens a

wide prospect, but it is so distant, it is indistinct.  I love

Blair's Sermons.  Though the dog is a Scotchman, and a

Presbyterian, and every thing he should not be, I was the first to

praise them.  Such was my candour,' (smiling.)  MRS. BOSCAWEN.

'Such his great merit to get the better of all your prejudices.'

JOHNSON.  'Why, Madam, let us compound the matter; let us ascribe

it to my candour, and his merit.'



In the evening we had a large company in the drawing-room, several

ladies, the Bishop of Killaloe, Dr. Percy, Mr. Chamberlayne, of the

Treasury, &c. &c.



Talking of a very respectable authour, he told us a curious

circumstance in his life, which was, that he had married a

printer's devil.  REYNOLDS.  'A printer's devil, Sir!  Why, I

thought a printer's devil was a creature with a black face and in

rags.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir.  But I suppose, he had her face

washed, and put clean clothes on her.  (Then looking very serious,

and very earnest.)  And she did not disgrace him; the woman had a

bottom of good sense.'  The word bottom thus introduced, was so

ludicrous when contrasted with his gravity, that most of us could

not forbear tittering and laughing; though I recollect that the

Bishop of Killaloe kept his countenance with perfect steadiness,

while Miss Hannah More slyly hid her face behind a lady's back who

sat on the same settee with her.  His pride could not bear that any

expression of his should excite ridicule, when he did not intend

it; he therefore resolved to assume and exercise despotick power,

glanced sternly around, and called out in a strong tone, 'Where's

the merriment?'  Then collecting himself, and looking aweful, to

make us feel how he could impose restraint, and as it were

searching his mind for a still more ludicrous word, he slowly

pronounced, 'I say the WOMAN was FUNDAMENTALLY sensible;' as if he

had said, hear this now, and laugh if you dare.  We all sat

composed as at a funeral.



He and I walked away together; we stopped a little while by the

rails of the Adelphi, looking on the Thames, and I said to him with

some emotion that I was now thinking of two friends we had lost,

who once lived in the buildings behind us, Beauclerk and Garrick.

'Ay, Sir, (said he, tenderly,) and two such friends as cannot be

supplied.'



For some time after this day I did not see him very often, and of

the conversation which I did enjoy, I am sorry to find I have

preserved but little.  I was at this time engaged in a variety of

other matters, which required exertion and assiduity, and

necessarily occupied almost all my time.



On Tuesday, May 8, I had the pleasure of again dining with him and

Mr. Wilkes, at Mr. Dilly's.  No NEGOCIATION was now required to

bring them together; for Johnson was so well satisfied with the

former interview, that he was very glad to meet Wilkes again, who

was this day seated between Dr. Beattie and Dr. Johnson; (between

Truth and Reason, as General Paoli said, when I told him of it.)

WILKES.  'I have been thinking, Dr. Johnson, that there should be a

bill brought into parliament that the controverted elections for

Scotland should be tried in that country, at their own Abbey of

Holy-Rood House, and not here; for the consequence of trying them

here is, that we have an inundation of Scotchmen, who come up and

never go back again.  Now here is Boswell, who is come up upon the

election for his own county, which will not last a fortnight.'

JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, I see no reason why they should be tried at

all; for, you know, one Scotchman is as good as another.'  WILKES.

'Pray, Boswell, how much may be got in a year by an Advocate at the

Scotch bar?'  BOSWELL.  'I believe two thousand pounds.'  WILKES.

'How can it be possible to spend that money in Scotland?'  JOHNSON.

'Why, Sir, the money may be spent in England: but there is a harder

question.  If one man in Scotland gets possession of two thousand

pounds, what remains for all the rest of the nation?'  WILKES.

'You know, in the last war, the immense booty which Thurot carried

off by the complete plunder of seven Scotch isles; he re-embarked

with THREE AND SIX-PENCE.'  Here again Johnson and Wilkes joined in

extravagant sportive raillery upon the supposed poverty of

Scotland, which Dr. Beattie and I did not think it worth our while

to dispute.



The subject of quotation being introduced, Mr. Wilkes censured it

as pedantry.  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir, it is a good thing; there is a

community of mind in it.  Classical quotation is the parole of

literary men all over the world.'



He gave us an entertaining account of Bet Flint, a woman of the

town, who, with some eccentrick talents and much effrontery, forced

herself upon his acquaintance.  'Bet (said he,) wrote her own Life

in verse, which she brought to me, wishing that I would furnish her

with a Preface to it, (laughing.)  I used to say of her that she

was generally slut and drunkard; occasionally, whore and thief.

She had, however, genteel lodgings, a spinnet on which she played,

and a boy that walked before her chair.  Poor Bet was taken up on a

charge of stealing a counterpane, and tried at the Old Bailey.

Chief Justice ------, who loved a wench, summed up favourably, and

she was acquitted.  After which Bet said, with a gay and satisfied

air, "Now that the counterpane is MY OWN, I shall make a petticoat

of it."'



Talking of oratory, Mr. Wilkes described it as accompanied with all

the charms of poetical expression.  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir; oratory is

the power of beating down your adversary's arguments, and putting

better in their place.'  WILKES.  'But this does not move the

passions.'  JOHNSON.  'He must be a weak man, who is to be so

moved.'  WILKES.  (naming a celebrated orator,) 'Amidst all the

brilliancy of ------'s imagination, and the exuberance of his wit,

there is a strange want of TASTE.  It was observed of Apelles's

Venus, that her flesh seemed as if she had been nourished by roses:

his oratory would sometimes make one suspect that he eats potatoes

and drinks whisky.'



Mr. Wilkes said to me, loud enough for Dr. Johnson to hear, 'Dr.

Johnson should make me a present of his Lives of the Poets, as I am

a poor patriot, who cannot afford to buy them.'  Johnson seemed to

take no notice of this hint; but in a little while, he called to

Mr. Dilly, 'Pray, Sir, be so good as to send a set of my Lives to

Mr. Wilkes, with my compliments.'  This was accordingly done; and

Mr. Wilkes paid Dr. Johnson a visit, was courteously received, and

sat with him a long time.



The company gradually dropped away.  Mr. Dilly himself was called

down stairs upon business; I left the room for some time; when I

returned, I was struck with observing Dr. Samuel Johnson and John

Wilkes, Esq., literally tete-a-tete; for they were reclined upon

their chairs, with their heads leaning almost close to each other,

and talking earnestly, in a kind of confidential whisper, of the

personal quarrel between George the Second and the King of Prussia.

Such a scene of perfectly easy sociality between two such opponents

in the war of political controversy, as that which I now beheld,

would have been an excellent subject for a picture.  It presented

to my mind the happy days which are foretold in Scripture, when the

lion shall lie down with the kid.



After this day there was another pretty long interval, during which

Dr. Johnson and I did not meet.  When I mentioned it to him with

regret, he was pleased to say, 'Then, Sir, let us live double.'



About this time it was much the fashion for several ladies to have

evening assemblies, where the fair sex might participate in

conversation with literary and ingenious men, animated by a desire

to please.  These societies were denominated Blue-stocking Clubs,

the origin of which title being little known, it may be worth while

to relate it.  One of the most eminent members of those societies,

when they first commenced, was Mr. Stillingfleet, whose dress was

remarkably grave, and in particular it was observed, that he wore

blue stockings.  Such was the excellence of his conversation, that

his absence was felt as so great a loss, that it used to be said,

'We can do nothing without the blue stockings;' and thus by degrees

the title was established.  Miss Hannah More has admirably

described a Blue-stocking Club, in her Bas Bleu, a poem in which

many of the persons who were most conspicuous there are mentioned.



Johnson was prevailed with to come sometimes into these circles,

and did not think himself too grave even for the lively Miss

Monckton (now Countess of Corke), who used to have the finest BIT

OF BLUE at the house of her mother, Lady Galway.  Her vivacity

enchanted the Sage, and they used to talk together with all

imaginable ease.  A singular instance happened one evening, when

she insisted that some of Sterne's writings were very pathetick.

Johnson bluntly denied it.  'I am sure (said she,) they have

affected ME.'  'Why, (said Johnson, smiling, and rolling himself

about,) that is, because, dearest, you're a dunce.'  When she some

time afterwards mentioned this to him, he said with equal truth and

politeness; 'Madam, if I had thought so, I certainly should not

have said it.'



Another evening Johnson's kind indulgence towards me had a pretty

difficult trial.  I had dined at the Duke of Montrose's with a very

agreeable party, and his Grace, according to his usual custom, had

circulated the bottle very freely.  Lord Graham and I went together

to Miss Monckton's, where I certainly was in extraordinary spirits,

and above all fear or awe.  In the midst of a great number of

persons of the first rank, amongst whom I recollect with confusion,

a noble lady of the most stately decorum, I placed myself next to

Johnson, and thinking myself now fully his match, talked to him in

a loud and boisterous manner, desirous to let the company know how

I could contend with Ajax.  I particularly remember pressing him

upon the value of the pleasures of the imagination, and as an

illustration of my argument, asking him, 'What, Sir, supposing I

were to fancy that the ----- (naming the most charming Duchess in

his Majesty's dominions) were in love with me, should I not be very

happy?'  My friend with much address evaded my interrogatories, and

kept me as quiet as possible; but it may easily be conceived how he

must have felt.  However, when a few days afterwards I waited upon

him and made an apology, he behaved with the most friendly

gentleness.



While I remained in London this year, Johnson and I dined together

at several places.  I recollect a placid day at Dr. Butter's, who

had now removed from Derby to Lower Grosvenor-street, London; but

of his conversation on that and other occasions during this period,

I neglected to keep any regular record, and shall therefore insert

here some miscellaneous articles which I find in my Johnsonian

notes.



His disorderly habits, when 'making provision for the day that was

passing over him,' appear from the following anecdote, communicated

to me by Mr. John Nichols:--'In the year 1763, a young bookseller,

who was an apprentice to Mr. Whiston, waited on him with a

subscription to his Shakspeare: and observing that the Doctor made

no entry in any book of the subscriber's name, ventured diffidently

to ask, whether he would please to have the gentleman's address,

that it might be properly inserted in the printed list of

subscribers.  "I shall print no list of subscribers;" said Johnson,

with great abruptness: but almost immediately recollecting himself,

added, very complacently, "Sir, I have two very cogent reasons for

not printing any list of subscribers;--one, that I have lost all

the names,--the other, that I have spent all the money."



Johnson could not brook appearing to be worsted in argument, even

when he had taken the wrong side, to shew the force and dexterity

of his talents.  When, therefore, he perceived that his opponent

gained ground, he had recourse to some sudden mode of robust

sophistry.  Once when I was pressing upon him with visible

advantage, he stopped me thus:--'My dear Boswell, let's have no

more of this; you'll make nothing of it.  I'd rather have you

whistle a Scotch tune.'



Care, however, must be taken to distinguish between Johnson when he

'talked for victory,' and Johnson when he had no desire but to

inform and illustrate.  'One of Johnson s principal talents (says

an eminent friend of his) was shewn in maintaining the wrong side

of an argument, and in a splendid perversion of the truth.  If you

could contrive to have his fair opinion on a subject, and without

any bias from personal prejudice, or from a wish to be victorious

in argument, it was wisdom itself, not only convincing, but

overpowering.'



He had, however, all his life habituated himself to consider

conversation as a trial of intellectual vigour and skill; and to

this, I think, we may venture to ascribe that unexampled richness

and brilliancy which appeared in his own.  As a proof at once of

his eagerness for colloquial distinction, and his high notion of

this eminent friend, he once addressed him thus:-- '-----, we now

have been several hours together; and you have said but one thing

for which I envied you.'



Goldsmith could sometimes take adventurous liberties with him, and

escape unpunished.  Beauclerk told me that when Goldsmith talked of

a project for having a third Theatre in London, solely for the

exhibition of new plays, in order to deliver authours from the

supposed tyranny of managers, Johnson treated it slightingly; upon

which Goldsmith said, 'Ay, ay, this may be nothing to you, who can

now shelter yourself behind the corner of a pension;' and that

Johnson bore this with good-humour.



Johnson had called twice on the Bishop of Killaloe before his

Lordship set out for Ireland, having missed him the first time.  He

said, 'It would have hung heavy on my heart if I had not seen him.

No man ever paid more attention to another than he has done to me;

and I have neglected him, not wilfully, but from being otherwise

occupied.  Always, Sir, set a high value on spontaneous kindness.

He whose inclination prompts him to cultivate your friendship of

his own accord, will love you more than one whom you have been at

pains to attach to you.'



I asked him if he was not dissatisfied with having so small a share

of wealth, and none of those distinctions in the state which are

the objects of ambition.  He had only a pension of three hundred a

year.  Why was he not in such circumstances as to keep his coach?

Why had he not some considerable office?  JOHNSON.  'Sir, I have

never complained of the world; nor do I think that I have reason to

complain.  It is rather to be wondered at that I have so much.  My

pension is more out of the usual course of things than any instance

that I have known.  Here, Sir, was a man avowedly no friend to

Government at the time, who got a pension without asking for it.  I

never courted the great; they sent for me; but I think they now

give me up.  They are satisfied; they have seen enough of me.'



Strange, however, it is, to consider how few of the great sought

his society; so that if one were disposed to take occasion for

satire on that account, very conspicuous objects present

themselves.  His noble friend, Lord Elibank, well observed, that if

a great man procured an interview with Johnson, and did not wish to

see him more, it shewed a mere idle curiosity, and a wretched want

of relish for extraordinary powers of mind.  Mrs. Thrale justly and

wittily accounted for such conduct by saying, that Johnson's

conversation was by much too strong for a person accustomed to

obsequiousness and flattery; it was mustard in a young child's

mouth!



On Saturday, June 2, I set out for Scotland, and had promised to

pay a visit in my way, as I sometimes did, at Southill, in

Bedfordshire, at the hospitable mansion of 'Squire Dilly, the elder

brother of my worthy friends, the booksellers, in the Poultry.  Dr.

Johnson agreed to be of the party this year, with Mr. Charles Dilly

and me, and to go and see Lord Bute's seat at Luton Hoe.  He talked

little to us in the carriage, being chiefly occupied in reading Dr.

Watson's second volume of Chemical Essays, which he liked very

well, and his own Prince of Abyssinia, on which he seemed to be

intensely fixed; having told us, that he had not looked at it since

it was first published.  I happened to take it out of my pocket

this day, and he seized upon it with avidity.



We stopped at Welwyn, where I wished much to see, in company with

Dr. Johnson, the residence of the authour of Night Thoughts, which

was then possessed by his son, Mr. Young.  Here some address was

requisite, for I was not acquainted with Mr. Young, and had I

proposed to Dr. Johnson that we should send to him, he would have

checked my wish, and perhaps been offended.  I therefore concerted

with Mr. Dilly, that I should steal away from Dr. Johnson and him,

and try what reception I could procure from Mr. Young; if

unfavourable, nothing was to be said; but if agreeable, I should

return and notify it to them.  I hastened to Mr. Young's, found he

was at home, sent in word that a gentleman desired to wait upon

him, and was shewn into a parlour, where he and a young lady, his

daughter, were sitting.  He appeared to be a plain, civil, country

gentleman; and when I begged pardon for presuming to trouble him,

but that I wished much to see his place, if he would give me leave;

he behaved very courteously, and answered, 'By all means, Sir; we

are just going to drink tea; will you sit down?'  I thanked him,

but said, that Dr. Johnson had come with me from London, and I must

return to the inn and drink tea with him; that my name was Boswell,

I had travelled with him in the Hebrides.  'Sir, (said he,) I

should think it a great honour to see Dr. Johnson here.  Will you

allow me to send for him?'  Availing myself of this opening, I said

that 'I would go myself and bring him, when he had drunk tea; he

knew nothing of my calling here.'  Having been thus successful, I

hastened back to the inn, and informed Dr. Johnson that 'Mr. Young,

son of Dr. Young, the authour of Night Thoughts, whom I had just

left, desired to have the honour of seeing him at the house where

his father lived.'  Dr. Johnson luckily made no inquiry how this

invitation had arisen, but agreed to go, and when we entered Mr.

Young's parlour, he addressed him with a very polite bow, 'Sir, I

had a curiosity to come and see this place.  I had the honour to

know that great man, your father.'  We went into the garden, where

we found a gravel walk, on each side of which was a row of trees,

planted by Dr. Young, which formed a handsome Gothick arch; Dr.

Johnson called it a fine grove.  I beheld it with reverence.



We sat some time in the summer-house, on the outside wall of which

was inscribed, 'Ambulantes in horto audiebant vocem Dei;' and in

reference to a brook by which it is situated, 'Vivendi recte qui

prorogat horam,' &c.  I said to Mr. Young, that I had been told his

father was cheerful.  'Sir, (said he,) he was too well-bred a man

not to be cheerful in company; but he was gloomy when alone.  He

never was cheerful after my mother's death, and he had met with

many disappointments.'  Dr. Johnson observed to me afterwards,

'That this was no favourable account of Dr. Young; for it is not

becoming in a man to have so little acquiescence in the ways of

Providence, as to be gloomy because he has not obtained as much

preferment as he expected; nor to continue gloomy for the loss of

his wife.  Grief has its time.'  The last part of this censure was

theoretically made.  Practically, we know that grief for the loss

of a wife may be continued very long, in proportion as affection

has been sincere.  No man knew this better than Dr. Johnson.



Upon the road we talked of the uncertainty of profit with which

authours and booksellers engage in the publication of literary

works.  JOHNSON.  'My judgement I have found is no certain rule as

to the sale of a book.'  BOSWELL.  'Pray, Sir, have you been much

plagued with authours sending you their works to revise?'  JOHNSON.

'No, Sir; I have been thought a sour, surly fellow.'  BOSWELL.

'Very lucky.  for you, Sir,--in that respect.'  I must however

observe, that notwithstanding what he now said, which he no doubt

imagined at the time to be the fact, there was, perhaps, no man who

more frequently yielded to the solicitations even of very obscure

authours, to read their manuscripts, or more liberally assisted

them with advice and correction.



He found himself very happy at 'Squire Dilly's, where there is

always abundance of excellent fare, and hearty welcome.



On Sunday, June 3, we all went to Southill church, which is very

near to Mr. Dilly's house.  It being the first Sunday of the month,

the holy sacrament was administered, and I staid to partake of it.

When I came afterwards into Dr. Johnson's room, he said, 'You did

right to stay and receive the communion; I had not thought of it.'

This seemed to imply that he did not choose to approach the altar

without a previous preparation, as to which good men entertain

different opinions, some holding that it is irreverent to partake

of that ordinance without considerable premeditation.



Although upon most occasions I never heard a more strenuous

advocate for the advantages of wealth, than Dr. Johnson: he this

day, I know not from what caprice, took the other side.  'I have

not observed (said he,) that men of very large fortunes enjoy any

thing extraordinary that makes happiness.  What has the Duke of

Bedford?  What has the Duke of Devonshire?  The only great instance

that I have ever known of the enjoyment of wealth was, that of

Jamaica Dawkins, who, going to visit Palmyra, and hearing that the

way was infested by robbers, hired a troop of Turkish horse to

guard him.'



Dr. Gibbons, the Dissenting minister, being mentioned, he said, 'I

took to Dr. Gibbons.'  And addressing himself to Mr. Charles Dilly,

added, 'I shall be glad to see him.  Tell him, if he'll call on me,

and dawdle over a dish of tea in an afternoon, I shall take it

kind.'



The Reverend Mr. Smith, Vicar of Southill, a very respectable man,

with a very agreeable family, sent an invitation to us to drink

tea.  I remarked Dr. Johnson's very respectful politeness.  Though

always fond of changing the scene, he said, 'We must have Mr.

Dilly's leave.  We cannot go from your house, Sir, without your

permission.'  We all went, and were well satisfied with our visit.



When I observed that a housebreaker was in general very timorous;

JOHNSON.  'No wonder, Sir; he is afraid of being shot getting INTO

a house, or hanged when he has got OUT of it.'



He told us, that he had in one day written six sheets of a

translation from the French, adding, 'I should be glad to see it

now.  I wish that I had copies of all the pamphlets written against

me, as it is said Pope had.  Had I known that I should make so much

noise in the world, I should have been at pains to collect them.  I

believe there is hardly a day in which there is not something about

me in the newspapers.'



On Monday, June 4, we all went to Luton-Hoe, to see Lord Bute's

magnificent seat, for which I had obtained a ticket.  As we entered

the park, I talked in a high style of my old friendship with Lord

Mountstuart, and said, 'I shall probably be much at this place.'

The Sage, aware of human vicissitudes, gently checked me: 'Don't

you be too sure of that.'  He made two or three peculiar

observations; as when shewn the botanical garden, 'Is not EVERY

garden a botanical garden?'  When told that there was a shrubbery

to the extent of several miles: 'That is making a very foolish use

of the ground; a little of it is very well.'  When it was proposed

that we should walk on the pleasure-ground; 'Don't let us fatigue

ourselves.  Why should we walk there?  Here's a fine tree, let's

get to the top of it.'  But upon the whole, he was very much

pleased.  He said, 'This is one of the places I do not regret

having come to see.  It is a very stately place, indeed; in the

house magnificence is not sacrificed to convenience, nor

convenience to magnificence.  The library is very splendid: the

dignity of the rooms is very great; and the quantity of pictures is

beyond expectation, beyond hope.'



It happened without any previous concert, that we visited the seat

of Lord Bute upon the King's birthday; we dined and drank his

Majesty's health at an inn, in the village of Luton.



In the evening I put him in mind of his promise to favour me with a

copy of his celebrated Letter to the Earl of Chesterfield, and he

was at last pleased to comply with this earnest request, by

dictating it to me from his memory; for he believed that he himself

had no copy.  There was an animated glow in his countenance while

he thus recalled his high-minded indignation.



On Tuesday, June 5, Johnson was to return to London.  He was very

pleasant at breakfast; I mentioned a friend of mine having resolved

never to marry a pretty woman.  JOHNSON.  'Sir it is a very foolish

resolution to resolve not to marry a pretty woman.  Beauty is of

itself very estimable.  No, Sir, I would prefer a pretty woman,

unless there are objections to her.  A pretty woman may be foolish;

a pretty woman may be wicked; a pretty woman may not like me.  But

there is no such danger in marrying a pretty woman as is

apprehended: she will not be persecuted if she does not invite

persecution.  A pretty woman, if she has a mind to be wicked, can

find a readier way than another; and that is all.'



At Shefford I had another affectionate parting from my revered

friend, who was taken up by the Bedford coach and carried to the

metropolis.  I went with Messieurs Dilly, to see some friends at

Bedford; dined with the officers of the militia of the county, and

next day proceeded on my journey.



Johnson's charity to the poor was uniform and extensive, both from

inclination and principle.  He not only bestowed liberally out of

his own purse, but what is more difficult as well as rare, would

beg from others, when he had proper objects in view.  This he did

judiciously as well as humanely.  Mr. Philip Metcalfe tells me,

that when he has asked him for some money for persons in distress,

and Mr. Metcalfe has offered what Johnson thought too much, he

insisted on taking less, saying, 'No, no, Sir; we must not PAMPER

them.'



I am indebted to Mr. Malone, one of Sir Joshua Reynolds's

executors, for the following note, which was found among his papers

after his death, and which, we may presume, his unaffected modesty

prevented him from communicating to me with the other letters from

Dr. Johnson with which he was pleased to furnish me.  However

slight in itself, as it does honour to that illustrious painter,

and most amiable man, I am happy to introduce it.





'TO SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.



'DEAR SIR,--It was not before yesterday that I received your

splendid benefaction.  To a hand so liberal in distributing, I hope

nobody will envy the power of acquiring.  I am, dear Sir, your

obliged and most humble servant,



'June 23, 1781.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





The following curious anecdote I insert in Dr. Burney's own words:--



'Dr. Burney related to Dr. Johnson the partiality which his

writings had excited in a friend of Dr. Burney's, the late Mr.

Bewley, well known in Norfolk by the name of the Philosopher of

Massingham: who, from the Ramblers and Plan of his Dictionary, and

long before the authour's fame was established by the Dictionary

itself, or any other work, had conceived such a reverence for him,

that he urgently begged Dr. Burney to give him the cover of the

first letter he had received from him, as a relick of so estimable

a writer.  This was in 1755.  In 1760, when Dr. Burney visited Dr.

Johnson at the Temple in London, where he had then chambers, he

happened to arrive there before he was up; and being shewn into the

room where he was to breakfast, finding himself alone, he examined

the contents of the apartment, to try whether he could undiscovered

steal anything to send to his friend Bewley, as another relick of

the admirable Dr. Johnson.  But finding nothing better to his

purpose, he cut some bristles off his hearth-broom, and enclosed

them in a letter to his country enthusiast, who received them with

due reverence.  The Doctor was so sensible of the honour done him

by a man of genius and science, to whom he was an utter stranger,

that he said to Dr. Burney, "Sir, there is no man possessed of the

smallest portion of modesty, but must be flattered with the

admiration of such a man.  I'll give him a set of my Lives, if he

will do me the honour to accept of them."  In this he kept his

word; and Dr. Burney had not only the pleasure of gratifying his

friend with a present more worthy of his acceptance than the

segment from the hearth-broom, but soon after of introducing him to

Dr. Johnson himself in Bolt-court, with whom he had the

satisfaction of conversing a considerable time, not a fortnight

before his death; which happened in St. Martin's-street, during his

visit to Dr. Burney, in the house where the great Sir Isaac Newton

had lived and died before.'





In one of his little memorandum-books is the following minute:--



'August 9, 3 P.M., aetat. 72, in the summer-house at Streatham.



'After innumerable resolutions formed and neglected, I have retired

hither, to plan a life of greater diligence, in hope that I may yet

be useful, and be daily better prepared to appear before my Creator

and my Judge, from whose infinite mercy I humbly call for

assistance and support.



'My purpose is,



'To pass eight hours every day in some serious employment.



'Having prayed, I purpose to employ the next six weeks upon the

Italian language, for my settled study.'



In autumn he went to Oxford, Birmingham, Lichfield, and Ashbourne,

for which very good reasons might be given in the conjectural yet

positive manner of writers, who are proud to account for every

event which they relate.  He himself, however, says, 'The motives

of my journey I hardly know; I omitted it last year, and am not

willing to miss it again.'



But some good considerations arise, amongst which is the kindly

recollection of Mr. Hector, surgeon at Birmingham: 'Hector is

likewise an old friend, the only companion of my childhood that

passed through the school with me.  We have always loved one

another; perhaps we may be made better by some serious

conversation, of which however I have no distinct hope.'  He says

too, 'At Lichfield, my native place, I hope to shew a good example

by frequent attendance on publick worship.'



1782: AETAT. 73.]--In 1782, his complaints increased, and the

history of his life this year, is little more than a mournful

recital of the variations of his illness, in the midst of which,

however, it will appear from his letters, that the powers of his

mind were in no degree impaired.



At a time when he was less able than he had once been to sustain a

shock, he was suddenly deprived of Mr. Levett, which event he thus

communicated to Dr. Lawrence:--





'SIR,--Our old friend, Mr. Levett, who was last night eminently

cheerful, died this morning.  The man who lay in the same room,

hearing an uncommon noise, got up and tried to make him speak, but

without effect, he then called Mr. Holder, the apothecary, who,

though when he came he thought him dead, opened a vein, but could

draw no blood.  So has ended the long life of a very useful and

very blameless man.  I am, Sir, your most humble servant,



'Jan. 17, 1782.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





In one of his memorandum-books in my possession, is the following

entry:--'January 20, Sunday.  Robert Levett was buried in the

church-yard of Bridewell, between one and two in the afternoon.  He

died on Thursday 17, about seven in the morning, by an

instantaneous death.  He was an old and faithful friend; I have

known him from about 46.  Commendavi.  May GOD have mercy on him.

May he have mercy on me.'



On the 30th of August, I informed him that my honoured father had

died that morning; a complaint under which he had long laboured

having suddenly come to a crisis, while I was upon a visit at the

seat of Sir Charles Preston, from whence I had hastened the day

before, upon receiving a letter by express.



In answer to my next letter, I received one from him, dissuading me

from hastening to him as I had proposed; what is proper for

publication is the following paragraph, equally just and tender:--

'One expence, however, I would not have you to spare: let nothing

be omitted that can preserve Mrs. Boswell, though it should be

necessary to transplant her for a time into a softer climate.  She

is the prop and stay of your life.  How much must your children

suffer by losing her.'



My wife was now so much convinced of his sincere friendship for me,

and regard for her, that, without any suggestion on my part, she

wrote him a very polite and grateful letter:--





'DR. JOHNSON TO MRS. BOSWELL.



'DEAR LADY,--I have not often received so much pleasure as from

your invitation to Auchinleck.  The journey thither and back is,

indeed, too great for the latter part of the year; but if my health

were fully recovered, I would suffer no little heat and cold, nor a

wet or a rough road to keep me from you.  I am, indeed, not without

hope of seeing Auchinleek again; but to make it a pleasant place I

must see its lady well, and brisk, and airy.  For my sake,

therefore, among many greater reasons, take care, dear Madam, of

your health, spare no expence, and want no attendance that can

procure ease, or preserve it.  Be very careful to keep your mind

quiet; and do not think it too much to give an account of your

recovery to, Madam, yours, &c.



'London, Sept. 7, 1782.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





The death of Mr. Thrale had made a very material alteration with

respect to Johnson's reception in that family.  The manly authority

of the husband no longer curbed the lively exuberance of the lady;

and as her vanity had been fully gratified, by having the Colossus

of Literature attached to her for many years, she gradually became

less assiduous to please him.  Whether her attachment to him was

already divided by another object, I am unable to ascertain; but it

is plain that Johnson's penetration was alive to her neglect or

forced attention; for on the 6th of October this year, we find him

making a 'parting use of the library' at Streatham, and pronouncing

a prayer, which he composed on leaving Mr. Thrale's family:--



'Almighty God, Father of all mercy, help me by thy grace, that I

may, with humble and sincere thankfulness, remember the comforts

and conveniences which I have enjoyed at this place; and that I may

resign them with holy submission, equally trusting in thy

protection when thou givest, and when thou takest away.  Have mercy

upon me, O Lord, have mercy upon me.



'To thy fatherly protection, O Lord, I commend this family.  Bless,

guide, and defend them, that they may so pass through this world,

as finally to enjoy in thy presence everlasting happiness, for

Jesus Christ's sake.  Amen.'



One cannot read this prayer, without some emotions not very

favourable to the lady whose conduct occasioned it.



In one of his memorandum-books I find, 'Sunday, went to church at

Streatham.  Templo valedixi cam osculo.'



He met Mr. Philip Metcalfe often at Sir Joshua Reynolds's, and

other places, and was a good deal with him at Brighthelmston this

autumn, being pleased at once with his excellent table and animated

conversation.  Mr. Metcalfe shewed him great respect, and sent him

a note that he might have the use of his carriage whenever he

pleased.  Johnson (3rd October, 1782) returned this polite answer:--

'Mr. Johnson is very much obliged by the kind offer of the

carriage, but he has no desire of using Mr. Metcalfe's carriage,

except when he can have the pleasure of Mr. Metcalfe's company.'

Mr. Metcalfe could not but be highly pleased that his company was

thus valued by Johnson, and he frequently attended him in airings.

They also went together to Chichester, and they visited Petworth,

and Cowdry, the venerable seat of the Lords Montacute.  'Sir, (said

Johnson,) I should like to stay here four-and-twenty hours.  We see

here how our ancestors lived.'





'TO SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.



'DEAR SIR,--I heard yesterday of your late disorder, and should

think ill of myself if I had heard of it without alarm.  I heard

likewise of your recovery, which I sincerely wish to be complete

and permanent.  Your country has been in danger of losing one of

its brightest ornaments, and I of losing one of my oldest and

kindest friends: but I hope you will still live long, for the

honour of the nation: and that more enjoyment of your elegance,

your intelligence, and your benevolence, is still reserved for,

dear Sir, your most affectionate, &c.



'Brighthelmston, Nov. 14, 1782.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





1783: AETAT. 74.]--In 1783, he was more severely afflicted than

ever, as will appear in the course of his correspondence; but still

the same ardour for literature, the same constant piety, the same

kindness for his friends, and the same vivacity both in

conversation and writing, distinguished him.



On Friday, March 21, having arrived in London the night before, I

was glad to find him at Mrs. Thrale's house, in Argyll-street,

appearances of friendship between them being still kept up.  I was

shewn into his room, and after the first salutation he said, 'I am

glad you are come.  I am very ill.'  He looked pale, and was

distressed with a difficulty of breathing; but after the common

inquiries he assumed his usual strong animated style of

conversation.  Seeing me now for the first time as a Laird, or

proprietor of land, he began thus: 'Sir, the superiority of a

country-gentleman over the people upon his estate is very

agreeable; and he who says he does not feel it to be agreeable,

lies; for it must be agreeable to have a casual superiority over

those who are by nature equal with us.'  BOSWELL.  'Yet, Sir, we

see great proprietors of land who prefer living in London.'

JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, the pleasure of living in London, the

intellectual superiority that is enjoyed there, may counterbalance

the other.  Besides, Sir, a man may prefer the state of the

country-gentleman upon the whole, and yet there may never be a

moment when he is willing to make the change to quit London for

it.'



He talked with regret and indignation of the factious opposition to

Government at this time, and imputed it in a great measure to the

Revolution.  'Sir, (said he, in a low voice, having come nearer to

me, while his old prejudices seemed to be fermenting in his mind,)

this Hanoverian family is isolee here.  They have no friends.  Now

the Stuarts had friends who stuck by them so late as 1745.  When

the right of the King is not reverenced, there will not be

reverence for those appointed by the King.'



He repeated to me his verses on Mr. Levett, with an emotion which

gave them full effect; and then he was pleased to say, 'You must be

as much with me as you can.  You have done me good.  You cannot

think how much better I am since you came in.



He sent a message to acquaint Mrs. Thrale that I was arrived.  I

had not seen her since her husband's death.  She soon appeared, and

favoured me with an invitation to stay to dinner, which I accepted.

There was no other company but herself and three of her daughters,

Dr. Johnson, and I.  She too said, she was very glad I was come,

for she was going to Bath, and should have been sorry to leave Dr.

Johnson before I came.  This seemed to be attentive and kind; and I

who had not been informed of any change, imagined all to be as well

as formerly.  He was little inclined to talk at dinner, and went to

sleep after it; but when he joined us in the drawing-room, he

seemed revived, and was again himself.



Talking of conversation, he said, 'There must, in the first place,

be knowledge, there must be materials; in the second place, there

must be a command of words; in the third place, there must be

imagination, to place things in such views as they are not commonly

seen in; and in the fourth place, there must be presence of mind,

and a resolution that is not to be overcome by failures: this last

is an essential requisite; for want of it many people do not excel

in conversation.  Now I want it: I throw up the game upon losing a

trick.'  I wondered to hear him talk thus of himself, and said, 'I

don't know, Sir, how this may be; but I am sure you beat other

people's cards out of their hands.'  I doubt whether he heard this

remark.  While he went on talking triumphantly, I was fixed in

admiration, and said to Mrs. Thrale, 'O, for short-hand to take

this down!'  'You'll carry it all in your head, (said she;) a long

head is as good as short-hand.'



It has been observed and wondered at, that Mr. Charles Fox never

talked with any freedom in the presence of Dr. Johnson, though it

is well known, and I myself can witness, that his conversation is

various, fluent, and exceedingly agreeable.  Johnson's own

experience, however, of that gentleman's reserve was a sufficient

reason for his going on thus: 'Fox never talks in private company;

not from any determination not to talk, but because he has not the

first motion.  A man who is used to the applause of the House of

Commons, has no wish for that of a private company.  A man

accustomed to throw for a thousand pounds, if set down to throw for

sixpence, would not be at the pains to count his dice.  Burke's

talk is the ebullition of his mind; he does not talk from a desire

of distinction, but because his mind is full.'



After musing for some time, he said, 'I wonder how I should have

any enemies; for I do harm to nobody.'  BOSWELL.  'In the first

place, Sir, you will be pleased to recollect, that you set out with

attacking the Scotch; so you got a whole nation for your enemies.'

JOHNSON.  'Why, I own, that by my definition of OATS I meant to vex

them.'  BOSWELL.  'Pray, Sir, can you trace the cause of your

antipathy to the Scotch?'  JOHNSON.  'I cannot, Sir.'  BOSWELL.

'Old Mr. Sheridan says, it was because they sold Charles the

First.'  JOHNSON.  'Then, Sir, old Mr. Sheridan has found out a

very good reason.'



I had paid a visit to General Oglethorpe in the morning,* and was

told by him that Dr. Johnson saw company on Saturday evenings, and

he would meet me at Johnson's that night.  When I mentioned this to

Johnson, not doubting that it would please him, as he had a great

value for Oglethorpe, the fretfulness of his disease unexpectedly

shewed itself; his anger suddenly kindled, and he said, with

vehemence, 'Did not you tell him not to come?  Am I to be HUNTED in

this manner?'  I satisfied him that I could not divine that the

visit would not be convenient, and that I certainly could not take

it upon me of my own accord to forbid the General.





* March 22.--Ed.





I found Dr. Johnson in the evening in Mrs. Williams's room, at tea

and coffee with her and Mrs. Desmoulins, who were also both ill; it

was a sad scene, and he was not in very good humour.  He said of a

performance that had lately come out, 'Sir, if you should search

all the madhouses in England, you would not find ten men who would

write so, and think it sense.'



I was glad when General Oglethorpe's arrival was announced, and we

left the ladies.  Dr. Johnson attended him in the parlour, and was

as courteous as ever.



On Sunday, March 23, I breakfasted with Dr. Johnson, who seemed

much relieved, having taken opium the night before.  He however

protested against it, as a remedy that should be given with the

utmost reluctance, and only in extreme necessity.  I mentioned how

commonly it was used in Turkey, and that therefore it could not be

so pernicious as he apprehended.  He grew warm and said, 'Turks

take opium, and Christians take opium; but Russel, in his Account

of Aleppo, tells us, that it is as disgraceful in Turkey to take

too much opium, as it is with us to get drunk.  Sir, it is amazing

how things are exaggerated.  A gentleman was lately telling in a

company where I was present, that in France as soon as a man of

fashion marries, he takes an opera girl into keeping; and this he

mentioned as a general custom.  "Pray, Sir, (said I,) how many

opera girls may there be?"  He answered, "About fourscore."  "Well

then, Sir, (said I,) you see there can be no more than fourscore

men of fashion who can do this."'



Mrs. Desmoulins made tea; and she and I talked before him upon a

topick which he had once borne patiently from me when we were by

ourselves,--his not complaining of the world, because he was not

called to some great office, nor had attained to great wealth.  He

flew into a violent passion, I confess with some justice, and

commanded us to have done.  'Nobody, (said he,) has a right to talk

in this manner, to bring before a man his own character, and the

events of his life, when he does not choose it should be done.  I

never have sought the world; the world was not to seek me.  It is

rather wonderful that so much has been done for me.  All the

complaints which are made of the world are unjust.  I never knew a

man of merit neglected: it was generally by his own fault that he

failed of success.  A man may hide his head in a hole: he may go

into the country, and publish a book now and then, which nobody

reads, and then complain he is neglected.  There is no reason why

any person should exert himself for a man who has written a good

book: he has not written it for any individual.  I may as well make

a present to the postman who brings me a letter.  When patronage

was limited, an authour expected to find a Maecenas, and complained

if he did not find one.  Why should he complain?  This Maecenas has

others as good as he, or others who have got the start of him.'



On the subject of the right employment of wealth, Johnson observed,

'A man cannot make a bad use of his money, so far as regards

Society, if he does not hoard it; for if he either spends it or

lends it out, Society has the benefit.  It is in general better to

spend money than to give it away; for industry is more promoted by

spending money than by giving it away.  A man who spends his money

is sure he is doing good with it: he is not so sure when he gives

it away.  A man who spends ten thousand a year will do more good

than a man who spends two thousand and gives away eight.'



In the evening I came to him again.  He was somewhat fretful from

his illness.  A gentleman asked him, whether he had been abroad to-

day.  'Don't talk so childishly, (said he.)  You may as well ask if

I hanged myself to-day.'  I mentioned politicks.  JOHNSON.  'Sir,

I'd as soon have a man to break my bones as talk to me of publick

affairs, internal or external.  I have lived to see things all as

bad as they can be.'



He said, 'Goldsmith's blundering speech to Lord Shelburne, which

has been so often mentioned, and which he really did make to him,

was only a blunder in emphasis: "I wonder they should call your

Lordship Malagrida, for Malagrida was a very good man;" meant, I

wonder they should use Malagrida as a term of reproach.'



Soon after this time I had an opportunity of seeing, by means of

one of his friends, a proof that his talents, as well as his

obliging service to authours, were ready as ever.  He had revised

The Village, an admirable poem, by the Reverend Mr. Crabbe.  Its

sentiments as to the false notions of rustick happiness and rustick

virtue were quite congenial with his own; and he had taken the

trouble not only to suggest slight corrections and variations, but

to furnish some lines, when he thought he could give the writer's

meaning better than in the words of the manuscript.



On Sunday, March 30, I found him at home in the evening, and had

the pleasure to meet with Dr. Brocklesby, whose reading, and

knowledge of life, and good spirits, supply him with a never-

failing source of conversation.



I shall here insert a few of Johnson's sayings, without the

formality of dates, as they have no reference to any particular

time or place.



'The more a man extends and varies his acquaintance the better.'

This, however, was meant with a just restriction; for, he on

another occasion said to me, 'Sir, a man may be so much of every

thing, that he is nothing of any thing.'



'It is a very good custom to keep a journal for a man's own use; he

may write upon a card a day all that is necessary to be written,

after he has had experience of life.  At first there is a great

deal to be written, because there is a great deal of novelty; but

when once a man has settled his opinions, there is seldom much to

be set down.'



Talking of an acquaintance of ours, whose narratives, which

abounded in curious and interesting topicks, were unhappily found

to be very fabulous; I mentioned Lord Mansfield's having said to

me, 'Suppose we believe one HALF of what he tells.'  JOHNSON.  'Ay;

but we don't know WHICH half to believe.  By his lying we lose not

only our reverence for him, but all comfort in his conversation.'

BOSWELL.  'May we not take it as amusing fiction?'  JOHNSON.  'Sir,

the misfortune is, that you will insensibly believe as much of it

as you incline to believe.'



It is remarkable, that notwithstanding their congeniality in

politicks, he never was acquainted with a late eminent noble judge,

whom I have heard speak of him as a writer, with great respect.

Johnson, I know not upon what degree of investigation, entertained

no exalted opinion of his Lordship's intellectual character.

Talking of him to me one day, he said, 'It is wonderful, Sir, with

how little real superiority of mind men can make an eminent figure

in publick life.'  He expressed himself to the same purpose

concerning another law-Lord, who, it seems, once took a fancy to

associate with the wits of London; but with so little success, that

Foote said, 'What can he mean by coming among us?  He is not only

dull himself, but the cause of dullness in others.'  Trying him by

the test of his colloquial powers, Johnson had found him very

defective.  He once said to Sir Joshua Reynolds, 'This man now has

been ten years about town, and has made nothing of it;' meaning as

a companion.  He said to me, 'I never heard any thing from him in

company that was at all striking; and depend upon it, Sir, it is

when you come close to a man in conversation, that you discover

what his real abilities are; to make a speech in a publick assembly

is a knack.  Now I honour Thurlow, Sir; Thurlow is a fine fellow;

he fairly puts his mind to yours.'



After repeating to him some of his pointed, lively sayings, I said,

'It is a pity, Sir, you don't always remember your own good things,

that you may have a laugh when you will.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, it

is better that I forget them, that I may be reminded of them, and

have a laugh on their being brought to my recollection.'



When I recalled to him his having said as we sailed up Loch-lomond,

'That if he wore any thing fine, it should be VERY fine;' I

observed that all his thoughts were upon a great scale.  JOHNSON.

'Depend upon it, Sir, every man will have as fine a thing as he can

get; as a large diamond for his ring.'  BOSWELL.  'Pardon me, Sir:

a man of a narrow mind will not think of it, a slight trinket will

satisfy him:





    "Nec sufferre queat majoris pondera gemmae."'





I told him I should send him some Essays which I had written, which

I hoped he would be so good as to read, and pick out the good ones.

JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, send me only the good ones; don't make ME pick

them.'



As a small proof of his kindliness and delicacy of feeling, the

following circumstance may be mentioned: One evening when we were

in the street together, and I told him I was going to sup at Mr.

Beauclerk's, he said, 'I'll go with you.'  After having walked part

of the way, seeming to recollect something, he suddenly stopped and

said, 'I cannot go,--but I do not love Beauclerk the less.'



On the frame of his portrait, Mr. Beauclerk had inscribed,--





           '-------- Ingenium ingens

     Inculto latet hoc sub corpore.'





After Mr. Beauclerk's death, when it became Mr. Langton's property,

he made the inscription be defaced.  Johnson said complacently, 'It

was kind in you to take it off;' and then after a short pause,

added, 'and not unkind in him to put it on.'



He said, 'How few of his friends' houses would a man choose to be

at when he is sick.'  He mentioned one or two.  I recollect only

Thrale's.



He observed, 'There is a wicked inclination in most people to

suppose an old man decayed in his intellects.  If a young or

middle-aged man, when leaving a company, does not recollect where

he laid his hat, it is nothing; but if the same inattention is

discovered in an old man, people will shrug up their shoulders, and

say, "His memory is going."'



Sir Joshua Reynolds communicated to me the following particulars:--



Johnson thought the poems published as translations from Ossian had

so little merit, that he said, 'Sir, a man might write such stuff

for ever, if he would ABANDON his mind to it.'



He said, 'A man should pass a part of his time with THE LAUGHERS,

by which means any thing ridiculous or particular about him might

be presented to his view, and corrected.'  I observed, he must have

been a bold laugher who would have ventured to tell Dr. Johnson of

any of his particularities.*





* I am happy, however, to mention a pleasing instance of his

enduring with great gentleness to hear one of his most striking

particularities pointed out:--Miss Hunter, a niece of his friend

Christopher Smart, when a very young girl, struck by his

extraordinary motions, said to him, Pray, Dr. Johnson, why do you

make such strange gestures?'  From bad habit, he replied.  'Do you,

my dear, take care to guard against bad habits.'  This I was told

by the young lady's brother at Margate.--Boswell.





Dr. Goldsmith said once to Dr. Johnson, that he wished for some

additional members to THE LITERARY CLUB, to give it an agreeable

variety; for (said he,) there can now be nothing new among us: we

have travelled over one another's minds.  Johnson seemed a little

angry, and said, 'Sir, you have not travelled over MY mind, I

promise you.'  Sir Joshua, however, thought Goldsmith right;

observing, that 'when people have lived a great deal together, they

know what each of them will say on every subject.  A new

understanding, therefore, is desirable; because though it may only

furnish the same sense upon a question which would have been

furnished by those with whom we are accustomed to live, yet this

sense will have a different colouring; and colouring is of much

effect in every thing else as well as in painting.'



Johnson used to say that he made it a constant rule to talk as well

as he could both as to sentiment and expression, by which means,

what had been originally effort became familiar and easy.  The

consequence of this, Sir Joshua observed, was, that his common

conversation in all companies was such as to secure him universal

attention, as something above the usual colloquial style was

expected.



Yet, though Johnson had this habit in company, when another mode

was necessary, in order to investigate truth, he could descend to a

language intelligible to the meanest capacity.  An instance of this

was witnessed by Sir Joshua Reynolds, when they were present at an

examination of a little blackguard boy, by Mr. Saunders Welch, the

late Westminster Justice.  Welch, who imagined that he was exalting

himself in Dr. Johnson's eyes by using big words, spoke in a manner

that was utterly unintelligible to the boy; Dr. Johnson perceiving

it, addressed himself to the boy, and changed the pompous

phraseology into colloquial language.  Sir Joshua Reynolds, who was

much amused by this procedure, which seemed a kind of reversing of

what might have been expected from the two men, took notice of it

to Dr. Johnson, as they walked away by themselves.  Johnson said,

that it was continually the case; and that he was always obliged to

TRANSLATE the Justice's swelling diction, (smiling,) so as that his

meaning might be understood by the vulgar, from whom information

was to be obtained.



Sir Joshua once observed to him, that he had talked above the

capacity of some people with whom they had been in company

together.  'No matter, Sir, (said Johnson;) they consider it as a

compliment to be talked to, as if they were wiser than they are.

So true is this, Sir, that Baxter made it a rule in every sermon

that he preached, to say something that was above the capacity of

his audience.'



Johnson's dexterity in retort, when he seemed to be driven to an

extremity by his adversary, was very remarkable.  Of his power in

this respect, our common friend, Mr. Windham of Norfolk, has been

pleased to furnish me with an eminent instance.  However

unfavourable to Scotland, he uniformly gave liberal praise to

George Buchanan, as a writer.  In a conversation concerning the

literary merits of the two countries, in which Buchanan was

introduced, a Scotchman, imagining that on this ground he should

have an undoubted triumph over him, exclaimed, 'Ah, Dr. Johnson,

what would you have said of Buchanan, had he been an Englishman?'

'Why, Sir, (said Johnson, after a little pause,) I should NOT have

said of Buchanan, had he been an ENGLISHMAN, what I will now say of

him as a SCOTCHMAN,--that he was the only man of genius his country

ever produced.'



Though his usual phrase for conversation was TALK, yet he made a

distinction; for when he once told me that he dined the day before

at a friend's house, with 'a very pretty company;' and I asked him

if there was good conversation, he answered, 'No, Sir; we had TALK

enough, but no CONVERSATION; there was nothing DISCUSSED.'



Such was his sensibility, and so much was he affected by pathetick

poetry, that, when he was reading Dr. Beattie's Hermit in my

presence, it brought tears into his eyes.



Mr. Hoole told him, he was born in Moorfields, and had received

part of his early instruction in Grub-street.  'Sir, (said Johnson,

smiling,) you have been REGULARLY educated.'  Having asked who was

his instructor, and Mr. Hoole having answered, 'My uncle, Sir, who

was a taylor;' Johnson, recollecting himself, said, 'Sir, I knew

him; we called him the metaphysical taylor.  He was of a club in

Old-street, with me and George Psalmanazar, and some others: but

pray, Sir, was he a good taylor?'  Mr. Hoole having answered that

he believed he was too mathematical, and used to draw squares and

triangles on his shop-board, so that he did not excel in the cut of

a coat;--'I am sorry for it (said Johnson,) for I would have every

man to be master of his own business.'



In pleasant reference to himself and Mr. Hoole, as brother

authours, he often said, 'Let you and I, Sir, go together, and eat

a beef-steak in Grub-street.'



He said to Sir William Scott, 'The age is running mad after

innovation; all the business of the world is to be done in a new

way; men are to be hanged in a new way; Tyburn itself is not safe

from the fury of innovation.'  It having been argued that this was

an improvement,--'No, Sir, (said he, eagerly,) it is NOT an

improvement: they object that the old method drew together a number

of spectators.  Sir, executions are intended to draw spectators.

If they do not draw spectators they don't answer their purpose.

The old method was most satisfactory to all parties; the publick

was gratified by a procession; the criminal was supported by it.

Why is all this to be swept away?'  I perfectly agree with Dr.

Johnson upon this head, and am persuaded that executions now, the

solemn procession being discontinued, have not nearly the effect

which they formerly had.  Magistrates both in London, and

elsewhere, have, I am afraid, in this had too much regard to their

own case.



Johnson's attention to precision and clearness in expression was

very remarkable.  He disapproved of parentheses; and I believe in

all his voluminous writings, not half a dozen of them will be

found.  He never used the phrases the former and the latter, having

observed, that they often occasioned obscurity; he therefore

contrived to construct his sentences so as not to have occasion for

them, and would even rather repeat the same words, in order to

avoid them.  Nothing is more common than to mistake surnames when

we hear them carelessly uttered for the first time.  To prevent

this, he used not only to pronounce them slowly and distinctly, but

to take the trouble of spelling them; a practice which I have often

followed; and which I wish were general.



Such was the heat and irritability of his blood, that not only did

he pare his nails to the quick; but scraped the joints of his

fingers with a pen-knife, till they seemed quite red and raw.



The heterogeneous composition of human nature was remarkably

exemplified in Johnson.  His liberality in giving his money to

persons in distress was extraordinary.  Yet there lurked about him

a propensity to paultry saving.  One day I owned to him that 'I was

occasionally troubled with a fit of NARROWNESS.'  'Why, Sir, (said

he,) so am I.  BUT I DO NOT TELL IT.'  He has now and then borrowed

a shilling of me; and when I asked for it again, seemed to be

rather out of humour.  A droll little circumstance once occurred:

as if he meant to reprimand my minute exactness as a creditor, he

thus addressed me;--'Boswell, LEND me sixpence--NOT TO BE REPAID.'



This great man's attention to small things was very remarkable.  As

an instance of it, he one day said to me, 'Sir, when you get silver

in change for a guinea, look carefully at it; you may find some

curious piece of coin.'



Though a stern TRUE-BORN ENGLISHMAN, and fully prejudiced against

all other nations, he had discernment enough to see, and candour

enough to censure, the cold reserve too common among Englishmen

towards strangers: 'Sir, (said he,) two men of any other nation who

are shewn into a room together, at a house where they are both

visitors, will immediately find some conversation.  But two

Englishmen will probably go each to a different window, and remain

in obstinate silence.  Sir, we as yet do not enough understand the

common rights of humanity.'



Johnson, for sport perhaps, or from the spirit of contradiction,

eagerly maintained that Derrick had merit as a writer.  Mr.

Morgann* argued with him directly, in vain.  At length he had

recourse to this device.  'Pray, Sir, (said he,) whether do you

reckon Derrick or Smart the best poet?'  Johnson at once felt

himself roused; and answered, 'Sir, there is no settling the point

of precedency between a louse and a flea.'





* Author of the Essay on the Character of Falstaff.--ED.





He was pleased to say to me one morning when we were left alone in

his study, 'Boswell, I think I am easier with you than with almost

any body.'



He would not allow Mr. David Hume any credit for his political

principles, though similar to his own; saying of him, 'Sir, he was

a Tory by chance.'



His acute observation of human life made him remark, 'Sir, there is

nothing by which a man exasperates most people more, than by

displaying a superiour ability or brilliancy in conversation.  They

seem pleased at the time; but their envy makes them curse him in

their hearts.'



Johnson's love of little children, which he discovered upon all

occasions, calling them 'pretty dears,' and giving them sweetmeats,

was an undoubted proof of the real humanity and gentleness of his

disposition.



His uncommon kindness to his servants, and serious concern, not

only for their comfort in this world, but their happiness in the

next, was another unquestionable evidence of what all, who were

intimately acquainted with him, knew to be true.



Nor would it be just, under this head, to omit the fondness which

he shewed for animals which he had taken under his protection.  I

never shall forget the indulgence with which he treated Hodge, his

cat: for whom he himself used to go out and buy oysters, lest the

servants having that trouble should take a dislike to the poor

creature.  I am, unluckily, one of those who have an antipathy to a

cat, so that I am uneasy when in the room with one; and I own, I

frequently suffered a good deal from the presence of this same

Hodge.  I recollect him one day scrambling up Dr. Johnson's breast,

apparently with much satisfaction, while my friend smiling and

half-whistling, rubbed down his back, and pulled him by the tail;

and when I observed he was a fine cat, saying, 'Why yes, Sir, but I

have had cats whom I liked better than this;' and then as if

perceiving Hodge to be out of countenance, adding, 'but he is a

very fine cat, a very fine cat indeed.'



This reminds me of the ludicrous account which he gave Mr. Langton,

of the despicable state of a young Gentleman of good family.  'Sir,

when I heard of him last, he was running about town shooting cats.'

And then in a sort of kindly reverie, he bethought himself of his

own favourite cat, and said, 'But Hodge shan't be shot; no, no,

Hodge shall not be shot.'



On Thursday, April 10, I introduced to him, at his house in Bolt-

court, the Honourable and Reverend William Stuart, son of the Earl

of Bute; a gentleman truly worthy of being known to Johnson; being,

with all the advantages of high birth, learning, travel, and

elegant manners, an exemplary parish priest in every respect.



After some compliments on both sides, the tour which Johnson and I

had made to the Hebrides was mentioned.  JOHNSON.  'I got an

acquisition of more ideas by it than by any thing that I remember.

I saw quite a different system of life.'  BOSWELL.  'You would not

like to make the same journey again?'  JOHNSON.  'Why no, Sir; not

the same: it is a tale told.  Gravina, an Italian critick,

observes, that every man desires to see that of which he has read;

but no man desires to read an account of what he has seen: so much

does description fall short of reality.  Description only excites

curiosity: seeing satisfies it.  Other people may go and see the

Hebrides.'  BOSWELL.  'I should wish to go and see some country

totally different from what I have been used to; such as Turkey,

where religion and every thing else are different.'  JOHNSON.

'Yes, Sir; there are two objects of curiosity,--the Christian

world, and the Mahometan world.  All the rest may be considered as

barbarous.'  BOSWELL.  'Pray, Sir, is the Turkish Spy a genuine

book?'  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir.  Mrs. Manley, in her Life, says that

her father wrote the first two volumes: and in another book,

Dunton's Life and Errours, we find that the rest was written by one

Sault, at two guineas a sheet, under the direction of Dr.

Midgeley.'



About this time he wrote to Mrs. Lucy Porter, mentioning his bad

health, and that he intended a visit to Lichfield.  'It is, (says

he,) with no great expectation of amendment that I make every year

a journey into the country; but it is pleasant to visit those whose

kindness has been often experienced.'



On April 18, (being Good-Friday,) I found him at breakfast, in his

usual manner upon that day, drinking tea without milk, and eating a

cross-bun to prevent faintness; we went to St. Clement's church, as

formerly.  When we came home from church, he placed himself on one

of the stone-seats at his garden-door, and I took the other, and

thus in the open air and in a placid frame of mind, he talked away

very easily.  JOHNSON.  'Were I a country gentleman, I should not

be very hospitable, I should not have crowds in my house.'

BOSWELL.  'Sir Alexander Dick tells me, that he remembers having a

thousand people in a year to dine at his house: that is, reckoning

each person as one, each time that he dined there.'  JOHNSON.

'That, Sir, is about three a day.'  BOSWELL.  'How your statement

lessens the idea.'  JOHNSON.  'That, Sir, is the good of counting.

It brings every thing to a certainty, which before floated in the

mind indefinitely.'



BOSWELL.  'I wish to have a good walled garden.'  JOHNSON.  'I

don't think it would be worth the expence to you.  We compute in

England, a park wall at a thousand pounds a mile; now a garden-wall

must cost at least as much.  You intend your trees should grow

higher than a deer will leap.  Now let us see; for a hundred pounds

you could only have forty-four square yards, which is very little;

for two hundred pounds, you may have eighty-four square yards,

which is very well.  But when will you get the value of two hundred

pounds of walls, in fruit, in your climate?  No, Sir, such

contention with Nature is not worth while.  I would plant an

orchard, and have plenty of such fruit as ripen well in your

country.  My friend, Dr. Madden, of Ireland, said, that "in an

orchard there should be enough to eat, enough to lay up, enough to

be stolen, and enough to rot upon the ground."  Cherries are an

early fruit, you may have them; and you may have the early apples

and pears.'  BOSWELL.  'We cannot have nonpareils.'  JOHNSON.

'Sir, you can no more have nonpareils than you can have grapes.'

BOSWELL.  'We have them, Sir; but they are very bad.'  JOHNSON.

'Nay, Sir, never try to have a thing merely to shew that you CANNOT

have it.  From ground that would let for forty shillings you may

have a large orchard; and you see it costs you only forty

shillings.  Nay, you may graze the ground when the trees are grown

up; you cannot while they are young.'  BOSWELL.  'Is not a good

garden a very common thing in England, Sir?'  JOHNSON.  'Not so

common, Sir, as you imagine.  In Lincolnshire there is hardly an

orchard; in Staffordshire very little fruit.'  BOSWELL.  'Has

Langton no orchard?'  JOHNSON.  'No, Sir.'  BOSWELL.  'How so,

Sir?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, from the general negligence of the

county.  He has it not, because nobody else has it.'  BOSWELL.  'A

hot-house is a certain thing; I may have that.'  JOHNSON.  'A hot-

house is pretty certain; but you must first build it, then you must

keep fires in it, and you must have a gardener to take care of it.'

BOSWELL.  'But if I have a gardener at any rate ?--'  JOHNSON.

'Why, yes.'  BOSWELL.  'I'd have it near my house; there is no need

to have it in the orchard.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, I'd have it near my

house.  I would plant a great many currants; the fruit is good, and

they make a pretty sweetmeat.'



I record this minute detail, which some may think trifling, in

order to shew clearly how this great man, whose mind could grasp

such large and extensive subjects, as he has shewn in his literary

labours, was yet well-informed in the common affairs of life, and

loved to illustrate them.



Talking of the origin of language; JOHNSON.  'It must have come by

inspiration.  A thousand, nay, a million of children could not

invent a language.  While the organs are pliable, there is not

understanding enough to form a language; by the time that there is

understanding enough, the organs are become stiff.  We know that

after a certain age we cannot learn to pronounce a new language.

No foreigner, who comes to England when advanced in life, ever

pronounces English tolerably well; at least such instances are very

rare.  When I maintain that language must have come by inspiration,

I do not mean that inspiration is required for rhetorick, and all

the beauties of language; for when once man has language, we can

conceive that he may gradually form modifications of it.  I mean

only that inspiration seems to me to be necessary to give man the

faculty of speech; to inform him that he may have speech; which I

think he could no more find out without inspiration, than cows or

hogs would think of such a faculty.'  WALKER.  'Do you think, Sir,

that there are any perfect synonimes in any language?'  JOHNSON.

'Originally there were not; but by using words negligently, or in

poetry, one word comes to be confounded with another.'



He talked of Dr. Dodd.  'A friend of mine, (said he,) came to me

and told me, that a lady wished to have Dr. Dodd's picture in a

bracelet, and asked me for a motto.  I said, I could think of no

better than Currat Lex.  I was very willing to have him pardoned,

that is, to have the sentence changed to transportation: but, when

he was once hanged, I did not wish he should be made a saint.'



Mrs. Burney, wife of his friend Dr. Burney, came in, and he seemed

to be entertained with her conversation.



Garrick's funeral was talked of as extravagantly expensive.

Johnson, from his dislike to exaggeration, would not allow that it

was distinguished by any extraordinary pomp.  'Were there not six

horses to each coach?' said Mrs. Burney.  JOHNSON.  'Madam, there

were no more six horses than six phoenixes.'



Time passed on in conversation till it was too late for the service

of the church at three o'clock.  I took a walk, and left him alone

for some time; then returned, and we had coffee and conversation

again by ourselves.



We went to evening prayers at St. Clement's, at seven, and then

parted.



On Sunday, April 20, being Easter-day, after attending solemn

service at St. Paul's, I came to Dr. Johnson, and found Mr. Lowe,

the painter, sitting with him.  Mr. Lowe mentioned the great number

of new buildings of late in London, yet that Dr. Johnson had

observed, that the number of inhabitants was not increased.

JOHNSON.  Why, Sir, the bills of mortality prove that no more

people die now than formerly; so it is plain no more live.  The

register of births proves nothing, for not one tenth of the people

of London are born there.'  BOSWELL.  'I believe, Sir, a great many

of the children born in London die early.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, yes,

Sir.'  BOSWELL.  'But those who do live, are as stout and strong

people as any: Dr. Price says, they must be naturally stronger to

get through.'  JOHNSON.  'That is system, Sir.  A great traveller

observes, that it is said there are no weak or deformed people

among the Indians; but he with much sagacity assigns the reason of

this, which is, that the hardship of their life as hunters and

fishers does not allow weak or diseased children to grow up.  Now

had I been an Indian, I must have died early; my eyes would not

have served me to get food.  I indeed now could fish, give me

English tackle; but had I been an Indian I must have starved, or

they would have knocked me on the head, when they saw I could do

nothing.'  BOSWELL.  'Perhaps they would have taken care of you: we

are told they are fond of oratory, you would have talked to them.'

JOHNSON.  Nay, Sir, I should not have lived long enough to be fit

to talk; I should have been dead before I was ten years old.

Depend upon it, Sir, a savage, when he is hungry, will not carry

about with him a looby of nine years old, who cannot help himself.

They have no affection, Sir.'  BOSWELL.  'I believe natural

affection, of which we hear so much, is very small.'  JOHNSON.

'Sir, natural affection is nothing: but affection from principle

and established duty is sometimes wonderfully strong.'  LOWE.  'A

hen, Sir, will feed her chickens in preference to herself.'

JOHNSON.  'But we don't know that the hen is hungry; let the hen be

fairly hungry, and I'll warrant she'll peck the corn herself.  A

cock, I believe, will feed hens instead of himself; but we don't

know that the cock is hungry.'  BOSWELL.  'And that, Sir, is not

from affection but gallantry.  But some of the Indians have

affection.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, that they help some of their children

is plain; for some of them live, which they could not do without

being helped.'



I dined with him; the company were, Mrs. Williams, Mrs. Desmoulins,

and Mr. Lowe.  He seemed not to be well, talked little, grew drowsy

soon after dinner, and retired, upon which I went away.



Having next day gone to Mr. Burke's seat in the country, from

whence I was recalled by an express, that a near relation of mine

had killed his antagonist in a duel, and was himself dangerously

wounded, I saw little of Dr. Johnson till Monday, April 28, when I

spent a considerable part of the day with him, and introduced the

subject, which then chiefly occupied my mind.  JOHNSON.  'I do not

see, Sir, that fighting is absolutely forbidden in Scripture; I see

revenge forbidden, but not self-defence.'  BOSWELL.  'The Quakers

say it is; "Unto him that smiteth thee on one cheek, offer him also

the other."'  JOHNSON.  'But stay, Sir; the text is meant only to

have the effect of moderating passion; it is plain that we are not

to take it in a literal sense.  We see this from the context, where

there are other recommendations, which I warrant you the Quaker

will not take literally; as, for instance, "From him that would

borrow of thee, turn thou not away."  Let a man whose credit is

bad, come to a Quaker, and say, "Well, Sir, lend me a hundred

pounds;" he'll find him as unwilling as any other man.  No, Sir, a

man may shoot the man who invades his character, as he may shoot

him who attempts to break into his house.*  So in 1745, my friend,

Tom Gumming, the Quaker, said, he would not fight, but he would

drive an ammunition cart; and we know that the Quakers have sent

flannel waistcoats to our soldiers, to enable them to fight

better.'  BOSWELL.  'When a man is the aggressor, and by ill-usage

forces on a duel in which he is killed, have we not little ground

to hope that he is gone into a state of happiness?'  JOHNSON.

'Sir, we are not to judge determinately of the state in which a man

leaves this life.  He may in a moment have repented effectually,

and it is possible may have been accepted by GOD.'





* I think it necessary to caution my readers against concluding

that in this or any other conversation of Dr. Johnson, they have

his serious and deliberate opinion on the subject of duelling.  In

my Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides, 3rd edit. p. 386 [p. 366,

Oct. 24], it appears that he made this frank confession:--'Nobody

at times, talks more laxly than I do;' and, ib., p. 231 [Sept. 19,

1773], 'He fairly owned he could not explain the rationality of

duelling.'  We may, therefore, infer, that he could not think that

justifiable, which seems so inconsistent with the spirit of the

Gospel.--BOSWELL.





Upon being told that old Mr. Sheridan, indignant at the neglect of

his oratorical plans, had threatened to go to America; JOHNSON.  'I

hope he will go to America.'  BOSWELL.  'The Americans don't want

oratory.'  JOHNSON.  'But we can want Sheridan.'



On Monday, April 29, I found him at home in the forenoon, and Mr.

Seward with him.  Horace having been mentioned; BOSWELL.  'There is

a great deal of thinking in his works.  One finds there almost

every thing but religion.'  SEWARD.  'He speaks of his returning to

it, in his Ode Parcus Deorum cultor et infrequens.'  JOHNSON.

'Sir, he was not in earnest: this was merely poetical.'  BOSWELL.

'There are, I am afraid, many people who have no religion at all.'

SEWARD.  'And sensible people too.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, not

sensible in that respect.  There must be either a natural or a

moral stupidity, if one lives in a total neglect of so very

important a concern.  SEWARD.  'I wonder that there should be

people without religion.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, you need not wonder at

this, when you consider how large a proportion of almost every

man's life is passed without thinking of it.  I myself was for some

years totally regardless of religion.  It had dropped out of my

mind.  It was at an early part of my life.  Sickness brought it

back, and I hope I have never lost it since.'  BOSWELL.  'My dear

Sir, what a man must you have been without religion!  Why you must

have gone on drinking, and swearing, and--'  JOHNSON (with a

smile,) 'I drank enough and swore enough, to be sure.'  SEWARD.

'One should think that sickness and the view of death would make

more men religious.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, they do not know how to go

about it: they have not the first notion.  A man who has never had

religion before, no more grows religious when he is sick, than a

man who has never learnt figures can count when he has need of

calculation.'



I mentioned Dr. Johnson's excellent distinction between liberty of

conscience and liberty of teaching.  JOHNSON.  'Consider, Sir; if

you have children whom you wish to educate in the principles of the

Church of England, and there comes a Quaker who tries to pervert

them to his principles, you would drive away the Quaker.  You would

not trust to the predomination of right, which you believe is in

your opinions; you would keep wrong out of their heads.  Now the

vulgar are the children of the State.  If any one attempts to teach

them doctrines contrary to what the State approves, the magistrate

may and ought to restrain him.'  SEWARD.  'Would you restrain

private conversation, Sir?'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, it is difficult

to say where private conversation begins, and where it ends.  If we

three should discuss even the great question concerning the

existence of a Supreme Being by ourselves, we should not be

restrained; for that would be to put an end to all improvement.

But if we should discuss it in the presence of ten boarding-school

girls, and as many boys, I think the magistrate would do well to

put us in the stocks, to finish the debate there.'



'How false (said he,) is all this, to say that in ancient times

learning was not a disgrace to a Peer as it is now.  In ancient

times a Peer was as ignorant as any one else.  He would have been

angry to have it thought he could write his name.  Men in ancient

times dared to stand forth with a degree of ignorance with which

nobody would dare now to stand forth.  I am always angry when I

hear ancient times praised at the expence of modern times.  There

is now a great deal more learning in the world than there was

formerly; for it is universally diffused.  You have, perhaps, no

man who knows as much Greek and Latin as Bentley; no man who knows

as much mathematicks as Newton: but you have many more men who know

Greek and Latin, and who know mathematicks.'



On Thursday, May 1, I visited him in the evening along with young

Mr. Burke.  He said, 'It is strange that there should be so little

reading in the world, and so much writing.  People in general do

not willingly read, if they can have any thing else to amuse them.

There must be an external impulse; emulation, or vanity, or

avarice.  The progress which the understanding makes through a

book, has more pain than pleasure in it.  Language is scanty, and

inadequate to express the nice gradations and mixtures of our

feelings.  No man reads a book of science from pure inclination.

The books that we do read with pleasure are light compositions,

which contain a quick succession of events.  However, I have this

year read all Virgil through.  I read a book of the Aeneid every

night, so it was done in twelve nights, and I had great delight in

it.  The Georgicks did not give me so much pleasure, except the

fourth book.  The Eclogues I have almost all by heart.  I do not

think the story of the Aeneid interesting.  I like the story of the

Odyssey much better; and this not on account of the wonderful

things which it contains; for there are wonderful things enough in

the Aeneid;--the ships of the Trojans turned to sea-nymphs,--the

tree at Polydorus's tomb dropping blood.  The story of the Odyssey

is interesting, as a great part of it is domestick.  It has been

said, there is pleasure in writing, particularly in writing verses.

I allow you may have pleasure from writing, after it is over, if

you have written well; but you don't go willingly to it again.  I

know when I have been writing verses, I have run my finger down the

margin, to see how many I had made, and how few I had to make.'



He seemed to be in a very placid humour, and although I have no

note of the particulars of young Mr. Burke's conversation, it is

but justice to mention in general, that it was such that Dr.

Johnson said to me afterwards, 'He did very well indeed; I have a

mind to tell his father.'



I have no minute of any interview with Johnson till Thursday, May

15, when I find what follows:--BOSWELL.  'I wish much to be in

Parliament, Sir.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, unless you come resolved to

support any administration, you would be the worse for being in

Parliament, because you would be obliged to live more expensively.'

BOSWELL.  'Perhaps, Sir, I should be the less happy for being in

Parliament.  I never would sell my vote, and I should be vexed if

things went wrong.'  JOHNSON.  'That's cant, Sir.  It would not vex

you more in the house, than in the gallery: publick affairs vex no

man.'  BOSWELL.  'Have not they vexed yourself a little, Sir?  Have

not you been vexed by all the turbulence of this reign, and by that

absurd vote of the house of Commons, "That the influence of the

Crown has increased, is increasing, and ought to be diminished?"'

Johnson.  'Sir, I have never slept an hour less, nor eat an ounce

less meat.  I would have knocked the factious dogs on the head, to

be sure; but I was not VEXED.'  BOSWELL.  'I declare, Sir, upon my

honour, I did imagine I was vexed, and took a pride in it; but it

WAS, perhaps, cant; for I own I neither ate less, nor slept less.'

JOHNSON.  'My dear friend, clear your MIND of cant.  You may TALK

as other people do: you may say to a man, "Sir, I am your most

humble servant."  You are not his most humble servant.  You may

say, "These are bad times; it is a melancholy thing to be reserved

to such times."  You don't mind the times.  You tell a man, "I am

sorry you had such bad weather the last day of your journey, and

were so much wet."  You don't care six-pence whether he is wet or

dry.  You may TALK in this manner; it is a mode of talking in

Society: but don't THINK foolishly.'



Here he discovered a notion common enough in persons not much

accustomed to entertain company, that there must be a degree of

elaborate attention, otherwise company will think themselves

neglected; and such attention is no doubt very fatiguing.  He

proceeded: 'I would not, however, be a stranger in my own county; I

would visit my neighbours, and receive their visits; but I would

not be in haste to return visits.  If a gentleman comes to see me,

I tell him he does me a great deal of honour.  I do not go to see

him perhaps for ten weeks; then we are very complaisant to each

other.  No, Sir, you will have much more influence by giving or

lending money where it is wanted, than by hospitality.'



On Saturday, May 17, I saw him for a short time.  Having mentioned

that I had that morning been with old Mr. Sheridan, he remembered

their former intimacy with a cordial warmth, and said to me, 'Tell

Mr. Sheridan, I shall be glad to see him, and shake hands with

him.'  BOSWELL.  'It is to me very wonderful that resentment should

be kept up so long.'  JOHNSON.  'Why, Sir, it is not altogether

resentment that he does not visit me; it is partly falling out of

the habit,--partly disgust, as one has at a drug that has made him

sick.  Besides, he knows that I laugh at his oratory.'



Another day I spoke of one of our friends, of whom he, as well as

I, had a very high opinion.  He expatiated in his praise; but

added, 'Sir, he is a cursed Whig, a BOTTOMLESS Whig, as they all

are now.'



On Monday, May 26, I found him at tea, and the celebrated Miss

Burney, the authour of Evelina and Cecilia, with him.  I asked if

there would be any speakers in Parliament, if there were no places

to be obtained.  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir.  Why do you speak here?

Either to instruct and entertain, which is a benevolent motive; or

for distinction, which is a selfish motive.'  I mentioned Cecilia.

JOHNSON.  (with an air of animated satisfaction,) 'Sir, if you talk

of Cecilia, talk on.'



We talked of Mr. Barry's exhibition of his pictures.  JOHNSON.

'Whatever the hand may have done, the mind has done its part.

There is a grasp of mind there which you find nowhere else.'



I asked whether a man naturally virtuous, or one who has overcome

wicked inclinations, is the best.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, to YOU, the man

who has overcome wicked inclinations is not the best.  He has more

merit to HIMSELF: I would rather trust my money to a man who has no

hands, and so a physical impossibility to steal, than to a man of

the most honest principles.  There is a witty satirical story of

Foote.  He had a small bust of Garrick placed upon his bureau.

"You may be surprized (said he,) that I allow him to be so near my

gold;--but you will observe he has no hands."'



On Friday, May 29, being to set out for Scotland next morning, I

passed a part of the day with him in more than usual earnestness;

as his health was in a more precarious state than at any time when

I had parted from him.  He, however, was quick and lively, and

critical as usual.  I mentioned one who was a very learned man.

JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir, he has a great deal of learning; but it never

lies straight.  There is never one idea by the side of another;

'tis all entangled: and their he drives it so aukwardly upon

conversation.'



He said, 'Get as much force of mind as you can.  Live within your

income.  Always have something saved at the end of the year.  Let

your imports be more than your exports, and you'll never go far

wrong.



I assured him, that in the extensive and various range of his

acquaintance there never had been any one who had a more sincere

respect and affection for him than I had.  He said, 'I believe it,

Sir.  Were I in distress, there is no man to whom I should sooner

come than to you.  I should like to come and have a cottage in your

park, toddle about, live mostly on milk, and be taken care of by

Mrs. Boswell.  She and I are good friends now; are we not?'



He embraced me, and gave me his blessing, as usual when I was

leaving him for any length of time.  I walked from his door to-day,

with a fearful apprehension of what might happen before I returned.



My anxious apprehensions at parting with him this year, proved to

be but too well founded; for not long afterwards he had a dreadful

stroke of the palsy, of which there are very full and accurate

accounts in letters written by himself, to shew with what composure

of mind, and resignation to the Divine Will, his steady piety

enabled him to behave.





'TO MR. EDMUND ALLEN.



'DEAR SIR,--It has pleased GOD, this morning, to deprive me of the

powers of speech; and as I do not know but that it may be his

further good pleasure to deprive me soon of my senses, I request

you will on the receipt of this note, come to me, and act for me,

as the exigencies of my case may require.  I am, sincerely yours,



'June 17, 1783.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





Two days after he wrote thus to Mrs. Thrale:--



'On Monday, the 16th, I sat for my picture, and walked a

considerable way with little inconvenience.  In the afternoon and

evening I felt myself light and easy, and began to plan schemes of

life.  Thus I went to bed, and in a short time waked and sat up, as

has been long my custom, when I felt a confusion and indistinctness

in my head, which lasted, I suppose, about half a minute.  I was

alarmed, and prayed God, that however he might afflict my body, he

would spare my understanding.  This prayer, that I might try the

integrity of my faculties, I made in Latin verse.  The lines were

not very good, but I knew them not to be very good: I made them

easily, and concluded myself to be unimpaired in my faculties.



'Soon after I perceived that I had suffered a paralytick stroke,

and that my speech was taken from me.  I had no pain, and so little

dejection in this dreadful state, that I wondered at my own apathy,

and considered that perhaps death itself, when it should come,

would excite less horrour than seems now to attend it.



'In order to rouse the vocal organs, I took two drams.  Wine has

been celebrated for the production of eloquence.  I put myself into

violent motion, and I think repeated it; but all was vain.  I then

went to bed, and strange as it may seem, I think slept.  When I saw

light, it was time to contrive what I should do.  Though God

stopped my speech, he left me my hand; I enjoyed a mercy which was

not granted to my dear friend Lawrence, who now perhaps overlooks

me as I am writing, and rejoices that I have what he wanted.  My

first note was necessarily to my servant, who came in talking, and

could not immediately comprehend why he should read what I put into

his hands.



'I then wrote a card to Mr. Allen, that I might have a discreet

friend at hand, to act as occasion should require.  In penning this

note, I had some difficulty; my hand, I knew not how nor why, made

wrong letters.  I then wrote to Dr. Taylor to come to me, and bring

Dr. Heberden; and I sent to Dr. Brocklesby, who is my neighbour.

My physicians are very friendly, and give me great hopes; but you

may imagine my situation.  I have so far recovered my vocal powers,

as to repeat the Lord's Prayer with no very imperfect articulation.

My memory, I hope, yet remains as it was; but such an attack

produces solicitude for the safety of every faculty.'





'TO MR. THOMAS DAVIES.



'DEAR SIR,--I have had, indeed, a very heavy blow; but GOD, who yet

spares my life, I humbly hope will spare my understanding, and

restore my speech.  As I am not at all helpless, I want no

particular assistance, but am strongly affected by Mrs. Davies's

tenderness; and when I think she can do me good, shall be very glad

to call upon her.  I had ordered friends to be shut out; but one or

two have found the way in; and if you come you shall be admitted:

for I know not whom I can see, that will bring more amusement on

his tongue, or more kindness in his heart.  I am, &c.



'June 18, 1783.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





It gives me great pleasure to preserve such a memorial of Johnson's

regard for Mr. Davies, to whom I was indebted for my introduction

to him.  He indeed loved Davies cordially, of which I shall give

the following little evidence.  One day when he had treated him

with too much asperity, Tom, who was not without pride and spirit,

went off in a passion; but he had hardly reached home when Frank,

who had been sent after him, delivered this note:--'Come, come,

dear Davies, I am always sorry when we quarrel; send me word that

we are friends.'



Such was the general vigour of his constitution, that he recovered

from this alarming and severe attack with wonderful quickness; so

that in July he was able to make a visit to Mr. Langton at

Rochester, where he passed about a fortnight, and made little

excursions as easily as at any time of his life.  In August he went

as far as the neighbourhood of Salisbury, to Heale, the seat of

William Bowles, Esq., a gentleman whom I have heard him praise for

exemplary religious order in his family.  In his diary I find a

short but honourable mention of this visit:--'August 28, I came to

Heale without fatigue.  30, I am entertained quite to my mind.'



While he was here he had a letter from Dr. Brocklesby, acquainting

him of the death of Mrs. Williams, which affected him a good deal.

Though for several years her temper had not been complacent, she

had valuable qualities, and her departure left a blank in his

house.  Upon this occasion he, according to his habitual course of

piety, composed a prayer.



I shall here insert a few particulars concerning him, with which I

have been favoured by one of his friends.



'He spoke often in praise of French literature.  "The French are

excellent in this, (he would say,) they have a book on every

subject."  From what he had seen of them he denied them the praise

of superiour politeness, and mentioned, with very visible disgust,

the custom they have of spitting on the floors of their apartments.

"This, (said the Doctor), is as gross a thing as can well be done;

and one wonders how any man, or set of men, can persist in so

offensive a practice for a whole day together; one should expect

that the first effort towards civilization would remove it even

among savages."



'Chymistry was always an interesting pursuit with Dr. Johnson.

Whilst he was in Wiltshire, he attended some experiments that were

made by a physician at Salisbury, on the new kinds of air.  In the

course of the experiments frequent mention being made of Dr.

Priestley, Dr. Johnson knit his brows, and in a stern manner

inquired, "Why do we hear so much of Dr. Priestley?"  He was very

properly answered, "Sir, because we are indebted to him for these

important discoveries."  On this Dr. Johnson appeared well content;

and replied, "Well, well, I believe we are; and let every man have

the honour he has merited."'



'A friend was one day, about two years before his death, struck

with some instance of Dr. Johnson's great candour.  "Well, Sir,

(said he,) I will always say that you are a very candid man."

"Will you, (replied the Doctor,) I doubt then you will be very

singular.  But, indeed, Sir, (continued he,) I look upon myself to

be a man very much misunderstood.  I am not an uncandid, nor am I a

severe man.  I sometimes say more than I mean, in jest; and people

are apt to believe me serious: however, I am more candid than I was

when I was younger.  As I know more of mankind I expect less of

them, and am ready now to call a man A GOOD MAN, upon easier terms

than I was formerly."'



On his return from Heale he wrote to Dr. Burney:--



'I came home on the 18th at noon to a very disconsolate house.  You

and I have lost our friends; but you have more friends at home.  My

domestick companion is taken from me.  She is much missed, for her

acquisitions were many, and her curiosity universal; so that she

partook of every conversation.  I am not well enough to go much

out; and to sit, and eat, or fast alone, is very wearisome.  I

always mean to send my compliments to all the ladies.'



His fortitude and patience met with severe trials during this year.

The stroke of the palsy has been related circumstantially; but he

was also afflicted with the gout, and was besides troubled with a

complaint which not only was attended with immediate inconvenience,

but threatened him with a chirurgical operation, from which most

men would shrink.  The complaint was a sarcocele, which Johnson

bore with uncommon firmness, and was not at all frightened while he

looked forward to amputation.  He was attended by Mr. Pott and Mr.

Cruikshank.



Happily the complaint abated without his being put to the torture

of amputation.  But we must surely admire the manly resolution

which he discovered while it hung over him.



He this autumn received a visit from the celebrated Mrs. Siddons.

He gives this account of it in one of his letters to Mrs. Thrale:--



'Mrs. Siddons, in her visit to me, behaved with great modesty and

propriety, and left nothing behind her to be censured or despised.

Neither praise nor money, the two powerful corrupters of mankind,

seem to have depraved her.  I shall be glad to see her again.  Her

brother Kemble calls on me, and pleases me very well.  Mrs. Siddons

and I talked of plays; and she told me her intention of exhibiting

this winter the characters of Constance, Catharine, and Isabella,

in Shakspeare.'



Mr. Kemble has favoured me with the following minute of what passed

at this visit:--



'When Mrs. Siddons came into the room, there happened to be no

chair ready for her, which he observing, said with a smile, "Madam,

you who so often occasion a want of seats to other people, will the

more easily excuse the want of one yourself."



'Having placed himself by her, he with great good-humour entered

upon a consideration of the English drama; and, among other

inquiries, particularly asked her which of Shakspeare's characters

she was most pleased with.  Upon her answering that she thought the

character of Queen Catharine, in Henry the Eighth, the most

natural:--"I think so too, Madam, (said he;) and whenever you

perform it, I will once more hobble out to the theatre myself."

Mrs. Siddons promised she would do herself the honour of acting his

favourite part for him; but many circumstances happened to prevent

the representation of King Henry the Eighth during the Doctor's

life.



'In the course of the evening he thus gave his opinion upon the

merits of some of the principal performers whom he remembered to

have seen upon the stage.  "Mrs. Porter in the vehemence of rage,

and Mrs. Clive in the sprightliness of humour, I have never seen

equalled.  What Clive did best, she did better than Garrick; but

could not do half so many things well; she was a better romp than

any I ever saw in nature.  Pritchard, in common life, was a vulgar

ideot; she would talk of her GOWND: but, when she appeared upon the

stage, seemed to be inspired by gentility and understanding.  I

once talked with Colley Cibber, and thought him ignorant of the

principles of his art.  Garrick, Madam; was no declaimer; there was

not one of his own scene-shifters who could not have spoken To be,

or not to be, better than he did; yet he was the only actor I ever

saw, whom I could call a master both in tragedy and comedy; though

I liked him best in comedy.  A true conception of character, and

natural expression of it, were his distinguished excellencies."

Having expatiated, with his usual force and eloquence, on Mr.

Garrick's extraordinary eminence as an actor, he concluded with

this compliment to his social talents: "And after all, Madam, I

thought him less to be envied on the stage than at the head of a

table."'



Johnson, indeed, had thought more upon the subject of acting than

might be generally supposed.  Talking of it one day to Mr. Kemble,

he said, 'Are you, Sir, one of those enthusiasts who believe

yourself transformed into the very character you represent?'  Upon

Mr. Kemble's answering that he had never felt so strong a

persuasion himself; 'To be sure not, Sir, (said Johnson;) the thing

is impossible.  And if Garrick really believed himself to be that

monster, Richard the Third, he deserved to be hanged every time he

performed it.'



I find in this, as in former years, notices of his kind attention

to Mrs. Gardiner, who, though in the humble station of a tallow-

chandler upon Snow-hill, was a woman of excellent good sense,

pious, and charitable.  She told me, she had been introduced to him

by Mrs. Masters, the poetess, whose volumes he revised, and, it is

said, illuminated here and there with a ray of his own genius.

Mrs. Gardiner was very zealous for the support of the Ladies'

charity-school, in the parish of St. Sepulchre.  It is confined to

females; and, I am told, it afforded a hint for the story of Betty

Broom in The Idler.



The late ingenious Mr. Mickle, some time before his death, wrote me

a letter concerning Dr. Johnson, in which he mentions,--'I was

upwards of twelve years acquainted with him, was frequently in his

company, always talked with ease to him, and can truly say, that I

never received from him one rough word.'



Mr. Mickle reminds me in this letter of a conversation, at dinner

one day at Mr. Hoole's with Dr. Johnson, when Mr. Nicol the King's

bookseller and I attempted to controvert the maxim, 'better that

ten guilty should escape, than one innocent person suffer;' and

were answered by Dr. Johnson with great power of reasoning and

eloquence.  I am very sorry that I have no record of that day: but

I well recollect my illustrious friend's having ably shewn, that

unless civil institutions insure protection to the innocent, all

the confidence which mankind should have in them would be lost.



Notwithstanding the complication of disorders under which Johnson

now laboured, he did not resign himself to despondency and

discontent, but with wisdom and spirit endeavoured to console and

amuse his mind with as many innocent enjoyments as he could

procure.  Sir John Hawkins has mentioned the cordiality with which

he insisted that such of the members of the old club in Ivy-lane as

survived, should meet again and dine together, which they did,

twice at a tavern and once at his house: and in order to insure

himself society in the evening for three days in the week, he

instituted a club at the Essex Head, in Essex-street, then kept by

Samuel Greaves, an old servant of Mr. Thrale's.





'TO SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.



'DEAR SIR,--It is inconvenient to me to come out, I should else

have waited on you with an account of a little evening Club which

we are establishing in Essex-street, in the Strand, and of which

you are desired to be one.  It will be held at the Essex Head, now

kept by an old servant of Thrale's.  The company is numerous, and,

as you will see by the list, miscellaneous.  The terms are lax, and

the expences light.  Mr. Barry was adopted by Dr. Brocklesby, who

joined with me in forming the plan.  We meet thrice a week, and he

who misses forfeits two-pence.



'If you are willing to become a member, draw a line under your

name.  Return the list.  We meet for the first time on Monday at

eight.  I am, &c.



'Dec. 4, 1783.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





It did not suit Sir Joshua to be one of this Club.  But when I

mention only Mr. Daines Barrington, Dr. Brocklesby, Mr. Murphy, Mr.

John Nichols, Mr. Cooke, Mr. Joddrel, Mr. Paradise, Dr. Horsley,

Mr. Windham,* I shall sufficiently obviate the misrepresentation of

it by Sir John Hawkins, as if it had been a low ale-house

association, by which Johnson was degraded.  Johnson himself, like

his namesake Old Ben, composed the Rules of his Club.





* I was in Scotland when this Club was founded, and during all the

winter.  Johnson, however, declared I should be a member, and

invented a word upon the occasion: Boswell (said he,) is a very

CLUBABLE man.'  When I came to town I was proposed by Mr.

Barrington, and chosen.  I believe there are few societies where

there is better conversation or more decorum, several of us

resolved to continue it after our great founder was removed by

death.  Other members were added; and now, above eight years since

that loss, we go on happily.--BOSWELL.





In the end of this year he was seized with a spasmodick asthma of

such violence, that he was confined to the house in great pain,

being sometimes obliged to sit all night in his chair, a recumbent

posture being so hurtful to his respiration, that he could not

endure lying in bed; and there came upon him at the same time that

oppressive and fatal disease, a dropsy.  It was a very severe

winter, which probably aggravated his complaints; and the solitude

in which Mr. Levett and Mrs. Williams had left him, rendered his

life very gloomy.  Mrs. Desmoulins, who still lived, was herself so

very ill, that she could contribute very little to his relief.  He,

however, had none of that unsocial shyness which we commonly see in

people afflicted with sickness.  He did not hide his head from the

world, in solitary abstraction; he did not deny himself to the

visits of his friends and acquaintances; but at all times, when he

was not overcome by sleep, was ready for conversation as in his

best days.





'TO MRS. LUCY PORTER, IN LICHFIELD.



'DEAR MADAM,--You may perhaps think me negligent that I have not

written to you again upon the loss of your brother; but condolences

and consolations are such common and such useless things, that the

omission of them is no great crime: and my own diseases occupy my

mind, and engage my care.  My nights are miserably restless, and my

days, therefore, are heavy.  I try, however, to hold up my head as

high as I can.



'I am sorry that your health is impaired; perhaps the spring and

the summer may, in some degree, restore it: but if not, we must

submit to the inconveniences of time, as to the other dispensations

of Eternal Goodness.  Pray for me, and write to me, or let Mr.

Pearson write for you.  I am, &c.



'London, Nov. 29, 1783.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





1784: AETAT. 75.]--And now I am arrived at the last year of the

life of SAMUEL JOHNSON, a year in which, although passed in severe

indisposition, he nevertheless gave many evidences of the

continuance of those wondrous powers of mind, which raised him so

high in the intellectual world.  His conversation and his letters

of this year were in no respect inferiour to those of former years.



In consequence of Johnson's request that I should ask our

physicians about his case, and desire Sir Alexander Dick to send

his opinion, I transmitted him a letter from that very amiable

Baronet, then in his eighty-first year, with his faculties as

entire as ever; and mentioned his expressions to me in the note

accompanying it: 'With my most affectionate wishes for Dr.

Johnson's recovery, in which his friends, his country, and all

mankind have so deep a stake:' and at the same time a full opinion

upon his case by Dr. Gillespie, who, like Dr. Cullen, had the

advantage of having passed through the gradations of surgery and

pharmacy, and by study and practice had attained to such skill,

that my father settled on him two hundred pounds a year for five


years, and fifty pounds a year during his life, as an honorarium to

secure his particular attendance.



I also applied to three of the eminent physicians who had chairs in

our celebrated school of medicine at Edinburgh, Doctors Cullen,

Hope, and Monro.



All of them paid the most polite attention to my letter, and its

venerable object.  Dr. Cullen's words concerning him were, 'It

would give me the greatest pleasure to be of any service to a man

whom the publick properly esteem, and whom I esteem and respect as

much as I do Dr. Johnson.'  Dr. Hope's, 'Few people have a better

claim on me than your friend, as hardly a day passes that I do not

ask his opinion about this or that word.'  Dr. Monro's, 'I most

sincerely join you in sympathizing with that very worthy and

ingenious character, from whom his country has derived much

instruction and entertainment.'





'TO THE REVEREND DR. TAYLOR, ASHBOURNE, DERBYSHIRE.



'DEAR SIR,--What can be the reason that I hear nothing from you?  I 

hope nothing disables you from writing.  What I have seen, and what

I have felt, gives me reason to fear every thing.  Do not omit

giving me the comfort of knowing, that after all my losses I have

yet a friend left.



'I want every comfort.  My life is very solitary and very

cheerless.  Though it has pleased GOD wonderfully to deliver me

from the dropsy, I am yet very weak, and have not passed the door

since the 13th of December.  I hope for some help from warm

weather, which will surely come in time.



'I could not have the consent of the physicians to go to church

yesterday; I therefore received the holy sacrament at home, in the

room where I communicated with dear Mrs. Williams, a little before

her death.  O! my friend, the approach of death is very dreadful.

I am afraid to think on that which I know I cannot avoid.  It is

vain to look round and round for that help which cannot be had.

Yet we hope and hope, and fancy that he who has lived to-day may

live to-morrow.  But let us learn to derive our hope only from GOD.



'In the mean time, let us be kind to one another.  I have no friend

now living but you and Mr. Hector, that was the friend of my youth.

Do not neglect, dear Sir, yours affectionately,



'London, Easter-Monday,

April 12, 1784.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





What follows is a beautiful specimen of his gentleness and

complacency to a young lady his god-child, one of the daughters of

his friend Mr. Langton, then I think in her seventh year.  He took

the trouble to write it in a large round hand, nearly resembling

printed characters, that she might have the satisfaction of reading

it herself.  The original lies before me, but shall be faithfully

restored to her; and I dare say will be preserved by her as a jewel

as long as she lives.





'TO MISS JANE LANGTON, IN ROCHESTER, KENT.



'MY DEAREST MISS JENNY,--I am sorry that your pretty letter has

been so long without being answered; but, when I am not pretty

well, I do not always write plain enough for young ladies.  I am

glad, my dear, to see that you write so well, and hope that you

mind your pen, your book, and your needle, for they are all

necessary.  Your books will give you knowledge, and make you

respected; and your needle will find you useful employment when you

do not care to read.  When you are a little older, I hope you will

be very diligent in learning arithmetick, and, above all, that

through your whole life you will carefully say your prayers, and

read your Bible.  I am, my dear, your most humble servant,



'May 10, 1784.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





On Wednesday, May 5, I arrived in London, and next morning had the

pleasure to find Dr. Johnson greatly recovered.  I but just saw

him; for a coach was waiting to carry him to Islington, to the

house of his friend the Reverend Mr. Strahan, where he went

sometimes for the benefit of good air, which, notwithstanding his

having formerly laughed at the general opinion upon the subject, he

now acknowledged was conducive to health.



One morning afterwards, when I found him alone, he communicated to

me, with solemn earnestness, a very remarkable circumstance which

had happened in the course of his illness, when he was much

distressed by the dropsy.  He had shut himself up, and employed a

day in particular exercises of religion--fasting, humiliation, and

prayer.  On a sudden he obtained extraordinary relief, for which he

looked up to Heaven with grateful devotion.  He made no direct

inference from this fact; but from his manner of telling it, I

could perceive that it appeared to him as something more than an

incident in the common course of events.  For my own part, I have

no difficulty to avow that cast of thinking, which by many modern

pretenders to wisdom is called SUPERSTITIOUS.  But here I think

even men of dry rationality may believe, that there was an

intermediate interposition of Divine Providence, and that 'the

fervent prayer of this righteous man' availed.



On Saturday, May 15, I dined with him at Dr. Brocklesby's, where

were Colonel Vallancy, Mr. Murphy, and that ever-cheerful companion

Mr. Devaynes, apothecary to his Majesty.  Of these days, and others

on which I saw him, I have no memorials, except the general

recollection of his being able and animated in conversation, and

appearing to relish society as much as the youngest man.  I find

only these three small particulars:--When a person was mentioned,

who said, 'I have lived fifty-one years in this world without

having had ten minutes of uneasiness;' he exclaimed, 'The man who

says so, lies: he attempts to impose on human credulity.'  The

Bishop of Exeter in vain observed, that men were very different.

His Lordship's manner was not impressive, and I learnt afterwards

that Johnson did not find out that the person who talked to him was

a Prelate; if he had, I doubt not that he would have treated him

with more respect; for once talking of George Psalmanazar, whom he

reverenced for his piety, he said, 'I should as soon think of

contradicting a BISHOP.'  One of the company* provoked him greatly

by doing what he could least of all bear, which was quoting

something of his own writing, against what he then maintained.

'What, Sir, (cried the gentleman,) do you say to





    "The busy day, the peaceful night,

       Unfelt, uncounted, glided by?"'--





Johnson finding himself thus presented as giving an instance of a

man who had lived without uneasiness, was much offended, for he

looked upon such a quotation as unfair.  His anger burst out in an

unjustifiable retort, insinuating that the gentleman's remark was a

sally of ebriety; 'Sir, there is one passion I would advise you to

command: when you have drunk out that glass, don't drink another.'

Here was exemplified what Goldsmith said of him, with the aid of a

very witty image from one of Cibber's Comedies: 'There is no

arguing with Johnson; for if his pistol misses fire, he knocks you

down with the butt end of it.'  Another was this: when a gentleman

of eminence in the literary world was violently censured for

attacking people by anonymous paragraphs in news-papers; he, from

the spirit of contradiction as I thought, took up his defence, and

said, 'Come, come, this is not so terrible a crime; he means only

to vex them a little.  I do not say that I should do it; but there

is a great difference between him and me; what is fit for

Hephaestion is not fit for Alexander.'  Another, when I told him

that a young and handsome Countess had said to me, 'I should think

that to be praised by Dr. Johnson would make one a fool all one's

life;' and that I answered, 'Madam, I shall make him a fool to-day,

by repeating this to him,' he said, 'I am too old to be made a

fool; but if you say I am made a fool, I shall not deny it.  I am

much pleased with a compliment, especially from a pretty woman.'





* Boswell himself, likely enough.--HILL.





On the evening of Saturday, May 15, he was in fine spirits, at our

Essex-Head Club.  He told us, 'I dined yesterday at Mrs. Garrick's,

with Mrs. Carter, Miss Hannah More, and Miss Fanny Burney.  Three

such women are not to be found: I know not where I could find a

fourth, except Mrs. Lennox, who is superiour to them all.'

BOSWELL.  'What! had you them all to yourself, Sir?'  JOHNSON.  'I

had them all as much as they were had; but it might have been

better had there been more company there.'  BOSWELL.  'Might not

Mrs. Montagu have been a fourth?'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, Mrs. Montagu

does not make a trade of her wit; but Mrs. Montagu is a very

extraordinary woman; she has a constant stream of conversation, and

it is always impregnated; it has always meaning.'  BOSWELL.  'Mr.

Burke has a constant stream of conversation.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir;

if a man were to go by chance at the same time with Burke under a

shed, to shun a shower, he would say--"this is an extraordinary

man."  If Burke should go into a stable to see his horse drest, the

ostler would say--"we have had an extraordinary man here."'

BOSWELL.  'Foote was a man who never failed in conversation.  If he

had gone into a stable--'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, if he had gone into a

stable, the ostler would have said, "here has been a comical

fellow"; but he would not have respected him.'  BOSWELL.  'And,

Sir, the ostler would have answered him, would have given him as

good as he brought, as the common saying is.'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir;

and Foote would have answered the ostler.--When Burke does not

descend to be merry, his conversation is very superiour indeed.

There is no proportion between the powers which he shews in serious

talk and in jocularity.  When he lets himself down to that, he is

in the kennel.'  I have in another place opposed, and I hope with

success, Dr. Johnson's very singular and erroneous notion as to Mr.

Burke's pleasantry.  Mr. Windham now said low to me, that he

differed from our great friend in this observation; for that Mr.

Burke was often very happy in his merriment.  It would not have

been right for either of us to have contradicted Johnson at this

time, in a Society all of whom did not know and value Mr. Burke as

much as we did.  It might have occasioned something more rough, and

at any rate would probably have checked the flow of Johnson's good-

humour.  He called to us with a sudden air of exultation, as the

thought started into his mind, 'O! Gentlemen, I must tell you a

very great thing.  The Empress of Russia has ordered the Rambler to

be translated into the Russian language: so I shall be read on the

banks of the Wolga.  Horace boasts that his fame would extend as

far as the banks of the Rhone; now the Wolga is farther from me

than the Rhone was from Horace.'  BOSWELL.  'You must certainly be

pleased with this, Sir.'  JOHNSON.  'I am pleased, Sir, to be sure.

A man is pleased to find he has succeeded in that which he has

endeavoured to do.'



One of the company mentioned his having seen a noble person driving

in his carriage, and looking exceedingly well, notwithstanding his

great age.  JOHNSON.  'Ah, Sir; that is nothing.  Bacon observes,

that a stout healthy old man is like a tower undermined.'



On Sunday, May 16, I found him alone; he talked of Mrs. Thrale with

much concern, saying, 'Sir, she has done every thing wrong, since

Thrale's bridle was off her neck;' and was proceeding to mention

some circumstances which have since been the subject of publick

discussion, when he was interrupted by the arrival of Dr. Douglas,

now Bishop of Salisbury.



In one of his little manuscript diaries, about this time, I find a

short notice, which marks his amiable disposition more certainly

than a thousand studied declarations.--'Afternoon spent cheerfully

and elegantly, I hope without offence to GOD or man; though in no

holy duty, yet in the general exercise and cultivation of

benevolence.'



On Monday, May 17, I dined with him at Mr. Dilly's, where were

Colonel Vallancy, the Reverend Dr. Gibbons, and Mr. Capel Lofft,

who, though a most zealous Whig, has a mind so full of learning and

knowledge, and so much exercised in various departments, and withal

so much liberality, that the stupendous powers of the literary

Goliath, though they did not frighten this little David of popular

spirit, could not but excite his admiration.  There was also Mr.

Braithwaite of the Post-office, that amiable and friendly man, who,

with modest and unassuming manners, has associated with many of the

wits of the age.  Johnson was very quiescent to-day.  Perhaps too I

was indolent.  I find nothing more of him in my notes, but that

when I mentioned that I had seen in the King's library sixty-three

editions of my favourite Thomas a Kempis, amongst which it was in

eight languages, Latin, German, French, Italian, Spanish, English,

Arabick, and Armenian, he said, he thought it unnecessary to

collect many editions of a book, which were all the same, except as

to the paper and print; he would have the original, and all the

translations, and all the editions which had any variations in the

text.  He approved of the famous collection of editions of Horace

by Douglas, mentioned by Pope, who is said to have had a closet

filled with them; and he added, every man should try to collect one

book in that manner, and present it to a publick library.'



On Wednesday, May 19, I sat a part of the evening with him, by

ourselves.  I observed, that the death of our friends might be a

consolation against the fear of our own dissolution, because we

might have more friends in the other world than in this.  He

perhaps felt this as a reflection upon his apprehension as to

death; and said, with heat, 'How can a man know WHERE his departed

friends are, or whether they will be his friends in the other

world?  How many friendships have you known formed upon principles

of virtue?  Most friendships are formed by caprice or by chance,

mere confederacies in vice or leagues in folly.'



We talked of our worthy friend Mr. Langton.  He said, 'I know not

who will go to Heaven if Langton does not.  Sir, I could almost

say, Sit anima mea cum Langtono.'  I mentioned a very eminent

friend as a virtuous man.  JOHNSON.  'Yes, Sir; but ------ has not

the evangelical virtue of Langton.  ------, I am afraid, would not

scruple to pick up a wench.'



He however charged Mr. Langton with what he thought want of

judgment upon an interesting occasion.  'When I was ill, (said he,)

I desired he would tell me sincerely in what he thought my life was

faulty.  Sir, he brought me a sheet of paper, on which he had

written down several texts of Scripture, recommending christian

charity.  And when I questioned him what occasion I had given for

such an animadversion, all that he could say amounted to this,--

that I sometimes contradicted people in conversation.  Now what

harm does it do to any man to be contradicted?'  BOSWELL.  'I

suppose he meant the MANNER of doing it; roughly,--and harshly.'

JOHNSON.  'And who is the worse for that?'  BOSWELL.  'It hurts

people of weak nerves.'  JOHNSON.  'I know no such weak-nerved

people.'  Mr. Burke, to whom I related this conference, said, 'It

is well, if when a man comes to die, he has nothing heavier upon

his conscience than having been a little rough in conversation.'



Johnson, at the time when the paper was presented to him, though at

first pleased with the attention of his friend, whom he thanked in

an earnest manner, soon exclaimed, in a loud and angry tone, 'What

is your drift, Sir?'  Sir Joshua Reynolds pleasantly observed, that

it was a scene for a comedy, to see a penitent get into a violent

passion and belabour his confessor.



He had dined that day at Mr. Hoole's, and Miss Helen Maria Williams

being expected in the evening, Mr. Hoole put into his hands her

beautiful Ode on the Peace: Johnson read it over, and when this

elegant and accomplished young lady was presented to him, he took

her by the hand in the most courteous manner, and repeated the

finest stanza of her poem; this was the most delicate and pleasing

compliment he could pay.  Her respectable friend, Dr. Kippis, from

whom I had this anecdote, was standing by, and was not a little

gratified.



Miss Williams told me, that the only other time she was fortunate

enough to be in Dr. Johnson's company, he asked her to sit down by

him, which she did, and upon her inquiring how he was, he answered,

'I am very ill indeed, Madam.  I am very ill even when you are near

me; what should I be were you at a distance?'



He had now a great desire to go to Oxford, as his first jaunt after

his illness; we talked of it for some days, and I had promised to

accompany him.  He was impatient and fretful to-night, because I

did not at once agree to go with him on Thursday.  When I

considered how ill he had been, and what allowance should be made

for the influence of sickness upon his temper, I resolved to

indulge him, though with some inconvenience to myself, as I wished

to attend the musical meeting in honour of Handel, in Westminster-

Abbey, on the following Saturday.



In the midst of his own diseases and pains, he was ever

compassionate to the distresses of others, and actively earnest in

procuring them aid, as appears from a note to Sir Joshua Reynolds,

of June, in these words:--'I am ashamed to ask for some relief for

a poor man, to whom, I hope, I have given what I can be expected to

spare.  The man importunes me, and the blow goes round.  I am going

to try another air on Thursday.'



On Thursday, June 3, the Oxford post-coach took us up in the

morning at Bolt-court.  The other two passengers were Mrs.

Beresford and her daughter, two very agreeable ladies from America;

they were going to Worcestershire, where they then resided.  Frank

had been sent by his master the day before to take places for us;

and I found, from the waybill, that Dr. Johnson had made our names

be put down.  Mrs. Beresford, who had read it, whispered me, 'Is

this the great Dr. Johnson?'  I told her it was; so she was then

prepared to listen.  As she soon happened to mention in a voice so

low that Johnson did not hear it, that her husband had been a

member of the American Congress, I cautioned her to beware of

introducing that subject, as she must know how very violent Johnson

was against the people of that country.  He talked a great deal,

but I am sorry I have preserved little of the conversation.  Miss

Beresford was so much charmed, that she said to me aside, 'How he

does talk!  Every sentence is an essay.'  She amused herself in the

coach with knotting; he would scarcely allow this species of

employment any merit.  'Next to mere idleness (said he,) I think

knotting is to be reckoned in the scale of insignificance; though I

once attempted to learn knotting.  Dempster's sister (looking to

me,) endeavoured to teach me it; but I made no progress.'



I was surprised at his talking without reserve in the publick post-

coach of the state of his affairs; 'I have (said he,) about the

world I think above a thousand pounds, which I intend shall afford

Frank an annuity of seventy pounds a year.'  Indeed his openness

with people at a first interview was remarkable.  He said once to

Mr. Langton, 'I think I am like Squire Richard in The Journey to

London, "I'm never strange in a strange place."'  He was truly

SOCIAL.  He strongly censured what is much too common in England

among persons of condition,--maintaining an absolute silence, when

unknown to each other; as for instance, when occasionally brought

together in a room before the master or mistress of the house has

appeared.  'Sir, that is being so uncivilised as not to understand

the common rights of humanity.'



At the inn where we stopped he was exceedingly dissatisfied with

some roast mutton which we had for dinner.  The ladies I saw

wondered to see the great philosopher, whose wisdom and wit they

had been admiring all the way, get into ill-humour from such a

cause.  He scolded the waiter, saying, 'It is as bad as bad can be:

it is ill-fed, ill-killed, ill-kept, and ill-drest.'



He bore the journey very well, and seemed to feel himself elevated

as he approached Oxford, that magnificent and venerable seat of

learning, Orthodoxy, and Toryism.  Frank came in the heavy coach,

in readiness to attend him; and we were received with the most

polite hospitality at the house of his old friend Dr. Adams, Master

of Pembroke College, who had given us a kind invitation.  Before we

were set down, I communicated to Johnson, my having engaged to

return to London directly, for the reason I have mentioned, but

that I would hasten back to him again.  He was pleased that I had

made this journey merely to keep him company.  He was easy and

placid with Dr. Adams, Mrs. and Miss Adams, and Mrs. Kennicot,

widow of the learned Hebraean, who was here on a visit.  He soon

dispatched the inquiries which were made about his illness and

recovery, by a short and distinct narrative; and then assuming a

gay air, repeated from Swift,--





    'Nor think on our approaching ills,

     And talk of spectacles and pills.'





I fulfilled my intention by going to London, and returned to Oxford

on Wednesday the 9th of June, when I was happy to find myself again

in the same agreeable circle at Pembroke College, with the

comfortable prospect of making some stay.  Johnson welcomed my

return with more than ordinary glee.



Next morning at breakfast, he pointed out a passage in Savage's

Wanderer, saying, 'These are fine verses.'  'If (said he,) I had

written with hostility of Warburton in my Shahspeare, I should have

quoted this couplet:--





    "Here Learning, blinded first and then beguil'd,

     Looks dark as Ignorance, as Fancy wild."





You see they'd have fitted him to a T,' (smiling.) Dr. ADAMS.  'But

you did not write against Warburton.'  JOHNSON.  No, Sir, I treated

him with great respect both in my Preface and in my Notes.'



After dinner, when one of us talked of there being a great enmity

between Whig and Tory;--Johnson.  'Why not so much, I think, unless

when they come into competition with each other.  There is none

when they are only common acquaintance, none when they are of

different sexes.  A Tory will marry into a Whig family, and a Whig

into a Tory family, without any reluctance.  But indeed, in a

matter of much more concern than political tenets, and that is

religion, men and women do not concern themselves much about

difference of opinion; and ladies set no value on the moral

character of men who pay their addresses to them; the greatest

profligate will be as well received as the man of the greatest

virtue, and this by a very good woman, by a woman who says her

prayers three times a day.'  Our ladies endeavoured to defend their

sex from this charge; but he roared them down!  'No, no, a lady

will take Jonathan Wild as readily as St. Austin, if he has

threepence more; and, what is worse, her parents will give her to

him.  Women have a perpetual envy of our vices; they are less

vicious than we, not from choice, but because we restrict them;

they are the slaves of order and fashion; their virtue is of more

consequence to us than our own, so far as concerns this world.'



Miss Adams mentioned a gentleman of licentious character, and said,

'Suppose I had a mind to marry that gentleman, would my parents

consent?'  JOHNSON.  'Yes, they'd consent, and you'd go.  You'd go

though they did not consent.'  Miss ADAMS.  'Perhaps their opposing

might make me go.'  JOHNSON.  'O, very well; you'd take one whom

you think a bad man, to have the pleasure of vexing your parents.

You put me in mind of Dr. Barrowby, the physician, who was very

fond of swine's flesh.  One day, when he was eating it, he said, "I

wish I was a Jew."  "Why so? (said somebody;) the Jews are not

allowed to eat your favourite meat."  "Because, (said he,) I should

then have the gust of eating it, with the pleasure of sinning."'

Johnson then proceeded in his declamation.



Miss Adams soon afterwards made an observation that I do not

recollect, which pleased him much: he said with a good-humoured

smile, 'That there should be so much excellence united with so much

DEPRAVITY, is strange.'



Indeed, this lady's good qualities, merit, and accomplishments, and

her constant attention to Dr. Johnson, were not lost upon him.  She

happened to tell him that a little coffeepot, in which she had made

his coffee, was the only thing she could call her own.  He turned

to her with a complacent gallantry, 'Don't say so, my dear; I hope

you don't reckon my heart as nothing.'



On Friday, June 11, we talked at breakfast, of forms of prayer.

JOHNSON.  'I know of no good prayers but those in the Book of

Common Prayer.'  DR. ADAMS.  (in a very earnest manner:) 'I wish,

Sir, you would compose some family prayers.'  JOHNSON.  'I will not

compose prayers for you, Sir, because you can do it for yourself.

But I have thought of getting together all the books of prayers

which I could, selecting those which should appear to me the best,

putting out some, inserting others, adding some prayers of my own,

and prefixing a discourse on prayer.'  We all now gathered about

him, and two or three of us at a time joined in pressing him to

execute this plan.  He seemed to be a little displeased at the

manner of our importunity, and in great agitation called out, 'Do

not talk thus of what is so aweful.  I know not what time GOD will

allow me in this world.  There are many things which I wish to do.'

Some of us persisted, and Dr. Adams said, 'I never was more serious

about any thing in my life.'  JOHNSON.  'Let me alone, let me

alone; I am overpowered.'  And then he put his hands before his

face, and reclined for some time upon the table.



Dr. Johnson and I went in Dr. Adams's coach to dine with Dr.

Nowell, Principal of St. Mary Hall, at his beautiful villa at

Iffley, on the banks of the Isis, about two miles from Oxford.

While we were upon the road, I had the resolution to ask Johnson

whether he thought that the roughness of his manner had been an

advantage or not, and if he would not have done more good if he had

been more gentle.  I proceeded to answer myself thus: 'Perhaps it

has been of advantage, as it has given weight to what you said: you

could not, perhaps, have talked with such authority without it.'

JOHNSON.  'No, Sir; I have done more good as I am.  Obscenity and

Impiety have always been repressed in my company.'  BOSWELL.

'True, Sir; and that is more than can be said of every Bishop.

Greater liberties have been taken in the presence of a Bishop,

though a very good man, from his being milder, and therefore not

commanding such awe.  Yet, Sir, many people who might have been

benefited by your conversation, have been frightened away.  A

worthy friend of ours has told me, that he has often been afraid to

talk to you.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, he need not have been afraid, if he

had any thing rational to say.  If he had not, it was better he did

not talk.'



We talked of a certain clergyman of extraordinary character, who by

exerting his talents in writing on temporary topicks, and

displaying uncommon intrepidity, had raised himself to affluence.

I maintained that we ought not to be indignant at his success; for

merit of every sort was entitled to reward.  JOHNSON.  'Sir, I will

not allow this man to have merit.  No, Sir; what he has is rather

the contrary; I will, indeed, allow him courage, and on this

account we so far give him credit.  We have more respect for a man

who robs boldly on the highway, than for a fellow who jumps out of

a ditch, and knocks you down behind your back.  Courage is a

quality so necessary for maintaining virtue, that it is always

respected, even when it is associated with vice.'



Mr. Henderson, with whom I had sauntered in the venerable walks of

Merton College, and found him a very learned and pious man, supped

with us.  Dr. Johnson surprised him not a little, by acknowledging

with a look of horrour, that he was much oppressed by the fear of

death.  The amiable Dr. Adams suggested that GOD was infinitely

good.  JOHNSON.  'That he is infinitely good, as far as the

perfection of his nature will allow, I certainly believe; but it is

necessary for good upon the whole, that individuals should be

punished.  As to an INDIVIDUAL, therefore, he is not infinitely

good; and as I cannot be SURE that I have fulfilled the conditions

on which salvation is granted, I am afraid I may be one of those

who shall be damned.' (looking dismally).  DR. ADAMS.  'What do you

mean by damned?'  JOHNSON.  (passionately and loudly,) 'Sent to

Hell, Sir, and punished everlastingly!'  DR. ADAMS.  'I don't

believe that doctrine.'  JOHNSON.  'Hold, Sir, do you believe that

some will be punished at all?'  DR. ADAMS.  'Being excluded from

Heaven will be a punishment; yet there may be no great positive

suffering.'  JOHNSON.  Well, Sir; but, if you admit any degree of

punishment, there is an end of your argument for infinite goodness

simply considered; for, infinite goodness would inflict no

punishment whatever.  There is not infinite goodness physically

considered; morally there is.'  BOSWELL.  'But may not a man attain

to such a degree of hope as not to be uneasy from the fear of

death?'  JOHNSON.  'A man may have such a degree of hope as to keep

him quiet.  You see I am not quiet, from the vehemence with which I

talk; but I do not despair.'  MRS. ADAMS.  'You seem, Sir, to

forget the merits of our Redeemer.'  JOHNSON.  'Madam, I do not

forget the merits of my Redeemer; but my Redeemer has said that he

will set some on his right hand and some on his left.'  He was in

gloomy agitation, and said, 'I'll have no more on't.'  If what has

now been stated should be urged by the enemies of Christianity, as

if its influence on the mind were not benignant, let it be

remembered, that Johnson's temperament was melancholy, of which

such direful apprehensions of futurity are often a common effect.

We shall presently see that when he approached nearer to his aweful

change, his mind became tranquil, and he exhibited as much

fortitude as becomes a thinking man in that situation.



From the subject of death we passed to discourse of life, whether

it was upon the whole more happy or miserable.  Johnson was

decidedly for the balance of misery: in confirmation of which I

maintained, that no man would choose to lead over again the life

which he had experienced.  Johnson acceded to that opinion in the

strongest terms.



On Sunday, June 13, our philosopher was calm at breakfast.  There

was something exceedingly pleasing in our leading a College life,

without restraint, and with superiour elegance, in consequence of

our living in the Master's house, and having the company of ladies.

Mrs. Kennicot related, in his presence, a lively saying of Dr.

Johnson to Miss Hannah More, who had expressed a wonder that the

poet who had written Paradise Lost should write such poor Sonnets:--

'Milton, Madam, was a genius that could cut a Colossus from a

rock; but could not carve heads upon cherry-stones.'



On Monday, June 14, and Tuesday, 15, Dr. Johnson and I dined, on

one of them, I forget which, with Mr. Mickle, translator of the

Lusiad, at Wheatley, a very pretty country place a few miles from

Oxford; and on the other with Dr. Wetherell, Master of University

College.  From Dr. Wetherell's he went to visit Mr. Sackville

Parker, the bookseller; and when he returned to us, gave the

following account of his visit, saying, 'I have been to see my old

friend, Sack Parker; I find he has married his maid; he has done

right.  She had lived with him many years in great confidence, and

they had mingled minds; I do not think he could have found any wife

that would have made him so happy.  The woman was very attentive

and civil to me; she pressed me to fix a day for dining with them,

and to say what I liked, and she would be sure to get it for me.

Poor Sack!  He is very ill, indeed.  We parted as never to meet

again.  It has quite broke me down.'  This pathetic narrative was

strangely diversified with the grave and earnest defence of a man's

having married his maid.  I could not but feel it as in some degree

ludicrous.



In the morning of Tuesday, June 15, while we sat at Dr. Adams's, we

talked of a printed letter from the Reverend Herbert Croft, to a

young gentleman who had been his pupil, in which he advised him to

read to the end of whatever books he should begin to read.

JOHNSON.  'This is surely a strange advice; you may as well resolve

that whatever men you happen to get acquainted with, you are to

keep to them for life.  A book may be good for nothing; or there

may be only one thing in it worth knowing; are we to read it all

through?  These Voyages, (pointing to the three large volumes of

Voyages to the South Sea, which were just come out) WHO will read

them through?  A man had better work his way before the mast, than

read them through; they will be eaten by rats and mice, before they

are read through.  There can be little entertainment in such books;

one set of Savages is like another.'  BOSWELL.  'I do not think the

people of Otaheite can be reckoned Savages.'  JOHNSON.  'Don't cant

in defence of Savages.'  BOSWELL.  'They have the art of

navigation.'  JOHNSON.  'A dog or a cat can swim.'  BOSWELL.  'They

carve very ingeniously.'  JOHNSON.  'A cat can scratch, and a child

with a nail can scratch.'  I perceived this was none of the mollia

tempora fandi; so desisted.



Upon his mentioning that when he came to College he wrote his first

exercise twice over; but never did so afterwards; MISS ADAMS.  'I

suppose, Sir, you could not make them better?'  JOHNSON.  'Yes,

Madam, to be sure, I could make them better.  Thought is better

than no thought.'  MISS ADAMS.  'Do you think, Sir, you could make

your Ramblers better?'  JOHNSON.  'Certainly I could.'  BOSWELL.

'I'll lay a bet, Sir, you cannot.'  JOHNSON.  'But I will, Sir, if

I choose.  I shall make the best of them you shall pick out,

better.'  BOSWELL.  'But you may add to them.  I will not allow of

that.'  JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir, there are three ways of making them

better;--putting out,-- adding,--or correcting.'



During our visit at Oxford, the following conversation passed

between him and me on the subject of my trying my fortune at the

English bar: Having asked whether a very extensive acquaintance in

London, which was very valuable, and of great advantage to a man at

large, might not be prejudicial to a lawyer, by preventing him from

giving sufficient attention to his business;--JOHNSON.  'Sir, you

will attend to business, as business lays hold of you.  When not

actually employed, you may see your friends as much as you do now.

You may dine at a Club every day, and sup with one of the members

every night; and you may be as much at publick places as one who

has seen them all would wish to be.  But you must take care to

attend constantly in Westminster-Hall; both to mind your business,

as it is almost all learnt there, (for nobody reads now;) and to

shew that you want to have business.  And you must not be too often

seen at publick places, that competitors may not have it to say,

"He is always at the Playhouse or at Ranelagh, and never to be

found at his chambers."  And, Sir, there must be a kind of

solemnity in the manner of a professional man.  I have nothing

particular to say to you on the subject.  All this I should say to

any one; I should have said it to Lord Thurlow twenty years ago.'



On Wednesday, June 19, Dr. Johnson and I returned to London; he was

not well to-day, and said very little, employing himself chiefly in

reading Euripides.  He expressed some displeasure at me, for not

observing sufficiently the various objects upon the road.  'If I

had your eyes, Sir, (said he,) I should count the passengers.'  It

was wonderful how accurate his observation of visual objects was,

notwithstanding his imperfect eyesight, owing to a habit of

attention.  That he was much satisfied with the respect paid to him

at Dr. Adams's is thus attested by himself: 'I returned last night

from Oxford, after a fortnight's abode with Dr. Adams, who treated

me as well as I could expect or wish; and he that contents a sick

man, a man whom it is impossible to please, has surely done his

part well.'



After his return to London from this excursion, I saw him

frequently, but have few memorandums: I shall therefore here insert

some particulars which I collected at various times.



It having been mentioned to Dr. Johnson that a gentleman who had a

son whom he imagined to have an extreme degree of timidity,

resolved to send him to a publick school, that he might acquire

confidence;--'Sir, (said Johnson,) this is a preposterous expedient

for removing his infirmity; such a disposition should be cultivated

in the shade.  Placing him at a publick school is forcing an owl

upon day.'



Speaking of a gentleman whose house was much frequented by low

company; 'Rags, Sir, (said he,) will always make their appearance

where they have a right to do it.'



Of the same gentleman's mode of living, he said, 'Sir, the

servants, instead of doing what they are bid, stand round the table

in idle clusters, gaping upon the guests; and seem as unfit to

attend a company, as to steer a man of war.'



A dull country magistrate gave Johnson a long tedious account of

his exercising his criminal jurisdiction, the result of which was

his having sentenced four convicts to transportation.  Johnson, in

an agony of impatience to get rid of such a companion, exclaimed,

'I heartily wish, Sir, that I were a fifth.'



Johnson was present when a tragedy was read, in which there

occurred this line:--





    'Who rules o'er freemen should himself be free.'





The company having admired it much, 'I cannot agree with you (said

Johnson).  It might as well be said,--





    'Who drives fat oxen should himself be fat.'





Johnson having argued for some time with a pertinacious gentleman;

his opponent, who had talked in a very puzzling manner, happened to

say, 'I don't understand you, Sir:' upon which Johnson observed,

'Sir, I have found you an argument; but I am not obliged to find

you an understanding.'



Talking to me of Horry Walpole, (as Horace late Earl of Orford was

often called,) Johnson allowed that he got together a great many

curious little things, and told them in an elegant manner.  Mr.

Walpole thought Johnson a more amiable character after reading his

Letters to Mrs. Thrale: but never was one of the true admirers of

that great man.  We may suppose a prejudice conceived, if he ever

heard Johnson's account to Sir George Staunton, that when he made

the speeches in parliament for the Gentleman's Magazine, 'he always

took care to put Sir Robert Walpole in the wrong, and to say every

thing he could against the electorate of Hanover.'  The celebrated

Heroick Epistle, in which Johnson is satyrically introduced, has

been ascribed both to Mr. Walpole and Mr. Mason.  One day at Mr.

Courtenay's, when a gentleman expressed his opinion that there was

more energy in that poem than could be expected from Mr. Walpole;

Mr. Warton, the late Laureat, observed, 'It may have been written

by Walpole, and BUCKRAM'D by Mason.'



Sir Joshua Reynolds having said that he took the altitude of a

man's taste by his stories and his wit, and of his understanding by

the remarks which he repeated; being always sure that he must be a

weak man who quotes common things with an emphasis as if they were

oracles; Johnson agreed with him; and Sir Joshua having also

observed that the real character of a man was found out by his

amusements,--Johnson added, 'Yes, Sir; no man is a hypocrite in his

pleasures.'



I have mentioned Johnson's general aversion to a pun.  He once,

however, endured one of mine.  When we were talking of a numerous

company in which he had distinguished himself highly, I said, 'Sir,

you were a COD surrounded by smelts.  Is not this enough for you?

at a time too when you were not FISHING for a compliment?'  He

laughed at this with a complacent approbation.  Old Mr. Sheridan

observed, upon my mentioning it to him, 'He liked your compliment

so well, he was willing to take it with PUN SAUCE.'  For my own

part, I think no innocent species of wit or pleasantry should be

suppressed; and that a good pun may be admitted among the smaller

excellencies of lively conversation.



Mr. Burke uniformly shewed Johnson the greatest respect; and when

Mr. Townshend, now Lord Sydney, at a period when he was conspicuous

in opposition, threw out some reflection in parliament upon the

grant of a pension to a man of such political principles as

Johnson; Mr. Burke, though then of the same party with Mr.

Townshend, stood warmly forth in defence of his friend, to whom, he

justly observed, the pension was granted solely on account of his

eminent literary merit.  I am well assured, that Mr. Townshend's

attack upon Johnson was the occasion of his 'hitching in a rhyme;'

for, that in the original copy of Goldsmith's character of Mr.

Burke, in his Retaliation, another person's name stood in the

couplet where Mr. Townshend is now introduced:--





    'Though fraught with all learning kept straining his throat,

     To persuade Tommy Townshend to lend him a vote.'





It may be worth remarking, among the minutiae of my collection,

that Johnson was once drawn to serve in the militia, the Trained

Bands of the City of London, and that Mr. Rackstrow, of the Museum

in Fleet-street, was his Colonel.  It may be believed he did not

serve in person; but the idea, with all its circumstances, is

certainly laughable.  He upon that occasion provided himself with a

musket, and with a sword and belt, which I have seen hanging in his

closet.



An authour of most anxious and restless vanity being mentioned,

'Sir, (said he,) there is not a young sapling upon Parnassus more

severely blown about by every wind of criticism than that poor

fellow.'



The difference, he observed, between a well-bred and an ill-bred

man is this: 'One immediately attracts your liking, the other your

aversion.  You love the one till you find reason to hate him; you

hate the other till you find reason to love him.'



A foppish physician once reminded Johnson of his having been in

company with him on a former occasion; 'I do not remember it, Sir.'

The physician still insisted; adding that he that day wore so fine

a coat that it must have attracted his notice.  'Sir, (said

Johnson,) had you been dipt in Pactolus I should not have noticed

you.'



He seemed to take a pleasure in speaking in his own style; for when

he had carelessly missed it, he would repeat the thought translated

into it.  Talking of the Comedy of The Rehearsal, he said, 'It has

not wit enough to keep it sweet.'  This was easy; he therefore

caught himself, and pronounced a more round sentence; 'It has not

vitality enough to preserve it from putrefaction.'



Though he had no taste for painting, he admired much the manner in

which Sir Joshua Reynolds treated of his art, in his Discourses to

the Royal Academy.  He observed one day of a passage in them, 'I

think I might as well have said this myself:' and once when Mr.

Langton was sitting by him, he read one of them very eagerly, and

expressed himself thus:--'Very well, Master Reynolds; very well,

indeed.  But it will not be understood.'



When I observed to him that Painting was so far inferiour to

Poetry, that the story or even emblem which it communicates must be

previously known, and mentioned as a natural and laughable instance

of this, that a little Miss on seeing a picture of Justice with the

scales, had exclaimed to me, 'See, there's a woman selling

sweetmeats;' he said, 'Painting, Sir, can illustrate, but cannot

inform.'



No man was more ready to make an apology when he had censured

unjustly, than Johnson.  When a proof-sheet of one of his works was

brought to him, he found fault with the mode in which a part of it

was arranged, refused to read it, and in a passion desired that the

compositor might be sent to him.  The compositor was Mr. Manning, a

decent sensible man, who had composed about one half of his

Dictionary, when in Mr. Strahan's printing-house; and a great part

of his Lives of the Poets, when in that of Mr. Nichols; and who (in

his seventy-seventh year), when in Mr. Baldwin's printing-house,

composed a part of the first edition of this work concerning him.

By producing the manuscript, he at once satisfied Dr. Johnson that

he was not to blame.  Upon which Johnson candidly and earnestly

said to him, 'Mr. Compositor, I ask your pardon.  Mr. Compositor, I

ask your pardon, again and again.'



His generous humanity to the miserable was almost beyond example.

The following instance is well attested:--Coming home late one

night, he found a poor woman lying in the street, so much exhausted

that she could not walk; he took her upon his back, and carried her

to his house, where he discovered that she was one of those

wretched females who had fallen into the lowest state of vice,

poverty, and disease.  Instead of harshly upbraiding her, he had

her taken care of with all tenderness for a long time, at

considerable expence, till she was restored to health, and

endeavoured to put her into a virtuous way of living.



He once in his life was known to have uttered what is called a

BULL: Sir Joshua Reynolds, when they were riding together in

Devonshire, complained that he had a very bad horse, for that even

when going down hill he moved slowly step by step.  'Ay (said

Johnson,) and when he goes up hill, he STANDS STILL.'



He had a great aversion to gesticulating in company.  He called

once to a gentleman who offended him in that point, 'Don't

ATTITUDENISE.'  And when another gentleman thought he was giving

additional force to what he uttered, by expressive movements of his

hands, Johnson fairly seized them, and held them down.



Mr. Steevens, who passed many a social hour with him during their

long acquaintance, which commenced when they both lived in the

Temple, has preserved a good number of particulars concerning him,

most of which are to be found in the department of Apothegms, &c.

in the Collection of Johnson's Works.  But he has been pleased to

favour me with the following, which are original:--



'Dr. Johnson once assumed a character in which perhaps even Mr.

Boswell never saw him.  His curiosity having been excited by the

praises bestowed on the celebrated Torre's fireworks at Marybone-

Gardens, he desired Mr. Steevens to accompany him thither.  The

evening had proved showery; and soon after the few people present

were assembled, publick notice was given, that the conductors to

the wheels, suns, stars, &c., were so thoroughly water-soaked, that

it was impossible any part of the exhibition should be made.  "This

is a mere excuse, (says the Doctor,) to save their crackers for a

more profitable company.  Let us but hold up our sticks, and

threaten to break those coloured lamps that surround the Orchestra,

and we shall soon have our wishes gratified.  The core of the

fireworks cannot be injured; let the different pieces be touched in

their respective centers, and they will do their offices as well as

ever."  Some young men who overheard him, immediately began the

violence he had recommended, and an attempt was speedily made to

fire some of the wheels which appeared to have received the

smallest damage; but to little purpose were they lighted, for most

of them completely failed.  The authour of The Rambler, however,

may be considered, on this occasion, as the ringleader of a

successful riot, though not as a skilful pyrotechnist.'



'It has been supposed that Dr. Johnson, so far as fashion was

concerned, was careless of his appearance in publick.  But this is

not altogether true, as the following slight instance may show:--

Goldsmith's last Comedy was to be represented during some court-

mourning: and Mr. Steevens appointed to call on Dr. Johnson, and

carry him to the tavern where he was to dine with others of the

Poet's friends.  The Doctor was ready dressed, but in coloured

cloaths; yet being told that he would find every one else in black,

received the intelligence with a profusion of thanks, hastened to

change his attire, all the while repeating his gratitude for the

information that had saved him from an appearance so improper in

the front row of a front box.  "I would not (added he,) for ten

pounds, have seemed so retrograde to any general observance."



'He would sometimes found his dislikes on very slender

circumstances.  Happening one day to mention Mr. Flexman, a

Dissenting Minister, with some compliment to his exact memory in

chronological matters; the Doctor replied, "Let me hear no more of

him, Sir.  That is the fellow who made the Index to my Ramblers,

and set down the name of Milton thus: Milton, MR. John."'



In the course of this work a numerous variety of names has been

mentioned, to which many might be added.  I cannot omit Lord and

Lady Lucan, at whose house he often enjoyed all that an elegant

table and the best company can contribute to happiness; he found

hospitality united with extraordinary accomplishments, and

embellished with charms of which no man could be insensible.



On Tuesday, June 22, I dined with him at THE LITERARY CLUB, the

last time of his being in that respectable society.  The other

members present were the Bishop of St. Asaph, Lord Eliot, Lord

Palmerston, Dr. Fordyce, and Mr. Malone.  He looked ill; but had

such a manly fortitude, that he did not trouble the company with

melancholy complaints.  They all shewed evident marks of kind

concern about him, with which he was much pleased, and he exerted

himself to be as entertaining as his indisposition allowed him.



The anxiety of his friends to preserve so estimable a life, as long

as human means might be supposed to have influence, made them plan

for him a retreat from the severity of a British winter, to the

mild climate of Italy.  This scheme was at last brought to a

serious resolution at General Paoli's, where I had often talked of

it.  One essential matter, however, I understood was necessary to

be previously settled, which was obtaining such an addition to his

income, as would be sufficient to enable him to defray the expence

in a manner becoming the first literary character of a great

nation, and independent of all his other merits, the Authour of THE

DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE.  The person to whom I above all

others thought I should apply to negociate this business, was the

Lord Chancellor, because I knew that he highly valued Johnson, and

that Johnson highly valued his Lordship; so that it was no

degradation of my illustrious friend to solicit for him the favour

of such a man.  I have mentioned what Johnson said of him to me

when he was at the bar; and after his Lordship was advanced to the

seals, he said of him, 'I would prepare myself for no man in

England but Lord Thurlow.  When I am to meet with him I should wish

to know a day before.'  How he would have prepared himself I cannot

conjecture.  Would he have selected certain topicks, and considered

them in every view so as to be in readiness to argue them at all

points? and what may we suppose those topicks to have been?  I once

started the curious inquiry to the great man who was the subject of

this compliment: he smiled, but did not pursue it.



I first consulted with Sir Joshua Reynolds, who perfectly coincided

in opinion with me; and I therefore, though personally very little

known to his Lordship, wrote to him, stating the case, and

requesting his good offices for Dr. Johnson.  I mentioned that I

was obliged to set out for Scotland early in the following week, so

that if his Lordship should have any commands for me as to this

pious negociation, he would be pleased to send them before that

time; otherwise Sir Joshua Reynolds would give all attention to it.



This application was made not only without any suggestion on the

part of Johnson himself, but was utterly unknown to him, nor had he

the smallest suspicion of it.  Any insinuations, therefore, which

since his death have been thrown out, as if he had stooped to ask

what was superfluous, are without any foundation.  But, had he

asked it, it would not have been superfluous; for though the money

he had saved proved to be more than his friends imagined, or than I

believe he himself, in his carelessness concerning worldly matters,

knew it to be, had he travelled upon the Continent, an augmentation

of his income would by no means have been unnecessary.



On Thursday, June 24, I dined with him at Mr. Dilly's, where were

the Rev. Mr. (now Dr.) Knox, master of Tunbridge-school, Mr. Smith,

Vicar of Southill, Dr. Beattie, Mr. Pinkerton, authour of various

literary performances, and the Rev. Dr. Mayo.  At my desire old Mr.

Sheridan was invited, as I was earnest to have Johnson and him

brought together again by chance, that a reconciliation might be

effected.  Mr. Sheridan happened to come early, and having learned

that Dr. Johnson was to be there, went away; so I found, with

sincere regret, that my friendly intentions were hopeless.  I

recollect nothing that passed this day, except Johnson's quickness,

who, when Dr. Beattie observed, as something remarkable which had

happened to him, that he had chanced to see both No. 1, and No.

1000, of the hackney-coaches, the first and the last; 'Why, Sir,

(said Johnson,) there is an equal chance for one's seeing those two

numbers as any other two.'



On Friday, June 25, I dined with him at General Paoli's, where, he

says in one of his letters to Mrs. Thrale, 'I love to dine.'  There

was a variety of dishes much to his taste, of all which he seemed

to me to eat so much, that I was afraid he might be hurt by it; and

I whispered to the General my fear, and begged he might not press

him.  'Alas! (said the General,) see how very ill he looks; he can

live but a very short time.  Would you refuse any slight

gratifications to a man under sentence of death?  There is a humane

custom in Italy, by which persons in that melancholy situation are

indulged with having whatever they like best to eat and drink, even

with expensive delicacies.'



On Sunday, June 27, I found him rather better.  I mentioned to him

a young man who was going to Jamaica with his wife and children, in

expectation of being provided for by two of her brothers settled in

that island, one a clergyman, and the other a physician.  JOHNSON.

'It is a wild scheme, Sir, unless he has a positive and deliberate

invitation.  There was a poor girl, who used to come about me, who

had a cousin in Barbadoes, that, in a letter to her, expressed a

wish she should come out to that Island, and expatiated on the

comforts and happiness of her situation.  The poor girl went out:

her cousin was much surprised, and asked her how she could think of

coming.  "Because, (said she,) you invited me."  "Not I," answered

the cousin.  The letter was then produced.  "I see it is true,

(said she,) that I did invite you: but I did not think you would

come."  They lodged her in an out-house, where she passed her time

miserably; and as soon as she had an opportunity she returned to

England.  Always tell this, when you hear of people going abroad to

relations, upon a notion of being well received.  In the case which

you mention, it is probable the clergyman spends all he gets, and

the physician does not know how much he is to get.'



We this day dined at Sir Joshua Reynolds's, with General Paoli,

Lord Eliot, (formerly Mr. Eliot, of Port Eliot,) Dr. Beattie, and

some other company.  Talking of Lord Chesterfield;--JOHNSON.  'His

manner was exquisitely elegant, and he had more knowledge than I

expected.'  BOSWELL.  'Did you find, Sir, his conversation to be of

a superiour style?'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, in the conversation which I

had with him I had the best right to superiority, for it was upon

philology and literature.'  Lord Eliot, who had travelled at the

same time with Mr. Stanhope, Lord Chesterfield's natural son,

justly observed, that it was strange that a man who shewed he had

so much affection for his son as Lord Chesterfield did, by writing

so many long and anxious letters to him, almost all of them when he

was Secretary of State, which certainly was a proof of great

goodness of disposition, should endeavour to make his son a rascal.

His Lordship told us, that Foote had intended to bring on the stage

a father who had thus tutored his son, and to shew the son an

honest man to every one else, but practising his father's maxims

upon him, and cheating him.  JOHNSON.  'I am much pleased with this

design; but I think there was no occasion to make the son honest at

all.  No; he should be a consummate rogue: the contrast between

honesty and knavery would be the stronger.  It should be contrived

so that the father should be the only sufferer by the son's

villainy, and thus there would be poetical justice.'



A young gentleman present took up the argument against him, and

maintained that no man ever thinks of the NOSE OF THE MIND, not

adverting that though that figurative sense seems strange to us, as

very unusual, it is truly not more forced than Hamlet's 'In my

MIND'S EYE, Horatio.'  He persisted much too long, and appeared to

Johnson as putting himself forward as his antagonist with too much

presumption; upon which he called to him in a loud tone, 'What is

it you are contending for, if you BE contending?'  And afterwards

imagining that the gentleman retorted upon him with a kind of smart

drollery, he said, 'Mr. ***** it does not become you to talk so to

me.  Besides, ridicule is not your talent; you have THERE neither

intuition nor sagacity.'  The gentleman protested that he had

intended no improper freedom, but had the greatest respect for Dr.

Johnson.  After a short pause, during which we were somewhat

uneasy,--JOHNSON.  'Give me your hand, Sir.  You were too tedious,

and I was too short.'  Mr. *****.  'Sir, I am honoured by your

attention in any way.'  JOHNSON.  'Come, Sir, let's have no more of

it.  We offended one another by our contention; let us not offend

the company by our compliments.'



He now said, 'He wished much to go to Italy, and that he dreaded

passing the winter in England.'  I said nothing; but enjoyed a

secret satisfaction in thinking that I had taken the most effectual

measures to make such a scheme practicable.



On Monday, June 28, I had the honour to receive from the Lord

Chancellor the following letter:--





'TO JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.



'SIR,--I should have answered your letter immediately, if (being

much engaged when I received it) I had not put it in my pocket, and

forgot to open it till this morning.



'I am much obliged to you for the suggestion; and I will adopt and

press it as far as I can.  The best argument, I am sure, and I hope

it is not likely to fail, is Dr. Johnson's merit.  But it will be

necessary, if I should be so unfortunate as to miss seeing you, to

converse with Sir Joshua on the sum it will be proper to ask,--in

short, upon the means of setting him out.  It would be a reflection

on us all, if such a man should perish for want of the means to

take care of his health.  Yours, &c.



'THURLOW.'





This letter gave me a very high satisfaction; I next day went and

shewed it to Sir Joshua Reynolds, who was exceedingly pleased with

it.  He thought that I should now communicate the negociation to

Dr. Johnson, who might afterwards complain if the attention with

which he had been honoured, should be too long concealed from him.

I intended to set out for Scotland next morning; but Sir Joshua

cordially insisted that I should stay another day, that Johnson and

I might dine with him, that we three might talk of his Italian

Tour, and, as Sir Joshua expressed himself, 'have it all out.'  I

hastened to Johnson, and was told by him that he was rather better

to-day.  BOSWELL.  'I am very anxious about you, Sir, and

particularly that you should go to Italy for the winter, which I

believe is your own wish.'  JOHNSON.  'It is, Sir.'  BOSWELL.  'You

have no objection, I presume, but the money it would require.'

JOHNSON.  'Why, no, Sir.'  Upon which I gave him a particular

account of what had been done, and read to him the Lord

Chancellor's letter.  He listened with much attention; then warmly

said, 'This is taking prodigious pains about a man.'  'O! Sir,

(said I, with most sincere affection,) your friends would do every

thing for you.'  He paused, grew more and more agitated, till tears

started into his eyes, and he exclaimed with fervent emotion, 'GOD

bless you all.'  I was so affected that I also shed tears.  After a

short silence, he renewed and extended his grateful benediction,

'GOD bless you all, for JESUS CHRIST'S sake.'  We both remained for

some time unable to speak.  He rose suddenly and quitted the room,

quite melted in tenderness.  He staid but a short time, till he had

recovered his firmness; soon after he returned I left him, having

first engaged him to dine at Sir Joshua Reynolds's, next day.  I

never was again under that roof which I had so long reverenced.



On Wednesday, June 30, the friendly confidential dinner with Sir

Joshua Reynolds took place, no other company being present.  Had I

known that this was the last time that I should enjoy in this

world, the conversation of a friend whom I so much respected, and

from whom I derived so much instruction and entertainment, I should

have been deeply affected.  When I now look back to it, I am vexed

that a single word should have been forgotten.



Both Sir Joshua and I were so sanguine in our expectations, that we

expatiated with confidence on the liberal provision which we were

sure would be made for him, conjecturing whether munificence would

be displayed in one large donation, or in an ample increase of his

pension.  He himself catched so much of our enthusiasm, as to allow

himself to suppose it not impossible that our hopes might in one

way or other be realised.  He said that he would rather have his

pension doubled than a grant of a thousand pounds; 'For, (said he,)

though probably I may not live to receive as much as a thousand

pounds, a man would have the consciousness that he should pass the

remainder of his life in splendour, how long soever it might be.'

Considering what a moderate proportion an income of six hundred

pounds a year bears to innumerable fortunes in this country, it is

worthy of remark, that a man so truly great should think it

splendour.



As an instance of extraordinary liberality of friendship, he told

us, that Dr. Brocklesby had upon this occasion offered him a

hundred a year for his life.  A grateful tear started into his eye,

as he spoke this in a faultering tone.



Sir Joshua and I endeavoured to flatter his imagination with

agreeable prospects of happiness in Italy.  'Nay, (said he,) I must

not expect much of that; when a man goes to Italy merely to feel

how he breathes the air, he can enjoy very little.'



Our conversation turned upon living in the country, which Johnson,

whose melancholy mind required the dissipation of quick successive

variety, had habituated himself to consider as a kind of mental

imprisonment.  'Yet, Sir, (said I,) there are many people who are

content to live in the country.'  JOHNSON.  'Sir, it is in the

intellectual world as in the physical world; we are told by natural

philosophers that a body is at rest in the place that is fit for

it; they who are content to live in the country, are FIT for the

country.'



Talking of various enjoyments, I argued that a refinement of taste

was a disadvantage, as they who have attained to it must be

seldomer pleased than those who have no nice discrimination, and

are therefore satisfied with every thing that comes in their way.

JOHNSON.  'Nay, Sir; that is a paltry notion.  Endeavour to be as

perfect as you can in every respect.'



I accompanied him in Sir Joshua Reynolds's coach, to the entry of

Bolt-court.  He asked me whether I would not go with him to his

house; I declined it, from an apprehension that my spirits would

sink.  We bade adieu to each other affectionately in the carriage.

When he had got down upon the foot-pavement, he called out, 'Fare

you well;' and without looking back, sprung away with a kind of

pathetick briskness, if I may use that expression, which seemed to

indicate a struggle to conceal uneasiness, and impressed me with a

foreboding of our long, long separation.



I remained one day more in town, to have the chance of talking over

my negociation with the Lord Chancellor; but the multiplicity of

his Lordship's important engagements did not allow of it; so I left

the management of the business in the hands of Sir Joshua Reynolds.



Soon after this time Dr. Johnson had the mortification of being

informed by Mrs. Thrale, that, 'what she supposed he never

believed,' was true; namely, that she was actually going to marry

Signor Piozzi, an Italian musick-master.  He endeavoured to prevent

it; but in vain.  If she would publish the whole of the

correspondence that passed between Dr. Johnson and her on the

subject, we should have a full view of his real sentiments.  As it

is, our judgement must be biassed by that characteristick specimen

which Sir John Hawkins has given us: 'Poor Thrale!  I thought that

either her virtue or her vice would have restrained her from such a

marriage.  She is now become a subject for her enemies to exult

over; and for her friends, if she has any left, to forget, or

pity.'



It must be admitted that Johnson derived a considerable portion of

happiness from the comforts and elegancies which he enjoyed in Mr.

Thrale's family; but Mrs. Thrale assures us he was indebted for

these to her husband alone, who certainly respected him sincerely.



Having left the PIOUS NEGOCIATION, as I called it, in the best

hands, I shall here insert what relates to it.  Johnson wrote to

Sir Joshua Reynolds on July 6, as follows:--



'I am going, I hope, in a few days, to try the air of Derbyshire,

but hope to see you before I go.  Let me, however, mention to you

what I have much at heart.  If the Chancellor should continue his

attention to Mr. Boswell's request, and confer with you on the

means of relieving my languid state, I am very desirous to avoid

the appearance of asking money upon false pretences.  I desire you

to represent to his Lordship, what, as soon as it is suggested, he

will perceive to be reasonable,--That, if I grow much worse, I

shall be afraid to leave my physicians, to suffer the

inconveniences of travel, and pine in the solitude of a foreign

country; That, if I grow much better, of which indeed there is now

little appearance, I shall not wish to leave my friends and my

domestick comforts; for I do not travel, for pleasure or curiosity;

yet if I should recover, curiosity would revive.  In my present

state, I am desirous to make a struggle for a little longer life,

and hope to obtain some help from a softer climate.  Do for me what

you can.'



By a letter from Sir Joshua Reynolds I was informed, that the Lord

Chancellor had called on him, and acquainted him that the

application had not been successful; but that his Lordship, after

speaking highly in praise of Johnson, as a man who was an honour to

his country, desired Sir Joshua to let him know, that on granting a

mortgage of his pension, he should draw on his Lordship to the

amount of five or six hundred pounds; and that his Lordship

explained the meaning of the mortgage to be, that he wished the

business to be conducted in such a manner, that Dr. Johnson should

appear to be under the least possible obligation.  Sir Joshua

mentioned, that he had by the same post communicated all this to

Dr. Johnson.



How Johnson was affected upon the occasion will appear from what he

wrote to Sir Joshua Reynolds:--



'Ashbourne, Sept. 9.  Many words I hope are not necessary between

you and me, to convince you what gratitude is excited in my heart

by the Chancellor's liberality, and your kind offices. . . .



'I have enclosed a letter to the Chancellor, which, when you have

read it, you will be pleased to seal with a head, or any other

general seal, and convey it to him: had I sent it directly to him,

I should have seemed to overlook the favour of your intervention.'





'TO THE LORD HIGH CHANCELLOR.



'MY LORD,--After a long and not inattentive observation of mankind,

the generosity of your Lordship's offer raises in me not less

wonder than gratitude.  Bounty, so liberally bestowed, I should

gladly receive, if my condition made it necessary; for, to such a

mind, who would not be proud to own his obligations?  But it has

pleased GOD to restore me to so great a measure of health, that if

I should now appropriate so much of a fortune destined to do good,

I could not escape from myself the charge of advancing a false

claim.  My journey to the continent, though I once thought it

necessary, was never much encouraged by my physicians; and I was

very desirous that your Lordship should be told of it by Sir Joshua

Reynolds, as an event very uncertain; for if I grew much better, I

should not be willing, if much worse, not able, to migrate.  Your

Lordship was first solicited without my knowledge; but, when I was

told that you were pleased to honour me with your patronage, I did

not expect to hear of a refusal; yet, as I have had no long time to

brood hope, and have not rioted in imaginary opulence, this cold

reception has been scarce a disappointment; and, from your

Lordship's kindness, I have received a benefit, which only men like

you are able to bestow.  I shall now live mihi carior, with a

higher opinion of my own merit.  I am, my Lord, your Lordship's

most obliged, most grateful, and most humble servant,



'September, 1784.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





Upon this unexpected failure I abstain from presuming to make any

remarks, or to offer any conjectures.



Let us now contemplate Johnson thirty years after the death of his

wife, still retaining for her all the tenderness of affection.





'TO THE REVEREND MR. BAGSHAW, AT BROMLEY.



'SIR,--Perhaps you may remember, that in the year 1753, you

committed to the ground my dear wife.  I now entreat your

permission to lay a stone upon her; and have sent the inscription,

that, if you find it proper, you may signify your allowance.



'You will do me a great favour by showing the place where she lies,

that the stone may protect her remains.



'Mr. Ryland will wait on you for the inscription, and procure it to

be engraved.  You will easily believe that I shrink from this

mournful office.  When it is done, if I have strength remaining, I

will visit Bromley once again, and pay you part of the respect to

which you have a right from, Reverend Sir, your most humble

servant,



'July 12, 1784.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





Next day he set out on a jaunt to Staffordshire and Derbyshire,

flattering himself that he might be in some degree relieved.



During his absence from London he kept up a correspondence with

several of his friends, from which I shall select what appears to

me proper for publication, without attending nicely to

chronological order.





TO DR. BROCKLESBY, he writes, Ashbourne, Sept. 9:--



'Do you know the Duke and Duchess of Devonshire?  And have you ever

seen Chatsworth?  I was at Chatsworth on Monday: I had indeed seen

it before, but never when its owners were at home; I was very

kindly received, and honestly pressed to stay: but I told them that

a sick man is not a fit inmate of a great house.  But I hope to go

again some time.'



Sept. 11.  'I think nothing grows worse, but all rather better,

except sleep, and that of late has been at its old pranks.  Last

evening, I felt what I had not known for a long time, an

inclination to walk for amusement; I took a short walk, and came

back again neither breathless nor fatigued.  This has been a

gloomy, frigid, ungenial summer, but of late it seems to mend; I

hear the heat sometimes mentioned, but I do not feel it:





    "Praeterea minimus gelido jam in corpore sanguis

      Febre calet sola.--"





I hope, however, with good help, to find means of supporting a

winter at home, and to hear and tell at the Club what is doing, and

what ought to be doing in the world.  I have no company here, and

shall naturally come home hungry for conversation.  To wish you,

dear Sir, more leisure, would not be kind; but what leisure you

have, you must bestow upon me.'



Lichfield, Sept. 29.  'On one day I had three letters about the

air-balloon: yours was far the best, and has enabled me to impart

to my friends in the country an idea of this species of amusement.

In amusement, mere amusement, I am afraid it must end, for I do not

find that its course can be directed so as that it should serve any

purposes of communication; and it can give no new intelligence of

the state of the air at different heights, till they have ascended

above the height of mountains, which they seem never likely to do.

I came hither on the 27th.  How long I shall stay I have not

determined.  My dropsy is gone, and my asthma much remitted, but I

have felt myself a little declining these two days, or at least to-

day; but such vicissitudes must be expected.  One day may be worse

than another; but this last month is far better than the former; if

the next should be as much better than this, I shall run about the

town on my own legs.'



October 25.  'You write to me with a zeal that animates, and a

tenderness that melts me.  I am not afraid either of a journey to

London, or a residence in it.  I came down with little fatigue, and

am now not weaker.  In the smoky atmosphere I was delivered from

the dropsy, which I consider as the original and radical disease.

The town is my element*; there are my friends, there are my books,

to which I have not yet bid farewell, and there are my amusements.

Sir Joshua told me long ago that my vocation was to publick life,

and I hope still to keep my station, till God shall bid me Go in

peace.'





* His love of London continually appears.  In a letter from him to

Mrs. Smart, wife of his friend the Poet, which is published in a

well-written life of him, prefixed to an edition of his Poems, in

1791, there is the following sentence:--'To one that has passed so

many years in the pleasures and opulence of London, there are few

places that can give much delight.'



Once, upon reading that line in the curious epitaph quoted in The

Spectator,



    'Born in New-England, did in London die;'



he laughed and said, 'I do not wonder at this.  It would have been

strange, if born in London, he had died in New-England.'--BOSWELL.





TO SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS:--



Ashbourne, Sept. 2.  '. . . I still continue by God's mercy to

mend.  My breath is easier, my nights are quieter, and my legs are

less in bulk, and stronger in use.  I have, however, yet a great

deal to overcome, before I can yet attain even an old man's health.

Write, do write to me now and then; we are now old acquaintance,

and perhaps few people have lived so much and so long together,

with less cause of complaint on either side.  The retrospection of

this is very pleasant, and I hope we shall never think on each

other with less kindness.'



Sept. 9.  'I could not answer your letter before this day, because

I went on the sixth to Chatsworth, and did not come back till the

post was gone.  Many words, I hope, are not necessary between you

and me, to convince you what gratitude is excited in my heart, by

the Chancellor's liberality and your kind offices.  I did not

indeed expect that what was asked by the Chancellor would have been

refused, but since it has, we will not tell that any thing has been

asked.  I have enclosed a letter to the Chancellor which, when you

have read it, you will be pleased to seal with a head, or other

general seal, and convey it to him; had I sent it directly to him,

I should have seemed to overlook the favour of your intervention.

I do not despair of supporting an English winter.  At Chatsworth, I

met young Mr. Burke, who led me very commodiously into conversation

with the Duke and Duchess.  We had a very good morning.  The dinner

was publick.'



Sept. 18.  'I have three letters this day, all about the balloon, I

could have been content with one.  Do not write about the balloon,

whatever else you may think proper to say.'



It may be observed, that his writing in every way, whether for the

publick, or privately to his friends, was by fits and starts; for

we see frequently, that many letters are written on the same day.

When he had once overcome his aversion to begin, he was, I suppose,

desirous to go on, in order to relieve his mind from the uneasy

reflection of delaying what he ought to do.



We now behold Johnson for the last time, in his native city, for

which he ever retained a warm affection, and which, by a sudden

apostrophe, under the word Lich, he introduces with reverence, into

his immortal Work, THE ENGLISH DICTIONARY:--Salve, magna parens!

While here, he felt a revival of all the tenderness of filial

affection, an instance of which appeared in his ordering the grave-

stone and inscription over Elizabeth Blaney* to be substantially

and carefully renewed.





* His mother.--ED.





To Mr. Henry White, a young clergyman, with whom he now formed an

intimacy, so as to talk to him with great freedom, he mentioned

that he could not in general accuse himself of having been an

undutiful son.  'Once, indeed, (said he,) I was disobedient; I

refused to attend my father to Uttoxeter-market.  Pride was the

source of that refusal, and the remembrance of it was painful.  A

few years ago, I desired to atone for this fault; I went to

Uttoxeter in very bad weather, and stood for a considerable time

bareheaded in the rain, on the spot where my father's stall used to

stand.  In contrition I stood, and I hope the penance was

expiatory.'



'I told him (says Miss Seward) in one of my latest visits to him,

of a wonderful learned pig, which I had seen at Nottingham; and

which did all that we have observed exhibited by dogs and horses.

The subject amused him.  "Then, (said he,) the pigs are a race

unjustly calumniated.  PIG has, it seems, not been wanting to MAN,

but MAN to PIG.  We do not allow TIME for his education, we kill

him at a year old."  Mr. Henry White, who was present, observed

that if this instance had happened in or before Pope's time, he

would not have been justified in instancing the swine as the lowest

degree of groveling instinct.  Dr. Johnson seemed pleased with the

observation, while the person who made it proceeded to remark, that

great torture must have been employed, ere the indocility of the

animal could have been subdued.  "Certainly, (said the Doctor;)

but, (turning to me,) how old is your pig?"  I told him, three

years old.  "Then, (said he,) the pig has no cause to complain; he

would have been killed the first year if he had not been EDUCATED,

and protracted existence is a good recompence for very considerable

degrees of torture."'



As Johnson had now very faint hopes of recovery, and as Mrs. Thrale

was no longer devoted to him, it might have been supposed that he

would naturally have chosen to remain in the comfortable house of

his beloved wife's daughter, and end his life where he began it.

But there was in him an animated and lofty spirit, and however

complicated diseases might depress ordinary mortals, all who saw

him, beheld and acknowledged the invictum animum Catonis.  Such was

his intellectual ardour even at this time, that he said to one

friend, 'Sir, I look upon every day to be lost, in which I do not

make a new acquaintance;' and to another, when talking of his

illness, 'I will be conquered; I will not capitulate.'  And such

was his love of London, so high a relish had he of its magnificent

extent, and variety of intellectual entertainment, that he

languished when absent from it, his mind having become quite

luxurious from the long habit of enjoying the metropolis; and,

therefore, although at Lichfield, surrounded with friends, who

loved and revered him, and for whom he had a very sincere

affection, he still found that such conversation as London affords,

could be found no where else.  These feelings, joined, probably, to

some flattering hopes of aid from the eminent physicians and

surgeons in London, who kindly and generously attended him without

accepting fees, made him resolve to return to the capital.



From Lichfield he came to Birmingham, where he passed a few days

with his worthy old schoolfellow, Mr. Hector, who thus writes to

me:--'He was very solicitous with me to recollect some of our most

early transactions, and transmit them to him, for I perceive

nothing gave him greater pleasure than calling to mind those days

of our innocence.  I complied with his request, and he only

received them a few days before his death.  I have transcribed for

your inspection, exactly the minutes I wrote to him.'  This paper

having been found in his repositories after his death, Sir John

Hawkins has inserted it entire, and I have made occasional use of

it and other communications from Mr. Hector, in the course of this

Work.  I have both visited and corresponded with him since Dr.

Johnson's death, and by my inquiries concerning a great variety of

particulars have obtained additional information.  I followed the

same mode with the Reverend Dr. Taylor, in whose presence I wrote

down a good deal of what he could tell; and he, at my request,

signed his name, to give it authenticity.  It is very rare to find

any person who is able to give a distinct account of the life even

of one whom he has known intimately, without questions being put to

them.  My friend Dr. Kippis has told me, that on this account it is

a practice with him to draw out a biographical catechism.



Johnson then proceeded to Oxford, where he was again kindly

received by Dr. Adams.



He arrived in London on the 16th of November, and next day sent to

Dr. Burney the following note, which I insert as the last token of

his remembrance of that ingenious and amiable man, and as another

of the many proofs of the tenderness and benignity of his heart:--



'MR. JOHNSON, who came home last night, sends his respects to dear

Dr. Burney, and all the dear Burneys, little and great.'



Having written to him, in bad spirits, a letter filled with

dejection and fretfulness, and at the same time expressing anxious

apprehensions concerning him, on account of a dream which had

disturbed me; his answer was chiefly in terms of reproach, for a

supposed charge of 'affecting discontent, and indulging the vanity

of complaint.'  It, however, proceeded,--



'Write to me often, and write like a man.  I consider your fidelity

and tenderness as a great part of the comforts which are yet left

me, and sincerely wish we could be nearer to each other. . . .  My

dear friend, life is very short and very uncertain; let us spend it

as well as we can.  My worthy neighbour, Allen, is dead.  Love me

as well as you can.  Pay my respects to dear Mrs. Boswell.  Nothing

ailed me at that time; let your superstition at last have an end.'



Feeling very soon, that the manner in which he had written might

hurt me, he two days afterwards, July 28, wrote to me again, giving

me an account of his sufferings; after which, he thus proceeds:--



'Before this letter, you will have had one which I hope you will

not take amiss; for it contains only truth, and that truth kindly

intended. . . .  Spartam quam nactus es orna; make the most and

best of your lot, and compare yourself not with the few that are

above you, but with the multitudes which are below you.'



Yet it was not a little painful to me to find, that . . . he still

persevered in arraigning me as before, which was strange in him who

had so much experience of what I suffered.  I, however, wrote to

him two as kind letters as I could; the last of which came too late

to be read by him, for his illness encreased more rapidly upon him

than I had apprehended; but I had the consolation of being informed

that he spoke of me on his death-bed, with affection, and I look

forward with humble hope of renewing our friendship in a better

world.





Soon after Johnson's return to the metropolis, both the asthma and

dropsy became more violent and distressful.



During his sleepless nights he amused himself by translating into

Latin verse, from the Greek, many of the epigrams in the

Anthologia.  These translations, with some other poems by him in

Latin, he gave to his friend Mr. Langton, who, having added a few

notes, sold them to the booksellers for a small sum, to be given to

some of Johnson's relations, which was accordingly done; and they

are printed in the collection of his works.



A very erroneous notion has circulated as to Johnson's deficiency

in the knowledge of the Greek language, partly owing to the modesty

with which, from knowing how much there was to be learnt, he used

to mention his own comparative acquisitions.  When Mr. Cumberland

talked to him of the Greek fragments which are so well illustrated

in The Observer, and of the Greek dramatists in general, he

candidly acknowledged his insufficiency in that particular branch

of Greek literature.  Yet it may be said, that though not a great,

he was a good Greek scholar.  Dr. Charles Burney, the younger, who

is universally acknowledged by the best judges to be one of the few

men of this age who are very eminent for their skill in that noble

language, has assured me, that Johnson could give a Greek word for

almost every English one; and that although not sufficiently

conversant in the niceties of the language, he upon some occasions

discovered, even in these, a considerable degree of critical

acumen.  Mr. Dalzel, Professor of Greek at Edinburgh, whose skill

in it is unquestionable, mentioned to me, in very liberal terms,

the impression which was made upon him by Johnson, in a

conversation which they had in London concerning that language.  As

Johnson, therefore, was undoubtedly one of the first Latin scholars

in modern times, let us not deny to his fame some additional

splendour from Greek.



The ludicrous imitators of Johnson's style are innumerable.  Their

general method is to accumulate hard words, without considering,

that, although he was fond of introducing them occasionally, there

is not a single sentence in all his writings where they are crowded

together, as in the first verse of the following imaginary Ode by

him to Mrs. Thrale, which appeared in the newspapers:--





    'Cervisial coctor's viduate dame,

     Opin'st thou this gigantick frame,

       Procumbing at thy shrine:

     Shall, catenated by thy charms,

     A captive in thy ambient arms,

       Perennially be thine?'





This, and a thousand other such attempts, are totally unlike the

original, which the writers imagined they were turning into

ridicule.  There is not similarity enough for burlesque, or even

for caricature.





'TO MR. GREEN, APOTHECARY, AT LICHFIELD.



'DEAR SIR,--I have enclosed the Epitaph for my Father, Mother, and

Brother, to be all engraved on the large size, and laid in the

middle aisle in St. Michael's church, which I request the clergyman

and churchwardens to permit.



'The first care must be to find the exact place of interment, that

the stone may protect the bodies.  Then let the stone be deep,

massy, and hard; and do not let the difference of ten pounds, or

more, defeat our purpose.



'I have enclosed ten pounds, and Mrs. Porter will pay you ten more,

which I gave her for the same purpose.  What more is wanted shall

be sent; and I beg that all possible haste may be made, for I wish

to have it done while I am yet alive.  Let me know, dear Sir, that

you receive this.  I am, Sir, your most humble servant,



'Dec. 2, 1784.'



'SAM. JOHNSON.'





Death had always been to him an object of terrour; so that, though

by no means happy, he still clung to life with an eagerness at

which many have wondered.  At any time when he was ill, he was very

much pleased to be told that he looked better.  An ingenious member

of the Eumelian Club, informs me, that upon one occasion when he

said to him that he saw health returning to his cheek, Johnson

seized him by the hand and exclaimed, 'Sir, you are one of the

kindest friends I ever had.'



Dr. Heberden, Dr. Brocklesby, Dr. Warren, and Dr. Butter,

physicians, generously attended him, without accepting any fees, as

did Mr. Cruikshank, surgeon; and all that could be done from

professional skill and ability, was tried, to prolong a life so

truly valuable.  He himself, indeed, having, on account of his very

bad constitution, been perpetually applying himself to medical

inquiries, united his own efforts with those of the gentlemen who

attended him; and imagining that the dropsical collection of water

which oppressed him might be drawn off by making incisions in his

body, he, with his usual resolute defiance of pain, cut deep, when

he thought that his surgeon had done it too tenderly.*





* This bold experiment, Sir John Hawkins has related in such a

manner as to suggest a charge against Johnson of intentionally

hastening his end; a charge so very inconsistent with his character

in every respect, that it is injurious even to refute it, as Sir

John has thought it necessary to do.  It is evident, that what

Johnson did in hopes of relief, indicated an extraordinary

eagerness to retard his dissolution.--BOSWELL.





About eight or ten days before his death, when Dr. Brocklesby paid

him his morning visit, he seemed very low and desponding, and said,

'I have been as a dying man all night.'  He then emphatically broke

out in the words of Shakspeare:--





    'Can'st thou not minister to a mind diseas'd;

     Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow;

     Raze out the written troubles of the brain;

     And, with some sweet oblivious antidote,

     Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff,

     Which weighs upon the heart?'





To which Dr. Brocklesby readily answered, from the same great

poet:--





    '--therein the patient

     Must minister to himself.'





Johnson expressed himself much satisfied with the application.



On another day after this, when talking on the subject of prayer,

Dr. Brocklesby repeated from Juvenal,--





    'Orandum est, ut sit mens sana in corpore sano,'





and so on to the end of the tenth satire; but in running it quickly

over, he happened, in the line,





    'Qui spatium vitae extremum inter munera ponat,'





to pronounce supremum for extremum; at which Johnson's critical ear

instantly took offence, and discoursing vehemently on the

unmetrical effect of such a lapse, he shewed himself as full as

ever of the spirit of the grammarian.



Having no near relations, it had been for some time Johnson's

intention to make a liberal provision for his faithful servant, Mr.

Francis Barber, whom he looked upon as particularly under his

protection, and whom he had all along treated truly as an humble

friend.  Having asked Dr. Brocklesby what would be a proper annuity

to a favourite servant, and being answered that it must depend on

the circumstances of the master; and, that in the case of a

nobleman, fifty pounds a year was considered as an adequate reward

for many years' faithful service; 'Then, (said Johnson,) shall I be

nobilissimus, for I mean to leave Frank seventy pounds a year, and

I desire you to tell him so.'  It is strange, however, to think,

that Johnson was not free from that general weakness of being

averse to execute a will, so that he delayed it from time to time;

and had it not been for Sir John Hawkins's repeatedly urging it, I

think it is probable that his kind resolution would not have been

fulfilled.  After making one, which, as Sir John Hawkins informs

us, extended no further than the promised annuity, Johnson's final

disposition of his property was established by a Will and Codicil.





The consideration of numerous papers of which he was possessed,

seems to have struck Johnson's mind, with a sudden anxiety, and as

they were in great confusion, it is much to be lamented that he had

not entrusted some faithful and discreet person with the care and

selection of them; instead of which, he in a precipitate manner,

burnt large masses of them, with little regard, as I apprehend, to

discrimination.  Not that I suppose we have thus been deprived of

any compositions which he had ever intended for the publick eye;

but, from what escaped the flames, I judge that many curious

circumstances relating both to himself and other literary

characters have perished.



Two very valuable articles, I am sure, we have lost, which were two

quarto volumes, containing a full, fair, and most particular

account of his own life, from his earliest recollection.  I owned

to him, that having accidentally seen them, I had read a great deal

in them; and apologizing for the liberty I had taken, asked him if

I could help it.  He placidly answered, 'Why, Sir, I do not think

you could have helped it.'  I said that I had, for once in my life,

felt half an inclination to commit theft.  It had come into my mind

to carry off those two volumes, and never see him more.  Upon my

inquiring how this would have affected him, 'Sir, (said he,) I

believe I should have gone mad.'



During his last illness, Johnson experienced the steady and kind

attachment of his numerous friends.  Mr. Hoole has drawn up a

narrative of what passed in the visits which he paid him during

that time, from the 10th of November to the 13th of December, the

day of his death, inclusive, and has favoured me with a perusal of

it, with permission to make extracts, which I have done.  Nobody

was more attentive to him than Mr. Langton, to whom he tenderly

said, Te teneam moriens deficiente manu.  And I think it highly to

the honour of Mr. Windham, that his important occupations as an

active statesman did not prevent him from paying assiduous respect

to the dying Sage whom he revered, Mr. Langton informs me, that,

'one day he found Mr. Burke and four or five more friends sitting

with Johnson.  Mr. Burke said to him, "I am afraid, Sir, such a

number of us may be oppressive to you."  "No, Sir, (said Johnson,)

it is not so; and I must be in a wretched state, indeed, when your

company would not be a delight to me."  Mr. Burke, in a tremulous

voice, expressive of being very tenderly affected, replied, "My

dear Sir, you have always been too good to me."  Immediately

afterwards he went away.  This was the last circumstance in the

acquaintance of these two eminent men.'





The following particulars of his conversation within a few days of

his death, I give on the authority of Mr. John Nichols:--



'He said, that the Parliamentary Debates were the only part of his

writings which then gave him any compunction: but that at the time

he wrote them, he had no conception he was imposing upon the world,

though they were frequently written from very slender materials,

and often from none at all,--the mere coinage of his own

imagination.  He never wrote any part of his works with equal

velocity.  Three columns of the Magazine, in an hour, was no

uncommon effort, which was faster than most persons could have

transcribed that quantity.



'Of his friend Cave, he always spoke with great affection.  "Yet

(said he,) Cave, (who never looked out of his window, but with a

view to the Gentleman's Magazine,) was a penurious pay-master; he

would contract for lines by the hundred, and expect the long

hundred; but he was a good man, and always delighted to have his

friends at his table."



'He said at another time, three or four days only before his death,

speaking of the little fear he had of undergoing a chirurgical

operation, "I would give one of these legs for a year more of life,

I mean of comfortable life, not such as that which I now suffer;"--

and lamented much his inability to read during his hours of

restlessness; "I used formerly, (he added,) when sleepless in bed,

to read like a Turk."



'Whilst confined by his last illness, it was his regular practice

to have the church-service read to him, by some attentive and

friendly Divine.  The Rev. Mr. Hoole performed this kind office in

my presence for the last time, when, by his own desire, no more

than the Litany was read; in which his responses were in the deep

and sonorous voice which Mr. Boswell has occasionally noticed, and

with the most profound devotion that can be imagined.  His hearing

not being quite perfect, he more than once interrupted Mr. Hoole,

with "Louder, my dear Sir, louder, I entreat you, or you pray in

vain!"--and, when the service was ended, he, with great

earnestness, turned round to an excellent lady who was present,

saying," I thank you, Madam, very heartily, for your kindness in

joining me in this solemn exercise.  Live well, I conjure you; and

you will not feel the compunction at the last, which I now feel."

So truly humble were the thoughts which this great and good man

entertained of his own approaches to religious perfection.'



Amidst the melancholy clouds which hung over the dying Johnson, his

characteristical manner shewed itself on different occasions.



When Dr. Warren, in the usual style, hoped that he was better; his

answer was, 'No, Sir; you cannot conceive with what acceleration I

advance towards death.'



A man whom he had never seen before was employed one night to sit

up with him.  Being asked next morning how he liked his attendant,

his answer was, 'Not at all, Sir: the fellow's an ideot; he is as

aukward as a turn-spit when first put into the wheel, and as sleepy

as a dormouse.'



Mr. Windham having placed a pillow conveniently to support him, he

thanked him for his kindness, and said, 'That will do,--all that a

pillow can do.'



He requested three things of Sir Joshua Reynolds:--To forgive him

thirty pounds which he had borrowed of him; to read the Bible; and

never to use his pencil on a Sunday.  Sir Joshua readily

acquiesced.



Johnson, with that native fortitude, which, amidst all his bodily

distress and mental sufferings, never forsook him, asked Dr.

Brocklesby, as a man in whom he had confidence, to tell him plainly

whether he could recover.  'Give me (said he,) a direct answer.'

The Doctor having first asked him if he could hear the whole truth,

which way soever it might lead, and being answered that he could,

declared that, in his opinion, he could not recover without a

miracle.  'Then, (said Johnson,) I will take no more physick, not

even my opiates; for I have prayed that I may render up my soul to

GOD unclouded.'  In this resolution he persevered, and, at the same

time, used only the weakest kinds of sustenance.  Being pressed by

Mr. Windham to take somewhat more generous nourishment, lest too

low a diet should have the very effect which he dreaded, by

debilitating his mind, he said, 'I will take any thing but

inebriating sustenance.'



The Reverend Mr. Strahan, who was the son of his friend, and had

been always one of his great favourites, had, during his last

illness, the satisfaction of contributing to soothe and comfort

him.  That gentleman's house, at Islington, of which he is Vicar,

afforded Johnson, occasionally and easily, an agreeable change of

place and fresh air; and he attended also upon him in town in the

discharge of the sacred offices of his profession.



Mr. Strahan has given me the agreeable assurance, that, after being

in much agitation, Johnson became quite composed, and continued so

till his death.



Dr. Brocklesby, who will not be suspected of fanaticism, obliged me

with the following account:--



'For some time before his death, all his fears were calmed and

absorbed by the prevalence of his faith, and his trust in the

merits and propitiation of JESUS CHRIST.'



Johnson having thus in his mind the true Christian scheme, at once

rational and consolatory, uniting justice and mercy in the

Divinity, with the improvement of human nature, previous to his

receiving the Holy Sacrament in his apartment, composed and

fervently uttered this prayer:--



'Almighty and most merciful Father, I am now as to human eyes, it

seems, about to commemorate, for the last time, the death of thy

Son JESUS CHRIST, our Saviour and Redeemer.  Grant, O LORD, that my

whole hope and confidence may be in his merits, and thy mercy;

enforce and accept my imperfect repentance; make this commemoration

available to the confirmation of my faith, the establishment of my

hope, and the enlargement of my charity; and make the death of thy

Son JESUS CHRIST effectual to my redemption.  Have mercy upon me,

and pardon the multitude of my offences.  Bless my friends; have

mercy upon all men.  Support me, by thy Holy Spirit, in the days of

weakness, and at the hour of death; and receive me, at my death, to

everlasting happiness, for the sake of JESUS CHRIST.  Amen.'



Having, as has been already mentioned, made his will on the 8th and

9th of December, and settled all his worldly affairs, he languished

till Monday, the 13th of that month, when he expired, about seven

o'clock in the evening, with so little apparent pain that his

attendants hardly perceived when his dissolution took place.



Of his last moments, my brother, Thomas David, has furnished me

with the following particulars:--



'The Doctor, from the time that he was certain his death was near,

appeared to be perfectly resigned, was seldom or never fretful or

out of temper, and often said to his faithful servant, who gave me

this account, "Attend, Francis, to the salvation of your soul,

which is the object of greatest importance:" he also explained to

him passages in the Scripture, and seemed to have pleasure in

talking upon religious subjects.



'On Monday, the 13th of December, the day on which he died, a Miss

Morris, daughter to a particular friend of his, called, and said to

Francis, that she begged to be permitted to see the Doctor, that

she might earnestly request him to give her his blessing.  Francis

went into his room, followed by the young lady, and delivered the

message.  The Doctor turned himself in the bed, and said, "GOD

bless you, my dear!"  These were the last words he spoke.  His

difficulty of breathing increased till about seven o'clock in the

evening, when Mr. Barber and Mrs. Desmoulins, who were sitting in

the room, observing that the noise he made in breathing had ceased,

went to the bed, and found he was dead.'



About two days after his death, the following very agreeable

account was communicated to Mr. Malone, in a letter by the

Honourable John Byng, to whom I am much obliged for granting me

permission to introduce it in my work.





'DEAR SIR,--Since I saw you, I have had a long conversation with

Cawston, who sat up with Dr. Johnson, from nine o'clock, on Sunday

evening, till ten o'clock, on Monday morning.  And, from what I can

gather from him, it should seem, that Dr. Johnson was perfectly

composed, steady in hope, and resigned to death.  At the interval

of each hour, they assisted him to sit up in his bed, and move his

legs, which were in much pain; when he regularly addressed himself

to fervent prayer; and though, sometimes, his voice failed him, his

senses never did, during that time.  The only sustenance he

received, was cyder and water.  He said his mind was prepared, and

the time to his dissolution seemed long.  At six in the morning, he

inquired the hour, and, on being informed, said that all went on

regularly, and he felt he had but a few hours to live.



'At ten o'clock in the morning, he parted from Cawston, saying,

"You should not detain Mr. Windham's servant:--I thank you; bear my

remembrance to your master."  Cawston says, that no man could

appear more collected, more devout, or less terrified at the

thoughts of the approaching minute.



'This account, which is so much more agreeable than, and somewhat

different from, yours, has given us the satisfaction of thinking

that that great man died as he lived, full of resignation,

strengthened in faith, and joyful in hope.'



A few days before his death, he had asked Sir John Hawkins, as one

of his executors, where he should be buried; and on being answered,

'Doubtless, in Westminster-Abbey,' seemed to feel a satisfaction,

very natural to a Poet; and indeed in my opinion very natural to

every man of any imagination, who has no family sepulchre in which

he can be laid with his fathers.  Accordingly, upon Monday,

December 20, his remains were deposited in that noble and renowned

edifice; and over his grave was placed a large blue flag-stone,

with this inscription:--





    'SAMUEL JOHNSON, LL.D.

   Obiit XIII die Decembris,

         Anno Domini

         M.DCC.LXXXIV.

      Aetatis suae LXXV.'





His funeral was attended by a respectable number of his friends,

particularly such of the members of the LITERARY CLUB as were then

in town; and was also honoured with the presence of several of the

Reverend Chapter of Westminster.  Mr. Burke, Sir Joseph Banks, Mr.

Windham, Mr. Langton, Sir Charles Bunbury, and Mr. Colman, bore his

pall.  His school-fellow, Dr. Taylor, performed the mournful office

of reading the burial service.



I trust, I shall not be accused of affectation, when I declare,

that I find myself unable to express all that I felt upon the loss

of such a 'Guide, Philosopher, and Friend.'  I shall, therefore,

not say one word of my own, but adopt those of an eminent friend,

which he uttered with an abrupt felicity, superior to all studied

compositions:--'He has made a chasm, which not only nothing can

fill up, but which nothing has a tendency to fill up.  Johnson is

dead.  Let us go to the next best:--there is nobody; no man can be

said to put you in mind of Johnson.'











End 