





IX The New Foreman



Toward the end of the week Stillwell informed Madeline that

Stewart had arrived at the ranch and had taken up quarters with

Nels.



"Gene's sick.  He looks bad," said the old cattleman. "He's so

weak an' shaky he can't lift a cup.  Nels says that Gene has hed

some bad spells.  A little liquor would straighten him up now. 

But Nels can't force him to drink a drop, an' has hed to sneak

some liquor in his coffee.  Wal, I think we'll pull Gene through. 

He's forgotten a lot.  I was goin' to tell him what he did to me

up at Rodeo.  But I know if he'd believe it he'd be sicker than

he is.  Gene's losin' his mind, or he's got somethin' powerful

strange on it."



From that time Stillwell, who evidently found Madeline his most

sympathetic listener, unburdened himself daily of his hopes and

fears and conjectures.



Stewart was really ill.  It became necessary to send Link Stevens

for a physician.  Then Stewart began slowly to mend and presently

was able to get up and about.  Stillwell said the cowboy lacked

interest and seemed to be a broken man. This statement, however,

the old cattleman modified as Stewart continued to improve.  Then

presently it was a good augury of Stewart's progress that the

cowboys once more took up the teasing relation which had been

characteristic of them before his illness.  A cowboy was indeed

out of sorts when he could not vent his. peculiar humor on

somebody or something.  Stewart had evidently become a broad

target for their badinage.



"Wal, the boys are sure after Gene," said Stillwell, with his

huge smile.  "Joshin' him all the time about how he sits around

an' hangs around an' loafs around jest to get a glimpse of you,

Miss Majesty.  Sure all the boys hev a pretty bad case over their

pretty boss, but none of them is a marker to Gene.  He's got it

so bad, Miss Majesty, thet he actooly don't know they are joshin'

him.  It's the amazin'est strange thing I ever seen.  Why, Gene

was always a feller thet you could josh.  An' he'd laugh an' get

back at you.  But he was never before deaf to talk, an' there was

a certain limit no feller cared to cross with him.  Now he takes

every word an' smiles dreamy like, an' jest looks an' looks. 

Why, he's beginnin' to make me tired.  He'll never run thet bunch

of cowboys if he doesn't wake up quick."



Madeline smiled her amusement and expressed a belief that

Stillwell wanted too much in such short time from a man who had

done body and mind a grievous injury.



It had been impossible for Madeline to fail to observe Stewart's

singular behavior.  She never went out to take her customary

walks and rides without seeing him somewhere in the distance. 

She was aware that he watched for her and avoided meeting her. 

When she sat on the porch during the afternoon or at sunset

Stewart could always be descried at some point near. He idled

listlessly in the sun, lounged on the porch of his bunk-house,

sat whittling the top bar of the corral fence, and always it

seemed to Madeline he was watching her.  Once, while going the

rounds with her gardener, she encountered Stewart and greeted him

kindly.  He said little, but he was not embarrassed.  She did not

recognize in his face any feature that she remembered.  In fact,

on each of the few occasions when she had met Stewart he had

looked so different that she had no consistent idea of his facial

appearance.  He was now pale, haggard, drawn.  His eyes held a

shadow through which shone a soft, subdued light; and, once

having observed this, Madeline fancied it was like the light in

Majesty's eyes, in the dumb, worshiping eyes of her favorite

stag-hound.  She told Stewart that she hoped he would soon be in

the saddle again, and passed on her way.



That Stewart loved her Madeline could not help but see. She

endeavored to think of him as one of the many who, she was glad

to know, liked her.  But she could not regulate her thoughts to

fit the order her intelligence prescribed.  Thought of Stewart

dissociated itself from thought of the other cowboys.  When she

discovered this she felt a little surprise and annoyance.  Then

she interrogated herself, and concluded that it was not that

Stewart was so different from his comrades, but that

circumstances made him stand out from them. She recalled her

meeting with him that night when he bad tried to force her to

marry him.  This was unforgetable in itself. She called

subsequent mention of him, and found it had been peculiarly

memorable.  The man and his actions seemed to hinge on events. 

Lastly, the fact standing clear of all others in its relation to

her interest was that he had been almost ruined, almost lost, and

she had saved him.  That alone was sufficient to explain why she

thought of him differently.  She had befriended, uplifted the

other cowboys; she had saved Stewart's life.  To be sure, he had

been a ruffian, but a woman could not save the life of even a

ruffian without remembering it with gladness.  Madeline at length

decided her interest in Stewart was natural, and that her deeper

feeling was pity. Perhaps the interest had been forced from her;

however, she gave the pity as she gave everything.



Stewart recovered his strength, though not in time to ride at the

spring round-up; and Stillwell discussed with Madeline the

advisability of making the cowboy his foreman.



"Wal, Gene seems to be gettin' along," said Stillwell. "But he

ain't like his old self.  I think more of him at thet. But

where's his spirit?  The boys'd ride rough-shod all over him. 

Mebbe I'd do best to wait longer now, as the slack season is on. 

All the same, if those vaquero of Don Carlos's don't lay low I'll

send Gene over there.  Thet'll wake him up." 



A few days afterward Stillwell came to Madeline, rubbing his big

hands in satisfaction and wearing a grin that was enormous.



"Miss Majesty, I reckon before this I've said things was amazin'

strange.  But now Gene Stewart has gone an' done it!  Listen to

me.  Them Greasers down on our slope hev been gettin' prosperous. 

They're growin' like bad weeds.  An' they got a new padre--the

little old feller from El Cajon, Padre Marcos.  Wal, this was all

right, all the boys thought, except Gene.  An' he got blacker 'n

thunder an' roared round like a dehorned bull.  I was sure glad

to see he could get mad again. Then Gene haids down the slope fer

the church.  Nels an' me follered him, thinkin' he might hev been

took sudden with a crazy spell or somethin'.  He hasn't never

been jest right yet since he left off drinkin'.  Wal, we run into

him comin' out of the church.  We never was so dumfounded in our

lives.  Gene was crazy, all right--he sure hed a spell.  But it

was the kind of a spell he hed thet paralyzed us.  He ran past us

like a streak, an' we follered.  We couldn't ketch him.  We heerd

him laugh--the strangest laugh I ever heerd!  You'd thought the

feller was suddenly made a king.  He was like thet feller who was

tied in a bunyin'-sack an' throwed into the sea, an' cut his way

out, an' swam to the island where the treasures was, an' stood up

yellin', 'The world is mine.'  Wal, when we got up to his

bunk-house he was gone.  He didn't come back all day an' all

night.  Frankie Slade, who has a sharp tongue, says Gene hed gone

crazy for liquor an' thet was his finish.  Nels was some worried. 

An' I was sick.



"Wal. this mawnin' I went over to Nels's bunk.  Some of the

fellers was there, all speculatin' about Gene.  Then big as life

Gene struts round the corner.  He wasn't the same Gene. His face

was pale an' his eyes burned like fire.  He had thet old mockin',

cool smile, an' somethin' besides thet I couldn't understand. 

Frankie Slade up an' made a remark--no wuss than he'd been makin'

fer days--an' Gene tumbled him out of his chair, punched him

good, walked all over him.  Frankie wasn't hurt so much as he was

bewildered.  'Gene,' he says, 'what the hell struck you?'  An'

Gene says, kind of sweet like, 'Frankie, you may be a nice feller

when you're alone, but your talk's offensive to a gentleman.'



"After thet what was said to Gene was with a nice smile.  Now,

Miss Majesty, it's beyond me what to allow for Gene's sudden

change.  First off, I thought Padre Marcos had converted him.  I

actooly thought thet.  But I reckon it's only Gene Stewart come

back--the old Gene Stewart an' some.  Thet's all I care about. 

I'm rememberin' how I once told you thet Gene was the last of the

cowboys.  Perhaps I should hev said he's the last of my kind of

cowboys.  Wal, Miss Majesty, you'll be apprecatin' of what I

meant from now on."



It was also beyond Madeline to account for Gene Stewart's antics,

and, making allowance for the old cattle-man's fancy, she did not

weigh his remarks very heavily. She guessed why Stewart might

have been angry at the presence of Padre Marcos.  Madeline

supposed that it was rather an unusual circumstance for a cowboy

to be converted to religious belief.  But it was possible.  And

she knew that religious fervor often manifested itself in

extremes of feeling and action.  Most likely, in Stewart's case,

his real manner had been both misunderstood and exaggerated. 

However, Madeline had a curious desire, which she did not wholly

admit to herself, to see the cowboy and make her own deductions.



The opportunity did not present itself for nearly two weeks. 

Stewart had taken up his duties as foreman, and his activities

were ceaseless.  He was absent most of the time, ranging down

toward the Mexican line.  When he returned Stillwell sent for

him.



This was late in the afternoon of a day in the middle of April. 

Alfred and Florence were with Madeline on the porch. They saw the

cowboy turn his horse over to one of the Mexican boys at the

corral and then come with weary step up to the house, beating the

dust out of his gauntlets.  Little streams of gray sand trickled

from his sombrero as he removed it and bowed to the women.



Madeline saw the man she remembered, but with a singularly

different aspect.  His skin was brown; his eyes were piercing and

dark and steady; he carried himself erect; he seemed preoccupied,

and there was not a trace of embarrassment in his manner.



"Wal, Gene, I'm sure glad to see you," Stillwell was saying. 

"Where do you hail from?"



"Guadaloupe Canon," replied the cowboy.



Stillwell whistled.



"Way down there!  You don't mean you follered them hoss tracks

thet far?"



"All the way from Don Carlos's rancho across the Mexican line.  I

took Nick Steele with me.  Nick is the best tracker in the

outfit.  This trail we were on led along the foothill valleys. 

First we thought whoever made it was hunting for water.  But they

passed two ranches without watering.  At Seaton's Wash they dug

for water.  Here they met a pack-train of burros that came down

the mountain trail.  The burros were heavily loaded.  Horse and

burro tracks struck south from Seaton's to the old California

emigrant road.  We followed the trail through Guadelope Canon and 

across the border.  On the way back we stopped at Slaughter's

ranch, where the United States cavalry are camping.  There we met

foresters from the Peloncillo forest reserve.  If these fellows

knew anything they kept it to themselves.  So we hit the trail

home."



"Wal, I reckon you know enough?" inquired Stillwell, slowly.



"I reckon," replied Stewart.



"Wal, out with it, then," said Stillwell, gruffly. "Miss Hammond

can't be kept in the dark much longer.  Make your report to her."



The cowboy shifted his dark gaze to Madeline.  He was cool and

slow.



"We're losing a few cattle on the open range. Night-drives by the

vaqueros.  Some of these cattle are driven across the valley,

others up to the foothills.  So far as I can find out no cattle

are being driven south.  So this raiding is a blind to fool the

cowboys.  Don Carlos is a Mexican rebel. He located his rancho

here a few years ago and pretended to raise cattle.  All that

time he has been smuggling arms and ammunition across the border. 

He was for Madero against Diaz. Now he is against Madero because

he and all the rebels think Madero failed to keep his promises. 

There will be another revolution.  And all the arms go from the

States across the border.  Those burros I told about were packed

with contraband goods."



"That's a matter for the United States cavalry.  They are

patrolling the border," said Alfred.



"They can't stop the smuggling of arms, not down in that wild

corner," replied Stewart.



"What is my--my duty?  What has it to do with me?" inquired

Madeline, somewhat perturbed.



"Wal, Miss Majesty, I reckon it hasn't nothing to do with you,"

put in Stillwell.  "Thet's my bizness an' Stewart's. But I jest

wanted you to know.  There might be some trouble follerin' my

orders."



"Your orders?"



"I want to send Stewart over to fire Don Carlos an' his vaqueros

off the range.  They've got to go.  Don Carlos is breakin' the

law of the United States, an' doin' it on our property an' with

our hosses.  Hev I your permission, Miss Hammond?"



"Why, assuredly you have!  Stillwell, you know what to do. 

Alfred, what do you think best?"



"It'll make trouble, Majesty, but it's got to be done," replied

Alfred.  "Here you have a crowd of Eastern friends due next

month.  We want the range to ourselves then.  But, Stillwell, if

you drive those vaqueros off, won't they hang around in the

foothills?  I declare they are a bad lot."



Stillwell's mind was not at ease.  He paced the porch with a

frown clouding his brow.



"Gene, I reckon you got this Greaser deal figgered better'n me,"

said Stillwell.  "Now what do you say?"



"He'll have to be forced off," replied Stewart, quietly.  The

Don's pretty slick, but his vaqueros are bad actors.  It's just

this way.  Nels said the other day to me, 'Gene, I haven't packed

a gun for years until lately, and it feels good whenever I meet

any of those strange Greasers.'  You see, Stillwell, Don Carlos

has vaqueros coming and going all the time.  They're guerrilla

bands, that's all.  And they're getting uglier.  There have been

several shooting-scrapes lately.  A rancher named White, who

lives up the valley, was badly hurt.  It's only a matter of time

till something stirs up the boys here.  Stillwell, you know Nels

and Monty and Nick."



"Sure I know 'em.  An' you're not mentionin' one more particular

cowboy in my outfit," said Stiliwell, with a dry chuckle and a

glance at Stewart.



Madeline divined the covert meaning, and a slight chill passed

over her, as if a cold wind had blown in from the hills.



"Stewart, I see you carry a gun," she said, pointing to a black

handle protruding from a sheath swinging low along his leather

chaps.



"Yes, ma'am."



"Why do you carry it?" she asked.



"Well," he said, "it's not a pretty gun--and it's heavy."  She

caught the inference.  The gun was not an ornament.  His keen,

steady, dark gaze caused her vague alarm. What had once seemed

cool and audacious about this cowboy was now cold and powerful

and mystical.  Both her instinct and her intelligence realized

the steel fiber of the man's nature.  As she was his employer,

she had the right to demand that he should not do what was so

chillingly manifest that he might do.  But Madeline could not

demand.  She felt curiously young and weak, and the five months

of Western life were as if they had never been.  She now had to

do with a question involving human life.  And the value she

placed upon human life and its spiritual significance was a

matter far from her cowboy's thoughts.  A strange idea flashed

up.  Did she place too much value upon all human life?  She

checked that, wondering, almost horrified at herself.  And then

her intuition told her that she possessed a far stronger power to

move these primitive men than any woman's stern rule or order.



"Stewart, I do not fully understand what you hint that Nels and

his comrades might do.  Please be frank with me.  Do you mean

Nels would shoot upon little provocation?"



"Miss Hammond, as far as Nels is concerned, shooting is now just

a matter of his meeting Don Carlos's vaqueros.  It's wonderful

what Nels has stood from them, considering the Mexicans he's

already killed."



"Already killed!  Stewart, you are not in earnest?" cried

Madeline, shocked.



"I am.  Nels has seen hard life along the Arizona border.  He

likes peace as well as any man.  But a few years of that doesn't

change what the early days made of him.  As for Nick Steele and

Monty, they're just bad men, and looking for trouble."



"How about yourself, Stewart?  Stillwell's remark was not lost

upon me," said Madeline, prompted by curiosity.



Stewart did not reply.  He looked at her in respectful silence. 

In her keen earnestness Madeline saw beneath his cool exterior

and was all the more baffled.  Was there a slight, inscrutable,

mocking light in his eyes, or was it only her imagination? 

However, the cowboy's face was as hard as flint.



"Stewart, I have come to love my ranch," said Madeline, slowly,

"and I care a great deal for my--my cowboys.  It would be

dreadful if they were to kill anybody, or especially if one of

them should be killed."



"Miss Hammond, you've changed things considerable out here, but

you can't change these men.  All that's needed to start them is a

little trouble.  And this Mexican revolution is bound to make

rough times along some of the wilder passes across the border. 

We're in line, that's all.  And the boys are getting stirred up."



"Very well, then, I must accept the inevitable.  I am facing a

rough time.  And some of my cowboys cannot be checked much

longer.  But, Stewart, whatever you have been in the past, you

have changed."  She smiled at him, and her voice was singularly

sweet and rich.  "Stillwell has so often referred to you as the

last of his kind of cowboy.  I have just a faint idea of what a

wild life you have led.  Perhaps that fits you to be a leader of

such rough men.  I am no judge of what a leader should do in this

crisis.  My cowboys are entailing risk in my employ; my property

is not safe; perhaps my life even might be endangered.  I want to

rely upon you, since Stillwell believes, and I, too, that you are

the man for this place.  I shall give you no orders.  But is it

too much to ask that you be my kind of a cowboy?"



Madeline remembered Stewart's former brutality and shame and

abject worship, and she measured the great change in him by the

contrast afforded now in his dark, changeless, intent face.



"Miss Hammond, what kind of a cowboy is that?" he asked.



"I--I don't exactly know.  It is that kind which I feel you might

be.  But I do know that in the problem at hand I want your

actions to be governed by reason, not passion.  Human life is not

for any man to sacrifice unless in self-defense or in protecting

those dependent upon him.  What Stillwell and you hinted makes me

afraid of Nels and Nick Steele and Monty. Cannot they be

controlled?  I want to feel that they will not go gunning for Don

Carlos's men.  I want to avoid all violence. And yet when my

guests come I want to feel that they will be safe from danger or

fright or even annoyance.  May I not rely wholly upon you,

Stewart?  Just trust you to manage these obstreperous cowboys and

protect my property and Alfred's, and take care of us--of me,

until this revolution is ended?  I have never had a day's worry

since I bought the ranch.  It is not that I want to shirk my

responsibilities; it is that I like being happy.  May I put so

much faith in you?"



"I hope so, Miss Hammond," replied Stewart.  It was an instant

response, but none the less fraught with consciousness of

responsibility.  He waited a moment, and then, as neither

Stillwell nor Madeline offered further speech, he bowed and

turned down the path, his long spurs clinking in the gravel.



"Wal, wal," exclaimed Stillwell, "thet's no little job you give

him, Miss Majesty."



"It was a woman's cunning, Stillwell," said Alfred. "My sister

used to be a wonder at getting her own way when we were kids. 

Just a smile or two, a few sweet words or turns of thought, and

she had what she wanted."



"Al, what a character to give me!" protested Madeline. "Indeed, I

was deeply in earnest with Stewart.  I do not understand just

why, but I trust him.  He seems like iron and steel.  Then I was

a little frightened at the prospect of trouble with the vaqueros. 

Both you and Stillwell have influenced me to look upon Stewart as

invaluable.  I thought it best to confess my utter helplessness

and to look to him for support."



"Majesty, whatever actuated you, it was a stroke of diplomacy,"

replied her brother.  "Stewart has got good stuff in him.  He was

down and out.  Well, he's made a game fight, and it looks as if

he'd win.  Trusting him, giving him responsibility, relying upon

him, was the surest way to strengthen his hold upon himself. 

Then that little touch of sentiment about being your kind of

cowboy and protecting you--well, if Gene Stewart doesn't develop

into an Argus-eyed knight I'll say I don't know cowboys.  But,

Majesty, remember, he's a composite of tiger breed and forked

lightning, and don't imagine he has failed you if he gets into a

fight.



"I'll sure tell you what Gene Stewart will do," said Florence. 

"Don't I know cowboys?  Why, they used to take me up on their

horses when I was a baby.  Gene Stewart will be the kind of

cowboy your sister said he might be, whatever that is. She may

not know and we may not guess, but he knows."



"Wal, Flo, there you hit plumb center," replied the old

cattleman.  "An' I couldn't be gladder if he was my own son."

