





XXI Unbridled



In waking and sleeping hours Madeline Hammond could not release

herself from the thralling memory of that tragedy.  She was

haunted by Monty Price's terrible smile.  Only in action of some

kind could she escape; and to that end she worked, she walked and

rode.  She even overcame a strong feeling, which she feared was

unreasonable disgust, for the Mexican girl Bonita, who lay ill at

the ranch, bruised and feverish, in need of skilful nursing.



Madeline felt there was something inscrutable changing her soul. 

That strife--the struggle to decide her destiny for East or West-

-held still further aloof.  She was never spiritually alone. 

There was a step on her trail.  Indoors she was oppressed.  She

required the open--the light and wind, the sight of endless

slope, the sounds of corral and pond and field, physical things,

natural things.



One afternoon she rode down to the alfalfa-fields, round them,

and back up to the spillway of the lower lake, where a group of

mesquite-trees, owing to the water that seeped through the sand

to their roots, had taken on bloom and beauty of renewed life. 

Under these trees there was shade enough to make a pleasant place

to linger.  Madeline dismounted, desiring to rest a little.  She

liked this quiet, lonely spot.  It was really the only secluded

nook near the house.  If she rode down into the valley or out to

the mesa or up on the foothills she could not go alone.  Probably

now Stillwell or Nels knew her whereabouts.  But as she was

comparatively hidden here, she imagined a solitude that was not

actually hers.



Her horse, Majesty, tossed his head and flung his mane and

switched his tail at the flies.  He would rather have been

cutting the wind down the valley slope.  Madeline sat with her

back against a tree, and took off her sombrero.  The soft breeze,

fanning her hot face, blowing strands of her hair, was

refreshingly cool.  She heard the slow tramp of cattle going in

to drink.  That sound ceased, and the grove of mesquites appeared

to be lifeless, except for her and her horse.  It was, however,

only after moments of attention that she found the place was far

from being dead.  Keen eyes and ears brought reward.  Desert

quail, as gray as the bare earth, were dusting themselves in a

shady spot.  A bee, swift as light, hummed by. She saw a horned

toad, the color of stone, squatting low, hiding fearfully in the

sand within reach of her whip.  She extended the point of the

whip, and the toad quivered and swelled and hissed.  It was

instinct with fight.  The wind faintly stirred the thin foliage

of the mesquites, making a mournful sigh.  From far up in the

foothills, barely distinguishable, came the scream of an eagle. 

The bray of a burro brought a brief, discordant break.  Then a

brown bird darted down from an unseen perch and made a swift,

irregular flight after a fluttering winged insect.  Madeline

heard the sharp snapping of a merciless beak.  Indeed, there was

more than life in the shade of the mesquites.



Suddenly Majesty picked up his long ears and snorted. Then

Madeline heard a slow pad of hoofs.  A horse was approaching from

the direction of the lake.  Madeline had learned to be wary, and,

mounting Majesty, she turned him toward the open.  A moment later

she felt glad of her caution, for, looking back between the

trees, she saw Stewart leading a horse into the grove.  She would

as lief have met a guerrilla as this cowboy.



Majesty had broken into a trot when a shrill whistle rent the

air.  The horse leaped and, wheeling so swiftly that he nearly

unseated Madeline, he charged back straight for the mesquites. 

Madeline spoke to him, cried angrily at him, pulled with all her

strength upon the bridle, but was helplessly unable to stop him. 

He whistled a piercing blast.  Madeline realized then that

Stewart, his old master, had called him and that nothing could

turn him.  She gave up trying, and attended to the urgent need of

intercepting mesquite boughs that Majesty thrashed into motion. 

The horse thumped into an aisle between the trees and, stopping

before Stewart, whinnied eagerly.



Madeline, not knowing what to expect, had not time for any

feeling but amaze.  A quick glance showed her Stewart in rough

garb, dressed for the trail, and leading a wiry horse, saddled

and packed.  When Stewart, without looking at her, put his arm

around Majesty's neck and laid his face against the flowing mane

Madeline's heart suddenly began to beat with unwonted quickness. 

Stewart seemed oblivious to her presence. His eyes were closed. 

His dark face softened, lost its hardness and fierceness and

sadness, and for an instant became beautiful.



Madeline instantly divined what his action meant.  He was leaving

the ranch; this was his good-by to his horse.  How strange, sad,

fine was this love between man and beast!  A dimness confused

Madeline's eyes; she hurriedly brushed it away, and it came hack

wet and blurring.  She averted her face, ashamed of the tears

Stewart might see.  She was sorry for him. He was going away, and

this time, judging from the nature of his farewell to his horse,

it was to be forever.  Like a stab from a cold blade a pain shot

through Madeline's heart.  The wonder of it, the

incomprehensibility of it, the utter newness and strangeness of

this sharp pain that now left behind a dull pang, made her forget

Stewart, her surroundings, everything except to search her heart. 

Maybe here was the secret that had eluded her.  She trembled on

the brink of something unknown. In some strange way the emotion

brought back her girlhood.  Her mind revolved swift queries and

replies; she was living, feeling, learning; happiness mocked at

her from behind a barred door, and the bar of that door seemed to

be an inexplicable pain.  Then like lightning strokes shot the

questions:  Why should pain hide her happiness?  What was her

happiness?  What relation had it to this man?  Why should she

feel strangely about his departure?  And the voices within her

were silenced, stunned, unanswered.



"I want to talk to you," said Stewart.



Madeline started, turned to him, and now she saw the earlier

Stewart, the man who reminded her of their first meeting at El

Cajon, of that memorable meeting at Chiricahua.



"I want to ask you something," he went on.  "I've been wanting to

know something.  That's why I've hung on here.  You never spoke

to me, never noticed me, never gave me a chance to ask you.  But

now I'm going over--over the border.  And I want to know.  Why

did you refuse to listen to me?"



At his last words that hot shame, tenfold more stifling than when

it had before humiliated Madeline, rushed over her, sending the

scarlet in a wave to her temples.  It seemed that his words made

her realize she was actually face to face with him, that somehow

a shame she would rather have died than revealed was being

liberated.  Biting her lips to hold back speech, she jerked on

Majesty's bridle, struck him with her whip, spurred him. 

Stewart's iron arm held the horse.  Then Madeline, in a flash of

passion, struck at Stewart's face, missed it, struck again, and

hit.  With one pull, almost drawing her from the saddle, he tore

the whip from her hands. It was not that action on his part, or

the sudden strong masterfulness of his look, so much as the livid

mark on his face where the whip had lashed that quieted, if it

did not check, her fury.



That's nothing," he said, with something of his old audacity. 

"That's nothing to how you've hurt me."



Madeline battled with herself for control.  This man would not be

denied.  Never before had the hardness of his face, the flinty

hardness of these desert-bred men, so struck her with its

revelation of the unbridled spirit.  He looked stern, haggard,

bitter.  The dark shade was changing to gray--the gray to

ash-color of passion.  About him now there was only the ghost of

that finer, gentler man she had helped to bring into being.  The

piercing dark eyes he bent upon her burned her, went through her

as if he were looking into her soul. Then Madeline's quick sight

caught a fleeting doubt, a wistfulness, a surprised and saddened

certainty in his eyes, saw it shade and pass away.  Her woman's

intuition, as keen as her sight, told her Stewart in that moment

had sustained a shock of bitter, final truth.



For the third time he repeated his question to her. Madeline did

not answer; she could not speak.



"You don't know I love you, do you?" he continued, passionately. 

"That ever since you stood before me in that hole at Chiricahua

I've loved you?  You can't see I've been another man, loving you,

working for you, living for you?  You won't believe I've turned

my back on the old wild life, that I've been decent and honorable

and happy and useful--your kind of a cowboy?  You couldn't tell,

though I loved you, that I never wanted you to know it, that I

never dared to think of you except as my angel, my holy Virgin? 

What do you know of a man's heart and soul?  How could you tell

of the love, the salvation of a man who's lived his life in the

silence and loneliness?  Who could teach you the actual truth--

that a wild cowboy, faithless to mother and sister, except in

memory, riding a hard, drunken trail straight to hell; had looked

into the face, the eyes of a beautiful woman infinitely beyond

him, above him, and had so loved her that he was saved--that he

became faithful again--that he saw her face in every flower and

her eyes in the blue heaven?  Who could tell you, when at night I

stood alone under these Western stars, how deep in my soul I was

glad just to be alive, to be able to do something for you, to be

near you, to stand between you and worry, trouble, danger, to

feel somehow that I was a part, just a little part of the West

you had come to love?"



Madeline was mute.  She heard her heart thundering in her ears.



Stewart leaped at her.  His powerful hand closed on her arm.  She

trembled.  His action presaged the old instinctive violence.



"No; but you think I kept Bonita up in the mountains, that I went

secretly to meet her, that all the while I served you I was-- Oh,

I know what you think!  I know now.  I never knew till I made you

look at me.  Now, say it!  Speak!"



White-hot, blinded, utterly in the fiery grasp of passion,

powerless to stem the rush of a word both shameful and revealing

and fatal, Madeline cried:



"YES!"



He had wrenched that word from her, but he was not subtle enough,

not versed in the mystery of woman's motive enough, to divine the

deep significance of her reply.



For him the word had only literal meaning confirming the dishonor

in which she held him.  Dropping her arm, he shrank back, a

strange action for the savage and crude man she judged him to be.



"But that day at Chiricahua you spoke of faith," he burst out. 

"You said the greatest thing in the world was faith in human

nature.  You said the finest men had been those who had fallen

low and had risen.  You said you had faith in me! You made me

have faith in myself!"



His reproach, without bitterness or scorn, was a lash to her old

egoistic belief in her fairness.  She had preached a beautiful

principle that she had failed to live up to.  She understood his

rebuke, she wondered and wavered, but the affront to her pride

had been too great, the tumult within her breast had been too

startlingly fierce; she could not speak, the moment passed, and

with it his brief, rugged splendor of simplicity.



"You think I am vile," he said.  "You think that about Bonita! 

And all the time I've been . . .  I could make you ashamed--I

could tell you--"



His passionate utterance ceased with a snap of his teeth.  His

lips set in a thin, bitter line.  The agitation of his face

preceded a convulsive wrestling of his shoulders.  All this swift

action denoted an inner combat, and it nearly overwhelmed him.



"No, no!" he panted.  Was it his answer to some mighty

temptation?  Then, like a bent sapling released, he sprang erect. 

"But I'll be the man--the dog--you think me!"



He laid hold of her arm with rude, powerful clutch. One pull drew

her sliding half out of the saddle into his arms. She fell with

her breast against his, not wholly free of stirrups or horse, and

there she hung, utterly powerless. Maddened, writhing, she tore

to release herself.  All she could accomplish was to twist

herself, raise herself high enough to see his face.  That almost

paralyzed her.  Did he mean to kill her?  Then he wrapped his

arms around her and crushed her tighter, closer to him.  She felt

the pound of his heart; her own seemed to have frozen.  Then he

pressed his burning lips to hers.  It was a long, terrible kiss. 

She felt him shake.



"Oh, Stewart!  I--implore--you--let--me--go!" she whispered.



His white face loomed over hers.  She closed her eyes. He rained

kisses upon her face, but no more upon her mouth.  On her closed

eyes, her hair, her cheeks, her neck he pressed swift lips--lips

that lost their fire and grew cold.  Then he released her, and,

lifting and righting her in the saddle, he still held her arm to

keep her from falling.



For a moment Madeline sat on her horse with shut eyes. She

dreaded the light.



"Now you can't say you've never been kissed," Stewart said.  His

voice seemed a long way off.  "But that was coming to you, so be

game.  Here!"



She felt something hard and cold and metallic thrust into her

hand.  He made her fingers close over it, hold it. The feel of

the thing revived her.  She opened her eyes. Stewart had given

her his gun.  He stood with his broad breast against her knee,

and she looked up to see that old mocking smile on his face.



"Go ahead!  Throw my gun on me!  Be a thoroughbred!"



Madeline did not yet grasp his meaning.



"You can put me down in that quiet place on the hill--beside

Monty Price."



Madeline dropped the gun with a shuddering cry of horror.  The

sense of his words, the memory of Monty, the certainty that she

would kill Stewart if she held the gun an instant longer,

tortured the self-accusing cry from her.



Stewart stooped to pick up the weapon.



"You might have saved me a hell of a lot of trouble," he said,

with another flash of the mocking smile.  "You're beautiful and

sweet and proud, but you're no thoroughbred! Majesty Hammond,

adios!"



Stewart leaped for the saddle of his horse, and with the flying

mount crashed through the mesquites to disappear.


