





XIX Don Carlos



Stewart took Nels, Monty, and Nick Steele aside out of earshot,

and they evidently entered upon an earnest colloquy.  Presently

the other cowboys were called.  They all talked more or less, but

the deep voice of Stewart predominated over the others. Then the

consultation broke up, and the cowboys scattered.



"Rustle, you Indians!" ordered Stewart.



The ensuing scene of action was not reassuring to Madeline and

her friends.  They were quiet, awaiting some one to tell them

what to do.  At the offset the cowboys appeared to have forgotten

Madeline.  Some of them ran off into the woods, others into the

open, grassy places, where they rounded up the horses and burros. 

Several cowboys spread tarpaulins upon the ground and began to

select and roll small packs, evidently for hurried travel.  Nels

mounted his horse to ride down the trail. Monty and Nick Steele

went off into the grove, leading their horses.  Stewart climbed

up a steep jumble of stone between two sections of low, cracked

cliff back of the camp.



Castleton offered to help the packers, and was curtly told he

would be in the way.  Madeline's friends all importuned her: Was

there real danger?  Were the guerrillas coming?  Would a start be

made at once for the ranch?  Why had the cowboys suddenly become

so different?  Madeline answered as best she could; but her

replies were only conjecture, and modified to allay the fears of

her guests.  Helen was in a white glow of excitement.



Soon cowboys appeared riding barebacked horses, driving in others

and the burros.  Some of these horses were taken away and

evidently hidden in deep recesses between the crags.  The string

of burros were packed and sent off down the trail in charge of a

cowboy.  Nick Steele and Monty returned.  Then Stewart appeared,

clambering down the break between the cliffs.



His next move was to order all the baggage belonging to Madeline

and her guests taken up the cliff.  This was strenuous toil,

requiring the need of lassoes to haul up the effects.



"Get ready to climb," said Stewart, turning to Madelines party.



"Where?" asked Helen.



He waved his hand at the ascent to be made. Exclamations of

dismay followed his gesture.



"Mr. Stewart, is there danger?" asked Dorothy; and her voice

trembled.



This was the question Madeline had upon her lips to ask Stewart,

but she could not speak it.



"No, there's no danger," replied Stewart, "but we're taking

precautions we all agreed on as best."



Dorothy whispered that she believed Stewart lied. Castleton asked

another question, and then Harvey followed suit.  Mrs. Beck made

a timid query.



"Please keep quiet and do as you're told," said Stewart, bluntly.



At this juncture, when the last of the baggage was being hauled

up the cliff, Monty approached Madeline and removed his sombrero. 

His black face seemed the same, yet this was a vastly changed

Monty.



"Miss Hammond, I'm givin' notice I resign my job," he said.



"Monty!  What do you mean?  What does Nels mean now, when danger

threatens?"



"We jest quit.  Thet's all," replied Monty, tersely. He was stern

and somber; he could not stand still; his eyes roved everywhere.



Castleton jumped up from the log where he had been sitting, and

his face was very red.



"Mr. Price, does all this blooming fuss mean we are to be robbed

or attacked or abducted by a lot of ragamuffin guerrillas?"



"You've called the bet."



Dorothy turned a very pale face toward Monty.



"Mr. Price, you wouldn't--you couldn't desert us now? You and Mr.

Nels--"



"Desert you?" asked Monty, blankly.



"Yes, desert us.  Leave us when we may need you so much, with

something dreadful coming."



Monty uttered a short, hard laugh as he bent a strange look upon

the girl.



"Me an' Nels is purty much scared, an' we're goin' to slope. 

Miss Dorothy, bein' as we've rustled round so much; it sorta

hurts us to see nice young girls dragged off by the hair."



Dorothy uttered a little cry and then became hysterical. 

Castleton for once was fully aroused.



"By Gad!  You and your partner are a couple of blooming cowards. 

Where now is that courage you boasted of?"



Monty's dark face expressed extreme sarcasm.



"Dook, in my time I've seen some bright fellers, but you take the

cake.  It's most marvelous how bright you are. Figger'n' me an'

Nels so correct.  Say, Dook, if you don't git rustled off to

Mexico an' roped to a cactus-bush you'll hev a swell story fer

your English chums.  Bah Jove!  You'll tell 'em how you seen two

old-time gun-men run like scared jack-rabbits from a lot of

Greasers.  Like hell you will!  Unless you lie like the time you

told about proddin' the lion.  That there story allus--"



"Monty, shut up!" yelled Stewart, as he came hurriedly up.  Then

Monty slouched away, cursing to himself.



Madeline and Helen, assisted by Castleton, worked over Dorothy,

and with some difficulty quieted her.  Stewart passed several

times without noticing them, and Monty, who had been so

ridiculously eager to pay every little attention to Dorothy, did

not see her at all.  Rude it seemed; in Monty's ease more than

that.  Madeline hardly knew what to make of it.



Stewart directed cowboys to go to the head of the open place in

the cliff and let down lassoes.  Then, with little waste of

words, he urged the women toward this rough ladder of stones.



"We want to hide you," he said, when they demurred. "If the

guerrillas come we'll tell them you've all gone down to the

ranch.  If we have to fight you'll be safe up there."



Helen stepped boldly forward and let Stewart put the loop of a

lasso round her and tighten it.  He waved his hand to the cowboys

above.



"Just walk up, now," he directed Helen.



It proved to the watchers to be an easy, safe, and rapid means of

scaling the steep passage.  The men climbed up without

assistance.  Mrs. Beck, as usual, had hysteria; she half walked

and was half dragged up.  Stewart supported Dorothy with one arm,

while with the other he held to the lasso. Ambrose had to carry

Christine.  The Mexican women required no assistance.  Edith

Wayne and Madeline climbed last; and, once up, Madeline saw a

narrow bench, thick with shrubs, and overshadowed by huge,

leaning crags.  There were holes in the rock, and dark fissures

leading back.  It was a rough, wild place.  Tarpaulins and

bedding were then hauled up, and food and water.  The cowboys

spread comfortable beds in several of the caves, and told

Madeline and her friends to be as quiet as possible, not to make

a light, and to sleep dressed, ready for travel at a moment's

notice.



After the cowboys had gone down it was not a cheerful group left

there in the darkening twilight.  Castleton prevailed upon them

to eat.



"This is simply great," whispered Helen.



"Oh, it's awful!" moaned Dorothy.  "It's your fault, Helen.  You

prayed for something to happen."



"I believe it's a horrid trick those cowboys are playing," said

Mrs. Beck.



Madeline assured her friends that no trick was being played upon

them, and that she deplored the discomfort and distress, but felt

no real alarm.  She was more inclined to evasive kindness here

than to sincerity, for she had a decided uneasiness.  The swift

change in the manner and looks of her cowboys had been a shock to

her.  The last glance she had of Stewart's face, then stern,

almost sad, and haggard with worry, remained to augment her

foreboding.



Darkness appeared to drop swiftly down; the coyotes began their

haunting, mournful howls; the stars showed and grew brighter; the

wind moaned through the tips of the pines. Castleton was

restless.  He walked to and fro before the overhanging shelf of

rock, where his companions sat lamenting, and presently he went

out to the ledge of the bench.  The cowboys below had built a

fire, and the light from it rose in a huge, fan-shaped glow. 

Castleton's little figure stood out black against this light. 

Curious and anxious also, Madeline joined him and peered down

from the cliff.  The distance was short, and occasionally she

could distinguish a word spoken by the cowboys.  They were

unconcernedly cooking and eating.  She marked the absence of

Stewart, and mentioned it to Castleton. Silently Castleton

pointed almost straight down, and there in the gloom stood

Stewart, with the two stag-hounds at his feet.



Presently Nick Steele silenced the camp-fire circle by raising a

warning hand.  The cowboys bent their heads, listening.  Madeline

listened with all her might.  She heard one of the hounds whine,

then the faint beat of horse's hoofs. Nick spoke again and turned

to his supper, and the other men seemed to slacken in attention. 

The beat of hoofs grew louder, entered the grove, then the circle

of light.  The rider was Nels.  He dismounted, and the sound of

his low voice just reached Madeline.



"Gene, it's Nels.  Somethin' doin'," Madeline heard one of the

cowboys call, softly.



"Send him over," replied Stewart.



Nels stalked away from the fire.



"See here, Nels, the boys are all right, but I don't want them to

know everything about  this mix-up," said Stewart, as Nels came

up.  "Did you find the girl?"



Madeline guessed that Stewart referred to the Mexican girl

Bonita.



"No.  But I met"--Madeline did not catch the name--"an' he was

wild.  He was with a forest-ranger.  An' they said Pat Hawe had

trailed her an' was takin' her down under arrest."



Stewart muttered deep under his breath, evidently cursing.



"Wonder why he didn't come on up here?" he queried, presently. 

"He can see a trail."



"Wal, Gene, Pat knowed you was here all right, fer thet ranger

said Pat hed wind of the guerrillas, an' Pat said if Don Carlos

didn't kill you--which he hoped he'd do--then it 'd be time

enough to put you in jail when you come down."



"He's dead set to arrest me, Nels."



"An' he'll do it, like the old lady who kept tavern out West. 

Gene, the reason thet red-faced coyote didn't trail you up here

is because he's scared.  He allus was scared of you. But I reckon

he's shore scared to death of me an' Monty."



"Well, we'll take Pat in his turn.  The thing now is, when will

that Greaser stalk us, and what'll we do when he comes?"



"My boy, there's only one way to handle a Greaser.  I shore told

you thet.  He means rough toward us.  He'll come smilin' up, all

soci'ble like, insinuatin' an' sweeter 'n a woman.  But he's

treacherous; he's wuss than an Indian.  An', Gene, we know for a

positive fact how his gang hev been operatin' between these hills

an' Agua Prieta.  They're no nervy gang of outlaws like we used

to hev.  But they're plumb bad.  They've raided and murdered

through the San Luis Pass an' Guadalupe Canon.  They've murdered

women, an' wuss than thet, both north an' south of Agua Prieta. 

Mebbe the U. S. cavalry don't know it, an' the good old States;

but we, you an' me an' Monty an' Nick, we know it.  We know jest

about what thet rebel war down there amounts to.  It's guerrilla

war, an' shore some harvest-time fer a lot of cheap thieves an'

outcasts."



Oh, you're right, Nels.  I'm not disputing that," replied

Stewart.  "If it wasn't for Miss Hammond and the other women, I'd

rather enjoy seeing you and Monty open up on that bunch.  I'm

thinking I'd be glad to meet Don Carlos.  But Miss Hammond!  Why,

Nels, such a woman as she is would never recover from the sight

of real gun-play, let alone any stunts with a rope.  These

Eastern women are different.  I'm not belittling our Western

women.  It's in the blood.  Miss Hammond is--is--"



"Shore she is," interrupted Nels; "but she's got a damn sight

more spunk than you think she has, Gene Stewart.  I'm no

thick-skulled cow.  I'd hate somethin' powerful to hev Miss

Hammond see any rough work, let alone me an' Monty startin'

somethin'.  An' me an' Monty'll stick to you, Gene, as long as

seems reasonable.  Mind, ole feller, beggin' your pardon, you're

shore stuck on Miss Hammond, an' over-tender not to hurt her

feelin's or make her sick by lettin' some blood.  We're in bad

here, an' mebbe we'll hev to fight.  Sabe, senor?  Wal, we do you

can jest gamble thet Miss Hammond'll be game.  An' I'll bet you a

million pesos thet if you got goin' onct, an' she seen you as

I've seen you--wal, I know what she'd think of you.  This old

world 'ain't changed much.  Some women may be white-skinned an'

soft-eyed an' sweet-voiced an' high-souled, but they all like to

see a man!  Gene, here's your game.  Let Don Carlos come along. 

Be civil.  If he an' his gang are hungry, feed 'em.  Take even a

little overbearin' Greaser talk. Be blind if he wants his gang to

steal somethin'.  Let him think the women hev mosied down to the

ranch.  But if he says you're lyin'--if he as much as looks round

to see the women--jest jump him same as you jumped Pat Hawe.  Me

an' Monty'll hang back fer thet, an' if your strong bluff don't

go through, if the Don's gang even thinks of flashin' guns, then

we'll open up.  An' all I got to say is if them Greasers stand

fer real gun-play they'll be the fust I ever seen."



"Nels, there are white men in that gang," said Stewart.



"Shore.  But me an' Monty'll be thinkin' of thet.  If they start

anythin' it'll hev to be shore quick."



"All right, Nels, old friend, and thanks," replied Stewart.  Nels

returned to the camp-fire, and Stewart resumed his silent guard.



Madeline led Castleton away from the brink of the wall.



"By Jove!  Cowboys are bloom~ng strange folk!" he exclaimed. 

"They are not what they pretend to be."



"Indeed, you are right," replied Madeline.  "I cannot understand

them.  Come, let us tell the others that Nels and Monty were only

talking and do not intend to leave us. Dorothy, at least, will be

less frightened if she knows."



Dorothy was somewhat comforted.  The others, however, complained

of the cowboys' singular behavior.  More than once the idea was

advanced that an elaborate trick had been concocted.  Upon

general discussion this idea gained ground. Madeline did not

combat it, because she saw it tended to a less perturbed

condition of mind among her guests.  Castleton for once proved

that he was not absolutely obtuse, and helped along the idea.



They sat talking in low voices until a late hour.  The incident

now began to take on the nature of Helen's long-yearned-for

adventure.  Some of the party even grew merry in a subdued way. 

Then, gradually, one by one they tired and went to bed.  Helen

vowed she could not sleep in a place where there were bats and

crawling things.  Madeline fancied, however, that they all went

to sleep while she lay wide-eyed, staring up at the black bulge

of overhanging rock and beyond the starry sky.



To keep from thinking of Stewart and the burning anger he had

caused her to feel for herself, Madeline tried to keep her mind

on other things.  But thought of him recurred, and each time

there was a hot commotion in her breast hard to stifle. 

Intelligent reasoning seemed out of her power.  In the daylight

it had been possible for her to be oblivious to Stewart's deceit

after the moment of its realization.  At night, however, in the

strange silence and hovering shadows of gloom, with the speaking

stars seeming to call to her, with the moan of the wind in the

pines, and the melancholy mourn of coyotes in the distance, she

was not able to govern her thought and emotion.  The day was

practical, cold; the night was strange and tense.  In the

darkness she had fancies wholly unknown to her in the bright

light of the sun.  She battled with a haunting thought.  She had

inadvertently heard Nels's conversation with Stewart; she had

listened, hoping to hear some good news or to hear the worst; she

had learned both, and, moreover, enlightenment on one point of

Stewart's complex motives.  He wished to spare her any sight that

might offend, frighten, or disgust her.  Yet this Stewart, who

showed a fineness of feeling that might have been wanting even in

Boyd Harvey, maintained a secret rendezvous with that pretty,

abandoned Bonita.  Here always the hot shame, like a live,

stinging, internal fire, abruptly ended Madeline's thought.  It

was intolerable, and it was the more so because she could neither

control nor understand it.  The hours wore on, and at length, as

the stars began to pale and there was no sound whatever, she fell

asleep.



She was called out of her slumber.  Day had broken bright and

cool.  The sun was still below the eastern crags. Ambrose, with

several other cowboys, had brought up buckets of spring-water,

and hot coffee and cakes.  Madeline's party appeared to be none

the worse for the night's experience. Indeed, the meager

breakfast might have been as merrily partaken of as it was

hungrily had not Ambrose enjoined silence.



"They're expectin' company down below," he said.



This information and the summary manner in which the cowboys soon

led the party higher up among the ruined shelves of rock caused a

recurrence of anxiety.  Madeline insisted on not going beyond a

projection of cliff from which she could see directly down into

the camp.  As the vantage-point was one affording concealment,

Ambrose consented, but he placed the frightened Christine near

Madeline and remained there himself.



"Ambrose, do you really think the guerrillas will come?" asked

Madeline.



"Sure.  We know.  Nels just rode in and said they were on their

way up.  Miss Hammond, can I trust you?  You won't let out a

squeal if there's a fight down there?  Stewart told me to hide

you out of sight or keep you from lookin'."



"I promise not to make any noise," replied Madeline. Madeline

arranged her coat so that she could lie upon it, and settled down

to wait developments.  There came a slight rattling of stones in

the rear.  She turned to see Helen sliding down a bank with a

perplexed and troubled cowboy. Helen came stooping low to where

Madeline lay and said: "I am going to see what happens, if I die

in the attempt!  I can stand it if you can.  She was pale and

big-eyed.  Ambrose promptly swore at the cowboy who had let her

get away from him.  "Take a half-hitch on her yourself an' see

where you end up," replied the fellow, and disappeared in the

jumble of rocks.  Ambrose, finding words useless, sternly and

heroically prepared to carry Helen back to the others.  He laid

hold of her.  In a fury, with eyes blazing, Helen whispered:



"Let go of me!  Majesty, what does this fool mean?"



Madeline laughed.  She knew Helen, and had marked the whisper,

when ordinarily Helen would have spoken imperiously, and not low. 

Madeline explained to her the exigency of the situation.  "I

might run, but I'll never scream," said Helen. With that Ambrose

had to be content to let her stay.  However, he found her a place

somewhat farther back from Madeline's position, where he said

there was less danger of her being seen.  Then he sternly bound

her to silence, tarried a moment to comfort Christine, and

returned to where Madeline lay concealed.  He had been there

scarcely a moment when he whispered:



"I hear hosses.  The guerrillas are comin'."



Madeline's hiding-place was well protected from possible

discovery from below.  She could peep over a kind of parapet,

through an opening in the tips of the pines that reached up to

the cliff, and obtain a commanding view of the camp circle and

its immediate surroundings.  She could not, however, see far

either to right or left of the camp, owing to the obstructing

foliage.  Presently the sound of horses' hoofs quickened the beat

of her pulse and caused her to turn keener gaze upon the cowboys

below.



Although she had some inkling of the course Stewart and his men

were to pursue, she was not by any means prepared for the

indifference she saw.  Frank was asleep, or pretended to be. 

Three cowboys were lazily and unconcernedly attending to

camp-fire duties, such as baking biscuits, watching the ovens,

and washing tins and pots.  The elaborate set of aluminum plates,

cups, etc., together with the other camp fixtures that had done

service for Madeline's party, had disappeared.  Nick Steele sat

with his back to a log, smoking his pipe.  Another cowboy had

just brought the horses closer into camp, where they stood

waiting to be saddled.  Nels appeared to be fussing over a pack. 

Stewart was rolling a cigarette.  Monty had apparently nothing to

do for the present except whistle, which he was doing much more

loudly than melodiously.  The whole ensemble gave an impression

of careless indifference.



The sound of horses' hoofs grew louder and slowed its beat.  One

of the cowboys pointed down the trail, toward which several of

his comrades turned their heads for a moment, then went on with

their occupations.



Presently a shaggy, dusty horse bearing a lean, ragged, dark

rider rode into camp and halted.  Another followed, and another. 

Horses with Mexican riders came in single file and stopped behind

the leader.



The cowboys looked up, and the guerrillas looked down. "Buenos

dias, senor," ceremoniously said the foremost guerrilla.



By straining her ears Madeline heard that voice, and she

recognized it as belonging to Don Carlos.  His graceful bow to

Stewart was also familiar.  Otherwise she would never have

recognized the former elegant vaquero in this uncouth, roughly

dressed Mexican.



Stewart answered the greeting in Spanish, and, waving his hand

toward the camp-fire, added in English, "Get down and eat."



The guerrillas were anything but slow in complying. They crowded

to the fire, then spread in a little circle and squatted upon the

ground, laying their weapons beside them.  In appearance they

tallied with the band of guerrillas that had carried Madeline up

into the foothills, only this band was larger and better armed. 

The men, moreover, were just as hungry and as wild and beggarly. 

The cowboys were not cordial in their reception of this visit,

but they were hospitable. The law of the desert had always been

to give food and drink to wayfaring men, whether lost or hunted

or hunting.



"There's twenty-three in that outfit," whispered Ambrose,

"includin' four white men.  Pretty rummy outfit."



"They appear to be friendly enough," whispered Madeline.



"Things down there ain't what they seem," replied Ambrose.



"Ambrose, tell me--explain to me.  This is my opportunity.  As

long as you will let me watch them, please let me know the--the

real thing."



"Sure.  But recollect, Miss Hammond, that Gene'll give it to me

good if he ever knows I let you look and told you what's what. 

Well, decent-like Gene is seem' them poor devils get a square

meal.  They're only a lot of calf-thieves in this country. 

Across the border they're bandits, some of them, the others just

riffraff outlaws.  That rebel bluff doesn't go down with us.  I'd

have to see first before I'd believe them Greasers would fight. 

They're a lot of hard-ridin' thieves, and they'd steal a fellow's

blanket or tobacco.  Gene thinks they're after you ladies--to

carry you off.  But Gene-- Oh, Gene's some highfalutin in his

ideas lately.  Most of us boys think the guerrillas are out to

rob--that's all."



Whatever might have been the secret motive of Don Carlos and his

men, they did not allow it to interfere with a hearty

appreciation of a generous amount of food.  Plainly, each

individual ate all that he was able to eat at the time. They

jabbered like a flock of parrots; some were even merry, in a kind

of wild way.  Then, as each and every one began to roll and smoke

the inevitable cigarette of the Mexican, there was a subtle

change in manner.  They smoked and looked about the camp, off

into the woods, up at the crags, and back at the leisurely

cowboys.  They had the air of men waiting for something.



"Senor," began Don Carlos, addressing Stewart.  As he spoke he

swept his sombrero to indicate the camp circle.



Madeline could not distinguish his words, but his gesture plainly

indicated a question in regard to the rest of the camping party. 

Stewart's reply and the wave of his hand down the trail meant

that his party had gone home.  Stewart turned to some task, and

the guerrilla leader quietly smoked. He looked cunning and

thoughtful.  His men gradually began to manifest a restlessness,

noticeable in the absence of former languor and slow puffing of

cigarette smoke.  Presently a big-boned man with a bullet head

and a blistered red face of evil coarseness got up and threw away

his cigarette.  He was an American.



"Hey, cull," he called in loud voice, "ain't ye goin' to cough up

a drink?"



"My boys don't carry liquor on the trail," replied Stewart.  He

turned now to face the guerrillas.



"Haw, haw!  I heerd over in Rodeo thet ye was gittin' to be shore

some fer temperance," said this fellow.  "I hate to drink water,

but I guess I've gotter do it."



He went to the spring, sprawled down to drink, and all of a

sudden he thrust his arm down in the water to bring forth a

basket.  The cowboys in the hurry of packing had neglected to

remove this basket; and it contained bottles of wine and liquors

for Madeline's guests.  They had been submerged in the spring to

keep them cold.  The guerrilla fumbled with the lid, opened it,

and then got up, uttering a loud roar of delight.



Stewart made an almost imperceptible motion, as if to leap

forward; but he checked the impulse, and after a quick glance at

Nels he said to the guerrilla:



"Guess my party forgot that.  You're welcome to it." Like bees

the guerrillas swarmed around the lucky finder of the bottles. 

There was a babel of voices.  The drink did not last long, and it

served only to liberate the spirit of recklessness.  The several

white outlaws began to prowl around the camp; some of the

Mexicans did likewise; others waited, showing by their

ill-concealed expectancy the nature of their thoughts.



It was the demeanor of Stewart and his comrades that puzzled

Madeline.  Apparently they felt no anxiety or even particular

interest.  Don Carlos, who had been covertly watching them, now

made his scrutiny open, even aggressive.  He looked from Stewart

to Nels and Monty, and then to the other cowboys.  While some of

his men prowled around the others watched him, and the waiting

attitude had taken on something sinister.  The guerrilla leader

seemed undecided, but not in any sense puzzled.  When he turned

his cunning face upon Nels and Monty he had the manner of a man

in whom decision was lacking.



In her growing excitement Madeline had not clearly heard

Ambrose's low whispers and she made an effort to distract some of

her attention from those below to the cowboy crouching beside

her.



The quality, the note of Ambrose's whisper had changed.  It had a

slight sibilant sound.



"Don't be mad if sudden-like I clap my hands over your eyes, Miss

Hammond," he was saying.  "Somethin's brewin' below. I never seen

Gene so cool.  That's a dangerous sign in him. And look, see how

the boys are workin' together!  Oh, it's slow and accident-like,

but I know it's sure not accident.  That foxy Greaser knows, too. 

But maybe his men don't.  If they are wise they haven't sense

enough to care.  The Don, though--he's worried.  He's not payin'

so much attention to Gene, either. It's Nels and Monty he's

watchin'.  And well he need do it! There, Nick and Frank have

settled down on that log with Booly. They don't seem to be

packin' guns.  But look how heavy their vests hang.  A gun in

each side!  Those boys can pull a gun and flop over that log

quicker than you can think.  Do you notice how Nels and Monty and

Gene are square between them guerrillas and the trail up here? 

It doesn't seem on purpose, but it is. Look at Nels and Monty. 

How quiet they are confabbin' together, payin' no attention to

the guerrillas.  I see Monty look at Gene, then I see Nels look

at Gene.  Well, it's up to Gene.  And they're goin' to back him. 

I reckon, Miss Hammond, there'd be dead Greasers round that camp

long ago if Nels and Monty were foot-loose.  They're beholdin' to

Gene.  That's plain.  And, Lord! how it tickles me to watch them! 

Both packin' two forty-fives, butts swingin' clear.  There's

twenty-four shots in them four guns.  And there's twenty-three

guerrillas.  If Nels and Monty ever throw guns at that close

range, why, before you'd know what was up there'd be a pile of

Greasers.  There!  Stewart said something to the Don.  I wonder

what.  I'll gamble it was something to get the Don's outfit all

close together.  Sure!  Greasers have no sense.  But them white

guerrillas, they're lookin' some dubious.  Whatever's comin' off

will come soon, you can bet.  I wish I was down there.  But maybe

it won't come to a scrap.  Stewart's set on avoidin' that.  He's

a wonderful chap to get his way.  Lord, though, I'd like to see

him go after that overbearin' Greaser!  See! the Don can't stand

prosperity.  All this strange behavior of cowboys is beyond his

pulque-soaked brains.  Then he's a Greaser.  If Gene doesn't

knock him on the head presently he'll begin to get over his

scare, even of Nels and Monty.  But Gene'll pick out the right

time.  And I'm gettin' nervous.  I want somethin' to start. 

Never saw Nels in but one fight, then he just shot a Greaser's

arm off for tryin' to draw on him. But I've heard all about him. 

And Monty!  Monty's the real old-fashioned gun-man.  Why, none of

them stories, them lies he told to entertain the Englishman, was

a marker to what Monty has done.  What I don't understand is how

Monty keeps so quiet and easy and peaceful-like.  That's not his

way, with such an outfit lookin' for trouble.  O-ha!  Now for the

grand bluff. Looks like no fight at all!"



The guerrilla leader had ceased his restless steps and glances,

and turned to Stewart with something of bold resolution in his

aspect.



"Gracias, senor," he said.  "Adios."  He swept his sombrero in

the direction of the trail leading down the mountain to the

ranch; and as he completed the gesture a smile, crafty and

jeering, crossed his swarthy face.



Ambrose whispered so low that Madeline scarcely heard him.  "If

the Greaser goes that way he'll find our horses and get wise to

the trick.  Oh, he's wise now!  But I'll gamble he never even

starts on that trail."



Neither hurriedly nor guardedly Stewart rose out of his leaning

posture and took a couple of long strides toward Don Carlos.



"Go back the way you came," he fairly yelled; and his voice had

the ring of a bugle.



Ambrose nudged Madeline; his whisper was tense and rapid: "Don't

miss nothin'.  Gene's called him.  Whatever's comin' off will be

here quick as lightnin'.  See!  I guess maybe that Greaser don't

savvy good U. S. lingo.  Look at that dirty yaller face turn

green.  Put one eye on Nels and Monty! That's great--just to see

'em.  Just as quiet and easy.  But oh, the difference!  Bent and

stiff--that means every muscle is like a rawhide riata.  They're

watchin' with eyes that can see the workin's of them Greasers'

minds.  Now there ain't a hoss-hair between them Greasers and

hell!"



Don Carlos gave Stewart one long malignant stare; then he threw

back his head, swept up the sombrero, and his evil smile showed

gleaming teeth.



"Senor--" he began.



With magnificent bound Stewart was upon him.  The guerrilla's cry

was throttled in his throat.  A fierce wrestling ensued, too

swift to see clearly; then heavy, sodden blows, and Don Carlos

was beaten to the ground.  Stewart leaped back.  Then, crouching

with his hands on the butts of guns at his hips, he yelled, he

thundered at the guerrillas.  He had been quicker than a panther,

and now his voice was so terrible that it curdled Madeline's

blood, and the menace of deadly violence in his crouching

position made her shut her eyes.  But she had to open them.  In

that single instant Nels and Monty had leaped to Stewart's side. 

Both were bent down, with hands on the butts of guns at their

hips.  Nels's piercing yell seemed to divide Monty's roar of

rage.  Then they ceased, and echoes clapped from the crags.  The

silence of those three men crouching like tigers about to leap

was more menacing than the nerve-racking yells.



Then the guerrillas wavered and broke and ran for their horses. 

Don Carlos rolled over, rose, and staggered away, to be helped

upon his mount.  He looked back, his pale and bloody face that of

a thwarted demon.  The whole band got into action and were gone

in a moment.



"I knew it," declared Ambrose.  "Never seen a Greaser who could

face gun-play.  That was some warm.  And Monty Price never

flashed a gun!  He'll never get over that.  I reckon, Miss

Harnmond, we're some lucky to avoid trouble.  Gene had his way,

as you seen.  We'll be makin' tracks for the ranch in about two

shakes."



"Why?" whispered Madeline, breathlessly.  She became conscious

that she was weak and shaken.



"Because the guerrillas sure will get their nerve back, and come

sneakin' on our trail or try to head us off by ambushin',"

replied Ambrose.  "That's their way.  Otherwise three cowboys

couldn't bluff a whole gang like that.  Gene knows the nature of

Greasers.  They're white-livered.  But I reckon we're in more

danger now than before, unless we get a good start down the

mountain.  There!  Gene's callin'.  Come! Hurry!"



Helen had slipped down from her vantage-point, and therefore had

not seen the last act in that little camp-fire drama.  It seemed,

however, that her desire for excitement was satisfied, for her

face was pale and she trembled when she asked if the guerrillas

were gone.



"I didn't see the finish, but those horrible yells were enough

for me."



Ambrose hurried the three women over the rough rocks, down the

cliff.  The cowboys below were saddling horses in haste. 

Evidently all the horses had been brought out of hiding. 

Swiftly, with regard only for life and limb, Madeline, Helen, and

Christine were lowered by lassoes and half carried down to the

level.  By the time they were safely down the other members of

the party appeared on the cliff above.  They were in excellent

spirits, appearing to treat the matter as a huge joke.



Ambrose put Christine on a horse and rode away through the pines;

Frankie Slade did likewise with Helen.  Stewart led Madeline's

horse up to her, helped her to mount, and spoke one stern word,

"Wait!"  Then as fast as one of the women reached the level she

was put upon a horse and taken away by a cowboy escort.  Few

words were spoken.  Haste seemed to be the great essential.  The

horses were urged, and, once in the trail, spurred and led into a

swift trot.  One cowboy drove up four pack-horses, and these were

hurriedly loaded with the party's baggage.  Castleton and his

companions mounted, and galloped off to catch the others in the

lead.  This left Madeline behind with Stewart and Nels and Monty.



"They're goin' to switch off at the holler thet heads near the

trail a few miles down," Nels was saying, as he tightened his

saddle-girth.  "Thet holler heads into a big canon.  Once in

thet, it'll be every man fer hisself.  I reckon there won't be

anythin' wuss than a rough ride."



Nels smiled reassuringly at Madeline, but he did not speak to

her.  Monty took her canteen and filled it at the spring and hung

it over the pommel of her saddle.  He put a couple of biscuits in

the saddle-bag.



"Don't fergit to take a drink an' a bite as you're ridin' along,"

he said.  "An' don't worry, Miss Majesty. Stewart'll be with you,

an' me an' Nels hangin' on the back-trail."



His somber and sullen face did not change in its strange

intensity, but the look in his eyes Madeline felt she would never

forget.  Left alone with these three men, now stripped of all

pretense, she realized how fortune had favored her and what peril

still hung in the balance.  Stewart swung astride his big black,

spurred him, and whistled.  At the whistle Majesty jumped, and

with swift canter followed Stewart.  Madeline looked back to see

Nels already up and Monty handing him a rifle.  Then the pines

hid her view.



Once in the trail, Stewart's horse broke into a gallop.  Majesty

changed his gait and kept at the black's heels.  Stewart called

back a warning.  The low, wide-spreading branches of trees might

brush Madeline out of the saddle.  Fast riding through the forest

along a crooked, obstructed trail called forth all her alertness. 

Likewise the stirring of her blood, always susceptible to the

spirit and motion of a ride, let alone one of peril, now began to

throb and burn away the worry, the dread, the coldness that had

weighted her down.



Before long Stewart wheeled at right angles off the trail and

entered a hollow between two low bluffs.  Madeline saw tracks in

the open patches of ground.  Here Stewart's horse took to a brisk

walk.  The hollow deepened, narrowed, became rocky, full of logs

and brush.  Madeline exerted all her keenness, and needed it, to

keep close to Stewart.  She did not think of him, nor her own

safety, but of keeping Majesty close in the tracks of the black,

of eluding the sharp spikes in the dead brush, of avoiding the

treacherous loose stones.



At last Madeline was brought to a dead halt by Stewart and his

horse blocking the trail.  Looking up, she saw they were at the

head of a canon that yawned beneath and widened its gray-walled,

green-patched slopes down to a black forest of fir.  The drab

monotony of the foothills made contrast below the forest, and

away in the distance, rosy and smoky, lay the desert.  Retracting

her gaze, Madeline saw pack-horses cross an open space a mile

below, and she thought she saw the stag-hounds.  Stewart's dark

eyes searched the slopes high up along the craggy escarpments. 

Then he put the black to the descent.



If there had been a trail left by the leading cowboys, Stewart

did not follow it.  He led off to the right, zigzagging an

intricate course through the roughest ground Madeline had ever

ridden over.  He crashed through cedars, threaded a tortuous way

among boulders, made his horse slide down slanting banks of soft

earth, picked a slow and cautious progress across weathered

slopes of loose rock.  Madeline followed, finding in this ride a

tax on strength and judgment.  On an ordinary horse she never

could have kept in Stewart's trail.  It was dust and heat, a

parching throat, that caused Madeline to think of time; and she

was amazed to see the sun sloping to the west.  Stewart never

stopped; he never looked back; he never spoke.  He must have

heard the horse close behind him.  Madeline remembered Monty's

advice about drinking and eating as she rode along. The worst of

that rough travel came at the bottom of the canon. Dead cedars

and brush and logs were easy to pass compared with the miles, it

seemed, of loose boulders.  The horses slipped and stumbled. 

Stewart proceeded here with exceeding care.  At last, when the

canon opened into a level forest of firs, the sun was setting red

in the west.



Stewart quickened the gait of his horse.  After a mile or so of

easy travel the ground again began to fall decidedly, sloping in

numerous ridges, with draws between.  Soon night shadowed the

deeper gullies.  Madeline was refreshed by the cooling of the

air.



Stewart traveled slowly now.  The barks of coyotes seemed to

startle him.  Often he stopped to listen.  And during one of

those intervals the silence was broken by sharp rifle-shots. 

Madeline could not tell whether they were near or far, to right

or left, behind or before.  Evidently Stewart was both alarmed

and baffled.  He dismounted.  He went cautiously forward to

listen.  Madeline fancied she heard a cry, low and far away.  It

was only that of a coyote, she convinced herself, yet it was so

wailing, so human, that she shuddered.  Stewart came back.  He

slipped the bridles of both horses, and he led them.  Every few

paces he stopped to listen.  He changed his direction several

times, and the last time he got among rough, rocky ridges.  The

iron shoes of the horses cracked on the rocks.  That sound must

have penetrated far into the forest. It perturbed Stewart, for he

searched for softer ground. Meanwhile the shadows merged into

darkness.  The stars shone. The wind rose.  Madeline believed

hours passed.



Stewart halted again.  In the gloom Madeline discerned a log

cabin, and beyond it pear-pointed dark trees piercing the

sky-line.  She could just make out Stewart's tall form as he

leaned against his horse.  Either he was listening or debating

what to do--perhaps both.  Presently he went inside the cabin.

Madeline heard the scratching of a match; then she saw a faint

light.  The cabin appeared to be deserted.  Probably it was one

of the many habitations belonging to prospectors and foresters

who lived in the mountains.  Stewart came out again.  He walked

around the horses, out into the gloom, then back to Madeline. For

a long moment he stood as still as a statue and listened. Then

she heard him mutter, "If we have to start quick I can ride

bareback."  With that he took the saddle and blanket off his

horse and carried them into the cabin.



"Get off," he said, in a low voice, as he stepped out of the

door.



He helped her down and led her inside, where again he struck a

match.  Madeline caught a glimpse of a rude fireplace and

rough-hewn logs.  Stewart's blanket and saddle lay on the

hard-packed earthen floor.



"Rest a little," he said.  "I'm going into the woods a piece to

listen.  Gone only a minute or so."



Madeline had to feel round in the dark to locate the saddle and

blanket.  When she lay down it was with a grateful sense of ease

and relief.  As her body rested, however, her mind became the old

thronging maze for sensation and thought. All day she had

attended to the alert business of helping her horse.  Now, what

had already happened, the night, the silence, the proximity of

Stewart and his strange, stern caution, the possible happenings

to her friends--all claimed their due share of her feeling.  She

went over them all with lightning swiftness of thought.  She

believed, and she was sure Stewart believed, that her friends,

owing to their quicker start down the mountain, had not been

headed off in their travel by any of the things which had delayed

Stewart.  This conviction lifted the suddenly returning dread

from her breast; and as for herself, somehow she had no fear. 

But she could not sleep; she did not try to.



Stewart's soft steps sounded outside.  His dark form loomed in

the door.  As he sat down Madeline heard the thump of a gun that

he laid beside him on the sill; then the thump of another as he

put that down, too.  The sounds thrilled her. Stewart's wide

shoulders filled the door; his finely shaped head and strong,

stern profile showed clearly in outline against the sky; the wind

waved his hair.  He turned his ear to that wind and listened. 

Motionless he sat for what to her seemed hours.



Then the stirring memory of the day's adventure, the feeling of

the beauty of the night, and a strange, deep-seated, sweetly

vague consciousness of happiness portending, were all burned out

in hot, pressing pain at the remembrance of Stewart's disgrace in

her eyes.  Something had changed within her so that what had been

anger at herself was sorrow for him. He was such a splendid man. 

She could not feel the same; she knew her debt to him, yet she

could not thank him, could not speak to him.  She fought an

unintelligible bitterness.



Then she rested with closed eyes, and time seemed neither short

nor long.  When Stewart called her she opened her eyes to see the

gray of dawn.  She rose and stepped outside. The horses whinnied. 

In a moment she was in the saddle, aware of cramped muscles and a

weariness of limbs.  Stewart led off at a sharp trot into the fir

forest.  They came to a trail into which be turned.  The horses

traveled steadily; the descent grew less steep; the firs thinned

out; the gray gloom brightened.



When Madeline rode out of the firs the sun had arisen and the

foothills rolled beneath her; and at their edge, where the gray

of valley began, she saw a dark patch that she knew was the

ranch-house.

