





XIV Bandits



When Madeline and her party recovered composure they sat up to

watch the finish of the match.  It came with spectacular

suddenness.  A sharp yell pealed out, and all the cowboys turned

attentively in its direction.  A big black horse had surmounted

the rim of the mesa and was just breaking into a run.  His rider

yelled sharply to the cowboys.  They wheeled to dash toward their

grazing horses.



"That's Stewart.  There is something wrong," said Madeline, in

alarm.



Castleton stared.  The other men exclaimed uneasily. The women

sought Madeline's face with anxious eyes.



The black got into his stride and bore swiftly down upon them.



"Oh, look at that horse run!" cried Helen.  "Look at that fellow

ride!"



Helen was not alone in her admiration, for Madeline divided her

emotions between growing alarm of some danger menacing and a

thrill and quickening of pulse-beat that tingled over her

whenever she saw Stewart in violent action.  No action of his was

any longer insignificant, but violent action meant so much.  It

might mean anything.  For one moment she remembered Stillwell and

all his talk about fun, and plots, and tricks to amuse her guest. 

Then she discountenanced the thought.  Stewart might lend himself

to a little fun, but he cared too much for a horse to run him at

that speed unless there was imperious need.  That alone sufficed

to answer Madeline's questioning curiosity.  And her alarm

mounted to fear not so much for herself as for her guests.  But

what danger could there be?  She could think of nothing except

the guerrillas.



Whatever threatened, it would be met and checked by this man

Stewart, who was thundering up on his fleet horse; and as he

neared her, so that she could see the dark gleam of face and

eyes, she had a strange feeling of trust in her dependence upon

him.



The big black was so close to Madeline and her friends that when

Stewart pulled him the dust and sand kicked up by his pounding

hoofs flew in their faces.



"Oh, Stewart, what is it?" cried Madeline.



"Guess I scared you, Miss Hammond," he replied.  "But I'm pressed

for time.  There's a gang of bandits hiding on the ranch, most

likely in a deserted hut.  They held up a train near Agua Prieta. 

Pat Hawe is with the posse that's trailing them, and you know Pat

has no use for us.  I'm afraid it wouldn't be pleasant for you or

your guests to meet either the posse or the bandits."



"I fancy not," said Madeline, considerably relieved. "We'll hurry

back to the house."



They exchanged no more speech at the moment, and Madeline's

guests were silent.  Perhaps Stewart's actions and looks belied

his calm words.  His piercing eyes roved round the rim of the

mesa, and his face was as hard and stern as chiseled bronze.



Monty and Nick came galloping up, each leading several horses by

the bridles.  Nels appeared behind them with Majesty, and he was

having trouble with the roan.  Madeline observed that all the

other cowboys had disappeared.



One sharp word from Stewart calmed Madeline's horse; the other

horses, however, were frightened and not inclined to stand.  The

men mounted without trouble, and likewise Madeline and Florence. 

But Edith Wayne and Mrs. Beck, being nervous and almost helpless,

were with difficulty gotten into the saddle.



"Beg pardon, but I'm pressed for time," said Stewart, coolly, as

with iron arm he forced Dorothy's horse almost to its knees. 

Dorothy, who was active and plucky, climbed astride; and when

Stewart loosed his hold on bit and mane the horse doubled up and

began to buck.  Dorothy screamed as she shot into the air. 

Stewart, as quick as the horse, leaped forward and caught Dorothy

in his arms.  She had slipped head downward and, had he not

caught her, would have had a serious fall.  Stewart, handling her

as if she were a child, turned her right side up to set her upon

her feet.  Dorothy evidently thought only of the spectacle she

presented, and made startled motions to readjust her

riding-habit.  It was no time to laugh, though Madeline felt as

if she wanted to.  Besides, it was impossible to be anything but

sober with Stewart in violent mood.  For he had jumped at

Dorothy's stubborn mount.  All cowboys were masters of horses. 

It was wonderful to see him conquer the vicious animal.  He was

cruel, perhaps, yet it was from necessity.  When, presently, he

led the horse back to Dorothy she mounted without further

trouble.  Meanwhile, Nels and Nick had lifted Helen into her

saddle.



"We'll take the side trail," said Stewart, shortly, as he swung

upon the big black.  Then he led the way, and the other cowboys

trotted in the rear.



It was only a short distance to the rim of the mesa, and when

Madeline saw the steep trail, narrow and choked with weathered

stone, she felt that her guests would certainly flinch.



"That's a jolly bad course," observed Castleton.



The women appeared to be speechless.



Stewart checked his horse at the deep cut where the trail started

down.



"Boys, drop over, and go slow," he said, dismounting. "Flo, you

follow.  Now, ladies, let your horses loose and hold on.  Lean

forward and hang to the pommel.  It looks bad.  But the horses

are used to such trails."



Helen followed closely after Florence; Mrs. Beck went next, and

then Edith Wayne.  Dorothy's horse balked.



"I'm not so--so frightened," said Dorothy.  "If only he would

behave!"



She began to urge him into the trail, making him rear, when

Stewart grasped the bit and jerked the horse down.



"Put your foot in my stirrup," said Stewart.  "We can't waste

time."



He lifted her upon his horse and started him down over the rim.



"Go on, Miss Hammond.  I'll have to lead this nag down. It'll

save time."



Then Madeline attended to the business of getting down herself. 

It was a loose trail.  The weathered slopes seemed to slide under

the feet of the horses.  Dust-clouds formed; rocks rolled and

rattled down; cactus spikes tore at horse and rider. Mrs. Beck

broke into laughter, and there was a note in it that suggested

hysteria.  Once or twice Dorothy murmured plaintively.  Half the

time Madeline could not distinguish those ahead through the

yellow dust.  It was dry and made her cough.  The horses snorted. 

She heared Stewart close behind, starting little avalanches that

kept rolling on Majesty's fetlocks.  She feared his legs might he

cut or bruised, for some of the stones cracked by and went

rattling down the slope. At length the clouds of dust thinned and

Madeline saw the others before her ride out upon a level.  Soon

she was down, and Stewart also.



Here there was a delay, occasioned by Stewart changing Dorothy

from his horse to her own.  This struck Madeline as being

singular, and made her thoughtful.  In fact, the alert, quiet

manner of all the cowboys was not reassuring.  As they resumed

the ride it was noticeable that Nels and Nick were far in

advance, Monty stayed far in the rear, and Stewart rode with the

party.  Madeline heard Boyd Harvey ask Stewart if lawlessness

such as he had mentioned was not unusual.  Stewart replied that,

except for occasional deeds of outlawry such as might break out

in any isolated section of the country, there had been peace and

quiet along the border for years.  It was the Mexican revolution

that had revived wild times, with all the attendant raids and

holdups and gun-packing.  Madeline knew that they were really

being escorted home under armed guard.



When they rounded the head of the mesa, bringing into view the

ranch-house and the valley, Madeline saw dust or smoke hovering

over a hut upon the outskirts of the Mexican quarters. As the sun

had set and the light was fading, she could not distinguish which

it was.  Then Stewart set a fast pace for the house.  In a few

minutes the party was in the yard, ready and willing to dismount.



Stillwell appeared, ostensibly cheerful, too cheerful to deceive

Madeline.  She noted also that a number of armed cowboys were

walking with their horses just below the house.



"Wal, you-all had a nice little run," Stillwell said, speaking

generally.  "I reckon there wasn't much need of it. Pat Hawe

thinks he's got some outlaws corralled on the ranch. Nothin' at

all to be fussed up about.  Stewart's that particular he won't

have you meetin' with any rowdies."



Many and fervent were the expressions of relief from Madeline's

feminine guests as they dismounted and went into the house. 

Madeline lingered behind to speak with Stillwell and Stewart.



"Now, Stillwell, out with it," she said, briefly.



The cattleman stared, and then he laughed, evidently pleased with

her keenness.



"Wal, Miss Majesty, there's goin' to be a fight somewhere, an'

Stewart wanted to get you-all in before it come off.  He says the

valley's overrun by vaqueros an' guerrillas an' robbers, an' Lord

knows what else."



He stamped off the porch, his huge spurs rattling, and started

down the path toward the waiting men.



Stewart stood in his familiar attentive position, erect, silent,

with a hand on pommel and bridle.



"Stewart, you are exceedingly--thoughtful of my interests," she

said, wanting to thank him, and not readily finding words.  "I

would not know what to do without you.  Is there danger?"



"I'm not sure.  But I want to be on the safe side."



She hesitated.  It was no longer easy for her to talk to him, and

she did not know why.



"May I know the special orders you gave Nels and Nick and Monty?"

she asked.



"Who said I gave those boys special orders?"



"I heard Stillwell tell them so."



"Of course I'll tell you if you insist.  But why should you worry

over something that'll likely never happen?"



"I insist, Stewart," she replied, quietly.



"My orders were that at least one of them must be on guard near

you day and night--never to be out of hearing of your voice."



"I thought as much.  But why Nels or Monty or Nick? That seems

rather hard on them.  For that matter, why put any one to keep

guard over me?  Do you not trust any other of my cowboys?"



"I'd trust their honesty, but not their ability."



"Ability?  Of what nature?"



"With guns."



"Stewart!" she exclaimed.



"Miss Hammond, you have been having such a good time entertaining

your guests that you forget.  I'm glad of that. I wish you had

not questioned me."



"Forget what?"



"Don Carlos and his guerrillas."



"Indeed I have not forgotten.  Stewart, you still think Don

Carlos tried to make off with me--may try it again?"



"I don't think.  I know."



"And besides all your other duties you have shared the watch with

these three cowboys?"



"Yes."



"It has been going on without my knowledge?"



"Yes."



"Since when?"



"Since I brought you down from the mountains last month."



"How long is it to continue?"



"That's hard to say.  Till the revolution is over, anyhow."



She mused a moment, looking away to the west, where the great

void was filling with red haze.  She believed implicitly in him,

and the menace hovering near her fell like a shadow upon her

present happiness.



"What must I do?" she asked.



"I think you ought to send your friends back East--and go with

them, until this guerrilla war is over."



"Why, Stewart, they would be broken-hearted, and so would I."



He had no reply for that.



"If I do not take your advice it will be the first time since I

have come to look to you for so much," she went on. "Cannot you

suggest something else?  My friends are having such a splendid

visit.  Helen is getting well.  Oh, I should be sorry to see them

go before they want to."



"We might take them up into the mountains and camp out for a

while," he said, presently.  "I know a wild place up among the

crags.  It's a hard climb, but worth the work.  I never saw a

more beautiful spot.  Fine water, and it will be cool.  Pretty

soon it'll be too hot here for your party to go out-of-doors."



"You mean to hide me away among the crags and clouds?" replied

Madeline, with a laugh.



"Well, it'd amount to that.  Your friends need not know.  Perhaps

in a few weeks this spell of trouble on the border will be over

till fall."



"You say it's a hard climb up to this place?"



"It surely is.  Your friends will get the real thing if they make

that trip."



"That suits me.  Helen especially wants something to happen.  And

they are all crazy for excitement."



"They'd get it up there.  Bad trails, canons to head, steep

climbs, wind-storms, thunder and lightning, rain, mountain-lions

and wildcats."



"Very well, I am decided.  Stewart, of course you will take

charge?  I don't believe I--Stewart, isn't there something more

you could tell me--why you think, why you know my own personal

liberty is in peril?"



"Yes.  But do not ask me what it is.  If I hadn't been a rebel

soldier I would never have known."



"If you had not been a rebel soldier, where would Madeline

Hammond be now?" she asked, earnestly.



He made no reply.



"Stewart," she continued, with warm impulse, "you once mentioned

a debt you owed me--"  And seeing his dark face pale, she

wavered, then went on.  "It is paid."



"No, no," he answered, huskily.



"Yes.  I will not have it otherwise."



"No.  That never can be paid."



Madeline held out her hand.



"It is paid, I tell you," she repeated.



Suddenly he drew back from the outstretched white hand that

seemed to fascinate him.



"I'd kill a man to touch your hand.  But I won't touch it on the

terms you offer."



His unexpected passion disconcerted her.



"Stewart, no man ever before refused to shake hands with me, for

any reason.  It--it is scarcely flattering," she said, with a

little laugh.  "Why won't you?  Because you think I offer it as

mistress to servant--rancher to cowboy?"



"No."



"Then why?  The debt you owed me is paid.  I cancel it. So why

not shake hands upon it, as men do?"



"I won't.  That's all."



"I fear you are ungracious, whatever your reason," she replied. 

"Still, I may offer it again some day.  Good night."



He said good night and turned.  Madeline wonderingly watched him

go down the path with his hand on the black horse's neck.



She went in to rest a little before dressing for dinner, and,

being fatigued from the day's riding and excitement, she fell

asleep.  When she awoke it was twilight. She wondered why her

Mexican maid had not come to her, and she rang the bell.  The

maid did not put in an appearance, nor was there any answer to

the ring.  The house seemed unusually quiet.  It was a brooding

silence, which presently broke to the sound of footsteps on the

porch.  Madeline recognized Stillwell's tread, though it appeared

to be light for him. Then she heard him call softly in at the

open door of her office.  The suggestion of caution in his voice

suited the strangeness of his walk.  With a boding sense of

trouble she hurried through the rooms.  He was standing outside

her office door.



"Stillwell!" she exclaimed.



"Anybody with you?" he asked, in a low tone.



"No."



"Please come out on the porch," he added.



She complied, and, once out, was enabled to see him. His grave

face, paler than she had ever beheld it, caused her to stretch an

appealing hand toward him.  Stillwell intercepted it and held it

in his own.



"Miss Majesty, I'm amazin' sorry to tell worrisome news."  He

spoke almost in a whisper, cautiously looked about him, and

seemed both hurried and mysterious.  "If you'd heerd Stewart cuss

you'd sure know how we hate to hev to tell you this.  But it

can't be avoided.  The fact is we're in a bad fix.  If your

guests ain't scared out of their skins it'll be owin' to your

nerve an' how you carry out Stewart's orders."



"You can rely upon me," replied Madeline, firmly, though she

trembled.



"Wal, what we're up against is this: that gang of bandits Pat

Hawe was chasin'--they're hidin' in the house!"



"In the house?" echoed Madeline, aghast.



"Miss Majesty, it's the amazin' truth, an' shamed indeed am I to

admit it.  Stewart--why, he's wild with rage to think it could

hev happened.  You see, it couldn't hev happened if I hedn't

sloped the boys off to the gol-lof-links, an' if Stewart hedn't

rid out on the mesa after us.  It's my fault. I've hed too much

femininity around fer my old haid.  Gene cussed me--he cussed me

sure scandalous.  But now we've got to face it--to figger."



"Do you mean that a gang of hunted outlaws--bandits--have

actually taken refuge somewhere in my house?" demanded Madeline.



"I sure do.  Seems powerful strange to me why you didn't find

somethin' was wrong, seem' all your servants hev sloped."



"Gone?  Ah, I missed my maid!  I wondered why no lights were lit. 

Where did my servants go?"



"Down to the Mexican quarters, an' scared half to death.  Now

listen.  When Stewart left you an hour or so ago he follered me

direct to where me an' the boys was tryin' to keep Pat Hawe from

tearin' the ranch to pieces.  At that we was helpin' Pat all we

could to find them bandits.  But when Stewart got there he made a

difference.  Pat was nasty before, but seein' Stewart made him

wuss.  I reckon Gene to Pat is the same as red to a Greaser bull. 

Anyway, when the sheriff set fire to an old adobe hut Stewart

called him an' called him hard.  Pat Hawe hed six fellers with

him, an' from all appearances bandit-huntin' was some fiesta. 

There was a row, an 'it looked bad fer a little.  But Gene was

cool, an' he controlled the boys.  Then Pat an' his tough

de-pooties went on huntin'.  That huntin', Miss Majesty, petered

out into what was only a farce.  I reckon Pat could hev kept on

foolin' me an' the boys, but as soon as Stewart showed up on the

scene--wal, either Pat got to blunderin' or else we-all shed our

blinders. Anyway, the facts stood plain.  Pat Hawe wasn't lookin'

hard fer any bandits; he wasn't daid set huntin' anythin', unless

it was trouble fer Stewart.  Finally, when Pat's men made fer our

storehouse, where we keep ammunition, grub, liquors, an' sich,

then Gene called a halt.  An' he ordered Pat Hawe off the ranch. 

It was hyar Hawe an' Stewart locked horns.



An' hyar the truth come out.  There was a gang of bandits hid

somewheres, an' at fust Pat Hawe hed been powerful active an'

earnest in his huntin'.  But sudden-like he'd fetched a pecooliar

change of heart.  He had been some flustered with Stewart's eyes

a-pryin' into his moves, an' then, mebbe to hide somethin', mebbe

jest nat'rul, he got mad. He hollered law.  He pulled down off

the shelf his old stock grudge on Stewart, accusin' him over

again of that Greaser murder last fall.  Stewart made him look

like a fool--showed him up as bein' scared of the bandits or

hevin' some reason fer slopin' off the trail.  Anyway, the row

started all right, an' but fer Nels it might hev amounted to a

fight.  In the thick of it, when Stewart was drivin' Pat an' his

crowd off the place, one of them de-pooties lost his head an'

went fer his gun. Nels throwed his gun an' crippled the feller's

arm.  Monty jumped then an' throwed two forty-fives, an' fer a

second or so it looked ticklish.  But the bandit-hunters crawled,

an' then lit out."



Stillwell paused in the rapid delivery of his narrative; he still

retained Madeline's hand, as if by that he might comfort her.



"After Pat left we put our haids together," began the old

cattleman, with a long respiration.  "We rounded up a lad who hed

seen a dozen or so fellers--he wouldn't to they was Greasers--

breakin' through the shrubbery to the back of the house.  That

was while Stewart was ridin' out to the mesa. Then this lad seen

your servants all runnin' down the hill toward the village.  Now,

heah's the way Gene figgers.  There sure was some deviltry down

along the railroad, an' Pat Hawe trailed bandits up to the ranch. 

He hunts hard an' then all to onct he quits.  Stewart says Pat

Hawe wasn't scared, but he discovered signs or somethin', or got

wind in some strange way that there was in the gang of bandits

some fellers he didn't want to ketch.  Sabe?  Then Gene, quicker

'n a flash, springs his plan on me.  He'd go down to Padre Marcos

an' hev him help to find out all possible from your Mexican

servants.  I was to hurry up hyar an' tell you--give you orders,

Miss Majesty. Ain't that amazin' strange?  Wal, you're to

assemble all your guests in the kitchen.  Make a grand bluff an'

pretend, as your help has left, that it'll be great fun fer your

guests to cook dinner.  The kitchen is the safest room in the

house.  While you're joshin' your party along, makin' a kind of

picnic out of it, I'll place cowboys in the long corridor, an'

also outside in the corner where the kitchen joins on to the main

house. It's pretty sure the bandits think no one's wise to where

they're hid.  Stewart says they're in that end room where the

alfalfa is, an' they'll slope in the night.  Of course, with me

an' the boys watchin', you-all will be safe to go to bed.  An'

we're to rouse your guests early before daylight, to hit the

trail up into the mountains.  Tell them to pack outfits before

goin' to bed.  Say as your servants hev sloped, you might as well

go campin' with the cowboys.  That's all.  If we hev any luck

your' friends'll never know they've been sittin' on a

powder-mine."



"Stillwell, do you advise that trip up into the mountains?" asked

Madeline.



"I reckon I do, considerin' everythin'.  Now, Miss Majesty, I've

used up a lot of time explainin'.  You'll sure keep your nerve?"



"Yes," Madeline replied, and was surprised at herself. "Better

tell Florence.  She'll be a power of comfort to you. I'm goin'

now to fetch up the boys."



Instead of returning to her room Madeline went through the office

into the long corridor.  It was almost as dark as night.  She

fancied she saw a slow-gliding figure darker than the surrounding

gloom; and she entered upon the fulfilment of her part of the

plan in something like trepidation.  Her footsteps were

noiseless.  Finding the door to the kitchen, and going in, she

struck lights.  Upon passing out again she made certain she

discerned a dark shape, now motionless, crouching along the wall. 

But she mistrusted her vivid imagination.  It took all her

boldness to enable her unconcernedly and naturally to strike the

corridor light.  Then she went on through her own rooms and

thence into the patio.



Her guests laughingly and gladly entered into the spirit of the

occasion.  Madeline fancied her deceit must have been perfect,

seeing that it deceived even Florence.  They trooped merrily into

the kitchen.  Madeline, delaying at the door, took a sharp but

unobtrusive glance down the great, barnlike hall.  She saw

nothing but blank dark space.  Suddenly from one side, not a rod

distant, protruded a pale, gleaming face breaking the even

blackness.  Instantly it flashed back out of sight.  Yet that

time was long enough for Madeline to see a pair of glittering

eyes, and to recognize them as Don Carlos's.



Without betraying either hurry or alarm, she closed the door.  It

had a heavy bolt which she slowly, noiselessly shot. Then the

cold amaze that had all but stunned her into inaction throbbed

into wrath.  How dared that Mexican steal into her home!  What

did he mean?  Was he one of the bandits supposed to be hidden in

her house?  She was thinking herself into greater anger and

excitement, and probably would have betrayed herself had not

Florence, who had evidently seen her bolt the door and now read

her thoughts, come toward her with a bright, intent, questioning

look.  Madeline caught herself in time.



Thereupon she gave each of her guests a duty to perform.  Leading

Florence into the pantry, she unburdened herself of the secret in

one brief whisper.  Florence's reply was to point out of the

little open window, passing which was a file of stealthily moving

cowboys.  Then Madeline lost both anger and fear, retaining only

the glow of excitement.



Madeline could be gay, and she initiated the abandonment of

dignity by calling Castleton into the pantry, and, while

interesting him in some pretext or other, imprinting the outlines

of her flour-covered hands upon the back of his black coat. 

Castleton innocently returned to the kitchen to be greeted with a

roar.  That surprising act of the hostess set the pace, and there

followed a merry, noisy time.  Everybody helped.  The

miscellaneous collection of dishes so confusingly contrived made

up a dinner which they all heartily enjoyed. Madeline enjoyed it

herself, even with the feeling of a sword hanging suspended over

her.



The hour was late when she rose from the table and told her

guests to go to their rooms, don their riding-clothes, pack what

they needed for the long and adventurous camping trip that she

hoped would be the climax of their Western experience, and to

snatch a little sleep before the cowboys roused them for the

early start.



Madeline went immediately to her room, and was getting out her

camping apparel when a knock interrupted her.  She thought

Florence had come to help her pack.  But this knock was upon the

door opening out in the porch.  It was repeated.



"Who's there?" she questioned.



"Stewart," came the reply.



She opened the door.  He stood on the threshold. Beyond him,

indistinct in the gloom, were several cowboys.



"May I speak to you?" he asked.



"Certainly."  She hesitated a moment, then asked him in and

closed the door.  "Is--is everything all right?"



"No.  These bandits stick to cover pretty close.  They must have

found out we're on the watch.  But I'm sure we'll get you and

your friends away before anything starts.  I wanted to tell you

that I've talked with your servants.  They were just scared. 

They'll come back to-morrow, soon as Bill gets rid of this gang. 

You need not worry about them or your property."



"Do you have any idea who is hiding in the house?"



"I was worried some at first.  Pat Hawe acted queer.  I imagined

he'd discovered he was trailing bandits who might turn out to be

his smuggling guerrilla cronies.  But talking with your servants,

finding a bunch of horses upon hidden down in the mesquite behind

the pond--several things have changed my mind.  My idea is that a

cowardly handful of riffraff outcasts from the border have hidden

in your house, more by accident than design.  We'll let them go--

get rid of them without even a shot.  If I didn't think so--well,

I'd be considerably worried.  It would make a different state of

affairs."



"Stewart, you are wrong," she said.



He started, but his reply did not follow swiftly.  The expression

of his eyes altered.  Presently he spoke:



"How so?"



"I saw one of these bandits.  I distinctly recognized him."



One long step brought him close to her.



"Who was he?" demanded Stewart.



"Don Carlos."



He muttered low and deep, then said, "Are you sure?"



"Absolutely.  I saw his figure twice in the hall, then his face

in the light.  I could never mistake his eyes."



"Did he know you saw him?"



"I am not positive, but I think so.  Oh, he must have known!  I

was standing full in the light.  I had entered the door, then

purposely stepped out.  His face showed from around a corner, and

swiftly flashed out of sight."



Madeline was tremblingly conscious that Stewart underwent a

transformation.  She saw as well as felt the leaping passion that

changed him.



"Call your friends--get them in here!" he ordered, tersely, and

wheeled toward the door.



"Stewart, wait!" she said.



He turned.  His white face, his burning eyes, his presence now

charged with definite, fearful meaning, influenced her strangely,

weakened her.



"What will you do?" she asked.



"That needn't concern you.  Get your party in here. Bar the

windows and lock the doors.  You'll be safe."



"Stewart!  Tell me what you intend to do."



"I won't tell you," he replied, and turned away again.



"But I will know," she said.  With a hand on his arm she detained

him.  She saw how he halted--felt the shock in him as she touched

him.  "Oh, I do know.  You mean to fight!"



"Well, Miss Hammond, isn't it about time?" he asked. Evidently he

overcame a violent passion for instant action. There was

weariness, dignity, even reproof in his question. "The fact of

that Mexican's presence here in your house ought to prove to you

the nature of the case.  These vaqueros, these guerrillas, have

found out you won't stand for any fighting on the part of your

men.  Don Carlos is a sneak, a coward, yet he's not afraid to

hide in your own house.  He has learned you won't let your

cowboys hurt anybody.  He's taking advantage of it.  He'll rob,

burn, and make off with you.  He'll murder, too, if it falls his

way.  These Greasers use knives in the dark.  So I ask--isn't it

about time we stop him?"



"Stewart, I forbid you to fight, unless in self-defense.  I

forbid you."



"What I mean to do is self-defense.  Haven't I tried to explain

to you that just now we've wild times along this stretch of

border?  Must I tell you again that Don Carlos is hand and glove

with the revolution?  The rebels are crazy to stir up the United

States.  You are a woman of prominence.  Don Carlos would make

off with you.  If he got you, what little matter to cross the

border with you!  Well, where would the hue and cry go?  Through

the troops along the border!  To New York! To Washington!  Why,

it would mean what the rebels are working for--United States

intervention.  In other words, war!"



"Oh, surely you exaggerate!" she cried.



"Maybe so.  But I'm beginning to see the Don's game. And, Miss

Hammond, I--It's awful for me to think what you'd suffer if Don

Carlos got you over the line.  I know these low-caste Mexicans. 

I've been among the peons--the slaves."



"Stewart, don't let Don Carlos get me," replied Madeline, in

sweet directness.



She saw him shake, saw his throat swell as he swallowed hard, saw

the hard fierceness return to his face.



"I won't.  That's why I'm going after him."



"But I forbade you to start a fight deliberately."



"Then I'll go ahead and start one without your permission," he

replied shortly, and again he wheeled.



This time, when Madeline caught his arm she held to it, even

after he stopped.



"No," she said, imperiously.



He shook off her hand and strode forward.



"Please don't go!" she called, beseechingly.  But he kept on. 

"Stewart!"



She ran ahead of him, intercepted him, faced him with her back

against the door.  He swept out a long arm as if to brush her

aside.  But it wavered and fell.  Haggard, troubled, with working

face, he stood before her.



"It's for your sake," he expostulated.



"If it is for my sake, then do what pleases me."



"These guerrillas will knife somebody.  They'll burn the house. 

They'll make off with you.  They'll do something bad unless we

stop them."



"Let us risk all that," she importuned.



"But it's a terrible risk, and it oughtn't be run," he exclaimed,

passionately.  "I know best here.  Stillwell upholds me.  Let me

out, Miss Hammond.  I'm going to take the boys and go after these

guerrillas."



"No!"



"Good Heavens!" exclaimed Stewart.  "Why not let me go?  It's the

thing to do.  I'm sorry to distress you and your guests.  Why not

put an end to Don Carlos's badgering?  Is it because you're

afraid a rumpus will spoil your friends' visit?"



"It isn't--not this time."



"Then it's the idea of a little shooting at these Greasers?"



"No."



"You're sick to think of a little Greaser blood staining the

halls of your home?"



"No!"



"Well, then, why keep me from doing what I know is best?"



"Stewart, I--I--" she faltered, in growing agitation. "I'm

frightened--confused.  All this is too--too much for me. I'm not

a coward.  If you have to fight you'll see I'm not a coward.  But

your way seems so reckless--that hall is so dark--the guerrillas

would shoot from behind doors.  You're so wild, so daring, you'd

rush right into peril.  Is that necessary?  I think--I mean--I

don't know just why I feel so--so about you doing it.  But I

believe it's because I'm afraid you--you might be hurt."



"You're afraid I--I might be hurt?" he echoed, wonderingly, the

hard whiteness of his face warming, flushing, glowing.



"Yes."



The single word, with all it might mean, with all it might not

mean, softened him as if by magic, made him gentle, amazed, shy

as a boy, stifling under a torrent of emotions.



Madeline thought she had persuaded him--worked her will with him. 

Then another of his startlingly sudden moves told her that she

had reckoned too quickly.  This move was to put her firmly aside

so he could pass; and Madeline, seeing he would not hesitate to

lift her out of the way, surrendered the door.  He turned on the

threshold.  His face was still working, but the flame-pointed

gleam of his eyes indicated the return of that cowboy

ruthlessness.



"I'm going to drive Don Carlos and his gang out of the house,"

declared Stewart.  "I think I may promise you to do it without a

fight.  But if it takes a fight, off he goes!"

