





XI A Band of Guerrillas



Madeline bolted the door, and, flying into the kitchen, she told

the scared servants to shut themselves in.  Then she ran to her

own rooms.  It was only a matter of a few moments for her to

close and bar the heavy shutters, yet even as she was fastening

the last one in the room she used as an office a clattering roar

of hoofs seemed to swell up to the front of the house.  She

caught a glimpse of wild, shaggy horses and ragged, dusty men. 

She had never seen any vaqueros that resembled these horsemen. 

Vaqueros had grace and style; they were fond of lace and glitter

and fringe; they dressed their horses in silvered trappings.  But

the riders now trampling into the driveway were uncouth. lean,

savage.  They were guerrillas, a band of the raiders who had been

harassing the border since the beginning of the revolution.  A

second glimpse assured Madeline that they were not all Mexicans.



The presence of outlaws in that band brought home to Madeline her

real danger.  She remembered what Stillwell had told her about

recent outlaw raids along the Rio Grande.  These flying bands,

operating under the excitement of the revolution, appeared here

and there, everywhere, in remote places, and were gone as quickly

as they came.  Mostly they wanted money and arms, but they would

steal anything, and unprotected women had suffered at their

hands.



Madeline, hurriedly collecting her securities and the

considerable money she had in her desk, ran out, closed and

locked the door, crossed the patio to the opposite side of the

house, and, entering again, went down a long corridor, trying to

decide which of the many unused rooms would be best to hide in. 

And before she made up her mind she came to the last room. Just

then a battering on door or window in the direction of the

kitchen and shrill screams from the servant women increased

Madeline's alarm.



She entered the last room.  There was no lock or bar upon the

door.  But the room was large and dark, and it was half full of

bales of alfalfa hay.  Probably it was the safest place in the

house; at least time would be necessary to find any one hidden

there.  She dropped her valuables in a dark corner and covered

them with loose hay.  That done, she felt her way down a narrow

aisle between the piled-up bales and presently crouched in a

niche.



With the necessity of action over for the immediate present,

Madeline became conscious that she was quivering and almost

breathless.  Her skin felt tight and cold.  There was a weight on

her chest; her mouth was dry, and she had a strange tendency to

swallow.  Her listening faculty seemed most acute. Dull sounds

came from parts of the house remote from her.  In the intervals

of silence between these sounds she heard the squeaking and

rustling of mice in the hay.  A mouse ran over her hand.



She listened, waiting, hoping yet dreading to hear the clattering

approach of her cowboys.  There would he fighting--blood--men

injured, perhaps killed.  Even the thought of violence of any

kind hurt her.  But perhaps the guerrillas would run in time to

avoid a clash with her men.  She hoped for that, prayed for it. 

Through her mind flitted what she knew of Nels, of Monty, of Nick

Steele; and she experienced a sensation that left her somewhat

chilled and sick.  Then she thought of the dark-browed, fire-eyed

Stewart.  She felt a thrill drive away the cold nausea.  And her

excitement augmented.



Waiting, listening increased all her emotions.  Nothing appeared

to be happening.  Yet hours seemed to pass while she crouched

there.  Had Florence been overtaken?  Could any of those lean

horses outrun Majesty?  She doubted it; she knew it could not be

true.  Nevertheless, the strain of uncertainty was torturing.



Suddenly the bang of the corridor door pierced her through and

through with the dread of uncertainty.  Some of the guerrillas

had entered the east wing of the house.  She heard a babel of

jabbering voices, the shuffling of boots and clinking of spurs,

the slamming of doors and ransacking of rooms.



Madeline lost faith in her hiding-place.  Morever, she found it

impossible to take the chance.  The idea of being caught in that

dark room by those ruffians filled her with horror.  She must get

out into the light.  Swiftly she rose and went to the window.  It

was rather more of a door than window, being a large aperture

closed by two wooden doors on hinges. The iron hook yielded

readily to her grasp, and one door stuck fast, while the other

opened a few inches.  She looked out upon a green slope covered

with flowers and bunches of sage and bushes.  Neither man nor

horse showed in the narrow field of her vision.  She believed she

would be safer hidden out there in the shrubbery than in the

house.  The jump from the window would be easy for her.  And with

her quick decision came a rush and stir of spirit that warded off

her weakness.



She pulled at the door.  It did not budge.  It had caught at the

bottom.  Pulling with all her might proved to be in vain. 

Pausing, with palms hot and bruised, she heard a louder, closer

approach of the invaders of her home.  Fear, wrath, and impotence

contested for supremacy over her and drove her to desperation. 

She was alone here, and she must rely on herself.  And as she

strained every muscle to move that obstinate door and heard the

quick, harsh voices of men and the sounds of a hurried search she

suddenly felt sure that they were hunting for her.  She knew it. 

She did not wonder at it. But she wondered if she were really

Madeline Hammond, and if it were possible that brutal men would

harm her.  Then the tramping of heavy feet on the floor of the

adjoining room lent her the last strength of fear.  Pushing with

hands and shoulders, she moved the door far enough to permit the

passage of her body.  Then she stepped up on the sill and slipped

through the aperture.  She saw no one.  Lightly she jumped down

and ran in among the bushes.  But these did not afford her the

cover she needed.  She stole from one clump to another, finding

too late that she had chosen with poor judgment.  The position of

the bushes had drawn her closer to the front of the house rather

than away from it, and just before her were horses, and beyond a

group of excited men.  With her heart in her throat Madeline

crouched down.



A shrill yell, followed by running and mounting guerrillas,

roused her hope.  They had sighted the cowboys and were in

flight.  Rapid thumping of boots on the porch told of men

hurrying from the house.  Several horses dashed past her, not ten

feet distant.  One rider saw her, for he turned to shout back. 

This drove Madeline into a panic.  Hardly knowing what she did,

she began to run away from the house.  Her feet seemed leaden. 

She felt the same horrible powerlessness that sometimes came over

her when she dreamed of being pursued. Horses with shouting

riders streaked past her in the shrubbery. There was a thunder of

hoofs behind her.  She turned aside, but the thundering grew

nearer.  She was being run down.



As Madeline shut her eyes and, staggering, was about to fall,

apparently right under pounding hoofs, a rude, powerful hand

clapped round her waist, clutched deep and strong, and swung her

aloft.  She felt a heavy blow when the shoulder of the horse

struck her, and then a wrenching of her arm as she was dragged

up.  A sudden blighting pain made sight and feeling fade from

her.



But she did not become unconscious to the extent that she lost

the sense of being rapidly borne away.  She seemed to hold that

for a long time.  When her faculties began to return the motion

of the horse was no longer violent.  For a few moments she could

not determine her position.  Apparently she was upside down. 

Then she saw that she was facing the ground, and must be lying

across a saddle with her head hanging down. She could not move a

hand; she could not tell where her hands were.  Then she felt the

touch of soft leather.  She saw a high-topped Mexican boot,

wearing a huge silver spur, and the reeking flank and legs of a

horse, and a dusty, narrow trail. Soon a kind of red darkness

veiled her eyes, her head swam, and she felt motion and pain only

dully.



After what seemed a thousand weary hours some one lifted her from

the horse and laid her upon the ground, where, gradually, as the

blood left her head and she could see, she began to get the right

relation of things.



She lay in a sparse grove of firs, and the shadows told of late

afternoon.  She smelled wood smoke, and she heard the sharp

crunch of horses' teeth nipping grass.  Voices caused her to turn

her face.  A group of men stood and sat round a camp-fire eating

like wolves.  The looks of her captors made Madeline close her

eyes, and the fascination, the fear they roused in her made her

open them again.  Mostly they were thin-bodied, thin-bearded

Mexicans, black and haggard and starved.  Whatever they might be,

they surely were hunger-stricken and squalid.  Not one had a

coat.  A few had scarfs.  Some wore belts in which were scattered

cartridges. Only a few had guns, and these were of diverse

patterns. Madeline could see no packs, no blankets, and only a

few cooking-utensils, all battered and blackened.  Her eyes

fastened upon men she believed were white men; but it was from

their features and not their color that she judged.  Once she had

seen a band of nomad robbers in the Sahara, and somehow was

reminded of them by this motley outlaw troop.



They divided attention between the satisfying of ravenous

appetites and a vigilant watching down the forest aisles.  They

expected some one, Madeline thought, and, manifestly, if it were

a pursuing posse, they did not show anxiety.  She could not

understand more than a word here and there that they uttered. 

Presently, however, the name of Don Carlos revived keen curiosity

in her and realization of her situation, and then once more dread

possessed her breast.



A low exclamation and a sweep of arm from one of the guerrillas

caused the whole band to wheel and concentrate their attention in

the opposite direction.  They heard something. They saw some one. 

Grimy hands sought weapons, and then every man stiffened. 

Madeline saw what hunted men looked like at the moment of

discovery, and the sight was terrible.  She closed her eyes, sick

with what she saw, fearful of the moment when the guns would leap

out.



There were muttered curses, a short period of silence followed by

whisperings, and then a clear voice rang out, "El Capitan!"



A strong shock vibrated through Madeline, and her eyelids swept

open.  Instantly she associated the name El Capitan with Stewart

and experienced a sensation of strange regret.  It was not

pursuit or rescue she thought of then, but death.  These men

would kill Stewart.  But surely he had not come alone.  The lean,

dark faces, corded and rigid, told her in what direction to look. 

She heard the slow, heavy thump of hoofs.  Soon into the wide

aisle between the trees moved the form of a man, arms flung high

over his head.  Then Madeline saw the horse, and she recognized

Majesty, and she knew it was really Stewart who rode the roan. 

When doubt was no longer possible she felt a suffocating sense of

gladness and fear and wonder.



Many of the guerrillas leaped up with drawn weapons. Still

Stewart approached with his hands high, and he rode right into

the camp-fire circle.  Then a guerrilla, evidently the chief,

waved down the threatening men and strode up to Stewart.  He

greeted him.  There was amaze and pleasure and respect in the

greeting.  Madeline could tell that, though she did not know what

was said.  At the moment Stewart appeared to her as cool and

careless as if he were dismounting at her porch steps.  But when

he got down she saw that his face was white. He shook hands with

the guerrilla, and then his glittering eyes roved over the men

and around the glade until they rested upon Madeline.  Without

moving from his tracks he seemed to leap, as if a powerful

current had shocked him.  Madeline tried to smile to assure him

she was alive and well; but the intent in his eyes, the power of

his controlled spirit telling her of her peril and his, froze the

smile on her lips.



With that he faced the chief and spoke rapidly in the Mexican

jargon Madeline had always found so difficult to translate.  The

chief answered, spreading wide his hands, one of which indicated

Madeline as she lay there.  Stewart drew the fellow a little

aside and said something for his ear alone. The chief's hands

swept up in a gesture of surprise and acquiescence.  Again

Stewart spoke swiftly.  His hearer then turned to address the

band.  Madeline caught the words "Don Carlos" and "pesos."  There

was a brief muttering protest which the chief thundered down. 

Madeline guessed her release had been given by this guerrilla and

bought from the others of the band.



Stewart strode to her side, leading the roan.  Majesty reared and

snorted when he saw his mistress prostrate.  Stewart knelt, still

holding the bridle.



"Are you all right?" he asked.



"I think so," she replied, essaying a laugh that was rather a

failure.  "My feet are tied."



Dark blood blotted out all the white from his face, and lightning

shot from his eyes.  She felt his hands, like steel tongs,

loosening the bonds round her ankles.  Without a word he lifted

her upright and then upon Majesty.  Madeline reeled a little in

the saddle, held hard to the pommel with one band, and tried to

lean on Stewart's shoulder with the other.



"Don't give up," he said.



She saw him gaze furtively into the forest on all sides.  And it

surprised her to see the guerrillas riding away.  Putting the two

facts together, Madeline formed an idea that neither Stewart nor

the others desired to meet with some one evidently due shortly in

the glade.  Stewart guided the roan off to the right and walked

beside Madeline, steadying her in the saddle.  At first Madeline

was so weak and dizzy that she could scarcely retain her seat. 

The dizziness left her presently, and then she made an effort to

ride without help. Her weakness, however, and a pain in her

wrenched arm made the task laborsome.



Stewart had struck off the trail, if there were one, and was

keeping to denser parts of the forest.  The sun sank low, and the

shafts of gold fell with a long slant among the firs.  Majesty's

hoofs made no sound on the soft ground, and Stewart strode on

without speaking.  Neither his hurry nor vigilance relaxed until

at least two miles had been covered. Then he held to a straighter

course and did not send so many glances into the darkening woods. 

The level of the forest began to be cut up by little hollows, all

of which sloped and widened.  Presently the soft ground gave

place to bare, rocky soil.  The horse snorted and tossed his

head.  A sound of splashing water broke the silence.  The hollow

opened into a wider one through which a little brook murmured its

way over the stones.  Majesty snorted again and stopped and bent

his head.



"He wants a drink," said Madeline.  "I'm thirsty, too, and very

tired."



Stewart lifted her out of the saddle, and as their hands parted

she felt something moist and warm.  Blood was running down her

arm and into the palm of her hand.



"I'm--bleeding," she said, a little unsteadily.  "Oh, I remember. 

My arm was hurt."



She held it out, the blood making her conscious of her weakness. 

Stewart's fingers felt so firm and sure.  Swiftly he ripped the

wet sleeve.  Her forearm had been cut or scratched. He washed off

the blood.



"Why, Stewart, it's nothing.  I was only a little nervous.  I

guess that's the first time I ever saw my own blood."



He made no reply as he tore her handkerchief into strips and

bound her arm.  His swift motions and his silence gave her a hint

of how he might meet a more serious emergency. She felt safe. 

And because of that impression, when he lifted his head and she

saw that he was pale and shaking, she was surprised.  He stood

before her folding his scarf, which was still wet, and from which

he made no effort to remove the red stains.



"Miss Hammond," he said, hoarsely, "it was a man's hands--a

Greaser's finger-nails--that cut your arm.  I know who he was.  I

could have killed him.  But I mightn't have got your freedom. 

You understand?  I didn't dare."



Madeline gazed at Stewart, astounded more by his speech than his

excessive emotion.



"My dear boy!" she exclaimed.  And then she paused. She could not

find words.



He was making an apology to her for not killing a man who had

laid a rough hand upon her person.  He was ashamed and seemed to

be in a torture that she would not understand why he had not

killed the man.  There seemed to be something of passionate scorn

in him that he had not been able to avenge her as well as free

her.



"Stewart, I understand.  You were being my kind of cowboy.  I

thank you."



But she did not understand so much as she implied.  She had heard

many stories of this man's cool indifference to peril and death. 

He had always seemed as hard as granite.  Why should the sight of

a little blood upon her arm pale his cheek and shake his hand and

thicken his voice?  What was there in his nature to make him

implore her to see the only reason he could not kill an outlaw? 

The answer to the first question was that he loved her.  It was

beyond her to answer the second. But the secret of it lay in the

same strength from which his love sprang--an intensity of feeling

which seemed characteristic of these Western men of simple,

lonely, elemental lives.  All at once over Madeline rushed a tide

of realization of how greatly it was possible for such a man as

Stewart to love her.  The thought came to her in all its singular

power.  All her Eastern lovers who had the graces that made them

her equals in the sight of the world were without the only great

essential that a lonely, hard life had given to Stewart.  Nature

here struck a just balance.  Something deep and dim in the

future, an unknown voice, called to Madeline and disturbed her. 

And because it was not a voice to her intelligence she deadened

the ears of her warm and throbbing life and decided never to

listen.



"Is it safe to rest a little?" she asked.  "I am so tired. 

Perhaps I'll be stronger if I rest."



"We're all right now," he said.  "The horse will be better, too. 

I ran him out.  And uphill, at that."



"Where are we?"



"Up in the mountains, ten miles and more from the ranch.  There's

a trail just below here.  I can get you home by midnight. 

They'll be some worried down there."



"What happened?"



"Nothing much to any one but you.  That's the--the hard luck of

it.  Florence caught us out on the slope.  We were returning from

the fire.  We were dead beat.  But we got to the ranch before any

damage was done.  We sure had trouble in finding a trace of you. 

Nick spotted the prints of your heels under the window.  And then

we knew.  I had to fight the boys. If they'd come after you we'd

never have gotten you without a fight.  I didn't want that.  Old

Bill came out packing a dozen guns.  He was crazy.  I had to rope

Monty.  Honest, I tied him to the porch.  Nels and Nick promised

to stay and hold him till morning.  That was the best I could do. 

I was sure lucky to come up with the band so soon.  I had figured

right.  I knew that guerrilla chief.  He's a bandit in Mexico. 

It's a business with him.  But he fought for Madero, and I was

with him a good deal.  He may be a Greaser, but he's white."



"How did you effect my release?"



"I offered them money.  That's what the rebels all want.  They

need money.  They're a lot of poor, hungry devils."



"I gathered that you offered to pay ransom.  How much?"



"Two thousand dollars Mex.  I gave my word.  I'll have to take

the money.  I told them when and where I'd meet them."



"Certainly.  I'm glad I've got the money."  Madeline laughed. 

"What a strange thing to happen to me!  I wonder what dad would

say to that?  Stewart, I'm afraid he'd say two thousand dollars

is more than I'm worth.  But tell me.  That rebel chieftain did

not demand money?"



"No. The money is for his men."



"What did you say to him?  I saw you whisper in his ear."



Stewart dropped his head, averting her direct gaze.



"We were comrades before Juarez.  One day I dragged him out of a

ditch.  I reminded him. Then I--I told him something I--I

thought--"



"Stewart, I know from the way he looked at me that you spoke of

me."



Her companion did not offer a reply to this, and Madeline did not

press the point.



"I heard Don Carlos's name several times.  That interests me. 

What have Don Carlos and his vaqueros to do with this?"



"That Greaser has all to do with it," replied Stewart, grimly. 

"He burned his ranch and corrals to keep us from getting them. 

But he also did it to draw all the boys away from your home. 

They had a deep plot, all right.  I left orders for some one to

stay with you.  But Al and Stillwell, who're both hot-headed,

rode off this morning.  Then the guerrillas came down."



"Well, what was the idea--the plot--as you call it?"



"To get you," he said, bluntly.



"Me!  Stewart, you do not mean my capture--whatever you call it--

was anything more than mere accident?"



"I do mean that.  But Stillwell and your brother think the

guerrillas wanted money and arms, and they just happened to make

off with you because you ran under a horse's nose."



"You do not incline to that point of view?"



"I don't.  Neither does Nels nor Nick Steele.  And we know Don

Carlos and the Greasers.  Look how the vaqueros chased Flo for

you!"



"What do you think, then?"



"I'd rather not say."



"But, Stewart, I would like to know.  If it is about me, surely I

ought to know," protested Madeline.  "What reason have Nels and

Nick to suspect Don Carlos of plotting to abduct me?"



"I suppose they've no reason you'd take.  Once I heard Nels say

he'd seen the Greaser look at you, and if he ever saw him do it

again he'd shoot him."



"Why, Stewart, that is ridiculous.  To shoot a man for looking at

a woman!  This is a civilized country."



"Well, maybe it would be ridiculous in a civilized country. 

There's some things about civilization I don't care for."



"What, for instance?"



"For one thing, I can't stand for the way men let other men treat

women."



"But, Stewart, this is strange talk from you, who, that night I

came--"



She broke off, sorry that she had spoken.  His shame was not

pleasant to see.  Suddenly he lifted his head, and she felt

scorched by flaming eyes.



"Suppose I was drunk.  Suppose I had met some ordinary girl. 

Suppose I had really made her marry me.  Don't you think I would

have stopped being a drunkard and have been good to her?"



"Stewart, I do not know what to think about you," replied

Madeline.



Then followed a short silence.  Madeline saw the last bright rays

of the setting sun glide up over a distant crag. Stewart

rebridled the horse and looked at the saddle-girths.



"I got off the trail.  About Don Carlos I'll say right out, not

what Nels and Nick think, but what I know.  Don Carlos hoped to

make off with you for himself, the same as if you had been a poor

peon slave-girl down in Sonora.  Maybe he had a deeper plot than

my rebel friend told me.  Maybe he even went so far as to hope

for American troops to chase him.  The rebels are trying to stir

up the United States.  They'd welcome intervention.  But, however

that may be, the Greaser meant evil to you, and has meant it ever

since he saw you first.  That's all."



"Stewart, you have done me and my family a service we can never

hope to repay."



"I've done the service.  Only don't mention pay to me. But

there's one thing I'd like you to know, and I find it hard to

say.  It's prompted, maybe, by what I know you think of me and

what I imagine your family and friends would think if they knew. 

It's not prompted by pride or conceit.  And it's this: Such a

woman as you should never have come to this God-forsaken country

unless she meant to forget herself.  But as you did come, and as

you were dragged away by those devils, I want you to know that

all your wealth and position and influence--all that power behind

you--would never have saved you from hell to-night.  Only such a

man as Nels or Nick Steele or I could have done that."



Madeline Hammond felt the great leveling force of the truth. 

Whatever the difference between her and Stewart, or whatever the

imagined difference set up by false standards of class and

culture, the truth was that here on this wild mountain-side she

was only a woman and he was simply a man.  It was a man that she

needed, and if her choice could have been considered in this

extremity it would have fallen upon him who had just faced her in

quiet, bitter speech.  Here was food for thought.



"I reckon we'd better start now," he said, and drew the horse

close to a large rock.  "Come."



Madeline's will greatly exceeded her strength.  For the first

time she acknowledged to herself that she had been hurt. Still,

she did not feel much pain except when she moved her shoulder. 

Once in the saddle, where Stewart lifted her, she drooped weakly. 

The way was rough; every step the horse took hurt her; and the

slope of the ground threw her forward on the pommel.  Presently,

as the slope grew rockier and her discomfort increased, she

forgot everything except that she was suffering.



"Here is the trail," said Stewart, at length.



Not far from that point Madeline swayed, and but for Stewart's

support would have fallen from the saddle.  She heard him swear

under his breath.



"Here, this won't do," he said.  "Throw your leg over the pommel. 

The other one--there."



Then, mounting, he slipped behind her and lifted and turned her,

and then held her with his left arm so that she lay across the

saddle and his knees, her head against his shoulder.



As the horse started into a rapid walk Madeline gradually lost

all pain and discomfort when she relaxed her muscles.  Presently

she let herself go and lay inert, greatly to her relief.  For a

little while she seemed to be half drunk with the gentle swaying

of a hammock.  Her mind became at once dreamy and active, as if

it thoughtfully recorded the slow, soft impressions pouring in

from all her senses.



A red glow faded in the west.  She could see out over the

foothills, where twilight was settling gray on the crests, dark

in the hollows.  Cedar and pinon trees lined the trail, and there

were no more firs.  At intervals huge drab-colored rocks loomed

over her.  The sky was clear and steely.  A faint star twinkled. 

And lastly, close to her, she saw Stewart's face, once more dark

and impassive, with the inscrutable eyes fixed on the trail.



His arm, like a band of iron, held her, yet it was flexible and

yielded her to the motion of the horse.  One instant she felt the

brawn, the bone, heavy and powerful; the next the stretch and

ripple, the elasticity of muscles.  He held her as easily as if

she were a child.  The roughness of his flannel shirt rubbed her

cheek, and beneath that she felt the dampness of the scarf he had

used to bathe her arm, and deeper still the regular pound of his

heart.  Against her ear, filling it with strong, vibrant beat,

his heart seemed a mighty engine deep within a great cavern.  Her

head had never before rested on a man's breast, and she had no

liking for it there; but she felt more than the physical contact. 

The position was mysterious and fascinating, and something

natural in it made her think of life.  Then as the cool wind blew

down from the heights, loosening her tumbled hair, she was

compelled to see strands of it curl softly into Stewart's face,

before his eyes, across his lips.  She was unable to reach it

with her free hand, and therefore could not refasten it.  And

when she shut her eyes she felt those loosened strands playing

against his cheeks.



In the keener press of such sensations she caught the smell of

dust and a faint, wild, sweet tang on the air.  There was a low,

rustling sigh of wind in the brush along the trail. Suddenly the

silence ripped apart to the sharp bark of a coyote, and then,

from far away, came a long wail.  And then Majesty's metal-rimmed

hoof rang on a stone.



These later things lent probability to that ride for Madeline. 

Otherwise it would have seemed like a dream.  Even so it was hard

to believe.  Again she wondered if this woman who had begun to

think and feel so much was Madeline Hammond. Nothing had ever

happened to her.  And here, playing about her like her hair

played about Stewart's face, was adventure, perhaps death, and

surely life.  She could not believe the evidence of the day's

happenings.  Would any of her people, her friends, ever believe

it?  Could she tell it?  How impossible to think that a cunning

Mexican might have used her to further the interests of a forlorn

revolution.  She remembered the ghoulish visages of those starved

rebels, and marveled at her blessed fortune in escaping them. 

She was safe, and now self-preservation had some meaning for her. 

Stewart's arrival in the glade, the courage with which he had

faced the outlawed men, grew as real to her now as the iron arm

that clasped her. Had it been an instinct which had importuned

her to save this man when he lay ill and hopeless in the shack at

Chiricahua? In helping him had she hedged round her forces that

had just operated to save her life, or if not that, more than

life was to her?  She believed so.



Madeline opened her eyes after a while and found that night had

fallen.  The sky was a dark, velvety blue blazing with white

stars.  The cool wind tugged at her hair, and through waving

strands she saw Stewart's profile, bold and sharp against the

sky.



Then, as her mind succumbed to her bodily fatigue, again her

situation became unreal and wild.  A heavy languor, like a

blanket, began to steal upon her.  She wavered and drifted.  With

the last half-conscious sense of a muffled throb at her ear, a

something intangibly sweet, deep-toned, and strange, like a

distant calling bell, she fell asleep with her head on Stewart's

breast.

