





XII Friends from the East



Three days after her return to the ranch Madeline could not

discover any physical discomfort as a reminder of her adventurous

experiences.  This surprised her, but not nearly so much as the

fact that after a few weeks she found she scarcely remembered the

adventures at all.  If it had not been for the quiet and

persistent guardianship of her cowboys she might almost have

forgotten Don Carlos and the raiders.  Madeline was assured of

the splendid physical fitness to which this ranch life had

developed her, and that she was assimilating something of the

Western disregard of danger.  A hard ride, an accident, a day in

the sun and dust, an adventure with outlaws--these might once

have been matters of large import, but now for Madeline they were

in order with all the rest of her changed life.



There was never a day that something interesting was not brought

to her notice. Stillwell, who had ceaselessly reproached himself

for riding away the morning Madeline was captured, grew more like

an anxious parent than a faithful superintendent.  He was never

at ease regarding her unless he was near the ranch or had left

Stewart there, or else Nels and Nick Steele.  Naturally, he

trusted more to Stewart than to any one else.



"Miss Majesty, it's sure amazin' strange about Gene," said the

old cattleman, as he tramped into Madeline's office.



"What's the matter now?" she inquired.



"Wal, Gene has rustled off into the mountains again."



"Again?  I did not know he had gone.  I gave him money for that

band of guerrillas.  Perhaps he went to take it to them."



"No.  He took that a day or so after he fetched you back home. 

Then in about a week he went a second time.  An' he packed some

stuff with him.  Now he's sneaked off, an' Nels, who was down to

the lower trail, saw him meet somebody that looked like Padre

Marcos.  Wal, I went down to the church, and, sure enough, Padre

Marcos is gone.  What do you think of that, Miss Majesty?"



"Maybe Stewart is getting religious," laughed Madeline. You told

me so once.



Stillwell puffed and wiped his red face.



"If you'd heerd him cuss Monty this mawnin' you'd never guess it

was religion.  Monty an' Nels hev been givin' Gene a lot of

trouble lately.  They're both sore an' in fightin' mood ever

since Don Carlos hed you kidnapped.  Sure they're goin' to break

soon, an' then we'll hev a couple of wild Texas steers ridin' the

range.  I've a heap to worry me."



"Let Stewart take his mysterious trips into the mountains.  Here,

Stillwell, I have news for you that may give you reason for

worry.  I have letters from home.  And my sister, with a party of

friends, is coming out to visit me. They are society folk, and

one of them is an English lord."



"Wal, Miss Majesty, I reckon we'll all be glad to see them," said

Stillwell.  "Onless they pack you off back East."



"That isn't likely," replied Madeline, thoughtfully. "I must go

back some time, though.  Well, let me read you a few extracts

from my mail."



Madeline took up her sister's letter with a strange sensation of

how easily sight of a crested monogram and scent of delicately

perfumed paper could recall the brilliant life she had given up. 

She scanned the pages of beautiful handwriting.  Helen's letter

was in turn gay and brilliant and lazy, just as she was herself;

but Madeline detected more of curiosity in it than of real

longing to see the sister and brother in the Far West.  Much of

what Helen wrote was enthusiastic anticipation of the fun she

expected to have with bashful cowboys.  Helen seldom wrote

letters, and she never read anything, not even popular novels of

the day.  She was as absolutely ignorant of the West as the

Englishman, who, she said, expected to hunt buffalo and fight

Indians.  Moreover, there was a satiric note in the letter that

Madeline did not like, and which roused her spirit.  Manifestly,

Helen was reveling in the prospect of new sensation.



When she finished reading aloud a few paragraphs the old

cattleman snorted and his face grew redder.



"Did your sister write that?" he asked.



"Yes."



"Wal, I--I beg pawdin, Miss Majesty.  But it doesn't seem like

you.  Does she think we're a lot of wild men from Borneo?"



"Evidently she does.  I rather think she is in for a surprise. 

Now, Stillwell, you are clever and you can see the situation.  I

want my guests to enjoy their stay here, but I do not want that

to be at the expense of the feelings of all of us, or even any

one.  Helen will bring a lively crowd.  They'll crave excitement-

-the unusual.  Let us see that they are not disappointed.  You

take the boys into your confidence.  Tell them what to expect,

and tell them how to meet it.  I shall help you in that.  I want

the boys to be on dress-parade when they are off duty.  I want

them to be on their most elegant behavior.  I do not care what

they do, what measures they take to protect themselves, what

tricks they contrive, so long as they do not overstep the limit

of kindness and courtesy.  I want them to play their parts

seriously, naturally, as if they had lived no other way.  My

guests expect to have fun.  Let us meet them with fun.  Now what

do you say?"



Stillwell rose, his great bulk towering, his huge face beaming.



"Wal, I say it's the most amazin' fine idee I ever heerd in my

life."



"Indeed, I am glad you like it," went on Madeline.



"Come to me again, Stillwell, after you have spoken to the boys. 

But, now that I have suggested it, I am a little afraid.  You

know what cowboy fun is.  Perhaps--"



"Don't you go back on that idee," interrupted Stillwell.  He was

assuring and bland, but his hurry to convince Madeline betrayed

him.  "Leave the boys to me.  Why, don't they all swear by you,

same as the Mexicans do to the Virgin?  They won't disgrace you,

Miss Majesty.  They'll be simply immense.  It'll beat any show

you ever seen."



"I believe it will," replied Madeline.  She was still doubtful of

her plan, but the enthusiasm of the old cattleman was infectious

and irresistible.  "Very well, we will consider it settled.  My

guests will arrive on May ninth.  Meanwhile let us get Her

Majesty's Rancho in shape for this invasion."







On the afternoon of the ninth of May, perhaps half an hour after

Madeline had received a telephone message from Link Stevens

announcing the arrival of her guests at El Cajon, Florence called

her out upon the porch.  Stillwell was there with his face

wrinkled by his wonderful smile and his eagle eyes riveted upon

the distant valley.  Far away, perhaps twenty miles, a thin

streak of white dust rose from the valley floor and slanted

skyward.



"Look!" said Florence, excitedly.



"What is that?" asked Madeline.



"Link Stevens and the automobile!"



"Oh no!  Why, it's only a few minutes since he telephoned saying

the party had just arrived."



"Take a look with the glasses," said Florence.



One glance through the powerful binoculars convinced Madeline

that Florence was right.  And another glance at Stillwell told

her that he was speechless with delight.  She remembered a little

conversation she had had with Link Stevens a short while

previous.



"Stevens, I hope the car is in good shape," she had said.  "Now,

Miss Hammond, she's as right as the best-trained hoss I ever

rode," he had replied.



"The valley road is perfect," she had gone on, musingly.  "I

never saw such a beautiful road, even in France. No fences, no

ditches, no rocks, no vehicles.  Just a lonely road on the

desert."



"Shore, it's lonely," Stevens had answered, with slowly

brightening eyes.  "An' safe, Miss Hammond."



"My sister used to like fast riding.  If I remember correctly,

all of my guests were a little afflicted with the speed mania. 

It is a common disease with New-Yorkers.  I hope, Stevens, that

you will not give them reason to think we are altogether steeped

in the slow, dreamy manana languor of the Southwest."



Link doubtfully eyed her, and then his bronze face changed its

dark aspect and seemed to shine.



"Beggin' your pardon, Miss Hammond, thet's shore tall talk fer

Link Stevens to savvy.  You mean--as long as I drive careful an'

safe I can run away from my dust, so to say, an' get here in

somethin' less than the Greaser's to-morrow?"



Madeline had laughed her assent.  And now, as she watched the

thin streak of dust, at that distance moving with snail pace, she

reproached herself.  She trusted Stevens; she had never known so

skilful, daring, and iron-nerved a driver as he was.  If she had

been in the car herself she would have had no anxiety.  But,

imagining what Stevens would do on forty miles and more of that

desert road, Madeline suffered a prick of conscience.



"Oh, Stillwell!" she exclaimed.  "I am afraid I will go back on

my wonderful idea.  What made me do it?"



"Your sister wanted the real thing, didn't she?  Said they all

wanted it.  Wal, I reckon they've begun gettin' it," replied

Stillwell.



That statement from the cattleman allayed Madeline's pangs of

conscience.  She understood just what she felt, though she could

not have put it in words.  She was hungry for a sight of

well-remembered faces; she longed to hear the soft laughter and

gay repartee of old friends; she was eager for gossipy first-hand

news of her old world.  Nevertheless, something in her sister's

letter, in messages from the others who were coming, had touched

Madeline's pride.  In one sense the expected guests were hostile,

inasmuch as they were scornful and curious about the West that

had claimed her.  She imagined what they would expect in a

Western ranch.  They would surely get the real thing, too, as

Stillwell said; and in that certainty was satisfaction for a

small grain of something within Madeline which approached

resentment.  She wistfully wondered, however, if her sister or

friends would come to see the West even a little as she saw it. 

That, perhaps, would he hoping too much.  She resolved once for

all to do her best to give them the sensation their senses

craved, and equally to show them the sweetness and beauty and

wholesomeness and strength of life in the Southwest.



"Wal, as Nels says, I wouldn't be in that there ottomobile right

now for a million pesos," remarked Stillwell.



"Why?  Is Stevens driving fast?"



"Good Lord!  Fast?  Miss Majesty, there hain't ever been anythin'

except a streak of lightnin' run so fast in this country.  I'll

bet Link for once is in heaven.  I can jest see him now, the

grim, crooked-legged little devil, hunchin' down over that wheel

as if it was a hoss's neck."



"I told him not to let the ride be hot or dusty," remarked

Madeline.



"Haw, haw!" roared Stillwell.  "Wal, I'll be goin'.  I reckon I'd

like to be hyar when Link drives up, but I want to be with the

boys down by the bunks.  It'll be some fun to see Nels an' Monty

when Link comes flyin' along."



"I wish Al had stayed to meet them," said Madeline.



Her brother had rather hurried a shipment of cattle to

California: and it was Madeline's supposition that he had

welcomed the opportunity to absent himself from the ranch.



"I am sorry he wouldn't stay," replied Florence.  "But Al's all

business now.  And he's doing finely.  It's just as well,

perhaps."



"Surely.  That was my pride speaking.  I would like to have all

my family and all my old friends see what a man Al has become. 

Well, Link Stevens is running like the wind.  The car will be

here before we know it.  Florence, we've only a few moments to

dress.  But first I want to order many and various and

exceedingly cold refreshments for that approaching party."



Less than a half-hour later Madeline went again to the porch and

found Florence there.



"Oh, you look just lovely!" exclaimed Florence, impulsively, as

she gazed wide-eyed up at Madeline.  "And somehow so different!"



Madeline smiled a little sadly.  Perhaps when she had put on that

exquisite white gown something had come to her of the manner

which befitted the wearing of it.  She could not resist the

desire to look fair once more in the eyes of these hypercritical

friends.  The sad smile had been for the days that were gone. 

For she knew that what society had once been pleased to call her

beauty had trebled since it had last been seen in a drawing-room. 

Madeline wore no jewels, but at her waist she had pinned two

great crimson roses.  Against the dead white they had the life

and fire and redness of the desert.



"Link's hit the old round-up trail," said Florence, "and oh,

isn't he riding that car!"



With Florence, as with most of the cowboys, the car was never

driven, but ridden.



A white spot with a long trail of dust showed low down in the

valley.  It was now headed almost straight for the ranch. 

Madeline watched it growing larger moment by moment, and her

pleasurable emotion grew accordingly.  Then the rapid beat of a

horse's hoofs caused her to turn.



Stewart was riding in on his black horse.  He had been absent on

an important mission, and his duty had taken him to the

international boundary-line. His presence home long before he was

expected was particularly gratifying to Madeline, for it meant

that his mission had been brought to a successful issue. Once

more, for the hundredth time, the man's reliability struck

Madeline.  He was a doer of things.  The black horse halted

wearily without the usual pound of hoofs on the gravel, and the

dusty rider dismounted wearily.  Both horse and rider showed the

heat and dust and wind of many miles.



Madeline advanced to the porch steps.  And Stewart, after taking

a parcel of papers from a saddle-bag, turned toward her.



"Stewart, you are the best of couriers," she said. "I am

pleased."



Dust streamed from his sombrero as he doffed it.  His dark face

seemed to rise as he straightened weary shoulders.



"Here are the reports, Miss Hammond," he replied.



As he looked up to see her standing there, dressed to receive her

Eastern guests, he checked his advance with a violent action

which recalled to Madeline the one he had made on the night she

had met him, when she disclosed her identity. It was not fear nor

embarrassment nor awkwardness.  And it was only momentary.  Yet,

slight as had been his pause, Madeline received from it an

impression of some strong halting force.  A man struck by a

bullet might have had an instant jerk of muscular control such as

convulsed Stewart.  In that instant, as her keen gaze searched

his dust-caked face, she met the full, free look of his eyes. 

Her own did not fall, though she felt a warmth steal to her

cheeks.  Madeline very seldom blushed.  And now, conscious of her

sudden color a genuine blush flamed on her face.  It was

irritating because it was incomprehensible.  She received the

papers from Stewart and thanked him.  He bowed, then led the

black down the path toward the corrals.



"When Stewart looks like that he's been riding," said Florence. 

"But when his horse looks like that he's sure been burning the

wind."



Madeline watched the weary horse and rider limp down the path. 

What had made her thoughtful?  Mostly it was something new or

sudden or inexplicable that stirred her mind to quick analysis. 

In this instance the thing that had struck Madeline was Stewart's

glance.  He had looked at her, and the old burning, inscrutable

fire, the darkness, had left his eyes.  Suddenly they had been

beautiful.  The look had not been one of surprise or admiration;

nor had it been one of love. She was familiar, too familiar with

all three.  It had not been a gaze of passion, for there was

nothing beautiful in that. Madeline pondered.  And presently she

realized that Stewart's eyes had expressed a strange joy of

pride.  That expression Madeline had never before encountered in

the look of any man. Probably its strangeness had made her notice

it and accounted for her blushing.  The longer she lived among

these outdoor men the more they surprised her.  Particularly, how

incomprehensible was this cowboy Stewart!  Why should he have

pride or joy at sight of her?



Florence's exclamation made Madeline once more attend to the

approaching automobile.  It was on the slope now, some miles down

the long gradual slant.  Two yellow funnel-shaped clouds of dust

seemed to shoot out from behind the car and roll aloft to join

the column that stretched down the valley.



"I wonder what riding a mile a minute would be like," said

Florence.  "I'll sure make Link take me.  Oh, but look at him

come!"



The giant car resembled a white demon, and but for the dust would

have appeared to be sailing in the air.  Its motion was steadily

forward, holding to the road as if on rails.  And its velocity

was astounding.  Long, gray veils, like pennants, streamed in the

wind.  A low rushing sound became perceptible, and it grew

louder, became a roar.  The car shot like an arrow past the

alfalfa-field, by the bunk-houses, where the cowboys waved and

cheered.  The horses and burros in the corrals began to snort and

tramp and race in fright.  At the base of the long slope of the

foothill Link cut the speed more than half.  Yet the car roared

up, rolling the dust, flying capes and veils and ulsters, and

crashed and cracked to a halt in the yard before the porch.



Madeline descried a gray, disheveled mass of humanity packed

inside the car.  Besides the driver there were seven occupants,

and for a moment they appeared to be coming to life, moving and

exclaiming under the veils and wraps and dust-shields.



Link Stevens stepped out and, removing helmet and goggles, coolly

looked at his watch.



"An hour an' a quarter, Miss Hammond," he said.  "It's

sixty-three miles by the valley road, an' you know there's a

couple of bad hills.  I reckon we made fair time, considerin' you

wanted me to drive slow an' safe."



From the mass of dusty-veiled humanity in the car came low

exclamations and plaintive feminine wails.



Madeline stepped to the front of the porch.  Then the deep voices

of men and softer voices of women united in one glad outburst, as

much a thanksgiving as a greeting, "MAJESTY!"







Helen Hammond was three years younger than Madeline, and a

slender, pretty girl.  She did not resemble her sister, except in

whiteness and fineness of skin, being more of a brown-eyed,

brown-haired type.  Having recovered her breath soon after

Madeline took her to her room, she began to talk.



"Majesty, old girl, I'm here; but you can bet I would never have

gotten here if I had known about that ride from the railroad. 

You never wrote that you had a car.  I thought this was out West-

-stage-coach, and all that sort of thing.  Such a tremendous car! 

And the road!  And that terrible little man with the leather

trousers!  What kind of a chauffeur is he?"



"He's a cowboy.  He was crippled by falling under his horse, so I

had him instructed to run the car.  He can drive, don't you

think?"



"Drive?  Good gracious!  He scared us to death, except Castleton. 

Nothing could scare that cold-blooded little Englishman.  I am

dizzy yet.  Do you know, Majesty, I was delighted when I saw the

car.  Then your cowboy driver met us at the platform.  What a

queer-looking individual!  He had a big pistol strapped to those

leather trousers.  That made me nervous.  When he piled us all in

with our grips, he put me in the seat beside him, whether I liked

it or not.  I was fool enough to tell him I loved to travel fast. 

What do you think he said?  Well, he eyed me in a rather cool and

speculative way and said, with a smile, 'Miss, I reckon anything

you love an' want bad will be coming to you out here!'  I didn't

know whether it was delightful candor or impudence.  Then he said

to all of us: 'Shore you had better wrap up in the veils an'

dusters.  It's a long, slow, hot, dusty ride to the ranch, an'

Miss Hammond's order was to drive safe.'  He got our baggage

checks and gave them to a man with a huge wagon and a four-horse

team.  Then he cranked the car, jumped in, wrapped his arms round

the wheel, and sank down low in his seat.  There was a crack, a

jerk, a kind of flash around us, and that dirty little town was

somewhere on the map behind.  For about five minutes I had a

lovely time.  Then the wind began to tear me to pieces.  I

couldn't hear anything but the rush of wind and roar of the car. 

I could see only straight ahead.  What a road!  I never saw a

road in my life till to-day.  Miles and miles and miles ahead,

with not even a post or tree.  That big car seemed to leap at the

miles.  It hummed and sang.  I was fascinated, then terrified. 

We went so fast I couldn't catch my breath. The wind went through

me, and I expected to be disrobed by it any minute.  I was afraid

I couldn't hold any clothes on. Presently all I could see was a

flashing gray wall with a white line in the middle.  Then my eyes

blurred.  My face burned. My ears grew full of a hundred thousand

howling devils.  I was about ready to die when the car stopped. 

I looked and looked, and when I could see, there you stood!"



"Helen, I thought you were fond of speeding," said Madeline, with

a laugh.



"I was.  But I assure you I never before was in a fast car; I

never saw a road; I never met a driver."



"Perhaps I may have a few surprises for you out here in the wild

and woolly West."



Helen's dark eyes showed a sister's memory of possibilities.



"You've started well," she said. "I am simply stunned. I expected

to find you old and dowdy.  Majesty, you're the handsomest thing

I ever laid eyes on.  You're so splendid and strong, and your

skin is like white gold.  What's happened to you?  What's changed

you?  This beautiful room, those glorious roses out there, the

cool, dark sweetness of this wonderful house!  I know you,

Majesty, and, though you never wrote it, I believe you have made

a home out here.  That's the most stunning surprise of all. 

Come, confess.  I know I've always been selfish and not much of a

sister; but if you are happy out here I am glad.  You were not

happy at home.  Tell me about yourself and about Alfred.  Then I

shall give you all the messages and news from the East."



It afforded Madeline exceeding pleasure to have from one and all

of her guests varied encomiums of her beautiful home, and a real

and warm interest in what promised to be a delightful and

memorable visit.



Of them all Castleton was the only one who failed to show

surprise.  He greeted her precisely as be had when he had last

seen her in London.  Madeline, rather to her astonishment, found

meeting him again pleasurable.  She discovered she liked this

imperturbable Englishman.  Manifestly her capacity for liking any

one had immeasurably enlarged.  Quite unexpectedly her old

girlish love for her younger sister sprang into life, and with it

interest in these half-forgotten friends, and a warm regard for

Edith Wayne, a chum of college days.



Helen's party was smaller than Madeline had expected it to be. 

Helen had been careful to select a company of good friends, all

of whom were well known to Madeline.  Edith Wayne was a patrician

brunette, a serious, soft-voiced woman, sweet and kindly, despite

a rather bitter experience that had left her worldly wise.  Mrs.

Carrollton Beck, a plain, lively person, had chaperoned the

party.  The fourth and last of the feminine contingent was Miss

Dorothy Coombs--Dot, as they called her--a young woman of

attractive blond prettiness.



For a man Castleton was of very small stature.  He had a

pink-and-white complexion, a small golden mustache, and his heavy

eyelids, always drooping, made him look dull.  His attire, cut to

what appeared to be an exaggerated English style, attracted

attention to his diminutive size.  He was immaculate and

fastidious.  Robert Weede was a rather large florid young man,

remarkable only for his good nature. Counting Boyd Harvey, a

handsome, pale-faced fellow, with the careless smile of the man

for whom life had been easy and pleasant, the party was complete.



Dinner was a happy hour, especially for the Mexican women who

served it and who could not fail to note its success. The

mingling of low voices and laughter, the old, gay, superficial

talk, the graciousness of a class which lived for the pleasure of

things and to make time pass pleasurably for others--all took

Madeline far back into the past.  She did not care to return to

it, but she saw that it was well she had not wholly cut herself

off from her people and friends.



When the party adjourned to the porch the heat had markedly

decreased and the red sun was sinking over the red desert.  An

absence of spoken praise, a gradually deepening silence, attested

to the impression on the visitors of that noble sunset.  Just as

the last curve of red rim vanished beyond the dim Sierra Madres

and the golden lightning began to flare brighter Helen broke the

silence with an exclamation.



"It wants only life.  Ah, there's a horse climbing the hill! 

See, he's up!  He has a rider!"



Madeline knew before she looked the identity of the man riding up

the mesa.  But she did not know until that moment how the habit

of watching for him at this hour had grown upon her. He rode

along the rim of the mesa and out to the point, where, against

the golden background, horse and rider stood silhouetted in bold

relief.



"What's he doing there?  Who is he?" inquired the curious Helen.



"That is Stewart, my right-hand man," replied Madeline. "Every

day when he is at the ranch he rides up there at sunset. I think

he likes the ride and the scene; but he goes to take a look at

the cattle in the valley."



"Is he a cowboy?" asked Helen.



"Indeed yes!" replied Madeline, with a little laugh. "You will

think so when Stillwell gets hold of you and begins to talk."



Madeline found it necessary to explain who Stillwell was, and

what he thought of Stewart, and, while she was about it, of her

own accord she added a few details of Stewart's fame.



"El Capitan.  How interesting!" mused Helen.  "What does he look

like?"



"He is superb."



Florence handed the field-glass to Helen and bade her look.



"Oh, thank you!" said Helen, as she complied.  "There. I see him. 

Indeed, he is superb.  What a magnificent horse! How still he

stands!  Why, he seems carved in stone."



"Let me look?" said Dorothy Coombs, eagerly.



Helen gave her the glass.



"You can look, Dot, but that's all.  He's mine.  I saw him

first."



Whereupon Madeline's feminine guests held a spirited contest over

the field-glass, and three of them made gay, bantering boasts not

to consider Helen's self-asserted rights. Madeline laughed with

the others while she watched the dark figure of Stewart and his

black outline against the sky.  There came over her a thought not

by any means new or strange--she wondered what was in Stewart's

mind as he stood there in the solitude and faced the desert and

the darkening west.  Some day she meant to ask him.  Presently he

turned the horse and rode down into the shadow creeping up the

mesa.



"Majesty, have you planned any fun, any excitement for us?" asked

Helen.  She was restless, nervous, and did not seem to be able to

sit still a moment.



"You will think so when I get through with you," replied

Madeline.



"What, for instance?" inquired Helen and Dot and Mrs. Beck, in

unison.  Edith Wayne smiled her interest.



"Well, I am not counting rides and climbs and golf; but these are

necessary to train you for trips over into Arizona. I want to

show you the desert and the Aravaipa Canon.  We have to go on

horseback and pack our outfit.  If any of you are alive after

those trips and want more we shall go up into the mountains.  I

should like very much to know what you each want particularly."



"I'll tell you," replied Helen, promptly.  "Dot will be the same

out here as she was in the East.  She wants to look bashfully

down at her hand--a hand imprisoned in another, by the way--and

listen to a man talk poetry about her eyes.  If cowboys don't

make love that way Dot's visit will be a failure. Now Elsie Beck

wants solely to be revenged upon us for dragging her out here. 

She wants some dreadful thing to happen to us. I don't know

what's in Edith's head, but it isn't fun.  Bobby wants to be near

Elsie, and no more.  Boyd wants what he has always wanted--the

only thing he ever wanted that he didn't get.  Castleton has a

horrible bloodthirsty desire to kill something."



"I declare now, I want to ride and camp out, also," protested

Castleton.



"As for myself," went on Helen, "I want-- Oh, if I only knew what

it is that I want!  Well, I know I want to be outdoors, to get

into the open, to feel sun and wind, to burn some color into my

white face.  I want some flesh and blood and life.  I am tired

out.  Beyond all that I don't know very well. I'll try to keep

Dot from attaching all the cowboys to her train."



"What a diversity of wants!" said Madeline.



"Above all, Majesty, we want something to happen," concluded

Helen, with passionate finality.



"My dear sister, maybe you will have your wish fulfilled,"

replied Madeline, soberly.  "Edith, Helen has made me curious

about your especial yearning."



"Majesty, it is only that I wanted to be with you for a while,"

replied this old friend.



There was in the wistful reply, accompanied by a dark and

eloquent glance of eyes, what told Madeline of Edith's

understanding, of her sympathy, and perhaps a betrayal of her own

unquiet soul.  It saddened Madeline.  How many women might there

not be who had the longing to break down the bars of their cage,

but had not the spirit!


