





XXII The Secret Told



In the shaded seclusion of her room, buried face down deep among

the soft cushions on her couch, Madeline Hammond lay prostrate

and quivering under the outrage she had suffered.



The afternoon wore away; twilight fell; night came; and then

Madeline rose to sit by the window to let the cool wind blow upon

her hot face.  She passed through hours of unintelligible shame

and impotent rage and futile striving to reason away her

defilement.



The train of brightening stars seemed to mock her with their

unattainable passionless serenity.  She had loved them, and now

she imagined she hated them and everything connected with this

wild, fateful, and abrupt West.



She would go home.



Edith Wayne had been right; the West was no place for Madeline

Hammond.  The decision to go home came easily, naturally, she

thought, as the result of events.  It caused her no mental

strife.  Indeed, she fancied she felt relief.  The great stars,

blinking white and cold over the dark crags, looked down upon

her, and, as always, after she had watched them for a while they

enthralled her.  "Under Western stars," she mused, thinking a

little scornfully of the romantic destiny they had blazed for her

idle sentiment.  But they were beautiful; they were speaking;

they were mocking; they drew her.  "Ah!" she sighed.  "It will

not be so very easy to leave them, after all."



Madeline closed and darkened the window.  She struck a light.  It

was necessary to tell the anxious servants who knocked that she

was well and required nothing.  A soft step on the walk outside

arrested her.  Who was there--Nels or Nick Steele or Stillwell? 

Who shared the guardianship over her, now that Monty Price was

dead and that other--that savage--?  It was monstrous and

unfathomable that she regretted him.



The light annoyed her.  Complete darkness fitted her strange

mood.  She retired and tried to compose herself to sleep.  Sleep

for her was not a matter of will.  Her cheeks burned so hotly

that she rose to bathe them.  Cold water would not alleviate this

burn, and then, despairing of forgetfulness, she lay down again

with a shameful gratitude for the cloak of night.  Stewart's

kisses were there, scorching her lips, her closed eyes, her

swelling neck.  They penetrated deeper and deeper into her blood,

into her heart, into her soul--the terrible farewell kisses of a

passionate, hardened man. Despite his baseness, he had loved her.



Late in the night Madeline fell asleep.  In the morning she was

pale and languid, but in a mental condition that promised composure.



It was considerably after her regular hour that Madeline repaired

to her office.  The door was open, and just outside, tipped back

in a chair, sat Stillwell.



"Mawnin', Miss Majesty," he said, as he rose to greet her with

his usual courtesy.  There were signs of trouble in his lined

face.  Madeline shrank inwardly, fearing his old lamentations

about Stewart.  Then she saw a dusty, ragged pony in the yard and

a little burro drooping under a heavy pack. Both animals bore

evidence of long, arduous travel.



"To whom do they belong?" asked Madeline.



"Them critters?  Why, Danny Mains," replied Stillwell, with a

cough that betrayed embarrassment.



"Danny Mains?" echoed Madeline, wonderingly.



"Wal, I said so."



Stillwell was indeed not himself.



Is Danny Mains here?" she asked, in sudden curiosity.



The old cattleman nodded gloomily.



"Yep, he's hyar, all right.  Sloped in from the hills, an' he

hollered to see Bonita.  He's locoed, too, about that little

black-eyed hussy.  Why, he hardly said, 'Howdy, Bill,' before he

begun to ask wild an' eager questions.  I took him in to see

Bonita.  He's been there more 'n a half-hour now."



Evidently Stillwell's sensitive feelings had been ruffled,

Madeline's curiosity changed to blank astonishment, which left

her with a thrilling premonition.  She caught her breath.  A

thousand thoughts seemed thronging for clear conception in her

mind.



Rapid footsteps with an accompaniment of clinking spurs sounded

in the hallway.  Then a young man ran out upon the porch.  He

resembled a cowboy in his lithe build, his garb and action, in

the way he wore his gun, but his face, instead of being red, was

clear brown tan.  His eyes were blue; his hair was light and

curly.  He was a handsome, frank-faced boy.  At sight of Madeline

he slammed down his sombrero and, leaping at her, he possessed

himself of her hands.  His swift violence not only alarmed her,

but painfully reminded her of something she wished to forget.



This cowboy bent his head and kissed her hands and wrung them,

and when he straightened up he was crying.



"Miss Hammond, she's safe an' almost well, an' what I feared most

ain't so, thank God," he cried.  "Sure I'll never be able to pay

you for all you've done for her.  She's told me how she was

dragged down here, how Gene tried to save her, how you spoke up

for Gene an' her, too, how Monty at the last throwed his guns. 

Poor Monty!  We were good friends, Monty an' I.  But it wasn't

friendship for me that made Monty stand in there.  He would have

saved her, anyway.  Monty Price was the whitest man I ever knew. 

There's Nels an' Nick an' Gene, he's been some friend to me; but

Monty Price was--he was grand.  He never knew, any more than you

or Bill, here, or the boys, what Bonita was to me."



Stillwell's kind and heavy hand fell upon the cowboy's shoulder.



"Danny, what's all this queer gab?" he asked.  "An' you're takin'

some liberty with Miss Hammond, who never seen you before.  Sure

I'm makin' allowance fer amazin' strange talk.  I see you're not

drinkin'.  Mebbe you're plumb locoed. Come, ease up now an' talk

sense."



The cowboy's fine, frank face broke into a smile.  He dashed the

tears from his eyes.  Then he laughed.  His laugh had a pleasant,

boyish ring--a happy ring.



"Bill, old pal, stand bridle down a minute, will you?" Then he

bowed to Madeline.  "I beg your pardon, Miss Hammond, for seemin'

rudeness.  I'm Danny Mains.  An' Bonita is my wife. I'm so crazy

glad she's safe an' unharmed--so grateful to you that--why, sure

it's a wonder I didn't kiss you outright."



"Bonita's your wife!" ejaculated Stillwell.



"Sure.  We've been married for months," replied Danny, happily. 

"Gene Stewart did it.  Good old Gene, he's hell on marryin'.  I

guess maybe I haven't come to pay him up for all he's done for

me!  You see, I've been in love with Bonita for two years.  An'

Gene--you know, Bill, what a way Gene has with girls--he was--

well, he was tryin' to get Bonita to have me."



Madeline's quick, varying emotions were swallowed up in a

boundless gladness.  Something dark, deep, heavy, and somber was

flooded from her heart.  She had a sudden rich sense of gratitude

toward this smiling, clean-faced cowboy whose blue eyes flashed

through tears.



"Danny Mains!" she said, tremulously and smilingly. "If you are

as glad as your news has made me--if you really think I merit

such a reward--you may kiss me outright."



With a bashful wonder, but with right hearty will, Danny Mains

availed himself of this gracious privilege. Stillwell snorted. 

The signs of his phenomenal smile were manifest, otherwise

Madeline would have thought that snort an indication of furious

disapproval.



"Bill, straddle a chair," said Danny.  "You've gone back a heap

these last few months, frettin' over your bad boys, Danny an'

Gene.  You'll need support under you while I'm throwin' my yarn. 

Story of my life, Bill."  He placed a chair for Madeline.  "Miss

Hammond, beggin' your pardon again, I want you to listen, also. 

You've the face an' eyes of a woman who loves to hear of other

people's happiness.  Besides, somehow, it's easy for me to talk

lookin' at you."



His manner subtly changed then.  Possibly it took on a little

swagger; certainly he lost the dignity that he had shown under

stress of feeling; he was now more like a cowboy about to boast

or affect some stunning maneuver.  Walking off the porch, he

stood before the weary horse and burro.



"Played out!" he exclaimed.



Then with the swift violence so characteristic of men of his

class he slipped the pack from the burro and threw saddle and

bridle from the horse.



"There!  See 'em!  Take a look at the last dog-gone weight you

ever packed!  You've been some faithful to Danny Mains.  An'

Danny Mains pays!  Never a saddle again or a strap or a halter or

a hobble so long as you live!  So long as you live nothin' but

grass an' clover, an' cool water in shady places, an' dusty

swales to roll in an' rest an' sleep!"



Then he untied the pack and, taking a small, heavy sack from it,

he came back upon the porch.  Deliberately he dumped the contents

of the sack at Stillwell's feet.  Piece after piece of rock

thumped upon the floor.  The pieces were sharp, ragged, evidently

broken from a ledge; the body of them was white in color, with

yellow veins and bars and streaks. Stillwell grasped up one rock

after another, stared and stuttered, put the rocks to his lips,

dug into them with his shaking fingers; then he lay back in his

chair, head against the wall, and as he gaped at Danny the old

smile began to transform his face.



"Lord, Danny if you hevn't been an' gone an' struck it rich!"



Danny regarded Stillwell with lofty condescension.



"Some rich," he said.  "Now, Bill, what've we got here, say,

offhand?"



"Oh, Lord, Danny!  I'm afraid to say.  Look, Miss Majesty, jest

look at the gold.  I've lived among prospectors an' gold-mines

fer thirty years, an' I never seen the beat of this."



"The Lost Mine of the Padres!" cried Danny, in stentorian voice. 

"An' it belongs to me!"



Stillwell made some incoherent sound as he sat up fascinated,

quite beside himself.



"Bill, it was some long time ago since you saw me," said Danny. 

"Fact is, I know how you felt, because Gene kept me posted.  I

happened to run across Bonita, an' I wasn't goin' to let her ride

away alone, when she told me she was in trouble.  We hit the

trail for the Peloncillos.  Bonita had Gene's horse, an' she was

to meet him up on the trail.  We got to the mountains all right,

an' nearly starved for a few days till Gene found us.  He had got

in trouble himself an' couldn't fetch much with him.



"We made for the crags an' built a cabin.  I come down that day

Gene sent his horse Majesty to you.  Never saw Gene so

broken-hearted.  Well, after he sloped for the border Bonita an'

I were hard put to it to keep alive.  But we got along, an' I

think it was then she began to care a little for me.  Because I

was decent.  I killed cougars an' went down to Rodeo to get

bounties for the skins, an' bought grub an' supplies I needed.

Once I went to El Cajon an' run plumb into Gene.  He was back

from the revolution an' cuttin' up some.  But I got away from him

after doin' all I could to drag him out of town.  A long time

after that Gene trailed up to the crags an' found us. Gene had

stopped drinkin', he'd changed wonderful, was fine an' dandy.  It

was then he began to pester the life out of me to make me marry

Bonita.  I was happy, so was she, an' I was some scared of

spoilin' it.  Bonita had been a little flirt, an' I was afraid

she'd get shy of a halter, so I bucked against Gene. But I was

all locoed, as it turned out.  Gene would come up occasionally,

packin' supplies for us, an' always he'd get after me to do the

right thing by Bonita.  Gene's so dog-gone hard to buck against! 

I had to give in, an' I asked Bonita to marry me.  Well, she

wouldn't at first--said she wasn't good enough for me.  But I saw

the marriage idea was workin' deep, an' I just kept on bein' as

decent as I knew how.  So it was my wantin' to marry Bonita--my

bein' glad to marry her--that made her grow soft an' sweet an'

pretty as--as a mountain quail.  Gene fetched up Padre Marcos,

an' he married us."



Danny paused in his narrative, breathing hard, as if the memory

of the incident described had stirred strong and thrilling

feeling in him.  Stillwell's smile was rapturous. Madeline leaned

toward Danny with her eyes shining.



"Miss Hammond, an' you, Bill Stillwell, now listen, for this is

strange I've got to tell you.  The afternoon Bonita an' I were

married, when Gene an' the padre had gone, I was happy one minute

an' low-hearted the next.  I was miserable because I had a bad

name.  I couldn't buy even a decent dress for my pretty wife. 

Bonita heard me, an' she was some mysterious. She told me the

story of the lost mine of the padres, an' she kissed me an made

joyful over me in the strangest way.  I knew marriage went to

women's heads, an' I thought even Bonita had a spell.



"Well, she left me for a little, an' when she came back she wore

some pretty yellow flowers in her hair.  Her eyes were big an'

black an' beautiful.  She said some queer things about spirits

rollin' rocks down the canon.  Then she said she wanted to show

me where she always sat an' waited an' watched for me when I was

away.



She led me around under the crags to a long slope.  It was some

pretty there--clear an' open, with a long sweep, an' the desert

yawnin' deep an' red.  There were yellow flowers on that slope,

the same kind she had in her hair--the same kind that Apache girl

wore hundreds of years ago when she led the padre to the

gold-mine.



"When I thought of that, an' saw Bonita's eyes, an' then heard

the strange crack of rollin' rocks--heard them rattle down an'

roll an' grow faint--I was some out of my head.  But not for

long.  Them rocks were rollin' all right, only it was the

weatherin' of the cliffs.



"An' there under the crags was a gold pocket.



"Then I was worse than locoed.  I went gold-crazy.  I worked like

seventeen burros.  Bill, I dug a lot of goldbearin' quartz. 

Bonita watched the trails for me, brought me water. That was how

she come to get caught by Pat Hawe an' his guerrillas.  Sure! 

Pat Hawe was so set on doin' Gene dirt that he mixed up with Don

Carlos.  Bonita will tell you some staggerin' news about that

outfit.  Just now my story is all gold."



Danny Mains got up and kicked back his chair.  Blue lightning

gleamed from his eyes as he thrust a hand toward Stillwell.



"Bill, old pal, put her there--give me your hand," he said.  "You

were always my friend.  You had faith in me.  Well, Danny Mains

owes you, an' he owes Gene Stewart a good deal, an' Danny Mains

pays.  I want two pardners to help me work my gold-mine.  You an'

Gene.  If there's any ranch hereabouts that takes your fancy I'll

buy it.  If Miss Hammond ever gets tired of her range an stock

an' home I'll buy them for Gene.  If there's any railroad or town

round here that she likes I'll buy it.  If I see anythin' myself

that I like I'll buy it.  Go out; find Gene for me.  I'm achin'

to see him, to tell him.  Go fetch him; an' right here in this

house, with my wife an' Miss Hammond as witnesses, we'll draw up

a pardnership.  Go find him, Bill.  I want to show him this gold,

show him how Danny Mains pays!  An' the only bitter drop in my

cup to-day is that I can't ever pay Monty Price."







Madeline's lips tremblingly formed to tell Danny Mains and

Stillwell that the cowboy they wanted so much had left the ranch;

but the flame of fine loyalty that burned in Danny's eyes, the

happiness that made the old cattleman's face at once amazing and

beautiful, stiffened her lips.  She watched the huge Stillwell

and the little cowboy, both talking wildly, as they walked off

arm in arm to find Stewart.  She imagined something of what

Danny's disappointment would be, of the elder man's consternation

and grief, when he learned Stewart had left for the border.  At

this juncture she looked up to see a strange, yet familiar figure

approaching.  Padre Marcos! Certain it was that Madeline felt

herself trembling.  What did his presence mean on this day?  He

had always avoided meeting her whenever possible.  He had been

exceedingly grateful for all she had done for his people, his

church, and himself; but he had never thanked her in person. 

Perhaps he had come for that purpose now.  But Madeline did not

believe so.



Mention of Padre Marcos, sight of him, had always occasioned

Madeline a little indefinable shock; and now, as he stepped to

the porch, a shrunken, stooped, and sad-faced man, she was

startled.



The padre bowed low to her.



"Senora, will you grant me audience?" he asked, in perfect

English, and his voice was low-toned and grave.



"Certainly, Padre Marcos," replied Madeline; and she led him into

her office.



"May I beg to close the doors?" he asked.  "It is a matter of

great moment, which you might not care to have any one hear."



Wonderingly Madeline inclined her head.  The padre gently closed

one door and then the others.



"Senora, I have come to disclose a secret--my own sinfulness in

keeping it--and to implore your pardon.  Do you remember that

night Senor Stewart dragged me before you in the waiting-room at

El Cajon?"



"Yes," replied Madeline.



"Senora, since that night you have been Senor Stewart's wife!"



Madeline became as motionless as stone.  She seemed to feel

nothing, only to hear.



"You are Senor Stewart's wife.  I have kept the secret under fear

of death.  But I could keep it no longer.  Senor Stewart may kill

me now.  Ah, Senora, it is very strange to you.  You were so

frightened that night, you knew not what happened.  Senor Stewart

threatened me.  He forced you.  He made me speak the service.  He

made you speak the Spanish yes. And I, Senora, knowing the deeds

of these sinful cowboys, fearing worse than disgrace to one so

beautiful and so good as you, I could not do less than marry you

truly.  At least you should be his wife.  So I married you,

truly, in the service of my church."



"My God!" cried Madeline, rising.



"Hear me!  I implore you, Senora, hear me out!  Do not leave me! 

Do not look so--so-- Ah, Senora, let me speak a word for Senor

Stewart.  He was drunk that night.  He did not know what he was

about.  In the morning he came to me, made me swear by my cross

that I would not reveal the disgrace he had put upon you.  If I

did he would kill me.  Life is nothing to the American vaquero,

Senora.  I promised to respect his command.  But I did not tell

him you were his wife.  He did not dream I had truly married you. 

He went to fight for the freedom of my country--Senora, he is one

splendid soldier--and I brooded over the sin of my secret.  If he

were killed I need never tell you.  But if he lived I knew that I

must some day.



"Strange indeed that Senor Stewart and Padre Marcos should both

come to this ranch together.  The great change your goodness

wrought in my beloved people was no greater than the change in

Senor Stewart.  Senora, I feared you would go away one day, go

back to your Eastern home, ignorant of the truth. The time came

when I confessed to Stewart--said I must tell you.  Senor, the

man went mad with joy.  I have never seen so supreme a joy.  He

threatened no more to kill me.  That strong, cruel vaquero begged

me not to tell the secret--never to reveal it.  He confessed his

love for you--a love something like the desert storm.  He swore

by all that was once sacred to him, and by my cross and my

church, that he would be a good man, that he would be worthy to

have you secretly his wife for the little time life left him to

worship at your shrine.  You needed never to know.  So I held my

tongue, half pitying him, half fearing him, and praying for some

God-sent light.



"Senora, it was a fool's paradise that Stewart lived in.  I saw

him, often.  When he took me up into the mountains to have me

marry that wayward Bonita and her lover I came to have respect

for a man whose ideas about nature and life and God were at a

variance with mine.  But the man is a worshiper of God in all

material things.  He is a part of the wind and sun and desert and

mountain that have made him.  I have never heard more beautiful

words than those in which he persuaded Bonita to accept Senor

Mains, to forget her old lovers, and henceforth to he happy.  He

is their friend.  I wish I could tell you what that means.  It

sounds so simple.  It is really simple.  All great things are so. 

For Senor Stewart it was natural to be loyal to his friend, to

have a fine sense of the honor due to a woman who had loved and

given, to bring about their marriage, to succor them in their

need and loneliness. It was natural for him never to speak of

them.  It would have been natural for him to give his life in

their defense if peril menaced them.  Senora, I want you to

understand that to me the man has the same stability, the same

strength, the same elements which I am in the habit of

attributing to the physical life around me in this wild and

rugged desert."



Madeline listened as one under a spell.  It was not only that

this soft-voiced, eloquent priest knew how to move the heart,

stir the soul; but his defense, his praise of Stewart, if they

had been couched in the crude speech of cowboys, would have been

a glory to her.



"Senora, I pray you, do not misunderstand my mission. Beyond my

confession to you I have only a duty to tell you of the man whose

wife you are.  But I am a priest and I can read the soul.  The

ways of God are inscrutable.  I am only a humble instrument.  You

are a noble woman, and Senor Stewart is a man of desert iron

forged anew in the crucible of love.  Quien sabe?  Senor Stewart

swore he would kill me if I betrayed him. But he will not lift

his hand against me.  For the man bears you a very great and pure

love, and it has changed him.  I no longer fear his threat, but I

do fear his anger, should he ever know I spoke of his love, of

his fool's paradise.  I have watched his dark face turned to the

sun setting over the desert.  I have watched him lift it to the

light of the stars. Think, my gracious and noble lady, think what

is his paradise? To love you above the spirit of the flesh; to

know you are his wife, his, never to be another's except by his

sacrifice; to watch you with a secret glory of joy and pride; to

stand, while he might, between you and evil; to find his

happiness in service; to wait, with never a dream of telling you,

for the hour to come when to leave you free he must go out and

get himself shot!  Senora, that is beautiful, it is sublime, it

is terrible.  It has brought me to you with my confession.  I

repeat, Senora, the ways of God are inscrutable.  What is the

meaning of your influence upon Senor Stewart?  Once he was merely

an animal, brutal, unquickened; now he is a man--I have not seen

his like!  So I beseech you in my humble office as priest, as a

lover of mankind, before you send Stewart to his death, to be

sure there is here no mysterious dispensation of God.  Love, that

mighty and blessed and unknown thing, might be at work.  Senora,

I have heard that somewhere in the rich Eastern cities you are a

very great lady.  I know you are good and noble.  That is all I

want to know.  To me you are only a woman, the same as Senor

Stewaft is only a man.  So I pray you, Senora, before you let

Stewart give you freedom at such cost be sure you do not want his

love, lest you cast away something sweet and ennobling which you

yourself have created."


