





XXIV The Ride



"Stillwell!'



Madeline's cry was more than the utterance of a breaking heart. 

It was full of agony.  But also it uttered the shattering of a

structure built of false pride, of old beliefs, of bloodless

standards, of ignorance of self.  It betrayed the final conquest

of her doubts, and out of their darkness blazed the unquenchable

spirit of a woman who had found herself, her love, her salvation,

her duty to a man, and who would not be cheated.



The old cattleman stood mute before her, staring at her white

face, at her eyes of flame.



"Stillwell!  I am Stewart's wife!"



"My Gawd, Miss Majesty!" he burst out.  "I knowed somethin'

turrible was wrong.  Aw, sure it's a pity--"



"Do you think I'll let him be shot when I know him now, when I'm

no longer blind, when I love him?" she asked, with passionate

swiftness.  "I will save him.  This is Wednesday morning.  I have

thirty-six hours to save his life.  Stillwell, send for Link and

the car!"



She went into her office.  Her mind worked with extraordinary

rapidity and clearness.  Her plan, born in one lightning-like

flash of thought, necessitated the careful wording of telegrams

to Washington, to New York, to San Antonio.  These were to

Senators, Representatives, men high in public and private life,

men who would remember her and who would serve her to their

utmost.  Never before had her position meant anything to her

comparable with what it meant now.  Never in all her life had

money seemed the power that it was then. If she had been poor!  A

shuddering chill froze the thought at its inception.  She

dispelled heartbreaking thoughts.  She had power.  She had

wealth.  She would set into operation all the unlimited means

these gave her--the wires and pulleys and strings underneath the

surface of political and international life, the open, free,

purchasing value of money or the deep, underground, mysterious,

incalculably powerful influence moved by gold.  She could save

Stewart.  She must await results--deadlocked in feeling, strained

perhaps almost beyond endurance, because the suspense would be

great; but she would allow no possibility of failure to enter her

mind.



When she went outside the car was there with Link, helmet in

hand, a cool, bright gleam in his eyes, and with Stillwell,

losing his haggard misery, beginning to respond to Madeline's

spirit.



"Link, drive Stillwell to El Cajon in time for him to catch the

El Paso train," she said.  "Wait there for his return, and if any

message comes from him, telephone it at once to me."



Then she gave Stillwell the telegrams to send from El Cajon and

drafts to cash in El Paso.  She instructed him to go before the

rebel junta, then stationed at Juarez, to explain the situation,

to bid them expect communications from Washington officials

requesting and advising Stewart's exchange as a prisoner of war,

to offer to buy his release from the rebel authorities.



When Stillwell had heard her through his huge, bowed form

straightened, a ghost of his old smile just moved his lips.  He

was no longer young, and hope could not at once drive away stern

and grim realities.  As he bent over her hand his manner appeared

courtly and reverent.  But either he was speechless or felt the

moment not one for him to break silence.



He climbed to a seat beside Link, who pocketed the watch he had

been studying and leaned over the wheel.  There was a crack, a

muffled sound bursting into a roar, and the big car jerked

forward to bound over the edge of the slope, to leap down the

long incline, to shoot out upon the level valley floor and

disappear in moving dust.



For the first time in days Madeline visited the gardens, the

corrals, the lakes, the quarters of the cowboys. Though imagining

she was calm, she feared she looked strange to Nels, to Nick, to

Frankie Slade, to those boys best known to her.  The situation

for them must have been one of tormenting pain and bewilderment. 

They acted as if they wanted to say something to her, but found

themselves spellbound.  She wondered--did they know she was

Stewart's wife?  Stillwell had not had time to tell them;

besides, he would not have mentioned the fact.  These cowboys

only knew that Stewart was sentenced to be shot; they knew if

Madeline had not been angry with him he would not have gone in

desperate fighting mood across the border.  She spoke of the

weather, of the horses and cattle, asked Nels when he was to go

on duty, and turned away from the wide, sunlit, adobe-arched

porch where the cowboys stood silent and bareheaded.  Then one of

her subtle impulses checked her.



"Nels, you and Nick need not go on duty to-day," she said.  "I

may want you.  I--I--"



She hesitated, paused, and stood lingering there.  Her glance had

fallen upon Stewart's big black horse prancing in a near-by

corral.



"I have sent Stillwell to El Paso," she went on, in a low voice

she failed to hold steady.  "He will save Stewart.  I have to

tell you--I am Stewart's wife!"



She felt the stricken amaze that made these men silent and

immovable.  With level gaze averted she left them. Returning to

the house and her room, she prepared for something--for what?  To

wait!



Then a great invisible shadow seemed to hover behind her.  She

essayed many tasks, to fail of attention, to find that her mind

held only Stewart and his fortunes.  Why had he become a Federal? 

She reflected that he had won his title, El Capitan, fighting for

Madero, the rebel.  But Madero was now a Federal, and Stewart was

true to him.  In crossing the border had Stewart any other motive

than the one he had implied to Madeline in his mocking smile and

scornful words, "You might have saved me a hell of a lot of

trouble!"  What trouble?  She felt again the cold shock of

contact with the gun she had dropped in horror.  He meant the

trouble of getting himself shot in the only way a man could seek

death without cowardice. But had he any other motive?  She

recalled Don Carlos and his guerrillas.  Then the thought leaped

up in her mind with gripping power that Stewart meant to hunt Don

Carlos, to meet him, to kill him.  It would be the deed of a

silent, vengeful, implacable man driven by wild justice such as

had been the deadly leaven in Monty Price.  It was a deed to

expect of Nels or Nick Steel--and, aye, of Gene Stewart. 

Madeline felt regret that Stewart, as he had climbed so high, had

not risen above deliberate seeking to kill his enemy, however

evil that enemy.



The local newspapers, which came regularly a day late from El

Paso and Douglas, had never won any particular interest from

Madeline; now, however, she took up any copies she could find and

read all the information pertaining to the revolution. Every word

seemed vital to her, of moving significant force.





AMERICANS ROBBED BY MEXICAN REBELS



MADERA, STATE OF CHIHUAHUA, MEXICO, July 17.--Having looted the

Madera Lumber Company's storehouses of $25,000 worth of goods and

robbed scores of foreigners of horses and saddles, the rebel

command of Gen. Antonio Rojas, comprising a thousand men, started

westward to-day through the state of Sonora for Agnaymas and

Pacific coast points.



The troops are headed for Dolores, where a mountain pass leads

into the state of Sonora.  Their entrance will be opposed by

1,000 Maderista volunteers, who are reported to be waiting the

rebel invasion.



The railroad south of Madera is being destroyed and many. 

Americans who were traveling to Chihuahua from Juarez are

marooned here.



General Rojas executed five men while here for alleged offenses

of a trivial character.  Gen. Rosalio y Hernandez, Lieut.

Cipriano Amador, and three soldiers were the unfortunates.



WASHINGTON, July 17.--Somewhere in Mexico Patrick Dunne, an

American citizen, is in prison under sentence of death.  This

much and no more the State Department learned through

Representative Kinkaid of Nebraska.  Consular officers in various

sections of Mexico have been directed to make every effort to

locate Dunne and save his life.



JUAREZ, MEXICO, July 31.--General Orozco, chief of the rebels,

declared to-day:



"If the United States will throw down the barriers and let us

have all the ammunition we can buy, I promise in sixty days to

have peace restored in Mexico and a stable government in charge."



CASAS GRANDES, CHIHUAHUA, July 31.--Rebel soldiers looted many

homes of Mormons near here yesterday.  All the Mormon families

have fled to El Paso.  Although General Salazar had two of his

soldiers executed yesterday for robbing Mormons, he has not made

any attempt to stop his men looting the unprotected homes of

Americans.



Last night's and to-day's trains carried many Americans from

Pearson, Madera, and other localities outside the Mormon

settlements.  Refugees from Mexico continued to pour into El

Paso.  About one hundred came last night, the majority of whom

were men.  Heretofore few men came.





Madeline read on in feverish absorption.  It was not a real war,

but a starving, robbing, burning, hopeless revolution.  Five men

executed for alleged offenses of a trivial nature!  What chance

had, then, a Federal prisoner, an enemy to be feared, an American

cowboy in the clutches of those crazed rebels?



Madeline endured patiently, endured for long interminable hours

while holding to her hope with indomitable will.



No message came.  At sunset she went outdoors, suffering a

torment of accumulating suspense.  She faced the desert, hoping,

praying for strength.  The desert did not influence her as did

the passionless, unchangeable stars that had soothed her spirit. 

It was red, mutable, shrouded in shadows, terrible like her mood. 

A dust-veiled sunset colored the vast, brooding, naked waste of

rock and sand.  The grim Chiricahua frowned black and sinister. 

The dim blue domes of the Guadalupes seemed to whisper, to beckon

to her.  Beyond them somewhere was Stewart, awaiting the end of a

few brief hours--hours that to her were boundless, endless,

insupportable.



Night fell.  But now the white, pitiless stars failed her.  Then

she sought the seclusion and darkness of her room, there to lie

with wide eyes, waiting, waiting.  She had always been

susceptible to the somber, mystic unrealities of the night, and

now her mind slowly revolved round a vague and monstrous gloom. 

Nevertheless, she was acutely sensitive to outside impressions. 

She heard the measured tread of a guard, the rustle of wind

stirring the window-curtain, the remote, mournful wail of a

coyote.  By and by the dead silence of the night insulated her

with leaden oppression.  There was silent darkness for so long

that when the window casements showed gray she believed it was

only fancy and that dawn would never come. She prayed for the sun

not to rise, not to begin its short twelve-hour journey toward

what might be a fatal setting for Stewart.  But the dawn did

lighten, swiftly she thought, remorselessly.  Daylight had

broken, and this was Thursday!



Sharp ringing of the telephone bell startled her, roused her into

action.  She ran to answer the call.



"Hello--hello--Miss Majesty!" came the hurried reply. "This is

Link talkin'.  Messages for you.  Favorable, the operator said. 

I'm to ride out with them.  I'll come a-hummin'."



That was all.  Madeline heard the bang of the receiver as Stevens

threw it down.  She passionately wanted to know more, but was

immeasurably grateful for so much!  Favorable! Then Stillwell had

been successful.  Her heart leaped. Suddenly she became weak and

her hands failed of their accustomed morning deftness.  It took

her what seemed a thousand years to dress.  Breakfast meant

nothing to her except that it helped her to pass dragging

minutes.



Finally a low hum, mounting swiftly to a roar and ending with a

sharp report, announced the arrival of the car. If her feet had

kept pace with her heart she would have raced out to meet Link. 

She saw him, helmet thrown back, watch in hand, and he looked up

at her with his cool, bright smile, with his familiar apologetic

manner.



"Fifty-three minutes, Miss Majesty," he said, "but I hed to ride

round a herd of steers an' bump a couple off the trail."



He gave he' a packet of telegrams.  Madeline tore them open with

shaking fingers, began to read with swift, dim eyes. Some were

from Washington, assuring her of every possible service; some

were from New York; others written in Spanish were from El Paso,

and these she could not wholly translate in a brief glance. 

Would she never find Stillwell's message?  It was the last.  It

was lengthy.  It read:





Bought Stewart's release.  Also arranged for his transfer as

prisoner of war.  Both matters official.  He's safe if we can get

notice to his captors.  Not sure I've reached them by wire.

Afraid to trust it.  You go with Link to Agua Prieta.  Take the

messages sent you in Spanish.  They will protect you and secure

Stewart's freedom.  Take Nels with you.  Stop for nothing. Tell

Link all--trust him--let him drive that car. STILLWELL







The first few lines of Stillwell's message lifted Madeline to the

heights of thanksgiving and happiness.  Then, reading on, she

experienced a check, a numb, icy, sickening pang.  At the last

line she flung off doubt and dread, and in white, cold passion

faced the issue.



"Read," she said, briefly, handing the telegram to Link.  He

scanned it and then looked blankly up at her.



"Link, do you know the roads, the trails--the desert between here

and Agua Prieta?" she asked.



"Thet's sure my old stampin'-ground.  An' I know Sonora, too."



"We must reach Agua Prieta before sunset--long before, so if

Stewart is in some near-by camp we can get to it in--in time."



"Miss Majesty, it ain't possible!" he exclaimed. "Stillwell's

crazy to say thet."



"Link, can an automobile be driven from here into northern

Mexico?"



"Sure.  But it 'd take time."



"We must do it in little time," she went on, in swift eagerness. 

"Otherwise Stewart may be--probably will be--be shot."



Link Stevens appeared suddenly to grow lax, shriveled, to lose

all his peculiar pert brightness, to weaken and age.



"I'm only a--a cowboy, Miss Majesty."  He almost faltered.  It

was a singular change in him.  "Thet's an awful ride--down over

the border.  If by some luck I didn't smash the car I'd turn your

hair gray.  You'd never be no good after thet ride!"



"I am Stewart's wife," she answered him and she looked at him,

not conscious of any motive to persuade or allure, but just to

let him know the greatness of her dependence upon him.



He started violently--the old action of Stewart, the memorable

action of Monty Price.  This man was of the same wild breed.



Then Madeline's words flowed in a torrent.  "I am Stewart's wife. 

I love him; I have been unjust to him; I must save him.  Link, I

have faith in you.  I beseech you to do your best for Stewart's

sake--for my sake.  I'll risk the ride gladly--bravely.  I'll not

care where or how you drive.  I'd far rather plunge into a canon-

-go to my death on the rocks--than not try to save Stewart."



How beautiful the response of this rude cowboy--to realize his

absolute unconsciousness of self, to see the haggard shade burn

out of his face, the old, cool, devil-may-care spirit return to

his eyes, and to feel something wonderful about him then!  It was

more than will or daring or sacrifice.  A blood-tie might have

existed between him and Madeline.  She sensed again that

indefinable brother-like quality, so fine, so almost invisible,

which seemed to be an inalienable trait in these wild cowboys.



"Miss Majesty, thet ride figgers impossible, but I'll do it!" he

replied.  His cool, bright glance thrilled her. "I'll need mebbe

half an hour to go over the car an' to pack on what I'll want."



She could not thank him, and her reply was merely a request that

he tell Nels and other cowboys off duty to come up to the house. 

When Link had gone Madeline gave a moment's thought to

preparations for the ride.  She placed what money she had and the

telegrams in a satchel.  The gown she had on was thin and white,

not suitable for travel, but she would not risk the losing of one

moment in changing it.  She put on a long coat and wound veils

round her head and neck, arranging them in a hood so she could

cover her face when necessary.  She remembered to take an extra

pair of goggles for Nels's use, and then, drawing on her gloves,

she went out ready for the ride.



A number of cowboys were waiting.  She explained the situation

and left them in charge of her home.  With that she asked Nels to

accompany her down into the desert.  He turned white to his lips,

and this occasioned Madeline to remember his mortal dread of the

car and Link's driving.



"Nels, I'm sorry to ask you," she added.  "I know you hate the

car.  But I need you--may need you, oh! so much."



"Why, Miss Majesty, thet's shore all a mistaken idee of yours

about me hatin' the car," he said, in his slow, soft drawl.  "I

was only jealous of Link; an' the boys, they made thet joke up on

me about bein' scared of ridin' fast.  Shore I'm powerful proud

to go.  An' I reckon if you hedn't asked me my feelin's might hev

been some hurt.  Because if you're goin' down among the Greasers

you want me."



His cool, easy speech, his familiar swagger, the smile with which

he regarded her did not in the least deceive Madeline.  The gray

was still in his face.  Incomprehensible as it seemed, Nels had a

dread, an uncanny fear, and it was of that huge white automobile. 

But he lied about it.  Here again was that strange quality of

faithfulness.



Madeline heard the buzz of the car.  Link appeared driving up the

slope.  He made a short, sliding turn and stopped before the

porch.  Link had tied two long, heavy planks upon the car, one on

each side, and in every available space he had strapped extra

tires.  A huge cask occupied one back seat, and another seat was

full of tools and ropes.  There was just room in this rear part

of the car for Nels to squeeze in.  Link put Madeline in front

beside him, then bent over the wheel. Madeline waved her hand at

the silent cowboys on the porch. Not an audible good-by was

spoken.



The car glided out of the yard, leaped from level to slope, and

started swiftly down the road, out into the open valley.  Each

stronger rush of dry wind in Madeline's face marked the increase

of speed.  She took one glance at the winding cattle-road,

smooth, unobstructed, disappearing in the gray of distance.  She

took another at the leather-garbed, leather-helmeted driver

beside her, and then she drew the hood of veils over her face and

fastened it round her neck so there was no possibility of its

blowing loose.



Harder and stronger pressed the wind till it was like sheeted

lead forcing her back in her seat.  There was a ceaseless,

intense, inconceivably rapid vibration under her; occasionally

she felt a long swing, as if she were to be propelled aloft; but

no jars disturbed the easy celerity of the car.  The buzz, the

roar of wheels, of heavy body in flight, increased to a

continuous droning hum.  The wind became an insupportable body

moving toward her, crushing her breast, making the task of

breathing most difficult.  To Madeline the time seemed to fly

with the speed of miles.  A moment came when she detected a faint

difference in hum and rush and vibration, in the ceaseless

sweeping of the invisible weight against her. This difference

became marked.  Link was reducing speed.  Then came swift change

of all sensation, and she realized the car had slowed to normal

travel.



Madeline removed her hood and goggles.  It was a relief to

breathe freely, to be able to use her eyes.  To her right, not

far distant, lay the little town of Chiricahua.  Sight of it made

her remember Stewart in a way strange to her constant thought of

him.  To the left inclined the gray valley.  The red desert was

hidden from view, but the Guadalupe Mountains loomed close in the

southwest.



Opposite Chiricahua, where the road forked, Link Stevens headed

the car straight south and gradually increased speed.  Madeline

faced another endless gray incline.  It was the San Bernardino

Valley.  The singing of the car, the stinging of the wind warned

her to draw the hood securely down over her face again, and then

it was as if she was riding at night.  The car lurched ahead,

settled into that driving speed which wedged Madeline back as in

a vise.  Again the moments went by fleet as the miles. 

Seemingly, there was an acceleration of the car till it reached a

certain swiftness--a period of time in which it held that pace,

and then a diminishing of all motion and sound which contributed

to Madeline's acute sensation.  Uncovering her face, she saw Link

was passing another village.  Could it be Bernardino?  She asked

Link--repeated the question.



"Sure," he replied.  "Eighty miles."



Link did not this time apologize for the work of his machine. 

Madeline marked the omission with her first thrill of the ride. 

Leaning over, she glanced at Link's watch, which he had fastened

upon the wheel in front of his eyes.  A quarter to ten!  Link had

indeed made short work of the valley miles.



Beyond Bernardino Link sheered off the road and put the car to a

long, low-rising slope.  Here the valley appeared to run south

under the dark brows of the Guadalupes.  Link was heading

southwest.  Madeline observed that the grass began to fail as

they climbed the ridge; bare, white, dusty spots appeared; there

were patches of mesquite and cactus and scattering areas of

broken rock.



She might have been prepared for what she saw from the ridge-top. 

Beneath them the desert blazed.  Seen from afar, it was striking

enough, but riding down into its red jaws gave Madeline the first

affront to her imperious confidence.  All about her ranch had

been desert, the valleys were desert; but this was different. 

Here began the red desert, extending far into Mexico, far across

Arizona and California to the Pacific. She saw a bare, hummocky

ridge, down which the car was gliding, bounding, swinging, and

this long slant seemed to merge into a corrugated world of rock

and sand, patched by flats and basins, streaked with canons and

ranges of ragged, saw-toothed stone. The distant Sierra Madres

were clearer, bluer, less smoky and suggestive of mirage than she

had ever seen them.  Madeline's sustaining faith upheld her in

the face of this appalling obstacle.  Then the desert that had

rolled its immensity beneath her gradually began to rise, to lose

its distant margins, to condense its varying lights and shades,

at last to hide its yawning depths and looming heights behind red

ridges, which were only little steps, little outposts, little

landmarks at its gates.



The bouncing of the huge car, throwing Madeline up, directed her

attention and fastened it upon the way Link Stevens was driving

and upon the immediate foreground.  Then she discovered that he

was following an old wagon-road.  At the foot of that long slope

they struck into rougher ground, and here Link took to a cautious

zigzag course.  The wagon-road disappeared and then presently

reappeared.  But Link did not always hold to it.  He made cuts,

detours, crosses, and all the time seemed to be getting deeper

into a maze of low, red dunes, of flat canon-beds lined by banks

of gravel, of ridges mounting higher.  Yet Link Stevens kept on

and never turned back.  He never headed into a place that he

could not pass.  Up to this point of travel he had not been

compelled to back the car, and Madeline began to realize that it

was the cowboy's wonderful judgment of ground that made advance

possible.  He knew the country; he was never at a loss; after

making a choice of direction, he never hesitated.



Then at the bottom of a wide canon he entered a wash where the

wheels just barely turned in dragging sand.  The sun beat down

white-hot, the dust arose, there was not a breath of wind; and no

sound save the slide of a rock now and then down the weathered

slopes and the labored chugging of the machine. The snail pace,

like the sand at the wheels, began to drag at Madeline's faith. 

Link gave over the wheel to Madeline, and, leaping out, he called

Nels.  When they untied the long planks and laid them straight in

front for the wheels to pass over Madeline saw how wise had been

Link's forethought.  With the aid of those planks they worked the

car through sand and gravel otherwise impossible to pass.



This canon widened and opened into space affording an

unobstructed view for miles.  The desert sloped up in steps, and

in the morning light, with the sun bright on the mesas and

escarpments, it was gray, drab, stone, slate, yellow, pink, and,

dominating all, a dull rust-red.  There was level ground ahead, a

wind-swept floor as hard as rock.  Link rushed the car over this

free distance.  Madeline's ears filled with a droning hum like

the sound of a monstrous, hungry bee and with a strange,

incessant crinkle which she at length guessed to be the spreading

of sheets of gravel from under the wheels.  The giant car

attained such a speed that Madeline could only distinguish the

colored landmarks to the fore, and these faded as the wind stung

her eyes.



Then Link began the ascent of the first step, a long, sweeping,

barren waste with dunes of wonderful violet and heliotrope hues. 

Here were well-defined marks of an old wagon-road lately

traversed by cattle.  The car climbed steadily, surmounted the

height, faced another long bench that had been cleaned smooth by

desert winds.  The sky was an intense, light, steely blue, hard

on the eyes.  Madeline veiled her face, and did not uncover it

until Link had reduced the racing speed.  From the summit of the

next ridge she saw more red ruin of desert.



A deep wash crossing the road caused Link Stevens to turn due

south.  There was a narrow space along the wash just wide enough

for the car.  Link seemed oblivious to the fact that the outside

wheels were perilously close to the edge. Madeline heard the

rattle of loosened gravel and earth sliding into the gully.  The

wash widened and opened out into a sandy flat.  Link crossed this

and turned up on the opposite side. Rocks impeded the progress of

the car, and these had to be rolled out of the way.  The shelves

of silt, apparently ready to slide with the slightest weight, the

little tributary washes, the boulder-strewn stretches of slope,

the narrow spaces allowing no more than a foot for the outside

wheels, the spear-pointed cactus that had to be avoided--all

these obstacles were as nothing to the cowboy driver.  He kept

on, and when he came to the road again he made up for the lost

time by speed.



Another height was reached, and here Madeline fancied that Link

had driven the car to the summit of a high pass between two

mountain ranges.  The western slope of that pass appeared to be

exceedingly rough and broken.  Below it spread out another gray

valley, at the extreme end of which glistened a white spot that

Link grimly called Douglas.  Part of that white spot was Agua

Prieta, the sister town across the line. Madeline looked with

eyes that would fain have pierced the intervening distance.



The descent of the pass began under difficulties. Sharp stones

and cactus spikes penetrated the front tires, bursting them with

ripping reports.  It took time to replace them.  The planks were

called into requisition to cross soft places.  A jagged point of

projecting rock had to be broken with a sledge.  At length a huge

stone appeared to hinder any further advance.  Madeline caught

her breath.  There was no room to turn the car.  But Link Stevens

had no intention of such a thing.  He backed the car to a

considerable distance, then walked forward.  He appeared to be

busy around the boulder for a moment and returned down the road

on the run.  A heavy explosion, a cloud of dust, and a rattle of

falling fragments told Madeline that her indomitable driver had

cleared a passage with dynamite.  He seemed to be prepared for

every emergency. Madeline looked to see what effect the discovery

of Link carrying dynamite would have upon the silent Nels.



"Shore, now, Miss Majesty, there ain't nothin' goin' to stop

Link," said Nels, with a reassuring smile.  The significance of

the incident had not dawned upon Nels, or else he was heedless of

it.  After all, he was afraid only of the car and Link, and that

fear was an idiosyncrasy.  Madeline began to see her cowboy

driver with clearer eyes and his spirit awoke something in her

that made danger of no moment.  Nels likewise subtly responded,

and, though he was gray-faced, tight-lipped, his eyes took on the

cool, bright gleam of Link's.



Cactus barred the way, rocks barred the way, gullies barred the

way, and these Nels addressed in the grim humor with which he was

wont to view tragic things.  A mistake on Link's part, a slip of

a wheel, a bursting of a tire at a critical moment, an instant of

the bad luck which might happen a hundred times on a less

perilous ride--any one of these might spell disaster for the car,

perhaps death to the occupants.  Again and again Link used the

planks to cross washes in sand. Sometimes the wheels ran all the

length of the planks, sometimes slipped off.  Presently Link came

to a ditch where water had worn deep into the road.  Without

hesitation he placed them, measuring distance carefully, and then

started across.  The danger was in ditching the machine.  One of

the planks split, sagged a little, but Link made the crossing

without a slip.



The road led round under an overhanging cliff and was narrow,

rocky, and slightly downhill.  Bidding Madeline and Nels walk

round this hazardous corner, Link drove the car. Madeline

expected to hear it crash down into the canon, but presently she

saw Link waiting to take them aboard again.  Then came steeper

parts of the road, places that Link could run down if he had

space below to control the car, and on the other hand places

where the little inclines ended in abrupt ledges upon one side or

a declivity upon the other.  Here the cowboy, with ropes on the

wheels and half-hitches upon the spurs of rock, let the car slide

down.



Once at a particularly bad spot Madeline exclaimed involuntarily,

"Oh, time is flying!"  Link Stevens looked up at her as if he had

been reproved for his care.  His eyes shone like the glint of

steel on ice.  Perhaps that utterance of Madeline's was needed to

liberate his recklessness to its utmost.  Certainly he put the

car to seemingly impossible feats.  He rimmed gullies, he hurdled

rising ground, he leaped little breaks in the even road.  He made

his machine cling like a goat to steep inclines; he rounded

corners with the inside wheels higher than the outside; he passed

over banks of soft earth that caved in the instant he crossed

weak places.  He kept on and on, threading tortuous passages

through rock-strewn patches, keeping to the old road where it was

clear, abandoning it for open spaces, and always going down.



At length a mile of clean, brown slope, ridged and grooved like a

washboard, led gently down to meet the floor of the valley, where

the scant grama-grass struggled to give a tinge of gray.  The

road appeared to become more clearly defined, and could be seen

striking straight across the valley.



To Madeline's dismay, that road led down to a deep, narrow wash. 

It plunged on one side, ascended on the other at a still steeper

angle.  The crossing would have been laborsome for a horse; for

an automobile it was unpassable.  Link turned the car to the

right along the rim and drove as far along the wash as the ground

permitted.  The gully widened, deepened all the way.  Then he

took the other direction.  When he made this turn Madeline

observed that the sun had perceptibly begun its slant westward. 

It shone in her face, glaring and wrathful. Link drove back to

the road, crossed it, and kept on down the line of the wash.  It

was a deep cut in red earth, worn straight down by swift water in

the rainy seasons.  It narrowed.  In some places it was only five

feet wide.  Link studied these points and looked up the slope,

and seemed to be making deductions.  The valley was level now,

and there were nothing but little breaks in the rim of the wash. 

Link drove mile after mile, looking for a place to cross, and

there was none.  Finally progress to the south was obstructed by

impassable gullies where the wash plunged into the head of a

canon.  It was necessary to back the car a distance before there

was room to turn.  Madeline looked at the imperturbable driver. 

His face revealed no more than the same old hard, immutable

character.  When he reached the narrowest points, which had so

interested him, he got out of the car and walked from place to

place.  Once with a little jump he cleared the wash.  Then

Madeline noted that the farther rim was somewhat lower.  In a

flash she divined Link's intention.  He was hunting a place to

jump the car over the crack in the ground.



Soon he found one that seemed to suit him, for he tied his red

scarf upon a greasewood-bush.  Then, returning to the car, he

clambered in, and, muttering, broke his long silence: "This ain't

no air-ship, hut I've outfiggered thet damn wash." He backed up

the gentle slope and halted just short of steeper ground.  His

red scarf waved in the wind.  Hunching low over the wheel, he

started, slowly at first, then faster, and then faster.  The

great car gave a spring like a huge tiger.  The impact of

suddenly formed wind almost tore Madeline out of her seat.  She

felt Nels's powerful hands on her shoulders.  She closed her

eyes.  The jolting headway of the car gave place to a gliding

rush.  This was broken by a slight jar, and then above the hum

and roar rose a cowboy yell.  Madeline waited with strained

nerves for the expected crash.  It did not come. Opening her

eyes, she saw the level valley floor without a break.  She had

not even noticed the instant when the car had shot over the wash.



A strange breathlessness attacked her, and she attributed it to

the celerity with which she was being carried along.  Pulling the

hood down over her face, she sank low in the seat.  The whir of

the car now seemed to be a world-filling sound.  Again the

feeling of excitement, the poignancy of emotional heights, the

ever-present impending sense of catastrophe became held in

abeyance to the sheer intensity of physical sensations.  There

came a time when all her strength seemed to unite in an effort to

lift her breast against the terrific force of the wind--to draw

air into her flattened lungs.  She became partly dazed.  The

darkness before her eyes was not all occasioned by the blood that

pressed like a stone mask on her face.  She had a sense that she

was floating, sailing, drifting, reeling, even while being borne

swiftly as a thunderbolt.  Her hands and arms were immovable

under the weight of mountains.  There was a long, blank period

from which she awakened to feel an arm supporting her.  Then she

rallied. The velocity of the car had been cut to the speed to

which she was accustomed.  Throwing back the hood, she breathed

freely again, recovered fully.



The car was bowling along a wide road upon the outskirts of a

city.  Madeline asked what place it could be.



"Douglas," replied Link.  "An' jest around is Agua Prieta!"



That last name seemed to stun Madeline.  She heard no more, and

saw little until the car stopped.  Nels spoke to some one.  Then

sight of khaki-clad soldiers quickened Madeline's faculties.  She

was on the boundary-line between the United States and Mexico,

and Agua Prieta, with its white and blue walled houses, its

brown-tiled roofs, lay before her.  A soldier, evidently

despatched by Nels, returned and said an officer would come at

once.  Madeline's attention was centered in the foreground, upon

the guard over the road, upon the dry, dusty town beyond; but she

was aware of noise and people in the rear.  A cavalry officer

approached the car, stared, and removed his sombrero.



"Can you tell me anything about Stewart, the American cowboy who

was captured by rebels a few days ago?" asked Madeline.



"Yes," replied the officer.  "There was a skirmish over the line

between a company of Federals and a large force of guerrillas and

rebels.  The Federals were driven west along the line.  Stewart

is reported to have done reckless fighting and was captured.  He

got a Mexican sentence.  He is known here along the border, and

the news of his capture stirred up excitement.  We did all we

could to get his release.  The guerrillas feared to execute him

here, and believed he might be aided to escape.  So a detachment

departed with him for Mezquital."



"He was sentenced to be shot Thursday at sunset--to-night?"



"Yes.  It was rumored there was a personal resentment against

Stewart.  I regret that I can't give you definite information. 

If you are friends of Stewart--relatives--I might find--"



"I am his wife," interrupted Madeline.  "Will you please read

these."  She handed him the telegrams.  "Advise me--help me, if

you can?"



With a wondering glance at her the officer received the

telegrams.  He read several, and whistled low in amaze.  His

manner became quick, alert, serious.



"I can't read these written in Spanish, but I know the names

signed."  Swiftly he ran through the others.



"Why, these mean Stewart's release has been authorized. They

explain mysterious rumors we have heard here.  Greaser treachery! 

For some strange reason messages from the rebel junta have failed

to reach their destination.  We heard reports of an exchange for

Stewart, but nothing came of it.  No one departed for Mezquital

with authority.  What an outrage!  Come, I'll go with you to

General Salazar, the rebel chief in command.  I know him. 

Perhaps we can find out something."



Nels made room for the officer.  Link sent the car whirring

across the line into Mexican territory.  Madeline's sensibilities

were now exquisitely alive.  The white road led into Agua Prieta,

a town of colored walls and roofs.  Goats and pigs and buzzards

scattered before the roar of the machine. Native women wearing

black mantles peeped through iron-barred windows.  Men wearing

huge sombreros, cotton shirts and trousers, bright sashes round

their waists, and sandals, stood motionless, watching the car go

by.  The road ended in an immense plaza, in the center of which

was a circular structure that in some measure resembled a corral. 

It was a bull-ring, where the national sport of bull-fighting was

carried on.  Just now it appeared to be quarters for a

considerable army. Ragged, unkempt rebels were everywhere, and

the whole square was littered with tents, packs, wagons, arms. 

There were horses, mules, burros, and oxen.



The place was so crowded that Link was compelled to drive slowly

up to the entrance to the bull-ring.  Madeline caught a glimpse

of tents inside, then her view was obstructed by a curious,

pressing throng.  The cavalry officer leaped from the car and

pushed his way into the entrance.



"Link, do you know the road to this Mezquital?" asked Madeline.



"Yes.  I've been there."



"How far is it?"



"Aw, not so very far," he mumbled.



"Link!  How many miles?" she implored.



"I reckon only a few."



Madeline knew that he lied.  She asked him no more; nor looked at

him, nor at Nels.  How stifling was this crowded, ill-smelling

plaza!  The sun, red and lowering, had sloped far down in the

west, but still burned with furnace heat.  A swarm of flies

whirled over the car.  The shadows of low-sailing buzzards

crossed Madeline's sight.  Then she saw a row of the huge,

uncanny black birds sitting upon the tiled roof of a house.  They

had neither an air of sleeping nor resting.  They were waiting. 

She fought off a horrible ghastly idea before its full

realization.  These rebels and guerrillas--what lean, yellow,

bearded wretches!  They curiously watched Link as he went working

over the car.  No two were alike, and all were ragged.  They had

glittering eyes sunk deep in their heads. They wore huge

sombreros of brown and black felt, of straw, of cloth.  Every man

wore a belt or sash into which was thrust some kind of weapon. 

Some wore boots, some shoes, some moccasins, some sandals, and

many were barefooted.  They were an excited, jabbering,

gesticulating mob.  Madeline shuddered to think how a frenzy to

spill blood could run through these poor revolutionists.  If it

was liberty they fought for, they did not show the intelligence

in their faces.  They were like wolves upon a scent.  They

affronted her, shocked her.  She wondered if their officers were

men of the same class.  What struck her at last and stirred pity

in her was the fact that every man of the horde her swift glance

roamed over, however dirty and bedraggled he was, wore upon him

some ornament, some tassel or fringe or lace, some ensign, some

band, bracelet, badge, or belt, some twist of scarf, something

that betrayed the vanity which was the poor jewel of their souls. 

It was in the race.



Suddenly the crowd parted to let the cavalry officer and a rebel

of striking presence get to the car.



"Madam, it is as I suspected," said the officer, quickly.  "The

messages directing Stewart's release never reached Salazar.  They

were intercepted.  But even without them we might have secured

Stewart's exchange if it had not been for the fact that one of

his captors wanted him shot.  This guerrilla intercepted the

orders, and then was instrumental in taking Stewart to Mezquital. 

It is exceedingly sad.  Why, he should be a free man this

instant.  I regret--"



"Who did this--this thing?" cried Madeline, cold and sick.  "Who

is the guerrilla?"



"Senor Don Carlos Martinez.  He has been a bandit, a man of

influence in Sonora.  He is more of a secret agent in the affairs

of the revolution than an active participator.  But he has seen

guerrilla service."



"Don Carlos!  Stewart in his power!  O God!"  Madeline sank down,

almost overcome.  Then two great hands, powerful, thrilling,

clasped her shoulders, and Nels bent over her.



"Miss Majesty, shore we're wastin' time here," he said. His

voice, like his hands, was uplifting.  She wheeled to him in

trembling importunity.  How cold, bright, blue the flash of his

eyes!  They told Madeline she must not weaken.  But she could not

speak her thought to Nels--could only look at Link.



"It figgers impossible, but I'll do it!" said Link Stevens, in

answer to her voiceless query.  The cold, grim, wild something

about her cowboys blanched Madeline's face, steeled her nerve,

called to the depths of her for that last supreme courage of a

woman.  The spirit of the moment was nature with Link and Nels;

with her it must be passion.



"Can I get a permit to go into the interior--to Mezquital?" asked

Madeline of the officer.



"You are going on?  Madam, it's a forlorn hope. Mezquital is a

hundred miles away.  But there's a chance--the barest chance if

your man can drive this car.  The Mexicans are either murderous

or ceremonious in their executions.  The arrangements for

Stewart's will be elaborate.  But, barring unusual circumstances,

it will take place precisely at the hour designated.  You need no

permit.  Your messages are official papers.  But to save time,

perhaps delay, I suggest you take this Mexican, Senor Montes,

with you.  He outranks Don Carlos and knows the captain of the

Mezquital detachment."



"Ah!  Then Don Carlos is not in command of the forces holding

Stewart?"



"No."



"I thank you, sir.  I shall not forget your kindness," concluded

Madeline.



She bowed to Senor Montes, and requested him to enter the car. 

Nels stowed some of the paraphernalia away, making room in the

rear seat.  Link bent over the wheel.  The start was so sudden,

with such crack and roar, that the crowd split in wild disorder. 

Out of the plaza the car ran, gathering headway; down a street

lined by white and blue walls; across a square where rebels were

building barricades; along a railroad track full of iron

flat-cars that carried mounted pieces of artillery; through the

outlying guards, who waved to the officer, Montes.



Madeline bound her glasses tightly over her eyes, and wound veils

round the lower part of her face.  She was all in a strange glow,

she had begun to burn, to throb, to thrill, to expand, and she

meant to see all that was possible.  The sullen sun, red as fire,

hung over the mountain range in the west. How low it had sunk! 

Before her stretched a narrow, white road, dusty, hard as stone--

a highway that had been used for centuries.  If it had been wide

enough to permit passing a vehicle it would have been a

magnificent course for automobiles.  But the weeds and the dusty

flowers and the mesquite boughs and arms of cactus brushed the

car as it sped by.



Faster, faster, faster!  That old resistless weight began to

press Madeline back; the old incessant bellow of wind filled her

ears.  Link Stevens hunched low over the wheel.  His eyes were

hidden under leather helmet and goggles, but the lower part of

his face was unprotected.  He resembled a demon, so dark and

stone-hard and strangely grinning was he.  All at once Madeline

realized how matchless, how wonderful a driver was this cowboy. 

She divined that weakening could not have been possible to Link

Stevens.  He was a cowboy, and he really was riding that car,

making it answer to his will, as it had been born in him to

master a horse.  He had never driven to suit himself, had never

reached an all-satisfying speed until now.  Beyond that his

motive was to save Stewart--to make Madeline happy.  Life was

nothing to him.  That fact gave him the superhuman nerve to face

the peril of this ride.  Because of his disregard of self he was

able to operate the machine, to choose the power, the speed, the

guidance, the going with the best judgment and highest efficiency

possible.  Madeline knew he would get her to Mezquital in time to

save Stewart or he would kill her in the attempt.



The white, narrow road flashed out of the foreground, slipped

with inconceivable rapidity under the car.  When she marked a

clump of cactus far ahead it seemed to shoot at her, to speed

behind her even the instant she noticed it. Nevertheless,

Madeline knew Link was not putting the car to its limit.  Swiftly

as he was flying, he held something in reserve. But he took the

turns of the road as if he knew the way was cleared before him. 

He trusted to a cowboy's luck.  A wagon in one of those curves, a

herd of cattle, even a frightened steer, meant a wreck.  Madeline

never closed her eyes at these fateful moments.  If Link could

stake himself, the others, and her upon such chance, what could

not she stake with her motive?  So while the great car hummed and

thrummed, and darted round the curves on two wheels, and sped on

like a bullet, Madeline lived that ride, meant to feel it to the

uttermost.



But it was not all swift going.  A stretch of softer ground

delayed Link, made the car labor and pant and pound and grind

through gravel.  Moreover, the cactus plants assumed an alarming

ability to impede progress.  Long, slender arms of the ocotillo

encroached upon the road; broad, round leaves did likewise;

fluted columns, fallen like timbers in a forest, lay along the

narrow margins; the bayonet cactus and the bisnagi leaned

threateningly; clusters of maguey, shadowed by the huge, looming

saguaro, infringed upon the highway to Mezquital.  And every leaf

and blade and branch of cactus bore wicked thorns, any one of

which would be fatal to a tire.



It came at length, the bursting report.  The car lurched, went on

like a crippled thing, and halted, obedient to the master hand at

the wheel.  Swift as Link was in replacing the tire, he lost

time.  The red sun, more sullen, duskier as it neared the black,

bold horizon, appeared to mock Madeline, to eye her in derision.



Link leaped in, and the car sprang ahead.  The road-bed changed,

the trees changed--all the surroundings changed except the

cactus.  There were miles of rolling ridges, rough in the

hollows, and short rocky bits of road, and washes to cross, and a

low, sandy swale where mesquites grouped a forest along a

trickling inch-deep sheet of water.  Green things softened the

hard, dry aspect of the desert.  There were birds and parrots and

deer and wild boars.  All these Madeline remarked with clear

eyes, with remarkable susceptibility of attention; but what she

strained to see, what she yearned for, prayed for, was straight,

unobstructed road.



But the road began to wind up; it turned and twisted in

tantalizing lazy curves; it was in no hurry to surmount a hill

that began to assume proportions of a mountain; it was leisurely,

as were all things in Mexico except strife.  That was quick,

fierce, bloody--it was Spanish.



The descent from that elevation was difficult, extremely

hazardous, yet Link Stevens drove fast.  At the base of the hill

rocks and sand all but halted him for good.  Then in taking an

abrupt curve a grasping spear ruined another tire.  This time the

car rasped across the road into the cactus, bursting the second

front-wheel tire.  Like demons indeed Link and Nels worked. 

Shuddering, Madeline felt the declining heat of the sun, saw with

gloomy eyes the shading of the red light over the desert.  She

did not look back to see how near the sun was to the horizon. 

She wanted to ask Nels. Strange as anything on this terrible ride

was the absence of speech.  As yet no word had been spoken. 

Madeline wanted to shriek to Link to hurry.  But he was more than

humanly swift in all his actions.  So with mute lips, with the

fire in her beginning to chill, with a lifelessness menacing her

spirit, she watched, hoped against hope, prayed for a long,

straight, smooth road.



Quite suddenly she saw it, seemingly miles of clear, narrow lane

disappearing like a thin, white streak in distant green.  Perhaps

Link Stevens's heart leaped like Madeline's. The huge car with a

roar and a jerk seemed to answer Madeline's call, a cry no less

poignant because it was silent.



Faster, faster, faster!  The roar became a whining hum. Then for

Madeline sound ceased to be anything--she could not hear.  The

wind was now heavy, imponderable, no longer a swift, plastic

thing, but solid, like an on-rushing wall.  It bore down upon

Madeline with such resistless weight that she could not move. 

The green of desert plants along the road merged in two shapeless

fences, sliding at her from the distance. Objects ahead began to

blur the white road, to grow streaky, like rays of light, the sky

to take on more of a reddening haze.



Madeline, realizing her sight was failing her, turned for one

more look at Link Stevens.  It had come to be his ride almost as

much as it was hers.  He hunched lower than ever, rigid, strained

to the last degree, a terrible, implacable driver.  This was his

hour, and he was great.  If he so much as brushed a flying tire

against one of the millions of spikes clutching out, striking out

from the cactus, there would be a shock, a splitting wave of air-

-an end.  Madeline thought she saw that Link's bulging cheek and

jaw were gray, that his tight-shut lips were white, that the

smile was gone.  Then he really was human--not a demon.  She felt

a strange sense of brotherhood.  He understood a woman's soul as

Monty Price had understood it.  Link was the lightning-forged

automaton, the driving, relentless, unconquerable instrument of a

woman's will.  He was a man whose force was directed by a woman's

passion.  He reached up to her height, felt her love, understood

the nature of her agony.  These made him heroic. But it was the

hard life, the wild years of danger on the desert, the

companionship of ruthless men, the elemental, that made possible

his physical achievement.  Madeline loved his spirit then and

gloried in the man.



She had pictured upon her heart, never to be forgotten, this

little hunched, deformed figure of Link's hanging with dauntless,

with deathless grip over the wheel, his gray face like a marble

mask.



That was Madeline's last clear sensation upon the ride. Blinded,

dazed, she succumbed to the demands upon her strength. She

reeled, fell back, only vaguely aware of a helping hand.

Confusion seized her senses.  All about her was a dark chaos

through which she was rushing, rushing, rushing under the

wrathful red eye of a setting sun.  Then, as there was no more

sound or sight for her, she felt there was no color.  But the

rush never slackened--a rush through opaque, limitless space. For

moments, hours, ages she was propelled with the velocity of a

shooting-star.  The earth seemed a huge automobile.  And it sped

with her down an endless white track through the universe.

Looming, ghostly, ghastly, spectral forms of cacti plants, large

as pine-trees, stabbed her with giant spikes.  She became an

unstable being in a shapeless, colorless, soundless cosmos of

unrelated things, but always rushing, even to meet the darkness

that haunted her and never reached her.



But at an end of infinite time that rush ceased. Madeline lost

the queer feeling of being disembodied by a frightfully swift

careening through boundless distance.  She distinguished voices,

low at first, apparently far away.  Then she opened her eyes to

blurred but conscious sight.



The car had come to a stop.  Link was lying face down over the

wheel.  Nels was rubbing her hands, calling to her. She saw a

house with clean whitewashed wall and brown-tiled roof.  Beyond,

over a dark mountain range, peeped the last red curve, the last

beautiful ray of the setting sun.

