





XX The Sheriff of El Cajon



About the middle of the forenoon of that day Madeline reached the

ranch.  Her guests had all arrived there late the night before,

and wanted only her presence and the assurance of her well-being

to consider the last of the camping trip a rare adventure. 

Likewise, they voted it the cowboys' masterpiece of a trick. 

Madeline's delay, they averred, had been only a clever coup to

give a final effect.  She did not correct their impression, nor

think it needful to state that she had been escorted home by only

one cowboy.



Her guests reported an arduous ride down the mountain, with only

one incident to lend excitement.  On the descent they had fallen

in with Sheriff Hawe and several of his deputies, who were

considerably under the influence of drink and very greatly

enraged by the escape of the Mexican girl Bonita.  Hawe had used

insulting language to the ladies and, according to Ambrose, would

have inconvenienced the party on some pretext or other if he had

not been sharply silenced by the cowboys.



Madeline's guests were two days in recovering from the hard ride. 

On the third day they leisurely began to prepare for departure. 

This period was doubly trying for Madeline. She had her own

physical need of rest, and, moreover, had to face a mental

conflict that could scarcely be postponed further.  Her sister

and friends were kindly and earnestly persistent in their

entreaties that she go back East with them.  She desired to go. 

It was not going that mattered; it was how and when and under

what circumstances she was to return that roused in her

disturbing emotion.  Before she went East she wanted to have

fixed in mind her future relation to the ranch and the West. 

When the crucial hour arrived she found that the West had not

claimed her yet.  These old friends had warmed cold ties.



It turned out, however, that there need be no hurry about making

the decision.  Madeline would have welcomed any excuse to

procrastinate; but, as it happened, a letter from Alfred made her

departure out of the question for the present. He wrote that his

trip to California had been very profitable, that he had a

proposition for Madeline from a large cattle company, and,

particularly, that he wanted to marry Florence soon after his

arrival home and would bring a minister from Douglas for that

purpose.



Madeline went so far, however, as to promise Helen and her

friends that she would go East soon, at the very latest by

Thanksgiving.  With that promise they were reluctantly content to

say good-by to the ranch and to her.  At the last moment there

seemed a great likelihood of a hitch in plans for the first stage

of that homeward journey.  All of Madeline's guests held up their

hands, Western fashion, when Link Stevens appeared with the big

white car.  Link protested innocently, solemnly, that he would

drive slowly and safely; but it was necessary for Madeline to

guarantee Link's word and to accompany them before they would

enter the car.  At the station good-bys were spoken and repeated,

and Madeline's promise was exacted for the hundredth time.



Dorothy Coombs's last words were: "Give my love to Monty Price. 

Tell him I'm--I'm glad he kissed me!"



Helen's eyes had a sweet, grave, yet mocking light as she said:



"Majesty, bring Stewart with you when you come.  He'll be the

rage."



Madeline treated the remark with the same merry lightness with

which it was received by the others; but after the train had

pulled out and she was on her way home she remembered Helen's

words and looks with something almost amounting to a shock.  Any

mention of Stewart, any thought of him, displeased her.



"What did Helen mean?" mused Madeline.  And she pondered.  That

mocking light in Helen's eyes had been simply an ironical glint,

a cynical gleam from that worldly experience so suspicious and

tolerant in its wisdom.  The sweet gravity of Helen's look had

been a deeper and more subtle thing.  Madeline wanted to

understand it, to divine in it a new relation between Helen and

herself, something fine and sisterly that might lead to love. 

The thought, however, revolving around a strange suggestion of

Stewart, was poisoned at its inception, and she dismissed it.



Upon the drive in to the ranch, as she was passing the lower

lake, she saw Stewart walking listlessly along the shore. When he

became aware of the approach of the car he suddenly awakened from

his aimless sauntering and disappeared quickly in the shade of

the shrubbery.  This was not by any means the first time Madeline

had seen him avoid a possible meeting with her.  Somehow the act

had pained her, though affording her a relief.  She did not want

to meet him face to face.



It was annoying for her to guess that Stillwell had something to

say in Stewart's defense.  The old cattleman was evidently

distressed.  Several times he had tried to open a conversation

with Madeline relating to Stewart; she had evaded him until the

last time, when his persistence had brought a cold and final

refusal to hear another word about the foreman. Stillwell had

been crushed.



As days passed Stewart remained at the ranch without his old

faithfulness to his work.  Madeline was not moved to a kinder

frame of mind to see him wandering dejectedly around. It hurt

her, and because it hurt her she grew all the harder. Then she

could not help hearing snatches of conversation which

strengthened her suspicions that Stewart was losing his grip on

himself, that he would soon take the downward course again.

Verification of her own suspicion made it a belief, and belief

brought about a sharp conflict between her generosity and some

feeling that she could not name.  It was not a question of

justice or mercy or sympathy.  If a single word could have saved

Stewart from sinking his splendid manhood into the brute she had

recoiled from at Chiricahua, she would not have spoken it.  She

could not restore him to his former place in her regard; she

really did not want him at the ranch at all.  Once, considering

in wonder her knowledge of men, she interrogated herself to see

just why she could not overlook Stewart's transgression.  She

never wanted to speak to him again, or see him, or think of him. 

In some way, through her interest in Stewart, she had come to

feel for herself an inexplicable thing close to scorn.



A telegram from Douglas, heralding the coming of Alfred and a

minister, put an end to Madeline's brooding, and she shared

something of Florence Kingsley's excitement.  The cowboys were as

eager and gossipy as girls.  It was arranged to have the wedding

ceremony performed in Madeline's great hall-chamber, and the

dinner in the cool, flower-scented patio.



Alfred and his minister arrived at the ranch in the big white

car.  They appeared considerably wind-blown.  In fact, the

minister was breathless, almost sightless, and certainly hatless. 

Alfred, used as he was to wind and speed, remarked that he did

not wonder at Nels's aversion to riding a fleeting cannon-ball. 

The imperturbable Link took off his cap and goggles and,

consulting his watch, made his usual apologetic report to

Madeline, deploring the fact that a teamster and a few stray

cattle on the road had held him down to the manana time of only a

mile a minute.



Arrangements for the wedding brought Alfred's delighted approval. 

When he had learned all Florence and Madeline would tell him he

expressed a desire to have the cowboys attend; and then he went

on to talk about California, where he was going take Florence on

a short trip.  He was curiously interested to find out all about

Madeline's guests and what had happened to them.  His keen glance

at Madeline grew softer as she talked.



"I breathe again," he said, and laughed.  "I was afraid.  Well, I

must have missed some sport.  I can just fancy what Monty and

Nels did to that Englishman.  So you went up to the crags. 

That's a wild place.  I'm not surprised at guerrillas falling in

with you up there.  The crags were a famous rendezvous for

Apaches--it's near the border--almost inaccessible--good water

and grass.  I wonder what the U. S. cavalry would think if they

knew these guerrillas crossed the border right under their noses. 

Well, it's practically impossible to patrol some of that

border-line.  It's desert, mountain, and canon, exceedingly wild

and broken.  I'm sorry to say that there seems to be more trouble

in sight with these guerrillas than at any time heretofore. 

Orozco, the rebel leader, has failed to withstand Madero's army. 

The Federals are occupying Chihuahua now, and are driving the

rebels north. Orozco has broken up his army into guerrilla bands. 

They are moving north and west, intending to carry on guerrilla

warfare in Sonora.  I can't say just how this will affect us

here.  But we're too close to the border for comfort.  These

guerrillas are night-riding hawks; they can cross the border,

raid us here, and get back the same night.  Fighting, I imagine,

will not be restricted to northern Mexico.  With the revolution a

failure the guerrillas will be more numerous, bolder, and

hungrier.  Unfortunately, we happen to be favorably situated for

them down here in this wilderness corner of the state."



On the following day Alfred and Florence were married. Florence's

sister and several friends from El Cajon were present, besides

Madeline, Stillwell, and his men.  It was Alfred's express wish

that Stewart attend the ceremony. Madeline was amused when she

noticed the painfully suppressed excitement of the cowboys.  For

them a wedding must have been an unusual and impressive event. 

She began to have a better understanding of the nature of it when

they cast off restraint and pressed forward to kiss the bride. 

In all her life Madeline had never seen a bride kissed so much

and so heartily, nor one so flushed and disheveled and happy. 

This indeed was a joyful occasion.  There was nothing of the

"effete East" about Alfred Hammond; he might have been a

Westerner all his days. When Madeline managed to get through the

press of cowboys to offer her congratulations Alfred gave her a

bear hug and a kiss.  This appeared to fascinate the cowboys. 

With shining eyes and faces aglow, with smiling, boyish boldness,

they made a rush at Madeline.  For one instant her heart leaped

to her throat.  They looked as if they could most shamelessly

kiss and maul her.  That little, ugly-faced, soft-eyed, rude,

tender-hearted ruffian, Monty Price, was in the lead.  He

resembled a dragon actuated by sentiment.  All at once Madeline's

instinctive antagonism to being touched by strange hands or lips

battled with a real, warm, and fun-loving desire to let the

cowboys work their will with her.  But she saw Stewart hanging at

the back of the crowd, and something--some fierce, dark

expression of pain--amazed her, while it froze her desire to be

kind.  Then she did not know what change must have come to her

face and bearing; but she saw Monty fall back sheepishly and the

other cowboys draw aside to let her lead the way into the patio.



The dinner began quietly enough with the cowboys divided between

embarrassment and voracious appetites that they evidently feared

to indulge.  Wine, however, loosened their tongues, and when

Stillwell got up to make the speech everybody seemed to expect of

him they greeted him with a roar.



Stillwell was now one huge, mountainous smile.  He was so happy

that he appeared on the verge of tears.  He rambled on

ecstatically till he came to raise his glass.



"An' now, girls an' boys, let's all drink to the bride an' groom;

to their sincere an' lastin' love; to their happiness an'

prosperity; to their good health an' long life. Let's drink to

the unitin' of the East with the West.  No man full of red blood

an' the real breath of life could resist a Western girl an' a

good hoss an' God's free hand--that open country out there.  So

we claim Al Hammond, an' may we be true to him.  An', friends, I

think it fittin' that we drink to his sister an' to our hopes. 

Heah's to the lady we hope to make our Majesty!  Heah's to the

man who'll come ridin' out of the West, a fine, big-hearted man

with a fast hoss an' a strong rope, an' may he win an' hold her! 

Come, friends, drink."



A heavy pound of horses' hoofs and a yell outside arrested

Stillwell's voice and halted his hand in midair.



The patio became as silent as an unoccupied room.



Through the open doors and windows of Madeline's chamber burst

the sounds of horses stamping to a halt, then harsh speech of

men, and a low cry of a woman in pain.



Rapid steps crossed the porch, entered Madeline's room.  Nels

appeared in the doorway.  Madeline was surprised to see that be

had not been at the dinner-table.  She was disturbed at sight of

his face.



"Stewart, you're wanted outdoors," called Nels, bluntly.  "Monty,

you slope out here with me.  You, Nick, an' Stillwell--I reckon

the rest of you hed better shut the doors an' stay inside."



Nels disappeared.  Quick as a cat Monty glided out. Madeline

beard his soft, swift steps pass from her room into her office. 

He bad left his guns there.  Madeline trembled. She saw Stewart

get up quietly and without any change of expression on his dark,

sad face leave the patio.  Nick Steele followed him.   Stillwell

dropped his wine-glass.  As it broke, shivering the silence, his

huge smile vanished.  His face set into the old cragginess and

the red slowly thickened into black.  Stillwell went out and

closed the door behind him.



Then there was a blank silence.  The enjoyment of the moment had

been rudely disrupted.  Madeline glanced down the lines of brown

faces to see the pleasure fade into the old familiar hardness.



"What's wrong?" asked Alfred, rather stupidly.  The change of

mood had been too rapid for him.  Suddenly he awakened,

thoroughly aroused at the interruption.  "I'm going to see who's

butted in here to spoil our dinner," he said, and strode out.



He returned before any one at the table had spoken or moved, and

now the dull red of anger mottled his forehead.



"It's the sheriff of El Cajon!" he exclaimed, contemptuously. 

"Pat Hawe with some of his tough deputies come to arrest Gene

Stewart.  They've got that poor little Mexican girl out there

tied on a horse.  Confound that sheriff!"



Madeline calmly rose from the table, eluding Florence's

entreating hand, and started for the door.  The cowboys jumped

up.  Alfred barred her progress.



"Alfred, I am going out," she said.



"No, I guess not," he replied.  "That's no place for you."



"I am going."  She looked straight at him.



"Madeline!  Why, what is it?  You look-- Dear, there's pretty

sure to be trouble outside.  Maybe there'll be a fight. You can

do nothing.  You must not go."



"Perhaps I can prevent trouble," she replied.



As she left the patio she was aware that Alfred, with Florence at

his side and the cowboys behind, were starting to follow her. 

When she got out of her room upon the porch she heard several men

in loud, angry discussion.  Then, at sight of Bonita helplessly

and cruelly bound upon a horse, pale and disheveled and

suffering, Madeline experienced the thrill that sight or mention

of this girl always gave her.  It yielded to a hot pang in her

breast--that live pain which so shamed her. But almost instantly,

as a second glance showed an agony in Bonita's face, her bruised

arms where the rope bit deep into the flesh, her little brown

hands stained with blood, Madeline was overcome by pity for the

unfortunate girl and a woman's righteous passion at such

barbarous treatment of one of her own sex.



The man holding the bridle of the horse on which Bonita had been

bound was at once recognized by Madeline as the big-bodied,

bullet-headed guerrilla who had found the basket of wine in the

spring at camp.  Redder of face, blacker of beard, coarser of

aspect, evidently under the influence of liquor, he was as

fierce-looking as a gorilla and as repulsive.  Besides him there

were three other men present, all mounted on weary horses.  The

one in the foreground, gaunt, sharp-featured, red-eyed, with a

pointed beard, she recognized as the sheriff of El Cajon.



Madeline hesitated, then stopped in the middle of the porch. 

Alfred, Florence, and several others followed her out; the rest

of the cowboys and guests crowded the windows and doors. 

Stillwell saw Madeline, and, throwing up his hands, roared to be

heard.  This quieted the gesticulating, quarreling men.



"Wal now, Pat Hawe, what's drivin' you like a locoed steer on the

rampage?" demanded Stillwell.



"Keep in the traces, Bill," replied Hawe.  "You savvy what I come

fer.  I've been bidin' my time.  But I'm ready now. I'm hyar to

arrest a criminal."



The huge frame of the old cattleman jerked as if he had been

stabbed.  His face turned purple.



"What criminal?" he shouted, hoarsely.



The sheriff flicked his quirt against his dirty boot, and he

twisted his thin lips into a leer.  The situation was agreeable

to him.



"Why, Bill, I knowed you hed a no-good outfit ridin' this range;

but I wasn't wise thet you hed more 'n one criminal."



"Cut that talk!  Which cowboy are you wantin' to arrest?"



Hawe's manner altered.



"Gene Stewart," he replied, curtly.



"On what charge?"



"Fer killin' a Greaser one night last fall."



"So you're still harpin' on that?  Pat, you're on the wrong

trail.  You can't lay that killin' onto Stewart.  The thing's

ancient by now.  But if you insist on bringin' him to court, let

the arrest go to-day--we're hevin' some fiesta hyar--an' I'll

fetch Gene in to El Cajon."



"Nope.  I reckon I'll take him when I got the chance, before he

slopes."



"I'm givin' you my word," thundered Stillwell.



"I reckon I don't hev to take your word, Bill, or anybody

else's."



Stillwell's great bulk quivered with his rage, yet he made a

successful effort to control it.



"See hyar, Pat Hawe, I know what's reasonable.  Law is law.  But

in this country there always has been an' is now a safe an' sane

way to proceed with the law.  Mebbe you've forgot that.  The law

as invested in one man in a wild country is liable, owin' to that

man's weaknesses an' onlimited authority, to be disputed even by

a decent ole cattleman like myself.  I'm a-goin' to give you a

hunch.  Pat, you're not overliked in these parts.  You've rid too

much with a high hand.  Some of your deals hev been shady, an'

don't you overlook what I'm sayin'.  But you're the sheriff, an'

I'm respectin' your office.  I'm respectin' it this much.  If the

milk of human decency is so soured in your breast that you can't

hev a kind feelin', then try to avoid the onpleasantness that'll

result from any contrary move on your part to-day.  Do you get

that hunch?"



"Stillwell, you're threatenin' an officer," replied Hawe,

angrily.



"Will you hit the trail quick out of hyar?" queried Stillwell, in

strained voice.  "I guarantee Stewart's appearance in El Cajon

any day you say."



"No.  I come to arrest him, an' I'm goin' to."



"So that's your game!" shouted Stillwell.  "We-all are glad to

get you straight, Pat.  Now listen, you cheap, red-eyed coyote of

a sheriff!  You don't care how many enemies you make. You know

you'll never get office again in this county.  What do you care

now?  It's amazin' strange how earnest you are to hunt down the

man who killed that particular Greaser.  I reckon there's been

some dozen or more killin's of Greasers in the last year.  Why

don't you take to trailin' some of them killin's?  I'll tell you

why.  You're afraid to go near the border.  An' your hate of Gene

Stewart makes you want to hound him an' put him where he's never

been yet--in jail.  You want to spite his friends.  Wal, listen,

you lean-jawed, skunk-bitten coyote!  Go ahead an' try to arrest

him!"



Stillwell took one mighty stride off the porch.  His last words

had been cold.  His rage appeared to have been transferred to

Hawe.  The sheriff had begun to stutter and shake a lanky red

hand at the cattleman when Stewart stepped out.



"Here, you fellows, give me a chance to say a word."



As Stewart appeared the Mexican girl suddenly seemed vitalized

out of her stupor.  She strained at her bonds, as if to lift her

hands beseechingly.  A flush animated her haggard face, and her

big dark eyes lighted.



"Senor Gene!" she moaned.  "Help me!  I so seek.  They beat me,

rope me, 'mos' keel me.  Oh, help me, Senor Gene!"



"Shut up, er I'll gag you," said the man who held Bonita's horse.



"Muzzle her, Sneed, if she blabs again," called Hawe. Madeline

felt something tense and strained working in the short silence. 

Was it only a phase of her thrilling excitement?  Her swift

glance showed the faces of Nels and Monty and Nick to be

brooding, cold, watchful.  She wondered why Stewart did not look

toward Bonita.  He, too, was now dark-faced, cool, quiet, with

something ominous about him.



"Hawe, I'll submit to arrest without any fuss," he said, slowly,

"if you'll take the ropes off that girl."



"Nope," replied the sheriff.  "She got away from me onct.  She's

hawg-tied now, an' she'll stay hawg-tied."



Madeline thought she saw Stewart give a slight start. But an

unaccountable dimness came over her eyes, at brief intervals

obscuring her keen sight.  Vaguely she was conscious of a clogged

and beating tumult in her breast.



"All right, let's hurry out of here," said Stewart. "You've made

annoyance enough.  Ride down to the corral with me.  I'll get my

horse and go with you."



"Hold on!" yelled Hawe, as Stewart turned away.  "Not so fast. 

Who's doin' this?  You don't come no El Capitan stunts on me. 

You'll ride one of my pack-horses, an' you'll go in irons."



"You want to handcuff me?" queried Stewart, with sudden swift

start of passion.



"Want to?  Haw, haw!  Nope, Stewart, thet's jest my way with

hoss-thieves, raiders, Greasers, murderers, an' sich.  See hyar,

you Sneed, git off an' put the irons on this man."



The guerrilla called Sneed slid off his horse and began to fumble

in his saddle-bags.



"You see, Bill," went on Hawe, "I swore in a new depooty fer this

particular job.  Sneed is some handy.  He rounded up thet little

Mexican cat fer me."



Stillwell did not hear the sheriff; he was gazing at Stewart in a

kind of imploring amaze.



"Gene, you ain't goin' to stand fer them handcuffs?" he pleaded.



"Yes," replied the cowboy.  "Bill, old friend, I'm an outsider

here.  There's no call for Miss Hammond and--and her brother and

Florence to be worried further about me.  Their happy day has

already been spoiled on my account.  I want to get out quick."



"Wal, you might be too damn considerate of Miss Hammond's

sensitive feelin's."  There was now no trace of the courteous,

kindly old rancher.  He looked harder than stone. "How about my

feelin's?  I want to know if you're goin' to let this sneakin'

coyote, this last gasp of the old rum-guzzlin' frontier sheriffs,

put you in irons an' hawg-tie you an' drive you off to jail?"



"Yes," replied Stewart, steadily.



"Wal, by Gawd!  You, Gene Stewart!  What's come over you?  Why,

man, go in the house, an' I'll 'tend to this feller. Then

to-morrow you can ride in an' give yourself up like a gentleman."



"No.  I'll go.  Thanks, Bill, for the way you and the boys would

stick to me.  Hurry, Hawe, before my mind changes."



His voice broke at the last, betraying the wonderful control he

had kept over his passions.  As he ceased speaking he seemed

suddenly to become spiritless.  He dropped his head.



Madeline saw in him then a semblance to the hopeless, shamed

Stewart of earlier days.  The vague riot in her breast leaped

into conscious fury--a woman's passionate repudiation of

Stewart's broken spirit.  It was not that she would have him be a

lawbreaker; it was that she could not bear to see him deny his

manhood.  Once she had entreated him to become her kind of a

cowboy--a man in whom reason tempered passion.  She had let him

see how painful and shocking any violence was to her.  And the

idea had obsessed him, softened him, had grown like a stultifying

lichen upon his will, had shorn him of a wild, bold spirit she

now strangely longed to see him feel.  When the man Sneed came

forward, jingling the iron fetters, Madeline's blood turned to

fire.  She would have forgiven Stewart then for lapsing into the

kind of cowboy it had been her blind and sickly sentiment to

abhor.  This was a man's West--a man's game.  What right had a

woman reared in a softer mold to use her beauty and her influence

to change a man who was bold and free and strong?  At that

moment, with her blood hot and racing, she would have gloried in

the violence which she had so deplored: she would have welcomed

the action that had characterized Stewart's treatment of Don

Carlos; she had in her the sudden dawning temper of a woman who

had been assimilating the life and nature around her and who

would not have turned her eyes away from a harsh and bloody deed.



But Stewart held forth his hands to be manacled.  Then Madeline

heard her own voice burst out in a ringing, imperious "Wait!"



In the time it took her to make the few steps to the edge of the

porch, facing the men, she not only felt her anger and justice

and pride summoning forces to her command, but there was

something else calling--a deep, passionate, mysterious thing not

born of the moment.



Sneed dropped the manacles.  Stewart's face took on a chalky

whiteness.  Hawe, in a slow, stupid embarrassment beyond his

control, removed his sombrero in a respect that seemed wrenched

from him.



"Mr. Hawe, I can prove to you that Stewart was not concerned in

any way whatever with the crime for which you want to arrest

him."



The sheriff's stare underwent a blinking change.  He coughed,

stammered, and tried to speak.  Manifestly, he had been thrown

completely off his balance.  Astonishment slowly merged into

discomfiture.



"It was absolutely impossible for Stewart to have been connected

with that assault," went on Madeline, swiftly, "for he was with

me in the waiting-room of the station at the moment the assault

was made outside.  I assure you I have a distinct and vivid

recollection.  The door was open.  I heard the voices of

quarreling men.  They grew louder.  The language was Spanish. 

Evidently these men had left the dance-hall opposite and were

approaching the station.  I heard a woman's voice mingling with

the others.  It, too, was Spanish, and I could not understand. 

But the tone was beseeching.  Then I heard footsteps on the

gravel.  I knew Stewart heard them.  I could see from his face

that something dreadful was about to happen. Just outside the

door then there were hoarse, furious voices, a scuffle, a muffled

shot, a woman's cry, the thud of a falling body, and rapid

footsteps of a man running away.  Next, the girl Bonita staggered

into the door.  She was white, trembling, terror-stricken.  She

recognized Stewart, appealed to him. Stewart supported her and

endeavored to calm her.  He was excited.  He asked her if Danny

Mains had been shot, or if he had done the shooting.  The girl

said no.  She told Stewart that she had danced a little, flirted

a little with vaqueros, and they had quarreled over her.  Then

Stewart took her outside and put her upon his horse.  I saw the

girl ride that horse down the street to disappear in the

darkness."



While Madeline spoke another change appeared to be working in the

man Hawe.  He was not long disconcerted, but his discomfiture

wore to a sullen fury, and his sharp features fixed in an

expression of craft.



"Thet's mighty interestin', Miss Hammond, 'most as interestin' as

a story-book," he sald.  "Now, since you're so obligin' a

witness, I'd sure like to put a question or two. What time did

you arrive at El Cajon thet night?"



"It was after eleven o'clock," replied Madeline.



"Nobody there to meet you?"



"No."



"The station agent an' operator both gone?"



"Yes."



"Wal, how soon did this feller Stewart show up?"  Hawe continued,

with a wry smile.



"Very soon after my arrival.  I think--perhaps fifteen minutes,

possibly a little more."



"Some dark an' lonesome around thet station, wasn't it?"



"Indeed yes."



"An' what time was the Greaser shot?" queried Hawe, with his

little eyes gleaming like coals.



"Probably close to half past one.  It was two o'clock when I

looked at my watch at Florence Kingsley's house. Directly after

Stewart sent Bonita away he took me to Miss Kingsley's.  So,

allowing for the walk and a few minutes' conversation with her, I

can pretty definitely say the shooting took place at about half

past one."



Stillwell heaved his big frame a step closer to the sheriff. 

"What 're you drivin' at?" he roared, his face black again.



"Evidence," snapped Hawe.



Madeline marveled at this interruption; and as Stewart

irresistibly drew her glance she saw him gray-faced as ashes,

shaking, utterly unnerved.



"I thank you, Miss Hammond," he said, huskily.  "But you needn't

answer any more of Hawe's questions.  He's--he's-- It's not

necessary.  I'll go with him now, under arrest.  Bonita will

corroborate your testimony in court, and that will save me from

this--this man's spite."



Madeline, looking at Stewart, seeing a humility she at first took

for cowardice, suddenly divined that it was not fear for himself

which made him dread further disclosures of that night, but fear

for her--fear of shame she might suffer through him.



Pat Hawe cocked his head to one side, like a vulture about to

strike with his beak, and cunningly eyed Madeline.



"Considered as testimony, what you've said is sure important an'

conclusive.  But I'm calculatin' thet the court will want to hev

explained why you stayed from eleven-thirty till one-thirty in

thet waitin'-room alone with Stewart."



His deliberate speech met with what Madeline imagined a

remarkable reception from Stewart, who gave a tigerish start;

from Stillwell, whose big hands tore at the neck of his shirt, as

if he was choking; from Alfred, who now strode hotly forward, to

be stopped by the cold and silent Nels; from Monty Price, who

uttered a violent "Aw!" which was both a hiss and a roar.



In the rush of her thought Madeline could not interpret the

meaning of these things which seemed so strange at that moment. 

But they were portentous.  Even as she was forming a reply to

Hawe's speech she felt a chill creep over her.



"Stewart detained me in the waiting-room," she said, clear-voiced

as a bell.  "But we were not alone--all the time."



For a moment the only sound following her words was a gasp from

Stewart.  Hawe's face became transformed with a hideous amaze and

joy.



"Detained?" he whispered, craning his lean and corded neck. 

"How's thet?"



"Stewart was drunk.  He--"



With sudden passionate gesture of despair Stewart appealed to

her:



''Oh, Miss Hammond, don't! don't! DON'T! . . ."



Then he seemed to sink down, head lowered upon his breast, in

utter shame.  Stillwell's great hand swept to the bowed shoulder,

and he turned to Madeline.



"Miss Majesty, I reckon you'd be wise to tell all," said the old

cattleman, gravely.  "There ain't one of us who could

misunderstand any motive or act of yours.  Mebbe a stroke of

lightnin' might clear this murky air.  Whatever Gene Stewart did

that onlucky night--you tell it."



Madeline's dignity and self-possession had been disturbed by

Stewart's importunity.  She broke into swift, disconnected

speech:



"He came into the station--a few minutes after I got there.  I

asked-to be shown to a hotel.  He said there wasn't any that

would accommodate married women.  He grasped my hand--looked for

a wedding-ring.  Then I saw he was--he was intoxicated.  He told

me he would go for a hotel porter.  But he came back with a

padre--Padre Marcos.  The poor priest was--terribly frightened. 

So was I.  Stewart had turned into a devil.  He fired his gun at

the padre's feet.  He pushed me into a bench.  Again he shot--

right before my face.  I--I nearly fainted.  But I heard him

cursing the padre--heard the padre praying or chanting--I didn't

know what.  Stewart tried to make me say things in Spanish.  All

at once he asked my name.  I told him.  He jerked at my veil.  I

took it off.  Then he threw his gun down--pushed the padre out of

the door.  That was just before the vaqueros approached with

Bonita.  Padre Marcos must have seen them--must have heard them. 

After that Stewart grew quickly sober.  He was mortified--

distressed--stricken with shame.  He told me he had been drinking

at a wedding--I remember, it was Ed Linton's wedding.  Then he

explained--the boys were always gambling--he wagered he would

marry the first girl who arrived at El Cajon.  I happened to be

the first one.  He tried to force me to marry him.  The rest--

relating to the assault on the vaquero--I have already told you."



Madeline ended, out of breath and panting, with her hands pressed

upon her heaving bosom.  Revelation of that secret liberated

emotion; those hurried outspoken words had made her throb and

tremble and burn.  Strangely then she thought of Alfred and his

wrath.  But he stood motionless, as if dazed.  Stillwell was

trying to holster up the crushed Stewart.



Hawe rolled his red eyes and threw back his head.



"Ho, ho, ho!  Ho, ho, ho!  Say, Sneed, you didn't miss any of it,

did ye?  Haw, haw!  Best I ever heerd in all my born days.  Ho,

ho!"



Then he ceased laughing, and with glinting gaze upon Madeline,

insolent and vicious and savage, he began to drawl:



"Wal now, my lady, I reckon your story, if it tallies with

Bonita's an' Padre Marcos's, will clear Gene Stewart in the eyes

of the court."  Here he grew slower, more biting, sharper and

harder of face.  "But you needn't expect Pat Hawe or the court to

swaller thet part of your story--about bein' detained unwillin'!"



Madeline had not time to grasp the sense of his last words. 

Stewart had convulsively sprung upward, white as chalk. As he

leaped at Hawe Stillwell interposed his huge bulk and wrapped his

arms around Stewart.  There was a brief, whirling, wrestling

struggle.  Stewart appeared to be besting the old cattleman.



"Help, boys, help!" yelled Stillwell.  "I can't hold him.  Hurry,

or there's goin' to be blood spilled!"



Nick Steele and several cowboys leaped to Stillwell's assistance. 

Stewart, getting free, tossed one aside and then another.  They

closed in on him.  For an instant a furious straining wrestle of

powerful bodies made rasp and shock and blow.  Once Stewart

heaved them from him.  But they plunged back upon him--conquered

him.



"Gene!  Why, Gene!" panted the old cattleman.  "Sure you're

locoed--to act this way.  Cool down!  Cool down!  Why, boy, it's

all right.  Jest stand still--give us a chance to talk to you. 

It's only ole Bill, you know--your ole pal who's tried to be a

daddy to you.  He's only wantin' you to hev sense--to be cool--to

wait."



"Let me go!  Let me go!" cried Stewart; and the poignancy of that

cry pierced Madeline's heart.  "Let me go, Bill, if you're my

friend.  I saved your life once--over in the desert.  You swore

you'd never forget.  Boys, make him let me go!  Oh, I don't care

what Hawe's said or done to me!  It was that about her!  Are you

all a lot of Greasers?  How can you stand it?  Damn you for a lot

of cowards!  There's a limit, I tell you."  Then his voice broke,

fell to a whisper.  "Bill, dear old Bill, let me go.  I'll kill

him!  You know I'll kill him!"



"Gene, I know you'd kill him if you hed an even break," replied

Stillwell, soothingly.  "But, Gene, why, you ain't even packin' a

gun!  An' there's Pat lookin' nasty, with his hand nervous-like. 

He seen you hed no gun.  He'd jump at the chance to plug you now,

an' then holler about opposition to the law. Cool down, son;

it'll all come right."



Suddenly Madeline was transfixed by a terrible sound.



Her startled glance shifted from the anxious group round Stewart

to see that Monty Price had leaped off the porch. He crouched

down with his bands below his hips, where the big guns swung. 

From his distorted lips issued that which was combined roar and

bellow and Indian war-whoop, and, more than all, a horrible

warning cry.  He resembled a hunchback about to make the leap of

a demon.  He was quivering, vibrating.  His eyes, black and hot,

were fastened with most piercing intentness upon Hawe and Sneed.



"Git back, Bill, git back!" he roared.  "Git 'em back!" With one

lunge Stillwell shoved Stewart and Nick and the other cowboys up

on the porch.  Then he crowded Madeline and Alfred and Florence

to the wall, tried to force them farther.  His motions were rapid

and stern.  But failing to get them through door and windows, he

planted his wide person between the women and danger.  Madeline

grasped his arm, held on, and peered fearfully from behind his

broad shoulder.



"You, Hawe!  You, Sneed!" called Monty, in that same wild voice. 

"Don't you move a finger or an eyelash!"



Madeline's faculties nerved to keen, thrilling divination.  She

grasped the relation between Monty's terrible cry and the strange

hunched posture he had assumed. Stillwell's haste and silence,

too, were pregnant of catastrophe.



"Nels, git in this!" yelled Monty; and all the time he never

shifted his intent gaze as much as a hair's-breadth from Hawe and

his deputy.  "Nels, chase away them two fellers hangin' back

there.  Chase 'em, quick!"



These men, the two deputies who had remained in the background

with the pack-horses, did not wait for Nels.  They spurred their

mounts, wheeled, and galloped away.



"Now, Nels, cut the gurl loose," ordered Monty.



Nels ran forward, jerked the halter out of Sneed's hand, and

pulled Bonita's horse in close to the porch.  As he slit the rope

which bound her she fell into his arms.



"Hawe, git down!" went on Monty.  "Face front an' stiff!"



The sheriff swung his leg, and, never moving his hands, with his

face now a deathly, sickening white, he slid to the ground.



"Line up there beside your guerrilla pard.  There!  You two make

a damn fine pictoor, a damn fine team of pizened coyote an' a

cross between a wild mule an' a Greaser.  Now listen!"



Monty made a long pause, in which his breathing was plainly

audible.



Madeline's eyes were riveted upon Monty.  Her mind, swift as

lightning, had gathered the subtleties in action and word

succeeding his domination of the men.  Violence, terrible

violence, the thing she had felt, the thing she had feared, the

thing she had sought to eliminate from among her cowboys, was,

after many months, about to be enacted before her eyes.  It had

come at last.  She had softened Stillwell, she had influenced

Nels, she had changed Stewart; but this little black-faced,

terrible Monty Price now rose, as it were, out of his past wild

years, and no power on earth or in heaven could stay his hand. It

was the hard life of wild men in a wild country that was about to

strike this blow at her.  She did not shudder; she did not wish

to blot out from sight this little man, terrible in his mood of

wild justice.  She suffered a flash of horror that Monty, blind

and dead to her authority, cold as steel toward her presence,

understood the deeps of a woman's soul.  For in this moment of

strife, of insult to her, of torture to the man she had uplifted

and then broken, the passion of her reached deep toward primitive

hate.  With eyes slowly hazing red, she watched Monty Price; she

listened with thrumming ears; she waited, slowly sagging against

Stillwell.



"Hawe, if you an' your dirty pard hev loved the sound of human

voice, then listen an' listen hard," said Monty.  "Fer I've been

goin' contrary to my ole style jest to hev a talk with you.  You

all but got away on your nerve, didn't you? 'Cause why?  You roll

in here like a mad steer an' flash yer badge an' talk mean, then

almost bluff away with it.  You heerd all about Miss Hammond's

cowboy outfit stoppin' drinkin' an' cussin' an' packin' guns. 

They've took on religion an' decent livin', an' sure they'll be

easy to hobble an' drive to jail. Hawe, listen.  There was a good

an' noble an be-ootiful woman come out of the East somewheres,

an' she brought a lot of sunshine an' happiness an' new idees

into the tough lives of cowboys.  I reckon it's beyond you to

know what she come to mean to them.  Wal, I'll tell you. 

They-all went clean out of their heads.  They-all got soft an'

easy an' sweet-tempered. They got so they couldn't kill a coyote,

a crippled calf in a mud-hole.  They took to books, an' writin'

home to mother an' sister, an' to savin' money, an' to gittin'

married.  Onct they was only a lot of poor cowboys, an' then

sudden-like they was human bein's, livin' in a big world thet hed

somethin' sweet even fer them.  Even fer me--an ole, worn-out,

hobble-legged, burned-up cowman like me!  Do you git thet?  An'

you, Mister Hawe, you come along, not satisfied with ropin' an'

beatin', an' Gaw knows what else, of thet friendless little

Bonita; you come along an' face the lady we fellers honor an'

love an' reverence, an' you--you-- Hell's fire!"



With whistling breath, foaming at the mouth, Monty Price crouched

lower, hands at his hips, and he edged inch by inch farther out

from the porch, closer to Hawe and Sneed. Madeline saw them only

in the blurred fringe of her sight. They resembled specters.  She

heard the shrill whistle of a horse and recognized Majesty

calling her from the corral.



"Thet's all!" roared Monty, in a voice now strangling. Lower and

lower he bent, a terrible figure of ferocity.  "Now, both you

armed ocifers of the law, come on!  Flash your guns! Throw 'em,

an' be quick!  Monty Price is done!  There'll be daylight through

you both before you fan a hammer!  But I'm givin' you a chanst to

sting me.  You holler law, an' my way is the ole law."



His breath came quicker, his voice grew hoarser, and he crouched

lower.  All his body except his rigid arms quivered with a

wonderful muscular convulsion.



"Dogs!  Skunks!  Buzzards!  Flash them guns, er I'll flash mine! 

Aha!"



To Madeline it seemed the three stiff, crouching men leaped into

instant and united action.  She saw streaks of fire--streaks of

smoke.  Then a crashing volley deafened her.  It ceased as

quickly.  Smoke veiled the scene.  Slowly it drifted away to

disclose three fallen men, one of whom, Monty, leaned on his left

hand, a smoking gun in his right.  He watched for a movement from

the other two.  It did not come.  Then, with a terrible smile, he

slid back and stretched out.

