





VII Her Majesty's Rancho



FIVE months brought all that Stillwell had dreamed of, and so

many more changes and improvements and innovations that it was as

if a magic touch had transformed the old ranch.  Madeline and

Alfred and Florence had talked over a fitting name, and had

decided on one chosen by Madeline.  But this instance was the

only one in the course of developments in which Madeline's wishes

were not compiled with.  The cowboys named the new ranch "Her

Majesty's Rancho."  Stillwell said the names cowboys bestowed

were felicitous, and as unchangeable as the everlasting hills;

Florence went over to the enemy; and Alfred, laughing at

Madeline's protest, declared the cowboys had elected her queen of

the ranges, and that there was no help for it.  So the name stood

"Her Majesty's Rancho."



The April sun shone down upon a slow-rising green knoll that

nestled in the lee of the foothills, and seemed to center bright

rays upon the long ranch-house, which gleamed snow-white from the

level summit.  The grounds around the house bore no semblance to

Eastern lawns or parks; there had been no landscape-gardening;

Stillwell had just brought water and grass and flowers and plants

to the knoll-top, and there had left them, as it were, to follow

nature.  His idea may have been crude, but the result was

beautiful.  Under that hot sun and balmy air, with cool water

daily soaking into the rich soil, a green covering sprang into

life, and everywhere upon it, as if by magic, many colored

flowers rose in the sweet air.  Pale wild flowers, lavender

daisies, fragile bluebells, white four-petaled lilies like

Eastern mayflowers, and golden poppies, deep sunset gold, color

of the West, bloomed in happy confusion.  California roses,

crimson as blood, nodded heavy heads and trembled with the weight

of bees.  Low down in bare places, isolated, open to the full

power of the sun, blazed the vermilion and magenta blossoms of

cactus plants.



Green slopes led all the way down to where new adobe barns and

sheds had been erected, and wide corrals stretched high-barred

fences down to the great squares of alfalfa gently inclining to

the gray of the valley.  The bottom of a dammed-up hollow shone

brightly with its slowly increasing acreage of water, upon which

thousands of migratory wildfowl whirred and splashed and

squawked, as if reluctant to leave this cool, wet surprise so new

in the long desert journey to the northland. Quarters for the

cowboys--comfortable, roomy adobe houses that not even the lamest

cowboy dared describe as crampy bunks--stood in a row upon a long

bench of ground above the lake.  And down to the edge of the

valley the cluster of Mexican habitations and the little church

showed the touch of the same renewing hand.





All that had been left of the old Spanish house which had been

Stillwell's home for so long was the bare, massive structure, and

some of this had been cut away for new doors and windows.  Every

modern convenience, even to hot and cold running water and

acetylene light, had been installed; and the whole interior

painted and carpentered and furrished.  The ideal sought had not

been luxury, but comfort.  Every door into the patio looked out

upon dark, rich grass and sweet-faced flowers, and every window

looked down the green slopes.



Madeline's rooms occupied the west end of the building and

comprised four in number, all opening out upon the long porch. 

There was a small room for her maid, another which she used as an

office, then her sleeping-apartment; and, lastly, the great light

chamber which she had liked so well upon first sight, and which

now, simply yet beautifully furnished and containing her favorite

books and pictures, she had come to love as she had never loved

any room at home.  In the morning the fragrant, balmy air blew

the white curtains of the open windows; at noon the drowsy,

sultry quiet seemed to creep in for the siesta that was

characteristic of the country; in the afternoon the westering sun

peeped under the porch roof and painted the walls with gold bars

that slowly changed to red.



Madeline Hammond cherished a fancy that the transformation she

had wrought in the old Spanish house and in the people with whom

she had surrounded herself, great as that transformation had

been, was as nothing compared to the one wrought in herself.  She

had found an object in life.  She was busy, she worked with her

hands as well as mind, yet she seemed to have more time to read

and think and study and idle and dream than ever before.  She had

seen her brother through his difficulties, on the road to all the

success and prosperity that he cared for.  Madeline had been a

conscientious student of ranching and an apt pupil of Stillwell. 

The old cattleman, in his simplicity, gave her the place in his

heart that was meant for the daughter he had never had.  His

pride in her, Madeline thought, was beyond reason or belief or

words to tell.  Under his guidance, sometimes accompanied by

Alfred and Florence, Madeline had ridden the ranges and had

studied the life and work of the cowboys.  She had camped on the

open range, slept under the blinking stars, ridden forty miles a

day in the face of dust and wind.  She had taken two wonderful

trips down into the desert--one trip to Chiricahua, and from

there across the waste of sand and rock and alkali and cactus to

the Mexican borderline; and the other through the Aravaipa

Valley, with its deep, red-walled canons and wild fastnesses.



This breaking-in, this training into Western ways, though she had

been a so-called outdoor girl, had required great effort and

severe pain; but the education, now past its grades, had become a

labor of love.  She had perfect health, abounding spirits.  She

was so active hat she had to train herself into taking the midday

siesta, a custom of the country and imperative during the hot

summer months.  Sometimes she looked in her mirror and laughed

with sheer joy at sight of the lithe, audacious, brown-faced,

flashing-eyed creature reflected there.  It was not so much joy

in her beauty as sheer joy of life.  Eastern critics had been

wont to call her beautiful in those days when she had been pale

and slender and proud and cold.  She laughed.  If they could only

see her now!  From the tip of her golden head to her feet he was

alive, pulsating, on fire.



Sometimes she thought of her parents, sister, friends, of how

they had persistently refused to believe she could or would stay

in the West.  They were always asking her to come home.  And when

she wrote, which was dutifully often, the last thing under the

sun that she was likely to mention was the change in her.  She

wrote that she would return to her old home some time, of course,

for a visit; and letters such as this brought returns that amused

Madeline, sometimes saddened her. She meant to go back East for a

while, and after that once or twice every year.  But the

initiative was a difficult step from which she shrank.  Once

home, she would have to make explanations, and these would not be

understood.  Her father's business had been such that he could

not leave it for the time required for a Western trip, or else,

according to his letter, he would have come for her.  Mrs.

Hammond could not have been driven to cross the Hudson River; her

un-American idea of the wilderness westward was that Indians

still chased buffalo on the outskirts of Chicago.  Madeline's

sister Helen had long been eager to come, as much from curiosity,

Madeline thought, as from sisterly regard.  And at length

Madeline concluded that the proof of her breaking permanent ties

might better be seen by visiting relatives and friends before she

went back East. With that in mind she invited Helen to visit her

during the summer, and bring as many friends as she liked.







No slight task indeed was it to oversee the many business details

of Her Majesty's Rancho and to keep a record of them.  Madeline

found the course of business training upon which her father had

insisted to be invaluable to her now.  It helped her to

assimilate and arrange the practical details of cattle-raising as

put forth by the blunt Stillwell.  She split up the great stock

of cattle into different herds, and when any of these were out

running upon the open range she had them closely watched.  Part

of the time each herd was kept in an inclosed range, fed and

watered, and carefully handled by a big force of cowboys.  She

employed three cowboy scouts whose sole duty was to ride the

ranges searching for stray, sick, or crippled cattle or

motherless calves, and to bring these in to be treated and

nursed.  There were two cowboys whose business was to master a

pack of Russian stag-hounds and to hunt down the coyotes, wolves,

and lions that preyed upon the herds.  The better and tamer milch

cows were separated from the ranging herds and kept in a pasture

adjoining the dairy.  All branding was done in corrals, and

calves were weaned from mother-cows at the proper time to benefit

both.  The old method of branding and classing, that had so

shocked Madeline, had been abandoned, and one had been

inaugurated whereby cattle and cowboys and horses were spared

brutality and injury.



Madeline established an extensive vegetable farm, and she planted

orchards.  The climate was superior to that of California, and,

with abundant water, trees and plants and gardens flourished and

bloomed in a way wonderful to behold. It was with ever-increasing

pleasure that Madeline walked through acres of ground once bare,

now green and bright and fragrant.  There were poultry-yards and

pig-pens and marshy quarters for ducks and geese.  Here in the

farming section of the ranch Madeline found employment for the

little colony of Mexicans.  Their lives had been as hard and

barren as the dry valley where they had lived.  But as the valley

had been transformed by the soft, rich touch of water, so their

lives had been transformed by help and sympathy and work.  The

children were wretched no more, and many that had been blind

could now see, and Madeline had become to them a new and blessed

virgin.



Madeline looked abroad over these lands and likened the change in

them and those who lived by them to the change in her heart.  It

may have been fancy, but the sun seemed to be brighter, the sky

bluer, the wind sweeter.  Certain it was that the deep green of

grass and garden was not fancy, nor the white and pink of

blossom, nor the blaze and perfume of flower, nor the sheen of

lake and the fluttering of new-born leaves.  Where there had been

monotonous gray there was now vivid and changing color.  Formerly

there had been silence both day and night; now during the sunny

hours there was music.  The whistle of prancing stallions pealed

in from the grassy ridges. Innumerable birds had come and, like

the northward-journeying ducks, they had tarried to stay.  The

song of meadow-lark and blackbird and robin, familiar to Madeline

from childhood, mingled with the new and strange heart-throbbing

song of mocking-bird and the piercing blast of the desert eagle

and the melancholy moan of turtle-dove.







One April morning Madeline sat in her office wrestling with a

problem.  She had problems to solve every day.  The majority of

these were concerned with the management of twenty-seven

incomprehensible cowboys.  This particular problem involved

Ambrose Mills, who had eloped with her French maid, Christine.



Stillwell faced Madeline with a smile almost as huge as his bulk.



"Wal, Miss Majesty, we ketched them; but not before Padre Marcos

had married them. All thet speedin' in the autoomoobile was jest

a-scarin' of me to death fer nothin'.  I tell you Link Stevens is

crazy about runnin' thet car.  Link never hed no sense even with

a hoss.  He ain't afraid of the devil hisself.  If my hair hedn't

been white it 'd be white now.  No more rides in thet thing fer

me!  Wal, we ketched Ambrose an' the girl too late.  But we

fetched them back, an' they're out there now, spoonin', sure

oblivious to their shameless conduct."



"Stillwell, what shall I say to Ambrose?  How shall I punish him? 

He has done wrong to deceive me.  I never was so surprised in my

life.  Christine did not seem to care any more for Ambrose than

for any of the other cowboys.  What does my authority amount to? 

I must do something.  Stillwell, you must help me."



Whenever Madeline fell into a quandary she had to call upon the

old cattleman.  No man ever held a position with greater pride

than Stillwell, but he had been put to tests that steeped him in

humility.  Here he scratched his head in great perplexity.



"Dog-gone the luck!  What's this elopin' bizness to do with

cattle-raisin'?  I don't know nothin' but cattle.  Miss Majesty,

it's amazin' strange what these cowboys hev come to. I never seen

no cowboys like these we've got hyar now.  I don't know them any

more.  They dress swell an' read books, an' some of them hev

actooly stopped cussin' an' drinkin'.  I ain't sayin' all this is

against them.  Why, now, they're jest the finest bunch of

cow-punchers I ever seen or dreamed of.  But managin' them now is

beyond me.  When cowboys begin to play thet game gol-lof an' run

off with French maids I reckon Bill Stillwell has got to resign."



"Stillwell!  Oh, you will not leave me?  What in the world would

I do?" exclaimed Madeline, in great anxiety.



"Wal, I sure won't leave you, Miss Majesty.  No, I never'll do

thet.  I'll run the cattle bizness fer you an' see after the

hosses an' other stock.  But I've got to hev a foreman who can

handle this amazin' strange bunch of cowboys."



"You've tried half a dozen foremen.  Try more until you find the

man who meets your requirements," said Madeline. "Never mind that

now.  Tell me how to impress Ambrose--to make him an example, so

to  speak.  I must have another maid.  And I do not want a new

one carried off in this summary manner."



"Wal, if you fetch pretty maids out hyar you can't expect nothin'

else.  Why, thet black-eyed little French girl, with her white

skin an' pretty airs an' smiles an' shrugs, she had the cowboys

crazy.  It'll be wuss with the next one."



"Oh dear!" sighed Madeline.



"An' as fer impressin' Ambrose, I reckon I can tell you how to do

thet.  Jest give it to him good an' say you're goin' to fire him. 

That'll fix Ambrose, an' mebbe scare the other boys fer a spell."



"Very well, Stillwell, bring Ambrose in to see me, and tell

Christine to wait in my room."



"It was a handsome debonair, bright-eyed cowboy that came

tramping into Madeline's presence.  His accustomed shyness and

awkwardness had disappeared in an excited manner.  He was a happy

boy.  He looked straight into Madeline's face as if he expected

her to wish him joy.  And Madeline actually found that expression

trembling to her lips.  She held it back until she could be

severe.  But Madeline feared she would fail of much severity. 

Something warm and sweet, like a fragrance, had entered the room

with Ambrose.



"Ambrose, what have you done?" she asked.  "Miss Hammond, I've

been and gone and got married," replied Ambrose, his words

tumbling over one another.  His eyes snapped, and there was a

kind of glow upon his clean-shaven brown cheek. "I've stole a

march on the other boys.  There was Frank Slade pushin' me close,

and I was havin' some runnin' to keep Jim Bell back in my dust. 

Even old man Nels made eyes at Christine!  So I wasn't goin' to

take any chances.  I just packed her off to El Cajon and married

her."



"Oh, so I heard," said Madeline, slowly, as she watched him. 

"Ambrose, do you--love her?"



He reddened under her clear gaze, dropped his head, and fumbled

with his new sombrero, and there was a catch in his breath. 

Madeline saw his powerful brown hand tremble.  It affected her

strangely that this stalwart cowboy, who could rope and throw and

tie a wild steer in less than one minute, should tremble at a

mere question.  Suddenly he raised his head, and at the beautiful

blase of his eyes Madeline turned her own away.



"Yes, Miss Hammond, I love her," he said.  "I think I love her in

the way you're askin' about.  I know the first time I saw her I

thought how wonderful it'd be to have a girl like that for my

wife. It's all been so strange--her comin' an' how she made me

feel.  Sure I never knew many girls, and I haven't seen any girls

at all for years.  But when she came!  A girl makes a wonderful

difference in a man's feelin's and thoughts. I guess I never had

any before.  Leastways, none like I have now.  My--it--well, I

guess I have a little understandin' now of Padre Marcos's

blessin'."



"Ambrose, have you nothing to say to me?" asked Madeline.



"I'm sure sorry I didn't have time to tell you.  But I was in

some hurry."



"What did you intend to do?  Where were you going when Stillwell

found you?"



"We'd just been married.  I hadn't thought of anything after

that.  Suppose I'd have rustled back to my job.  I'll sure have

to work now and save my money."



"Oh, well, Ambrose, I am glad you realize your responsibilities. 

Do you earn enough--is your pay sufficient to keep a wife?"



"Sure it is!  Why, Miss Hammond, I never before earned half the

salary I'm gettin' now.  It's some fine to work for you.  I'm

goin' to fire the boys out of my bunk-house and fix it up for

Christine and me.  Say, won't they be jealous?"



"Ambrose, I--I congratulate you.  I wish you joy," said Madeline. 

"I--I shall make Christine a little wedding-present.  I want to

talk to her for a few moments.  You may go now."



It would have been impossible for Madeline to say one severe word

to that happy cowboy.  She experienced difficulty in hiding her

own happiness at the turn of events.  Curiosity and interest

mingled with her pleasure when she called to Christine.



"Mrs. Ambrose Mills, please come in."



No sound came from the other room.



"I should like very much to see the bride," went on Madeline.



Still there was no stir or reply



"Christine!" called Madeline.



Then it was as if a little whirlwind of flying feet and

entreating hands and beseeching eyes blew in upon Madeline.

Christine was small, graceful, plump, with very white skin and

very dark hair.  She had been Madeline's favorite maid for years

and there was sincere affection between the two. Whatever had

been the blissful ignorance of Ambrose, it was manifestly certain

that Christine knew how she had transgressed.  Her fear and

remorse and appeal for forgiveness were poured out in an

incoherent storm.  Plain it was that the little French maid had

been overwhelmed.  It was only after Madeline had taken the

emotional girl in her arms and had forgiven and soothed her that

her part in the elopement became clear.  Christine was in a maze. 

But gradually, as she talked and saw that she was forgiven,

calmness came in some degree, and with it a story which amused

yet shocked Madeline.  The unmistakable, shy, marveling love,

scarcely realized by Christine, gave Madeline relief and joy.  If

Christine loved Ambrose there was no harm done.  Watching the

girl's eyes, wonderful with their changes of thought, listening

to her attempts to explain what it was evident she did not

understand, Madeline gathered that if ever a caveman had taken

unto himself a wife, if ever a barbarian had carried off a Sabine

woman, then Ambrose Mills had acted with the violence of such

ancient forebears.  Just how it all happened seemed to be beyond

Christine.



"He say he love me," repeated the girl, in a kind of rapt awe. 

"He ask me to marry him--he kees me--he hug me--he lift me on ze

horse--he ride with me all night--he marry me."



And she exhibited a ring on the third finger of her left hand. 

Madeline saw that, whatever had been the state of Christine's

feeling for Ambrose before this marriage, she loved him now.  She

had been taken forcibly, but she was won.



After Christine had gone, comforted and betraying her shy

eagerness to get back to Ambrose, Madeline was haunted by the

look in the girl's eyes, and her words.  Assuredly the spell of

romance was on this sunny land.  For Madeline there was a

nameless charm, a nameless thrill combating her sense of the

violence and unfitness of Ambrose's wooing.  Something, she knew

not what, took arms against her intellectual arraignment of the

cowboy's method of getting himself a wife. He had said straight

out that he loved the girl--he had asked her to marry him--he

kissed her--he hugged her--he lifted her upon his horse--he rode

away with her through the night--and he married her.  In whatever

light Madeline reviewed this thing she always came back to her

first natural impression; it thrilled her, charmed her.  It went

against all the precepts of her training; nevertheless, it was

somehow splendid and beautiful.  She imagined it stripped another

artificial scale from her over-sophisticated eyes.



Scarcely had she settled again to the task on her desk when

Stillwell's heavy tread across the porch interrupted her. This

time when he entered he wore a look that bordered upon the

hysterical; it was difficult to tell whether he was trying to

suppress grief or glee.



"Miss Majesty, there's another amazin' strange thing sprung on

me.  Hyars Jim Bell come to see you, an', when I taxed him,

sayin' you was tolerable busy, he up an' says he was hungry an'

be ain't a-goin' to eat any more bread made in a wash-basin! 

Says he'll starve first.  Says Nels hed the gang over to big bunk

an' feasted them on bread you taught him how to make in some

new-fangled bucket-machine with a crank.  Jim says thet bread

beat any cake he ever eat, an' he wants you to show him how to

make some.  Now, Miss Majesty, as superintendent of this ranch I

ought to know what's goin' on. Mebbe Jim is jest a-joshin' me. 

Mebbe he's gone clean dotty. Mebbe I hev.  An' beggin' your

pardon, I want to know if there's any truth in what Jim says Nels

says."



Whereupon it became necessary for Madeline to stifle her mirth

and to inform the sadly perplexed old cattleman that she had

received from the East a patent bread-mixer, and in view of the

fact that her household women had taken fright at the

contrivance, she had essayed to operate it herself.  This had

turned out to be so simple, so saving of time and energy and

flour, so much more cleanly than the old method of mixing dough

with the hands, and particularly it had resulted in such good

bread, that Madeline had been pleased.  Immediately she ordered

more of the bread-mixers.  One day she had happened upon Nels

making biscuit dough in his wash-basin, and she had delicately

and considerately introduced to him the idea of her new method. 

Nels, it appeared, had a great reputation as a bread-maker, and

he was proud of it.  Moreover, he was skeptical of any clap-trap

thing with wheels and cranks.  He consented, however, to let her

show how the thing worked and to sample some of the bread.  To

that end she had him come up to the house, where she won him

over.  Stillwell laughed loud and long.



"Wal, wal, wal!" he exclaimed, at length.  "Thet's fine, an' it's

powerful funny.  Mebbe you don't see how funny? Wal, Nels has

jest been lordin' it over the boys about how you showed him, an'

now you'll hev to show every last cowboy on the place the same

thing.  Cowboys are the jealousest kind of fellers.  They're all

crazy about you, anyway.  Take Jim out hyar.  Why, thet lazy

cowpuncher jest never would make bread. He's notorious fer

shirkin' his share of the grub deal.  I've knowed Jim to trade

off washin' the pots an' pans fer a lonely watch on a rainy

night.  All he wants is to see you show him the same as Nels is

crowin' over.  Then he'll crow over his bunkie, Frank Slade, an'

then Frank'll get lonely to know all about this wonderful

bread-machine.  Cowboys are amazin' strange critters, Miss

Majesty.  An' now thet you've begun with them this way, you'll

hev to keep it up.  I will say I never seen such a bunch to work. 

You've sure put heart in them."



"Indeed, Stillwell, I am glad to hear that," replied Madeline. 

"And I shall be pleased to teach them all.  But may I not have

them all up here at once--at least those off duty?"



"Wal, I reckon you can't onless you want to hev them scrappin',"

rejoined Stillwell, dryly.  "What you've got on your hands now,

Miss Majesty, is to let 'em come one by one, an' make each cowboy

think you're takin' more especial pleasure in showin' him than

the feller who came before him.  Then mebbe we can go on with

cattle-raisin'."



Madeline protested, and Stillwell held inexorably to what he said

was wisdom.  Several times Madeline had gone against his advice,

to her utter discomfiture and rout.  She dared not risk it again,

and resigned herself grace-fully and with subdued merriment to

her task.  Jim Bell was ushered into the great, light, spotless

kitchen, where presently Madeline appeared to put on an apron and

roll up her sleeves.  She explained the use of the several pieces

of aluminum that made up the bread-mixer and fastened the bucket

to the table-shelf. Jim's life might have depended upon this

lesson, judging from his absorbed manner and his desire to have

things explained over and over, especially the turning of the

crank.  When Madeline had to take Jim's hand three times to show

him the simple mechanism and then he did not understand she began

to have faint misgivings as to his absolute sincerity.  She

guessed that as long as she touched Jim's hand he never would

understand.  Then as she began to measure out flour and milk and

lard and salt and yeast she saw with despair that Jim was not

looking at the ingredients, was not paying the slightest

attention to them.  His eyes were covertly upon her.



"Jim, I am not sure about you," said Madeline, severely.  "How

can you learn to make bread if you do not watch me mix it?"



"I am a-watchin' you," replied Jim, innocently.



Finally Madeline sent the cowboy on his way rejoicing with the

bread-mixer under his arm.  Next morning, true to Stillwell's

prophecy, Frank Slade, Jim's bunkmate, presented himself

cheerfully to Madeline and unbosomed himself of a long-deferred

and persistent desire to relieve his overworked comrade of some

of the house-keeping in their bunk.



"Miss Hammond," said Frank, "Jim's orful kind wantin' to do it

all hisself.  But he ain't very bright, an' I didn't believe him. 

You see, I'm from Missouri, an, you'll have to show me."



For a whole week Madeline held clinics where she expounded the

scientific method of modern bread-making.  She got a good deal of

enjoyment out of her lectures.  What boys these great hulking

fellows were!  She saw through their simple ruses.  Some of them

were grave as deacons; others wore expressions important enough

to have fitted the faces of statesmen signing government

treaties.  These cowboys were children; they needed to be

governed; but in order to govern them they had to be humored.  A

more light-hearted, fun-loving crowd of boys could not have been

found.  And they were grown men.  Stillwell explained that the

exuberance of spirits lay in the difference in their fortunes. 

Twenty-seven cowboys, in relays of nine, worked eight hours a

day.  That had never been heard of before in the West.  Stillwell

declared that cowboys from all points of the compass would head

their horses toward Her Majesty's Rancho.


