





XV The Mountain Trail



As Stewart departed from one door Florence knocked upon another;

and Madeline, far shaken out of her usual serenity, admitted the

cool Western girl with more than gladness.  Just to have her near

helped Madeline to get back her balance.  She was conscious of

Florence's sharp scrutiny, then of a sweet, deliberate change of

manner.  Florence might have been burning with curiosity to know

more about the bandits hidden in the house, the plans of the

cowboys, the reason for Madeline's suppressed emotion; but

instead of asking Madeline questions she introduced the important

subject of what to take on the camping trip.  For an hour they

discussed the need of this and that article, selected those

things most needful, and then packed them in Madeline's

duffle-bags.



That done, they decided to lie down, fully dressed as they were

in riding-costume, and sleep, or at least rest, the little

remaining time left before the call to saddle.  Madeline turned

out the light and, peeping through her window, saw dark forms

standing sentinel-like in the gloom.  When she lay down she heard

soft steps on the path.  This fidelity to her swelled her heart,

while the need of it presaged that fearful something which, since

Stewart's passionate appeal to her, haunted her as inevitable.



Madeline did not expect to sleep, yet she did sleep, and it

seemed to have been only a moment until Florence called her.  She

followed Florence outside.  It was the dark hour before dawn. 

She could discern saddled horses being held by cowboys.  There

was an air of hurry and mystery about the departure.  Helen, who

came tip-toeing out with Madeline's other guests, whispered that

it was like an escape.  She was delighted.  The others were

amused.  To Madeline it was indeed an escape.



In the darkness Madeline could not see how many escorts her party

was to have.  She heard low voices, the champing of bits and

thumping of hoofs, and she recognized Stewart when he led up

Majesty for her to mount.  Then came a pattering of soft feet and

the whining of dogs.  Cold noses touched her hands, and she saw

the long, gray, shaggy shapes of her pack of Russian wolf-hounds. 

That Stewart meant to let them go with her was indicative of how

he studied her pleasure.  She loved to be out with the hounds and

her horse.



Stewart led Majesty out into the darkness past a line of mounted

horses.



"Guess we're ready?" he said.  "I'll make the count." He went

back along the line, and on the return Madeline heard him say

several times, "Now, everybody ride close to the horse in front,

and keep quiet till daylight."  Then the snorting and pounding of

the big black horse in front of her told Madeline that Stewart

had mounted.



"All right, we're off," he called.



Madeline lifted Majesty's bridle and let the roan go. There was a

crack and crunch of gravel, fire struck from stone, a low whinny,

a snort, and then steady, short, clip-clop of iron hoofs on hard

ground.  Madeline could just discern Stewart and his black

outlined in shadowy gray before her.  Yet they were almost within

touching distance.  Once or twice one of the huge stag-hounds

leaped up at her and whined joyously.  A thick belt of darkness

lay low, and seemed to thin out above to a gray fog, through

which a few wan stars showed.  It was altogether an unusual

departure from the ranch; and Madeline, always susceptible even

to ordinary incident that promised well, now found herself

thrillingly sensitive to the soft beat of hoofs, the feel of

cool, moist air, the dim sight of Stewart's dark figure.  The

caution, the early start before dawn, the enforced silence--these

lent the occasion all that was needful to make it stirring.



Majesty plunged into a gully, where sand and rough going made

Madeline stop romancing to attend to riding.  In the darkness

Stewart was not so easy to keep close to even on smooth trails,

and now she had to be watchfully attentive to do it.  Then

followed a long march through dragging sand. Meantime the

blackness gradually changed to gray.  At length Majesty climbed

out of the wash, and once more his iron shoes rang on stone.  He

began to climb.  The figure of Stewart and his horse loomed more

distinctly in Madeline's sight.  Bending over, she tried to see

the trail, but could not.  She wondered how Stewart could follow

a trail in the dark.  His eyes must be as piercing as they

sometimes looked.  Over her shoulder Madeline could not see the

horse behind her, but she heard him.



As Majesty climbed steadily Madeline saw the gray darkness grow

opaque, change and lighten, lose its substance, and yield the

grotesque shapes of yucca and ocotillo.  Dawn was about to break. 

Madeline imagined she was facing east, still she saw no

brightening of sky.  All at once, to her surprise, Stewart and

his powerful horse stood clear in her sight.  She saw the

characteristic rock and cactus and brush that covered the

foothills.  The trail was old and seldom used, and it zigzagged

and turned and twisted.  Looking back, she saw the short, squat

figure of Monty Price humped over his saddle. Monty's face was

hidden under his sombrero.  Behind him rode Dorothy Coombs, and

next loomed up the lofty form of Nick Steele.  Madeline and the

members of her party were riding between cowboy escorts.



Bright daylight came, and Madeline saw the trail was leading up

through foothills.  It led in a round-about way through shallow

gullies full of stone and brush washed down by floods.  At every

turn now Madeline expected to come upon water and the waiting

pack-train.  But time passed, and miles of climbing, and no water

or horses were met.  Expectation in Madeline gave place to

desire; she was hungry.



Presently Stewart's horse went splashing into a shallow pool. 

Beyond that damp places in the sand showed here and there, and

again more water in rocky pockets.  Stewart kept on. It was eight

o'clock by Madeline's watch when, upon turning into a wide

hollow, she saw horses grazing on spare grass, a great pile of

canvas-covered bundles, and a fire round which cowboys and two

Mexican women were busy.



Madeline sat her horse and reviewed her followers as they rode up

single file.  Her guests were in merry mood, and they all talked

at once.



"Breakfast--and rustle," called out Stewart, without ceremony.



"No need to tell me to rustle," said Helen.  "I am simply

ravenous.  This air makes me hungry."



For that matter, Madeline observed Helen did not show any marked

contrast to the others.  The hurry order, however, did not

interfere with the meal being somewhat in the nature of a picnic. 

While they ate and talked and laughed the cowboys were packing

horses and burros and throwing the diamond-hitch, a procedure so

interesting to Castleton that he got up with coffee-cup in hand

and tramped from one place to another.



"Heard of that diamond-hitch-up," he observed to a cowboy. 

"Bally nice little job!"



As soon as the pack-train was in readiness Stewart started it off

in the lead to break trail.  A heavy growth of shrub interspersed

with rock and cactus covered the slopes; and now all the trail

appeared to be uphill.  It was not a question of comfort for

Madeline and her party, for comfort was impossible; it was a

matter of making the travel possible for him.  Florence wore

corduroy breeches and high-top boots, and the advantage of this

masculine garb was at once in evidence. The riding-habits of the

other ladies suffered considerably from the sharp spikes.  It

took all Madeline's watchfulness to save her horse's legs, to

pick the best bits of open ground, to make cut-offs from the

trail, and to protect herself from outreaching thorny branches,

so that the time sped by without her knowing it.  The pack-train

forged ahead, and the trailing couples grew farther apart.  At

noon they got out of the foothills to face the real ascent of the

mountains.  The sun beat down hot.  There was little breeze, and

the dust rose thick and hung in a pall.  The view was restricted,

and what scenery lay open to the eye was dreary and drab, a

barren monotony of slow-mounting slopes ridged by rocky canons.



Once Stewart waited for Madeline, and as she came up he said:



"We're going to have a storm."



"That will be a relief.  It's so hot and dusty," replied

Madeline.



"Shall I call a halt and make camp?"



"Here?  Oh no!  What do you think best?"



"Well, if we have a good healthy thunder-storm it will be

something new for your friends.  I think we'd be wise to keep on

the go.  There's no place to make a good camp.  The wind would

blow us off this slope if the rain didn't wash us off.  It'll

take all-day travel to reach a good camp-site, and I don't

promise that.  We're making slow time.  If it rains, let it rain. 

The pack outfit is well covered.  We will have to get wet."



"Surely," replied Madeline; and she smiled at his inference.  She

knew what a storm was in that country, and her guests had yet to

experience one.  "If it rains, let it rain."



Stewart rode on, and Madeline followed.  Up the slope toiled and

nodded the pack-animals, the little burros going easily where the

horses labored.  Their packs, like the humps of camels, bobbed

from side to side.  Stones rattled down; the heat-waves wavered

black; the dust puffed up and sailed.  The sky was a pale blue,

like heated steel, except where dark clouds peeped over the

mountain crests.  A heavy, sultry atmosphere made breathing

difficult.  Down the slope the trailing party stretched out in

twos and threes, and it was easy to distinguish the weary riders.



Half a mile farther up Madeline could see over the foothills to

the north and west and a little south, and she forgot the heat

and weariness and discomfort for her guests in wide, unlimited

prospects of sun-scorched earth.  She marked the gray valley and

the black mountains and the wide, red gateway of the desert, and

the dim, shadowy peaks, blue as the sky they pierced.  She was

sorry when the bleak, gnarled cedar-trees shut off her view.



Then there came a respite from the steep climb, and the way led

in a winding course through a matted, storm-wrenched forest of

stunted trees.  Even up to this elevation the desert reached with

its gaunt hand.  The clouds overspreading the sky, hiding the

sun, made a welcome change.  The pack-train rested, and Stewart

and Madeline waited for the party to come up.  Here he briefly

explained to her that Don Carlos and his bandits had left the

ranch some time in the night.  Thunder rumbled in the distance,

and a faint wind rustled the scant foliage of the cedars.  The

air grew oppressive; the horses panted.



"Sure it'll be a hummer," said Stewart.  "The first storm almost

always is bad.  I can feel it in the air."



The air, indeed, seemed to be charged with a heavy force that was

waiting to be liberated.



One by one the couples mounted to the cedar forest, and the

feminine contingent declaimed eloquently for rest.  But there was

to be no permanent rest until night and then that depended upon

reaching the crags.  The pack-train wagged onward, and Stewart

fell in behind.  The storm-center gathered slowly around the

peaks; low rumble and howl of thunder increased in frequence;

slowly the light shaded as smoky clouds rolled up; the air grew

sultrier, and the exasperating breeze puffed a few times and then

failed.



An hour later the party had climbed high and was rounding the

side of a great bare ridge that long had hidden the crags.  The

last burro of the pack-train plodded over the ridge out of

Madeline's sight.  She looked backward down the slope, amused to

see her guests change wearily from side to side in their saddles. 

Far below lay the cedar flat and the foothills.  Far to the west

the sky was still clear, with shafts of sunlight shooting down

from behind the encroaching clouds.



Stewart reached the summit of the ridge and, though only a few

rods ahead, he waved to her, sweeping his hand round to what he

saw beyond.  It was an impressive gesture, and Madeline, never

having climbed as high as this, anticipated much.



Majesty surmounted the last few steps and, snorting, halted

beside Stewart's black.  To Madeline the scene was as if the

world had changed.  The ridge was a mountain-top.  It dropped

before her into a black, stone-ridged, shrub-patched,

many-canoned gulf.  Eastward, beyond the gulf, round, bare

mountain-heads loomed up.  Upward, on the right, led giant steps

of cliff and bench and weathered slope to the fir-bordered and

pine-fringed crags standing dark and bare against the stormy sky. 

Massed inky clouds were piling across the peaks, obscuring the

highest ones.  A fork of white lightning flashed, and, like the

booming of an avalanche, thunder followed.



That bold world of broken rock under the slow mustering of

storm-clouds was a grim, awe-inspiring spectacle.  It had beauty,

but beauty of the sublime and majestic kind.  The fierce desert

had reached up to meet the magnetic heights where heat and wind

and frost and lightning and flood contended in everlasting

strife.  And before their onslaught this mighty upflung world of

rugged stone was crumbling, splitting, wearing to ruin.



Madeline glanced at Stewart.  He had forgotten her presence. 

Immovable as stone, he sat his horse, dark-faced, dark-eyed, and,

like an Indian unconscious of thought, he watched and watched. 

To see him thus, to divine the strange affinity between the soul

of this man, become primitive, and the savage environment that

had developed him, were powerful helps to Madeline Hammond in her

strange desire to understand his nature.



A cracking of iron-shod hoofs behind her broke the spell.  Monty

had reached the summit.



"Gene, what it won't all be doin' in a minnut Moses hisself

couldn't tell," observed Monty.



Then Dorothy climbed to his side and looked.



"Oh, isn't it just perfectly lovely!" she exclaimed. "But I wish

it wouldn't storm.  We'll all get wet."



Once more Stewart faced the ascent, keeping to the slow heave of

the ridge as it rose southward toward the looming spires of rock. 

Soon he was off smooth ground, and Madeline, some rods behind

him, looked back with concern at her friends. Here the real toil,

the real climb began, and a mountain storm was about to burst in

all its fury.



The slope that Stewart entered upon was a magnificent monument to

the ruined crags above.  It was a southerly slope, and therefore

semi-arid, covered with cercocarpus and yucca and some shrub that

Madeline believed was manzanita.  Every foot of the trail seemed

to slide under Majesty.  What hard ground there was could not be

traveled upon, owing to the spiny covering or masses of shattered

rocks.  Gullies lined the slope.



Then the sky grew blacker; the slow-gathering clouds appeared to

be suddenly agitated; they piled and rolled and mushroomed and

obscured the crags.  The air moved heavily and seemed to be laden

with sulphurous smoke, and sharp lightning flashes began to play. 

A distant roar of wind could be heard between the peals of

thunder.



Stewart waited for Madeline under the lee of a shelving cliff,

where the cowboys had halted the pack-train.  Majesty was

sensitive to the flashes of lightning.  Madeline patted his neck

and softly called to him.  The weary burros nodded; the Mexican

women covered their heads with their mantles.  Stewart untied the

slicker at the back of Madeline's saddle and helped her on with

it.  Then he put on his own.  The other cowboys followed suit. 

Presently Madeline saw Monty and Dorothy rounding the cliff, and

hoped the others would come soon.



A blue-white, knotted rope of lightning burned down out of the

clouds, and instantly a thunder-clap crashed, seeming to shake

the foundations of the earth.  Then it rolled, as if banging from

cloud to cloud, and boomed along the peaks, and reverberated from

deep to low, at last to rumble away into silence.  Madeline felt

the electricity in Majesty's mane, and it seemed to tingle

through her nerves.  The air had a weird, bright cast.  The

ponderous clouds swallowed more and more of the eastern domes. 

This moment of the breaking of the storm, with the strange

growing roar of wind, like a moaning monster, was pregnant with a

heart-disturbing emotion for Madeline Hammond.  Glorious it was

to be free, healthy, out in the open, under the shadow of the

mountain and cloud, in the teeth of the wind and rain and storm.



Another dazzling blue blaze showed the bold mountain-side and the

storm-driven clouds.  In the flare of light Madeline saw

Stewart's face



"Are you afraid?" she asked.



"Yes," he replied, simply.



Then the thunderbolt racked the heavens, and as it boomed away in

lessening power Madeline reflected with surprise upon Stewart's

answer.  Something in his face had made her ask him what she

considered a foolish question.  His reply amazed her.  She loved

a storm.  Why should he fear it--he, with whom she could not

associate fear?



"How strange!  Have you not been out in many storms?"



A smile that was only a gleam flitted over his dark face.



"In hundreds of them.  By day, with the cattle stampeding.  At

night, alone on the mountain, with the pines crashing and the

rocks rolling--in flood on the desert."



"It's not only the lightning, then?" she asked.



"No.  All the storm."



Madeline felt that henceforth she would have less faith in what

she had imagined was her love of the elements.  What little she

knew!  If this iron-nerved man feared a storm, then there was

something about a storm to fear.



And suddenly, as the ground quaked under her horse's feet, and

all the sky grew black and crisscrossed by flaming streaks, and

between thunderous reports there was a strange hollow roar

sweeping down upon her, she realized how small was her knowledge

and experience of the mighty forces of nature. Then, with that

perversity of character of which she was wholly conscious, she

was humble, submissive, reverent, and fearful even while she

gloried in the grandeur of the dark, cloud-shadowed crags and

canons, the stupendous strife of sound, the wonderful driving

lances of white fire.



With blacker gloom and deafening roar came the torrent of rain. 

It was a cloud-burst.  It was like solid water tumbling down. 

For long Madeline sat her horse, head bent to the pelting rain. 

When its force lessened and she heard Stewart call for all to

follow, she looked up to see that he was starting once more.  She

shot a glimpse at Dorothy and as quickly glanced away.  Dorothy,

who would not wear a hat suitable for inclement weather, nor one

of the horrid yellow, sticky slickers, was a drenched and

disheveled spectacle. Madeline did not trust herself to look at

the other girls.  It was enough to hear their lament.  So she

turned her horse into Stewart's trail.



Rain fell steadily.  The fury of the storm, however, had passed,

and the roll of thunder diminished in volume.  The air had

wonderfully cleared and was growing cool.  Madeline began to feel

uncomfortably cold and wet.  Stewart was climbing faster than

formerly, and she noted that Monty kept at her heels, pressing

her on.  Time had been lost, and the camp-site was a long way

off.  The stag-hounds began to lag and get footsore.  The sharp

rocks of the trail were cruel to their feet.  Then, as Madeline

began to tire, she noticed less and less around her.  The ascent

grew rougher and steeper--slow toil for panting horses.  The

thinning rain grew colder, and sometimes a stronger whip of wind

lashed stingingly in Madeline's face.  Her horse climbed and

climbed, and brush and sharp corners of stone everlastingly

pulled and tore at her wet garments.  A gray gloom settled down

around her.  Night was approaching.  Majesty heaved upward with a

snort, the wet saddle creaked, and an even motion told Madeline

she was on level ground.  She looked up to see looming crags and

spires, like huge pipe-organs, dark at the base and growing light

upward.  The rain had ceased, but the branches of fir-trees and

juniper were water-soaked arms reaching out for her.  Through an

opening between crags Madeline caught a momentary glimpse of the

west.  Red sun-shafts shone through the murky, broken clouds. 

The sun had set.



Stewart's horse was on a jog-trot now, and Madeline left the

trail more to Majesty than to her own choosing.  The shadows

deepened, and the crags grew gloomy and spectral.  A cool wind

moaned through the dark trees.  Coyotes, scenting the hounds,

kept apace of them, and barked and howled off in the gloom.  But

the tired hounds did not appear to notice.



As black night began to envelop her surroundings, Madeline marked

that the fir-trees had given place to pine forest.  Suddenly a

pin-point of light pierced the ebony blackness.  Like a solitary

star in dark sky it twinkled and blinked.  She lost sight of it--

found it again.  It grew larger.  Black tree-trunks crossed her

line of vision.  The light was a fire.  She heard a cowboy song

and the wild chorus of a pack of coyotes.  Drops of rain on the

branches of trees glittered in the rays of the fire.  Stewart's

tall figure, with sombrero slouched down, was now and then

outlined against a growing circle of light.  And by the aid of

that light she saw him turn every moment or so to look back,

probably to assure himself that she was close behind.



With a prospect of fire and warmth, and food and rest, Madeline's

enthusiasm revived.  What a climb!  There was promise in this

wild ride and lonely trail and hidden craggy height, not only in

the adventure her friends yearned for, but in some nameless joy

and spirit for herself.


