





III Sister and Brother



Then Madeline returned to the little parlor with the brother whom

she had hardly recognized.



"Majesty!" he exclaimed.  "To think of your being here!"



The warmth stole back along her veins.  She remembered how that

pet name had sounded from the lips of this brother who bad given

it to her.



"Alfred!"



Then his words of gladness at sight of her, his chagrin at not

being at the train to welcome her, were not so memorable of him

as the way he clasped her, for he had held her that way the day

he left home, and she had not forgotten.  But now he was so much

taller and bigger, so dusty and strange and different and

forceful, that she could scarcely think him the same man.  She

even had a humorous thought that here was another cowboy bullying

her, and this time it was her brother.



"Dear old girl," he said, more calmly, as he let her go, "you

haven't changed at all, except to grow lovelier.  Only you're a

woman now, and you've fulfilled the name I gave you. God! how

sight of you brings back home!  It seems a hundred years since I

left.  I missed you more than all the rest."



Madeline seemed to feel with his every word that she was

remembering him.  She was so amazed at the change in him that she

could not believe her eyes.  She saw a bronzed, strong-jawed,

eagle-eyed man, stalwart, superb of height, and, like the

cowboys, belted, booted, spurred.  And there was something hard

as iron in his face that quivered with his words.  It seemed that

only in those moments when the hard lines broke and softened

could she see resemblance to the face she remembered.  It was his

manner, the tone of his voice, and the tricks of speech that

proved to her he was really Alfred. She had bidden good-by to a

disgraced, disinherited, dissolute boy.  Well she remembered the

handsome pale face with its weakness and shadows and careless

smile, with the ever-present cigarette hanging between the lips. 

The years had passed, and now she saw him a man--the West had

made him a man.  And Madeline Hammond felt a strong, passionate

gladness and gratefulness, and a direct check to her suddenly

inspired hatred of the West.



"Majesty, it was good of you to come.  I'm all broken up.  How

did you ever do it?  But never mind that now.  Tell me about that

brother of mine."



And Madeline told him, and then about their sister Helen. 

Question after question he fired at her; and she told him of her

mother; of Aunt Grace, who had died a year ago; of his old

friends, married, scattered, vanished.  But she did not tell him

of his father, for he did not ask.



Quite suddenly the rapid-fire questioning ceased; he choked, was

silent a moment, and then burst into tears.  It seemed to her

that a long, stored-up bitterness was flooding away.  It hurt her

to see him--hurt her more to hear him.  And in the succeeding few

moments she grew closer to him than she had ever been in the

past.  Had her father and mother done right by him?  Her pulse

stirred with unwonted quickness.  She did not speak, but she

kissed him, which, for her, was an indication of unusual feeling. 

And when he recovered command over his emotions he made no

reference to his breakdown, nor did she.  But that scene struck

deep into Madeline Hammond's heart.  Through it she saw what he

had lost and gained.



"Alfred, why did you not answer my last letters?" asked Madeline. 

"I had not heard from you for two years."



"So long? How time flies! Well, things went bad with me about the

last time I heard from you.  I always intended to write some day,

but I never did."



"Things went wrong?  Tell me."



"Majesty, you mustn't worry yourself with my troubles. I want you

to enjoy your stay and not be bothered with my difficulties."



"Please tell me.  I suspected something had gone wrong. That is

partly why I decided to come out."



"All right; if you must know," he began; and it seemed to

Madeline that there was a gladness in his decision to unburden

himself.  "You remember all about my little ranch, and that for a

while I did well raising stock?  I wrote you all that.  Majesty,

a man makes enemies anywhere.  Perhaps an Eastern man in the West

can make, if not so many, certainly more bitter ones.  At any

rate, I made several.  There was a cattleman, Ward by name--he's

gone now--and he and I had trouble over cattle.  That gave me a

back-set.  Pat Hawe, the sheriff here, has been instrumental in

hurting my business. He's not so much of a rancher, but he has

influence at Santa Fe and El Paso and Douglas.  I made an enemy

of him.  I never did anything to him.  He hates Gene Stewart, and

upon one occasion I spoiled a little plot of his to get Gene in

his clutches. The real reason for his animosity toward me is that

he loves Florence, and Florence is going to marry me."



"Alfred!"



"What's the matter, Majesty?  Didn't Florence impress you

favorably?" he asked, with a keen glance.



"Why--yes, indeed. I like her.  But I did not think of her in

relation to you--that way.  I am greatly surprised. Alfred, is

she well born?  What connections?"



"Florence is just a girl of ordinary people.  She was born in

Kentucky, was brought up in Texas.  My aristocratic and wealthy

family would scorn--"



"Alfred, you are still a Hammond," said Madeline, with uplifted

head.



Alfred laughed.  "We won't quarrel, Majesty.  I remember you, and

in spite of your pride you've got a heart. If you stay here a

month you'll love Florence Kingsley.  I want you to know she's

had a great deal to do with straightening me up. . . . Well, to

go on with my story.  There's Don Carlos, a Mexican rancher, and

he's my worst enemy.  For that matter, he's as bad an enemy of

Bill Stillwell and other ranchers. Stillwell, by the way, is my

friend and one of the finest men on earth.  I got in debt to Don

Carlos before I knew he was so mean.  In the first place I lost

money at faro--I gambled some when I came West--and then I made

unwise cattle deals.  Don Carlos is a wily Greaser, he knows the

ranges, he has the water, and he is dishonest.  So he outfigured

me.  And now I am practically ruined.  He has not gotten

possession of my ranch, but that's only a matter of time, pending

lawsuits at Santa Fe. At present I have a few hundred cattle

running on Stillwell's range, and I am his foreman."



"Foreman?" queried Madeline.



"I am simply boss of Stillwell's cowboys, and right glad of my

job."



Madeline was conscious of an inward burning.  It required an

effort for her to retain her outward tranquillity. Annoying

consciousness she had also of the returning sense of new

disturbing emotions.  She began to see just how walled in from

unusual thought-provoking incident and sensation had been her

exclusive life.



"Cannot your property be reclaimed?" she asked.  "How much do you

owe?"



"Ten thousand dollars would clear me and give me another start. 

But, Majesty, in this country that's a good deal of money, and I

haven't been able to raise it. Stillwell's in worse shape than I

am."



Madeline went over to Alfred and put her hands on his shoulders.



"We must not be in debt."



He stared at her as if her words had recalled something long

forgotten.  Then he smiled.



"How imperious you are!  I'd fcrgotten just who my beautiful

sister really is.  Majesty, you're not going to ask me to take

money from you?"



"I am."



"Well, I'll not do it.  I never did, even when I was in college,

and then there wasn't much beyond me."



"Listen, Alfred," she went on, earnestly, "this is entirely

different.  I had only an allowance then.  You had no way to know

that since I last wrote you I had come into my inheritance from

Aunt Grace.  It was--well, that doesn't matter.  Only, I haven't

been able to spend half the income. It's mine.  It's not father's

money.  You will make me very happy if you'll consent.  Alfred,

I'm so--so amazed at the change in you.  I'm so happy.  You must

never take a backward step from now on.  What is ten thousand

dollars to me? Sometimes I spend that in a month.  I throw money

away.  If you let me help you it will be doing me good as well as

you. Please, Alfred."



He kissed her, evidently surprised at her earnestness. And indeed

Madeline was surprised herself.  Once started, her speech had

flowed.



"You always were the best of fellows, Majesty.  And if you really

care--if you really want to help me I'll be only too glad to

accept.  It will be fine.  Florence will go wild. And that

Greaser won't harass me any more.  Majesty, pretty soon some

titled fellow will be spending your money; I may as well take a

little before he gets it all," he finished, jokingly.



"What do you know about me?" she asked, lightly.



"More than you think.  Even if we are lost out here in the woolly

West we get news.  Everybody knows about Anglesbury. And that

Dago duke who chased you all over Europe, that Lord Castleton has

the running now and seems about to win.  How about it, Majesty?"



Madeline detected a hint that suggested scorn in his gay speech. 

And deep in his searching glance she saw a flame. She became

thoughtful.  She had forgotten Castleton, New York, society.



"Alfred," she began, seriously, "I don't believe any titled

gentleman will ever spend my money, as you elegantly express it."



"I don't care for that.  It's you!" he cried, passionately, and

he grasped her with a violence that startled her.  He was white;

his eyes were now like fire.  "You are so splendid--so wonderful. 

People called you the American Beauty, but you're more than that. 

You're the American Girl! Majesty, marry no man unless you love

him, and love an American.  Stay away from Europe long enough to

learn to know the men--the real men of your own country."



"Alfred, I'm afraid there are not always real men and real love

for American girls in international marriages.  But Helen knows

this.  It'll be her choice.  She'll be miserable if she marries

Anglesbury."



"It'll serve her just right," declared her brother. "Helen was

always crazy for glitter, adulation, fame.  I'll gamble she never

saw more of Anglesbury than the gold and ribbons on his breast."



"I am sorry.  Anglesbury is a gentleman; but it is the money he

wanted, I think.  Alfred, tell me how you came to know about me,

'way out here?  You may be assured I was astonished to find that

Miss Kingsley knew me as Majesty Hammond."



"I imagine it was a surprise," he replied, with a laugh, "I told

Florence about you--gave her a picture of you. And, of course,

being a woman, she showed the picture and talked.  She's in love

with you.  Then, my dear sister, we do get New York papers out

here occasionally, and we can see and read.  You may not be aware

that you and your society friends are objects of intense interest

in the U. S. in general, and the West in particular.  The papers

are full of you, and perhaps a lot of things you never did."



"That Mr. Stewart knew, too.  He said, 'You're not Majesty

Hammond?'"



"Never mind his impudence!" exclaimed Alfred; and then again he

laughed.  "Gene is all right, only you've got to know him.  I'll

tell you what he did.  He got hold of one of those newspaper

pictures of you--the one in the Times; he took it away from here,

and in spite of Florence he wouldn't fetch it back.  It was a

picture of you in riding-habit with your blue-ribbon horse, White

Stockings--remember?  It was taken at Newport.  Well, Stewart

tacked the picture up in his bunk-house and named his beautiful

horse Majesty.  All the cowboys knew it.  They would see the

picture and tease him unmercifully. But he didn't care.  One day

I happened to drop in on him and found him just recovering from a

carouse.  I saw the picture, too, and I said to him, 'Gene, if my

sister knew you were a drunkard she'd not be proud of having her

picture stuck up in your room.'  Majesty, he did not touch a drop

for a month, and when he did drink again he took the picture

down, and he has never put it back."



Madeline smiled at her brother's amusement, but she did not

reply.  She simply could not adjust herself to these queer free

Western' ways.  Her brother had eloquently pleaded for her to

keep herself above a sordid and brilliant marriage, yet he not

only allowed a cowboy to keep her picture in his room, but

actually spoke of her and used her name in a temperance lecture. 

Madeline just escaped feeling disgust.  She was saved from this,

however, by nothing less than her brother's naive gladness that

through subtle suggestion Stewart had been persuaded to be good

for a month.  Something made up of Stewart's effrontery to her;

of Florence Kingsley meeting her, frankly as it were, as an

equal; of the elder sister's slow, quiet, easy acceptance of this

visitor who had been honored at the courts of royalty; of that

faint hint of scorn in Alfred's voice, and his amused statement

in regard to her picture and the name Majesty--something made up

of all these stung Madeline Hammond's pride, alienated her for an

instant, and then stimulated her intelligence, excited her

interest, and made her resolve to learn a little about this

incomprehensible West.



"Majesty, I must run down to the siding," he said, consulting his

watch.  "We're loading a shipment of cattle. I'll be back by

supper-time and bring Stillwell with me. You'll like him.  Give

me the check for your trunk."



She went into the little bedroom and, taking up her bag, she got

out a number of checks.



"Six!  Six trunks!" he exclaimed.  "Well, I'm very glad you

intend to stay awhile.  Say, Majesty, it will take me as long to

realize who you really are as it'll take to break you of being a

tenderfoot.  I hope you packed a riding-suit. If not you'll have

to wear trousers!  You'll have to do that, anyway, when we go up

in the mountains."



"No!"



"You sure will, as Florence says."



"We shall see about that.  I don't know what's in the trunks.  I

never pack anything.  My dear brother, what do I have maids for?"



"How did it come that you didn't travel with a maid?"



"I wanted to be alone.  But don't you worry.  I shall be able to

look after myself.  I dare say it will be good for me."



She went to the gate with him.



"What a shaggy, dusty horse!  He's wild, too.  Do you let him

stand that way without being haltered?  I should think he would

run off."



"Tenderfoot!  You'll be great fun, Majesty, especially for the

cowboys."



"Oh, will I?" she asked, constrainedly.



"Yes, and in three days they will be fighting one another over

you.  That's going to worry me.  Cowboys fall in love with a

plain woman, an ugly woman, any woman, so long as she's young. 

And you!  Good Lord!  They'll go out of their heads."



"You are pleased to he facetious, Alfred.  I think I have had

quite enough of cowboys, and I haven't been here twenty-four

hours."



"Don't think too much of first impressions.  That was my mistake

when I arrived here.  Good-by.  I'll go now.  Better rest awhile. 

You look tired."



The horse started as Alfred put his foot in the stirrup and was

running when the rider slipped his leg over the saddle. Madeline

watched him in admiration.  He seemed to be loosely fitted to the

saddle, moving with the horse.



"I suppose that's a cowboy's style.  It pleases me," she said. 

"How different from the seat of Eastern riders!"



Then Madeline sat upon the porch and fell to interested

observation of her surrounding.  Near at hand it was decidedly

not prepossessing.  The street was deep in dust, and the cool

wind whipped up little puffs.  The houses along this street were

all low, square, flat-roofed structures made of some kind of red

cement.  It occurred to her suddenly that this building-material

must be the adobe she had read about.  There was no person in

sight.  The long street appeared to have no end, though the line

of houses did not extend far.  Once she heard a horse trotting at

some distance, and several times the ringing of a locomotive

bell.  Where were the mountains, wondered Madeline.  Soon low

over the house-roofs she saw a dim, dark-blue, rugged outline. 

It seemed to charm her eyes and fix her gaze.  She knew the

Adirondacks, she bad seen the Alps from the summit of Mont Blanc,

and had stood under the great black, white-tipped shadow of the

Himalayas.  But they had not drawn her as these remote Rockies.

This dim horizon line boldly cutting the blue sky fascinated her. 

Florence Kingsley's expression "beckoning mountains" returned to

Madeline.  She could not see or feel so much as that.  Her

impression was rather that these mountains were aloof,

unattainable, that if approached they would recede or vanish like

the desert mirage.



Madeline went to her room, intending to rest awhile, and she fell

asleep.  She was aroused by Florence's knock and call.



"Miss Hammond, your brother has come back with Stillwell."



"Why, how I have slept!" exclaimed Madeline.  "It's nearly six

o'clock."



"I'm sure glad.  You were tired.  And the air here makes

strangers sleepy.  Come, we want you to meet old Bill. He calls

himself the last of the cattlemen.  He has lived in Texas and

here all his life."



Madeline accompanied Florence to the porch.  Her brother, who was

sitting near the door, jumped up and said:



"Hello, Majesty!"  And as he put his arm around her he turned

toward a massive man whose broad, craggy face began to ripple and

wrinkle.  "I want to introduce my friend Stillwell to you.  Bill,

this is my sister, the sister I've so often told you about--

Majesty."



"Wal, wal, Al, this 's the proudest meetin' of my life," replied

Stillwell, in a booming voice.  He extended a huge hand.  "Miss--

Miss Majesty, sight of you is as welcome as the rain an' the

flowers to an old desert cattleman."



Madeline greeted him, and it was all she could do to repress a

cry at the way he crunched her baud in a grasp of iron.  He was

old, white-haired, weather-beaten, with long furrows down his

checks and with gray eyes almost hidden in wrinkles.  If he was

smiling she fancied it a most extraordinary smile.  The next

instant she realized that it had been a smile, for his face

appeared to stop rippling, the light died, and suddenly it was

like rudely chiseled stone.  The quality of hardness she had seen

in Stewart was immeasurably intensified in this old man's face.



"Miss Majesty, it's plumb humiliatin' to all of us thet we wasn't

on hand to meet you," Stillwell said.  "Me an' Al stepped into

the P. O. an' said a few mild an' cheerful things. Them messages

ought to hev been sent out to the ranch.  I'm sure afraid it was

a bit unpleasant fer you last night at the station."



"I was rather anxious at first and perhaps frightened," replied

Madeline.



"Wal, I'm some glad to tell you thet there's no man in these

parts except your brother thet I'd as lief hev met you as Gene

Stewart."



"Indeed?"



"Yes, an' thet's takin' into consideration Gene's weakness, too. 

I'm allus fond of sayin' of myself thet I'm the last of the old

cattlemen.  Wal, Stewart's not a native Westerner, but he's my

pick of the last of the cowboys.  Sure, he's young, but he's the

last of the old style--the picturesque--an' chivalrous, too, I

make bold to say, Miss Majesty, as well as the old hard-ridin'

kind.  Folks are down on Stewart.  An' I'm only sayin' a good

word for him hecause he is down, an' mebbe last night he might

hev scared you, you bein' fresh from the East."



Madeline liked the old fellow for his loyalty to the cowboy he

evidently cared for; but as there did not seem anything for her

to say, she remained silent.



"Miss Majesty, the day of the cattleman is about over. An' the

day of the cowboy, such as Gene Stewart, is over. There's no

place for Gene.  If these weren't modern days he'd come near

bein' a gun-man, same as we had in Texas, when I ranched there in

the 'seventies.  But he can't fit nowhere now; he can't hold a

job, an' he's goin' down."



"I am sorry to hear it," murmured Madeline.  "But, Mr. Stillwell,

aren't these modern days out here just a little wild--yet?  The

conductor on my train told me of rebels, bandits, raiders.  Then

I have had other impressions of--well, that were wild enough for

me."



"Wal, it's some more pleasant an' excitin' these days than for

many years," replied Stillwell.  "The boys hev took to packin'

guns again.  But thet's owin' to the revolution in Mexico. 

There's goin' to be trouble along the border.  I reckon people in

the East don't know there is a revolution. Wal, Madero will oust

Diaz, an' then some other rebel will oust Madero.  It means

trouble on the border an' across the border, too.  I wouldn't

wonder if Uncle Sam hed to get a hand in the game.  There's

already been holdups on the railroads an' raids along the Rio

Grande Valley.  An' these little towns are full of Greasers, all

disturbed by the fightin' down in Mexico. We've been hevin'

shootin'-scrapes an' knifin'-scrapes, an' some cattle-raidin'.  I

hev been losin' a few cattle right along.  Reminds me of old

times; an' pretty soon if it doesn't stop, I'll take the old-time

way to stop it."



"Yes, indeed, Majesty," put in Alfred, "you have hit upon an

interesting time to visit us."



"Wal, thet sure 'pears to be so," rejoined Stillwell. "Stewart

got in trouble down heah to-day, an' I'm more than sorry to hev

to tell you thet your name figgered in it.  But I couldn't blame

him, fer I sure would hev done the same myself."



"That so?" queried Aifred, laughing.  "Well, tell us about it."



Madeline simply gazed at her brother, and, though he seemed

amused at her consternation, there was mortification in his face.



It required no great perspicuity, Madeline thought, to see that

Stillwell loved to talk, and the way he squared himself and

spread his huge hands over his knees suggested that he meant to

do this opportunity justice.



"Miss Majesty, I reckon, bein' as you're in the West now, thet

you must take things as they come, an' mind each thing a little

less than the one before.  If we old fellers hedn't been thet way

we'd never hev lasted.



"Last night wasn't particular bad, ratin' with some other nights

lately.  There wasn't much doin'.  But, I had a hard knock. 

Yesterday when we started in with a bunch of cattle I sent one of

my cowboys, Danny Mains, along ahead, carryin' money I hed to pay

off hands an' my bills, an' I wanted thet money to get in town

before dark.  Wal, Danny was held up.  I don't distrust the lad. 

There's been strange Greasers in town lately, an' mebbe they knew

about the money comin'.



"Wal, when I arrived with the cattle I was some put to it to make

ends meet.  An' to-day I wasn't in no angelic humor. When I bed

my business all done I went around pokin' my nose beak an' there,

tryin' to get scent of thet money.  An' I happened in at a hall

we hev thet does duty fer' jail an' hospital an' election-post

an' what not.  Wal, just then it was doin' duty as a hospital. 

Last night was fiesta night--these Greasers hev a fiesta every

week or so--an' one Greaser who hed been bad hurt was layin' in

the hall, where he hed been fetched from the station.  Somebody

hed sent off to Douglas fer a doctor, but be hedn't come yet. 

I've hed some experience with gunshot wounds, an' I looked this

feller over.  He wasn't shot up much, but I thought there was

danger of blood-poison-in'.  Anyway, I did all I could.



"The hall was full of cowboys, ranchers, Greasers, miners, an'

town folks, along with some strangers.  I was about to get

started up this way when Pat Hawe come in.



"Pat he's the sheriff.  I reckon, Miss Majesty, thet sheriffs are

new to you, an' fer sake of the West I'll explain to you thet we

don't hev many of the real thing any more. Garrett, who killed

Billy the Kid an' was killed himself near a year or so ago--he

was the kind of sheriff thet helps to make a self-respectin'

country.  But this Pat Hawe--wal, I reckon there's no good in me

sayin' what I think of him.  He come into the hall, an' he was

roarin' about things.  He was goin' to arrest Danny Mains on

sight.  Wal, I jest polite-like told Pat thet the money was mine

an' he needn't get riled about it.  An' if I wanted to trail the

thief I reckon I could do it as well as anybody.  Pat howled thet

law was law, an' he was goin' to lay down the law.  Sure it

'peared to me thet Pat was daid set to arrest the first man he

could find excuse to.



"Then he cooled down a bit an' was askin' questions about the

wounded Greaser when Gene Stewart come in.  Whenever Pat an' Gene

come together it reminds me of the early days back in the

'seventies.  Jest naturally everybody shut up.  Fer Pat hates

Gene, an' I reckon Gene ain't very sweet on Pat.  They're jest

natural foes in the first place, an' then the course of events

here in El Cajon has been aggravatin'.



"'Hello, Stewart!  You're the feller I'm lookin' fer,' said Pat.



"Stewart eyed him an' said, mighty cool an' sarcastic, 'Hawe, you

look a good deal fer me when I'm hittin' up the dust the other

way.'



"Pat went red at thet, but he held in.  'Say, Stewart, you-all

think a lot of thet roan horse of yourn, with the aristocratic

name?'



"'I reckon I do,' replied Gene, shortly.



"'Wal, where is he?'



"'Thet's none of your business, Hawe.'



"'Oho! it ain't, hey?  Wal, I guess I can make it my business. 

Stewart, there was some queer goings-on last night thet you know

somethin' about.  Danny Mains robbed--Stillwell's money gone--

your roan horse gone--thet little hussy Bonita gone--an' this

Greaser near gone, too.  Now, seein' thet you was up late an'

prowlin' round the station where this Greaser was found, it ain't

onreasonable to think you might know how he got plugged--is it?'



"Stewart laughed kind of cold, an' he rolled a cigarette, all the

time eyin' Pat, an' then he said if he'd plugged the Greaser it

'd never hev been sich a bunglin' job.



"'I can arrest you on suspicion, Stewart, but before I go thet

far I want some evidence.  I want to round up Danny Mains an'

thet little Greaser girl.  I want to find out what's become of

your hoss.  You've never lent him since you bed him, an' there

ain't enough raiders across the border to steal him from you. 

It's got a queer look--thet hoss bein' gone.'



"'You sure are a swell detective, Hawe, an' I wish you a heap of

luck,' replied Stewart.



"Thet 'peared to nettle Pat beyond bounds, an' he stamped around

an' swore.  Then he had an idea.  It jest stuck out all over him,

an' he shook his finger in Stewart's face.



"'You was drunk last night?'



"Stewart never batted an eye.



'You met some woman on Number Eight, didn't you?' shouted Hawe.



"'I met a lady,' replied Stewart, quiet an' menacin' like.



"'You met Al Hammond's sister, an' you took her up to Kingsley's. 

An' cinch this, my cowboy cavalier, I'm goin' up there an' ask

this grand dame some questions, an' if she's as close-mouthed as

you are I'll arrest her!'



"Gene Stewart turned white.  I fer one expected to see him jump

like lightnin', as he does when he's riled sudden. But he was

calm an' he was thinkin' hard. Presently he said:



"'Pat, thet's a fool idee, an' if you do the trick it'll hurt you

all the rest of your life.  There's absolutely no reason to

frighten Miss Hammond.  An' tryin' to arrest her would be such a

damned outrage as won't be stood fer in El Cajon.  If you're sore

on me send me to jail.  I'll go.  If you want to hurt Al Hammond,

go an' do it some man kind of way. Don't take your spite out on

us by insultin' a lady who has come hyar to hev a little visit. 

We're bad enough without bein' low-down as Greasers.'



"It was a long talk for Gene, an' I was as surprised as the rest

of the fellers.  Think of Gene Stewart talkin' soft an' sweet to

thet red-eyed coyote of a sheriff!  An' Pat, he looked so

devilishly gleeful thet if somethin' about Gene hedn't held me

tight I'd hev got in the game my-self.  It was plain to me an'

others who spoke of it afterwards thet Pat Hawe hed forgotten the

law an' the officer in the man an' his hate.



"'I'm a-goin', an' I'm a-goin' right now!' he shouted. "An' after

thet any one could hev heerd a clock tick a mile off.  Stewart

seemed kind of chokin', an' he seemed to hev been bewildered by

the idee of Hawe's confrontin' you.



"An' finally he burst out: 'But, man, think who it is! It's Miss

Hammond!  If you seen her, even if you was locoed or drunk, you--

you couldn't do it.'



"'Couldn't I?  Wal, I'll show you damn quick.  What do I care who

she is?  Them swell Eastern women--I've heerd of them.  They're

not so much.  This Hamrnond woman--'



"Suddenly Hawe shut up, an' with his red mug turnin' green he

went for his gun."



Stillwell paused in his narrative to get breath, and he wiped his

moist brow.  And now his face began to lose its cragginess.  It

changed, it softened, it rippled and wrinkled, and all that

strange mobility focused and shone in a wonderful smile.



"An' then, Miss Majesty, then there was somethin' happened. 

Stewart took Pat's gun away from him and throwed it on the floor. 

An' what followed was beautiful.  Sure it was the beautifulest

sight I ever seen.  Only it was over so soon! A little while

after, when the doctor came, he hed another patient besides the

wounded Greaser, an' he said thet this new one would require

about four months to be up an' around cheerful-like again.  An'

Gene Stewart hed hit the trail for the border."

