





XXIII The Light of Western Stars



Blinded, like a wild creature, Madeline Hammond ran to her room. 

She felt as if a stroke of lightning had shattered the shadowy

substance of the dream she had made of real life.  The wonder of

Danny Mains's story, the strange regret with which she had

realized her injustice to Stewart, the astounding secret as

revealed by Padre Marcos--these were forgotten in the sudden

consciousness of her own love.



Madeline fled as if pursued.  With trembling hands she locked the

doors, drew the blinds of the windows that opened on the porch,

pushed chairs aside so that she could pace the length of her

room.  She was now alone, and she walked with soft, hurried,

uneven steps.  She could be herself here; she needed no mask; the

long habit of serenely hiding the truth from the world and from

herself could be broken.  The seclusion of her darkened chamber

made possible that betrayal of herself to which she was impelled.



She paused in her swift pacing to and fro.  She liberated the

thought that knocked at the gates of her mind. With quivering

lips she whispered it.  Then she spoke aloud:



"I will say it--hear it.  I--I love him!"



"I love him!" she repeated the astounding truth, but she doubted

her identity.



"Am I still Madeline Hammond?  What has happened?  Who am I?" 

She stood where the light from one unclosed window fell upon her

image in the mirror.  "Who is this woman?"



She expected to see a familiar, dignified person, a quiet,

unruffled figure, a tranquil face with dark, proud eyes and calm,

proud lips.  No, she did not see Madeline Hammond. She did not

see any one she knew.  Were her eyes, like her heart, playing her

false?  The figure before her was instinct with pulsating life. 

The hands she saw, clasped together, pressed deep into a swelling

bosom that heaved with each panting breath.  The face she saw--

white, rapt, strangely glowing, with parted, quivering lips, with

great, staring, tragic eyes--this could not be Madeline Hammond's

face.



Yet as she looked she knew no fancy could really deceive her,

that she was only Madeline Hammond come at last to the end of

brooding dreams.  She swiftly realized the change in her, divined

its cause and meaning, accepted it as inevitable, and straightway

fell back again into the mood of bewildering amaze.



Calmness was unattainable.  The surprise absorbed her. She could

not go back to count the innumerable, imperceptible steps of her

undoing.  Her old power of reflecting, analyzing, even thinking

at all, seemed to have vanished in a pulse-stirring sense of one

new emotion.  She only felt all her instinctive outward action

that was a physical relief, all her involuntary inner strife that

was maddening, yet unutterably sweet; and they seemed to be just

one bewildering effect of surprise.



In a nature like hers, where strength of feeling had long been

inhibited as a matter of training, such a transforming surprise

as sudden consciousness of passionate love required time for its

awakening, time for its sway.



By and by that last enlightening moment came, and Madeline

Hammond faced not only the love in her heart, but the thought of

the man she loved.



Suddenly, as she raged, something in her--this dauntless new

personality--took arms against indictment of Gene Stewart.  Her

mind whirled about him and his life.  She saw him drunk, brutal;

she saw him abandoned, lost.  Then out of the picture she had of

him thus slowly grew one of a different man--weak, sick, changed

by shock, growing strong, strangely, spiritually altered, silent,

lonely like an eagle, secretive, tireless, faithful, soft as a

woman, hard as iron to endure, and at the last noble.



She softened.  In a flash her complex mood changed to one wherein

she thought of the truth, the beauty, the wonder of Stewart's

uplifting.  Humbly she trusted that she had helped him to climb. 

That influence had been the best she had ever exerted.  It had

wrought magic in her own character.  By it she had reached some

higher, nobler plane of trust in man.  She had received

infinitely more than she had given.



Her swiftly flying memory seemed to assort a vast mine of

treasures of the past.  Of that letter Stewart had written to her

brother she saw vivid words.  But ah! she had known, and if it

had not made any difference then, now it made all in the world. 

She recalled how her loosened hair had blown across his lips that

night he had ridden down from the mountains carrying her in his

arms.  She recalled the strange joy of pride in Stewart's eyes

when he had suddenly come upon her dressed to receive her Eastern

guests in the white gown with the red roses at her breast.



Swiftly as they had come these dreamful memories departed.  There

was to be no rest for her mind.  All she had thought and felt

seemed only to presage a tumult.



Heedless, desperate, she cast off the last remnant of

self-control, turned from the old proud, pale, cold,

self-contained ghost of herself to face this strange, strong,

passionate woman.  Then, with hands pressed to her beating heart,

with eyes shut, she listened to the ringing trip-hammer voice of

circumstance, of truth, of fatality.  The whole story was

revealed, simple enough in the sum of its complicated details,

strange and beautiful in part, remorseless in its proof of great

love on Stewart's side, in dreaming blindness on her own, and,

from the first fatal moment to the last, prophetic of tragedy.



Madeline, like a prisoner in a cell, began again to pace to and

fro.



"Oh, it is all terrible!" she cried.  "I am his wife. His wife! 

That meeting with him--the marriage--then his fall, his love, his

rise, his silence, his pride!  And I can never be anything to

him.  Could I be anything to him?  I, Madeline Hammond?  But I am

his wife, and I love him!  His wife!  I am the wife of a cowboy! 

That might be undone.  Can my love be undone?  Ah, do I want

anything undone?  He is gone.  Gone!  Could he have meant-- I

will not, dare not think of that.  He will come back.  No, he

never will come back.  Oh, what shall I do?"







For Madeline Hammond the days following that storm of feeling

were leaden-footed, endless, hopeless--a long succession of weary

hours, sleepless hours, passionate hours, all haunted by a fear

slowly growing into torture, a fear that Stewart had crossed the

border to invite the bullet which would give her freedom.  The

day came when she knew this to be true. The spiritual tidings

reached her, not subtly as so many divinations had come, but in a

clear, vital flash of certainty. Then she suffered.  She burned

inwardly, and the nature of that deep fire showed through her

eyes.  She kept to herself, waiting, waiting for her fears to be

confirmed.



At times she broke out in wrath at the circumstances she had

failed to control, at herself, at Stewart.



"He might have learned from Ambrose!" she exclaimed, sick with a

bitterness she knew was not consistent with her pride.  She

recalled Christine's trenchant exposition of Ambrose's wooing:

"He tell me he love me; he kees me; he hug me; he put me on his

horse; he ride away with me; he marry me."



Then in the next breath Madeline denied this insistent clamoring

of a love that was gradually breaking her spirit. Like a somber

shadow remorse followed her, shading blacker. She had been blind

to a man's honesty, manliness, uprightness, faith, and striving. 

She had been dead to love, to nobility that she had herself

created.  Padre Marcos's grave, wise words returned to haunt her. 

She fought her bitterness, scorned her intelligence, hated her

pride, and, weakening, gave up more and more to a yearning,

hopeless hope.



She had shunned the light of the stars as she had violently

dismissed every hinting suggestive memory of Stewart's kisses. 

But one night she went deliberately to her window.  There they

shone.  Her stars!  Beautiful, passionless as always, but

strangely closer, warmer, speaking a kinder language, helpful as

they had never been, teaching her now that regret was futile,

revealing to her in their one grand, blazing task the supreme

duty of life--to be true.



Those shining stars made her yield.  She whispered to them that

they had claimed her--the West claimed her--Stewart claimed her

forever, whether he lived or died.  She gave up to her love.  And

it was as if he was there in person, dark-faced, fire-eyed,

violent in his action, crushing her to his breast in that

farewell moment, kissing her with one burning kiss of passion,

then with cold, terrible lips of renunciation.



"I am your wife!" she whispered to him.  In that moment,

throbbing, exalted, quivering in her first sweet, tumultuous

surrender to love, she would have given her all, her life, to be

in his arms again, to meet his lips, to put forever out of his

power any thought of wild sacrifice.







And on the morning of the next day, when Madeline went out upon

the porch, Stillwell, haggard and stern, with a husky, incoherent

word, handed her a message from El Cajon. She read:





El Capitan Stewart captured by rebel soldiers in fight at Agua

Prieta yesterday.  He was a sharpshooter in the Federal ranks.

Sentenced to death Thursday at sunset.

