





VI A Gift and A Purchase



For a week the scene of the round-up lay within riding-distance

of the ranch-house, and Madeline passed most of this time in the

saddle, watching the strenuous labors of the vaqueros and

cowboys.  She overestimated her strength, and more than once had

to be lifted from her horse.  Stillwell's pleasure in her

attendance gave place to concern.  He tried to persuade her to

stay away from the round-up, and Florence grew even more

solicitous.



Madeline, however, was not moved by their entreaties. She grasped

only dimly the truth of what it was she was learning--something

infinitely more than the rounding up of cattle by cowboys, and

she was loath to lose an hour of her opportunity.



Her brother looked out for her as much as his duties permitted;

but for several days he never once mentioned her growing fatigue

and the strain of excitement, or suggested that she had better go

back to the house with Florence.  Many times she felt the drawing

power of his keen blue eyes on her face. And at these moments she

sensed more than brotherly regard.  He was watching her, studying

her, weighing her, and the conviction was vaguely disturbing.  It

was disquieting for Madeline to think that Alfred might have

guessed her trouble. From time to time he brought cowboys to her

and introduced them, and laughed and jested, trying to make the

ordeal less embarrassing for these men so little used to women.



Before the week was out, however, Alfred found occasion to tell

her that it would be wiser for her to let the round-up go on

without gracing it further with her presence.  He said it

laughingly; nevertheless, he was serious.  And when Madeline

turned to him in surprise he said, bluntly:



"I don't like the way Don Carlos follows you around. Bill's

afraid that Nels or Ambrose or one of the cowboys will take a

fall out of the Mexican.  They're itching for the chance.  Of

course, dear, it's absurd to you, but it's true."



Absurd it certainly was, yet it served to show Madeline how

intensely occupied she had been with her own feelings, roused by

the tumult and toil of the round-up.  She recalled that Don

Carlos had been presented to her, and that she had not liked his

dark, striking face with its bold, prominent, glittering eyes and

sinister lines; and she had not liked his suave, sweet,

insinuating voice or his subtle manner, with its slow bows and

gestures.  She had thought he looked handsome and dashing on the

magnificent black horse.  However, now that Alfred's words made

her think, she recalled that wherever she had been in the field

the noble horse, with his silver-mounted saddle and his dark

rider, had been always in her vicinity.



"Don Carlos has been after Florence for a long time," said

Alfred.  "He's not a young man by any means.  He's fifty, Bill

says; but you can seldom tell a Mexican's age from his looks. 

Don Carlos is well educated and a man we know very little about. 

Mexicans of his stamp don't regard women as we white men do. 

Now, my dear, beautiful sister from New York, I haven't much use

for Don Carlos; but I don't want Nels or Ambrose to make a wild

throw with a rope and pull the Don off his horse.  So you had

better ride up to the house and stay there."



"Alfred, you are joking, teasing me," said Madeline. "Indeed

not," replied Alfred.  "How about it, Flo?"  Florence replied

that the cowboys would upon the slightest provocation treat Don

Carlos with less ceremony and gentleness than a roped steer.  Old

Bill Stillwell came up to be importuned by Alfred regarding the

conduct of cowboys on occasion, and he not only corroborated the

assertion, but added emphasis and evidence of his own.



"An', Miss Majesty," he concluded, "I reckon if Gene Stewart was

ridin' fer me, thet grinnin' Greaser would hev hed a bump in the

dust before now."



Madeline had been wavering between sobriety and laughter until

Stillwell's mention of his ideal of cowboy chivalry decided in

favor of the laughter.



"I am not convinced, but I surrender," she said.  "You have only

some occult motive for driving me away.  I am sure that handsome

Don Carlos is being unjustly suspected.  But as I have seen a

little of cowboys' singular imagination and gallantry, I am

rather inclined to fear their possibilities. So good-by."



Then she rode with Florence up the long, gray slope to the

ranch-house.  That night she suffered from excessive weariness,

which she attributed more to the strange working of her mind than

to riding and sitting her horse.  Morning, however, found her in

no disposition to rest.  It was not activity that she craved, or

excitement, or pleasure.  An unerring instinct, rising dear from

the thronging sensations of the last few days, told her that she

had missed something in life.  It could not have been love, for

she loved brother, sister, parents, friends; it could not have

been consideration for the poor, the unfortunate, the hapless;

she had expressed her sympathy for these by giving freely; it

could not have been pleasure, culture, travel, society, wealth,

position, fame, for these had been hers all her life.  Whatever

this something was, she had baffling intimations of it, hopes

that faded on the verge of realizations, haunting promises that

were unfulfilled. Whatever it was, it had remained hidden and

unknown at home, and here in the West it began to allure and

drive her to discovery.  Therefore she could not rest; she wanted

to go and see; she was no longer chasing phantoms; it was a hunt

for treasure that held aloof, as intangible as the substance of

dreams.



That morning she spoke a desire to visit the Mexican quarters

lying at the base of the foothills.  Florence protested that this

was no place to take Madeline.  But Madeline insisted, and it

required only a few words and a persuading smile to win Florence

over.



From the porch the cluster of adobe houses added a picturesque

touch of color and contrast to the waste of gray valley.  Near at

hand they proved the enchantment lent by distance.  They were

old, crumbling, broken down, squalid.  A few goats climbed around

upon them; a few mangy dogs barked announcement of visitors; and

then a troop of half-naked, dirty, ragged children ran out.  They

were very shy, and at first retreated in affright.  But kind

words and smiles gained their confidence, and then they followed

in a body, gathering a quota of new children at each house. 

Madeline at once conceived the idea of doing something to better

the condition of these poor Mexicans, and with this in mind she

decided to have a look indoors.  She fancied she might have been

an apparition, judging from the effect her presence had upon the

first woman she encountered.  While Florence exercised what

little Spanish she had command of, trying to get the women to

talk, Madeline looked about the miserable little rooms.  And

there grew upon her a feeling of sickness, which increased as she

passed from one house to another.  She had not believed such

squalor could exist anywhere in America.  The huts reeked with

filth; vermin crawled over the dirt floors.  There was absolutely

no evidence of water, and she believed what Florence told her--

that these people never bathed.  There was little evidence of

labor.  Idle men and women smoking cigarettes lolled about, some

silent, others jabbering.  They did not resent the visit of the

American women, nor did they show hospitality.  They appeared

stupid.  Disease was rampant in these houses; when the doors were

shut there was no ventilation, and even with the doors open

Madeline felt choked and stifled.  A powerful penetrating odor

pervaded the rooms that were less stifling than others, and this

odor Florence explained came from a liquor the Mexicans distilled

from a cactus plant.  Here drunkenness was manifest, a terrible

inert drunkenness that made its victims deathlike.



Madeline could not extend her visit to the little mission-house. 

She saw a padre, a starved, sad-faced man who, she instinctively

felt, was good.  She managed to mount her horse and ride up to

the house; but, once there, she weakened and Florence had almost

to carry her in-doors.  She fought off a faintness, only to

succumb to it when alone in her room. Still, she did not entirely

lose consciousness, and soon recovered to the extent that she did

not require assistance.



Upon the morning after the end of the round-up, when she went out

on the porch, her brother and Stillwell appeared to be arguing

about the identity of a horse.



"Wal, I reckon it's my old roan," said Stillwell, shading his

eves with his hand.



"Bill, if that isn't Stewart's horse my eyes are going back on

me," replied Al.  "It's not the color or shape--the distance is

too far to judge by that.  It's the motion--the swing."



"Al, mebbe you're right.  But they ain't no rider up on thet

hoss.  Flo, fetch my glass."



Florence went into the house, while Madeline tried to discover

the object of attention.  Presently far up the gray hollow along

a foothill she saw dust, and then the dark, moving figure of a

horse.  She was watching when Florence returned with the glass. 

Bill took a long look, adjusted the glasses carefully, and tried

again.



"Wal, I hate to admit my eyes are gettin' pore.  But I guess I'll

hev to.  Thet's Gene Stewart's hoss, saddled, an' comin' at a

fast clip without a rider.  It's amazin' strange, an' some in

keepin' with other things concernin' Gene."



"Give me the glass," said Al.  "Yes, I was right. Bill, the horse

is not frightened.  He's coming steadily; he's got something on

his mind."



"Thet's a trained hoss, Al.  He has more sense than some men I

know.  Take a look with the glasses up the hollow. See anybody?"



"No."



"Swing up over the foothills--where the trail leads. Higher--

along thet ridge where the rocks begin.  See anybody?"



"By Jove!  Bill--two horses!  But I can't make out much for dust. 

They are climbing fast.  One horse gone among the rocks.  There--

the other's gone.  What do you make of that?"



"Wal, I can't make no more 'n you.  But I'll bet we know

somethin' soon, fer Gene's hoss is comin' faster as he nears the

ranch."



The wide hollow sloping up into the foothills lay open to

unobstructed view, and less than half a mile distant Madeline saw

the riderless horse coming along the white trail at a rapid

canter.  She watched him, recalling the circumstances under which

she had first seen him, and then his wild flight through the

dimly lighted streets of El Cajon out into the black night.  She

thrilled again and believed she would never think of that starry

night's adventure without a thrill.  She watched the horse and

felt more than curiosity. A shrill, piercing whistle pealed in.



"Wal, he's seen us, thet's sure," said Bill.



The horse neared the corrals, disappeared into a lane, and then,

breaking his gait again, thundered into the inclosure and pounded

to a halt some twenty yards from where Stillwell waited for him.



One look at him at close range in the clear light of day was

enough for Madeline to award him a blue ribbon over all horses,

even her prize-winner, White Stockings.  The cowboy's great steed

was no lithe, slender-bodied mustang.  He was a charger, almost

tremendous of build, with a black coat faintly mottled in gray,

and it shone like polished glass in the sun. Evidently he had

been carefully dressed down for this occasion, for there was no

dust on him, nor a kink in his beautiful mane, nor a mark on his

glossy hide.



"Come hyar, you son-of-a-gun," said Stillwell.



The horse dropped his head, snorted, and came obediently up.  He

was neither shy nor wild.  He poked a friendly nose at Stillwell,

and then looked at Al and the women.  Unhooking the stirrups from

the pommel, Stillwell let them fall and began to search the

saddle for something which he evidently expected to find. 

Presently from somewhere among the trappings he produced a folded

bit of paper, and after scrutinizing it handed it to Al.



"Addressed to you; an' I'll bet you two bits I know what's in

it," he said.



Alfred unfolded the letter, read it, and then looked at

Stillwell.



"Bill, you're a pretty good guesser.  Gene's made for the border. 

He sent the horse by somebody, no names mentioned, and wants my

sister to have him if she will accept."



"Any mention of Danny Mains?" asked the rancher.



"Not a word."



"Thet's bad.  Gene'd know about Danny if anybody did. But he's a

close-mouthed cuss.  So he's sure hittin' for Mexico.  Wonder if

Danny's goin', too?  Wal, there's two of the best cowmen I ever

seen gone to hell an' I'm sorry."



With that he bowed his head and, grumbling to himself, went into

the house.  Alfred lifted the reins over the head of the horse

and, leading him to Madeline, slipped the knot over her arm and

placed the letter in her hand.



"Majesty, I'd accept the horse," he said.  "Stewart is only a

cowboy now, and as tough as any I've known.  But he comes of a

good family.  He was a college man and a gentleman once.  He went

to the bad out here, like so many fellows go, like I nearly did. 

Then he had told me about his sister and mother.  He cared a good

deal for them.  I think he has been a source of unhappiness to

them.  It was mostly when he was reminded of this in some way

that he'd get drunk.  I have always stuck to him, and I would do

so yet if I had the chance. You can see Bill is heartbroken about

Danny Mains and Stewart. I think he rather hoped to get good

news.  There's not much chance of them coming back now, at least

not in the case of Stewart.  This giving up his horse means he's

going to join the rebel forces across the border.  What wouldn't

I give to see that cowboy break loose on a bunch of Greasers! 

Oh, damn the luck!  I beg your pardon, Majesty.  But I'm upset,

too.  I'm sorry about Stewart.  I liked him pretty well before he

thrashed that coyote of a sheriff, Pat Hawe, and afterward I

guess I liked him more.  You read the letter, sister, and accept

the horse."



In silence Madeline bent her gaze from her brother's face to the

letter:



Friend Al,--I'm sending my horse down to you because I'm going

away and haven't the nerve to take him where he'd get hurt or

fall into strange hands.



If you think it's all right, why, give him to your sister with my

respects.  But if you don't like the idea, Al, or if she won't

have him, then he's for you.  I'm not forgetting your kindness to

me, even if I never showed it. And, Al, my horse has never felt a

quirt or a spur, and I'd like to think you'd never hurt him.  I'm

hoping your sister will take him.  She'll be good to him, and she

can afford to take care of him.  And, while I'm waiting to be

plugged by a Greaser bullet, if I happen to have a picture in

mind of how she'll look upon my horse, why, man, it's not going

to make any difference to you.  She needn't ever know it. 

Between you and me, Al, don't let her or Flo ride alone over Don

Carlos's way. If I had time I could tell you something about that

slick Greaser.  And tell your sister, if there's ever any reason

for her to run away from anybody when she's up on that roan, just

let her lean over and yell in his ear.  She'll find herself

riding the wind.  So long.



Gene Stewart.





Madeline thoughtfully folded the letter and murmured, "How he

must love his horse!"



"Well, I should say so," replied Alfred.  "Flo will tell you. 

She's the only person Gene ever let ride that horse, unless, as

Bill thinks, the little Mexican girl, Bonita, rode him out of El

Cajon the other night.  Well, sister mine, how about it--will you

accept the horse?"



"Assuredly.  And very happy indeed am I to get him. Al, you said,

I think, that Mr. Stewart named him after me--saw my nickname in

the New York paper?"



"Yes."



"Well, I will not change his name.  But, Al, how shall I ever

climb up on him?  He's taller than I am.  What a giant of a

horse!  Oh, look at him--he's nosing my hand.  I really believe

he understood what I said.  Al, did you ever see such a splendid

head and such beautiful eyes?  They are so large and dark and

soft--and human.  Oh, I am a fickle woman, for I am forgetting

White Stockings."



"I'll gamble he'll make you forget any other horse," said Alfred. 

"You'll have to get on him from the porch."



As Madeline was not dressed for the saddle, she did not attempt

to mount.



"Come, Majesty--how strange that sounds!--we must get acquainted. 

You have now a new owner, a very severe young woman who will

demand loyalty from you and obedience, and some day, after a

decent period, she will expect love."



Madeline led the horse to and fro, and was delighted with his

gentleness.  She discovered that he did not need to be led.  He

came at her call, followed her like a pet dog, rubbed his black

muzzle against her.  Sometimes, at the turns in their walk, he

lifted his head and with ears forward looked up the trail by

which he had come, and beyond the foothills.  He was looking over

the range.  Some one was calling to him, perhaps, from beyond the

mountains.  Madeline liked him the better for that memory, and

pitied the wayward cowboy who had parted with his only possession

for very love of it.



That afternoon when Alfred lifted Madeline to the back of the big

roan she felt high in the air.



"We'll have a run out to the mesa," said her brother, as he

mounted.  "Keep a tight rein on him and ease up when you want him

to go faster.  But don't yell in his ear unless you want Florence

and me to see you disappear on the horizon."



He trotted out of the yard, down by the corrals, to come out on

the edge of a gray, open flat that stretched several miles to the

slope of a mesa.  Florence led, and Madeline saw that she rode

like a cowboy.  Alfred drew on to her side, leaving Madeline in

the rear.  Then the leading horses broke into a gallop.  They

wanted to run, and Madeline felt with a thrill that she would

hardly be able to keep Majesty from running, even if she wanted

to.  He sawed on the tight bridle as the others drew away and

broke from pace to gallop.  Then Florence put her horse into a

run.  Alfred turned and called to Madeline to come along.



"This will never do.  They are running away from us," said

Madeline, and she eased up her hold on the bridle. Something

happened beneath her just then; she did not know at first exactly

what.  As much as she had been on horseback she had never ridden

at a running gait.  In New York it was not decorous or safe.  So

when Majesty lowered and stretched and changed the stiff, jolting

gallop for a wonderful, smooth, gliding run it required Madeline

some moments to realize what was happening.  It did not take long

for her to see the distance diminishing between her and her

companions.  Still they had gotten a goodly start and were far

advanced.  She felt the steady, even rush of the wind.  It amazed

her to find how easily, comfortably she kept to the saddle.  The

experience was new.  The one fault she had heretofore found with

riding was the violent shaking-up.  In this instance she

experienced nothing of that kind, no strain, no necessity to hold

on with a desperate awareness of work.  She had never felt the

wind in her face, the whip of a horse's mane, the buoyant, level

spring of a tanning gait.  It thrilled her, exhilarated her,

fired her blood.  Suddenly she found herself alive, throbbing;

and, inspired by she knew not what, she loosened the bridle and,

leaning far forward, she cried, "Oh, you splendid fellow, run!"



She heard from under her a sudden quick clattering roar of hoofs,

and she swayed back with the wonderfully swift increase in

Majesty's speed.  The wind stung her face, howled in her ears,

tore at her hair.  The gray plain swept by on each side, and in

front seemed to be waving toward her.  In her blurred sight

Florence and Alfred appeared to be coming back. But she saw

presently, upon nearer view, that Majesty was overhauling the

other horses, was going to pass them.  Indeed, he did pass them,

shooting by so as almost to make them appear standing still.  And

be ran on, not breaking his gait till he reached the steep side

of the mesa, where he slowed down and stopped.



"Glorious!" exclaimed Madeline.  She was all in a blaze, and

every muscle and nerve of her body tingled and quivered.  Her

hands, as she endeavored to put up the loosened strands of hair,

trembled and failed of their accustomed dexterity.  Then she

faced about and waited for her companions.



Alfred reached her first, laughing, delighted, yet also a little

anxious.



"Holy smoke!  But can't he run?  Did he bolt on you?"



"No, I called in his ear," replied Madeline.



"So that was it.  That's the woman of you, and forbidden fruit. 

Flo said she'd do it the minute she was on him.  Majesty, you can

ride.  See if Flo doesn't say so."



The Western girl came up then with her pleasure bright in her

face.



"It was just great to see you.  How your hair burned in the wind! 

Al, she sure can ride.  Oh, I'm so glad!  I was a little afraid. 

And that horse!  Isn't he grand?  Can't he run?"



Alfred led the way up the steep, zigzag trail to the top of the

mesa.  Madeline saw a beautiful flat surface of short grass,

level as a floor.  She uttered a little cry of wonder and

enthusiasm.



"Al, what a place for golf!  This would be the finest links in

the world."



Well, I've thought of that myself," he replied.  "The only

trouble would be--could anybody stop looking at the scenery long

enough to hit a ball?  Majesty, look!"



And then it seemed that Madeline was confronted by a spectacle

too sublime and terrible for her gaze.  The immensity of this

red-ridged, deep-gulfed world descending incalculable distances

refused to be grasped, and awed her,shocked her.



"Once, Majesty, when I first came out West, I was down and out--

determined to end it all," said Alfred.  "And happened to climb

up here looking for a lonely place to die. When I saw that I

changed my mind."



Madeline was silent.  She remained so during the ride around the

rim of the mesa and down the steep trail.  This time Alfred and

Florence failed to tempt her into a race.  She had been

awe-struck; she had been exalted she had been confounded; and she

recovered slowly without divining exactly what had come to her.



She reached the ranch-house far behind her companions, and at

supper-time was unusually thoughtful.  Later, when they assembled

on the porch to watch the sunset, Stillwell's humorous

complainings inspired the inception of an idea which flashed up

in her mind swift as lightning.  And then by listening

sympathetically she encouraged him to recite the troubles of a

poor cattleman.  They were many and long and interesting, and

rather numbing to the life of her inspired idea.



Mr. Stillwell, could ranching here on a large scale, with

up-to-date methods, be made--well, not profitable, exactly, but

to pay--to run without loss?" she asked, determined to kill her

new-born idea at birth or else give it breath and hope of life.



"Wal, I reckon it could," he replied, with a short laugh.  "It'd

sure be a money-maker.  Why, with all my bad luck an' poor

equipment I've lived pretty well an' paid my debts an' haven't

really lost any money except the original outlay.  I reckon

thet's sunk fer good."



"Would you sell--if some one would pay your price?"



"Miss Majesty, I'd jump at the chance.  Yet somehow I'd hate to

leave hyar.  I'd jest be fool enough to go sink the money in

another ranch."



"Would Don Carlos and these other Mexicans sell?"



"They sure would.  The Don has been after me fer years, wantin'

to sell thet old rancho of his; an' these herders in the valley

with their stray cattle, they'd fall daid at sight of a little

money."



"Please tell me, Mr. Stillwell, exactly what you would do here if

you had unlimited means?" went on Madeline.



"Good Lud!" ejaculated the rancher, and started so he dropped his

pipe.  Then with his clumsy huge fingers he refilled it,

relighted it, took a few long pulls, puffed great clouds of

smoke, and, squaring round, hands on his knees, he looked at

Madeline with piercing intentness.  His hard face began to relax

and soften and wrinkle into a smile.



"Wal, Miss Majesty, it jest makes my old heart warm up to think

of sich a thing.  I dreamed a lot when I first come hyar.  What

would I do if I hed unlimited money?  Listen.  I'd buy out Don

Carlos an' the Greasers.  I'd give a job to every good cowman in

this country.  I'd make them prosper as I prospered myself.  I'd

buy all the good horses on the ranges. I'd fence twenty thousand

acres of the best grazin'.  I'd drill fer water in the valley. 

I'd pipe water down from the mountains.  I'd dam up that draw out

there.  A mile-long dam from hill to hill would give me a big

lake, an' hevin' an eye fer beauty, I'd plant cottonwoods around

it.  I'd fill that lake full of fish.  I'd put in the biggest

field of alfalfa in the South-west.  I'd plant fruit-trees an'

garden.  I'd tear down them old corrals an' barns an' bunk-houses

to build new ones.  I'd make this old rancho some comfortable an'

fine.  I'd put in grass an' flowers all around an' bring young

pine-trees down from the mountains.  An' when all thet was done

I'd sit in my chair an' smoke an' watch the cattle stringin' in

fer water an' stragglin' back into the valley.  An' I see the

cowboys ridin' easy an' heah them singin' in their bunks.  An'

thet red sun out there wouldn't set on a happier man in the world

than Bill Stillwell, last of the old cattlemen."



Madeline thanked the rancher, and then rather abruptly retired to

her room, where she felt no restraint to hide the force of that

wonderful idea, now full-grown and tenacious and alluring.



Upon the next day, late in the afternoon, she asked Alfred if it

would be safe for her to ride out to the mesa.



"I'll go with you," he said, gaily.



"Dear fellow, I want to go alone," she replied.



"Ah!" Alfred exclaimed, suddenly serious.  He gave her just a

quick glance, then turned away.  "Go ahead.  I think it's safe. 

I'll make it safe by sitting here with my glass and keeping an

eye on you.  Be careful coming down the trail.  Let the horse

pick his way.  That's all."



She rode Majesty across the wide flat, up the zigzag trail,

across the beautiful grassy level to the far rim of the mesa, and

not till then did she lift her eyes to face the southwest.



Madeline looked from the gray valley at her feet to the blue

Sierra Madres, gold-tipped in the setting sun.  Her vision

embraced in that glance distance and depth and glory hitherto

unrevealed to her.  The gray valley sloped and widened to the

black sentinel Chiricahuas, and beyond was lost in a vast

corrugated sweep of earth, reddening down to the west, where a

golden blaze lifted the dark, rugged mountains into bold relief. 

The scene had infinite beauty.  But after Madeline's first swift,

all-embracing flash of enraptured eyes, thought of beauty passed

away.  In that darkening desert there was something illimitable. 

Madeline saw the hollow of a stupendous hand; she felt a mighty

hold upon her heart.  Out of the endless space, out of silence

and desolation and mystery and age, came slow-changing colored

shadows, phantoms of peace, and they whispered to Madeline.  They

whispered that it was a great, grim, immutable earth; that time

was eternity; that life was fleeting.  They whispered for her to

be a woman; to love some one before it was too late; to love any

one, every one; to realize the need of work, and in doing it to

find happiness.



She rode back across the mesa and down the trail, and, once more

upon the flat, she called to the horse and made him run.  His

spirit seemed to race with hers.  The wind of his speed blew her

hair from its fastenings.  When he thundered to a halt at the

porch steps Madeline, breathless and disheveled, alighted with

the mass of her hair tumbling around her.



Alfred met her, and his exclamation, and Florence's rapt eyes

shining on her face, and Stillwell's speechlessness made her

self-conscious.  Laughing, she tried to put up the mass of hair.



"I must--look a--fright," she panted.



"Wal, you can say what you like," replied the old cattleman, "but

I know what I think."



Madeline strove to attain calmness.



"My hat--and my combs--went on the wind.  I thought my hair would

go, too. . . . There is the evening star. . . . I think I am very

hungry."



And then she gave up trying to be calm, and likewise to fasten up

her hair, which fell again in a golden mass.



"Mr. Stillwell," she began, and paused, strangely aware of a

hurried note, a deeper ring in her voice.  "Mr. Stillwell, I want

to buy your ranch--to engage you as my superintendent. I want to

buy Don Carlos's ranch and other property to the extent, say, of

fifty thousand acres.  I want you to buy horses and cattle--in

short, to make all those improvements which you said you had so

long dreamed of.  Then I have ideas of my own, in the development

of which I must have your advice and Alfred's.  I intend to

better the condition of those poor Mexicans in the valley.  I

intend to make life a little more worth living for them and for

the cowboys of this range. To-morrow we shall talk it all over,

plan all the business details."



Madeline turned from the huge, ever-widening smile that beamed

down upon her and held out her hands to her brother.



"Alfred, strange, is it not, my coming out to you? Nay, don't

smile.  I hope I have found myself--my work--my happiness--here

under the light of that western star."

