





IV A Ride From Sunrise To Sunset



Next morning, when Madeline was aroused by her brother, it was

not yet daybreak; the air chilled her, and in the gray gloom she

had to feel around for matches and lamp.  Her usual languid

manner vanished at a touch of the cold water.  Presently, when

Alfred knocked on her door and said he was leaving a pitcher of

hot water outside, she replied, with chattering teeth, "Th-thank

y-you, b-but I d-don't ne-need any now."  She found it necessary,

however, to warm her numb fingers before she could fasten hooks

and buttons.  And when she was dressed she marked in the dim

mirror that there were tinges of red in her cheeks.



"Well, if I haven't some color!" she exclaimed.



Breakfast waited for her in the dining-room.  The sisters ate

with her.  Madeline quickly caught the feeling of brisk action

that seemed to be in the air.  From the back of the house sounded

the tramp of boots and voices of men, and from outside came a

dull thump of hoofs, the rattle of harness, and creak of wheels. 

Then Alfred came stamping in.



"Majesty, here's where you get the real thing," he announced,

merrily.  "We're rushing you off, I'm sorry to say; but we must

hustle back to the ranch.  The fall round-up begins to-morrow. 

You will ride in the buck-board with Florence and Stillwell. 

I'll ride on ahead with the boys and fix up a little for you at

the ranch.  Your baggage will follow, but won't get there till

to-morrow sometime.  It's a long ride out--nearly fifty miles by

wagon-road.  Flo, don't forget a couple of robes.  Wrap her up

well.  And hustle getting ready. We're waiting."



A little later, when Madeline went out with Florence, the gray

gloom was lightening.  Horses were champing bits and pounding

gravel.



"Mawnin', Miss Majesty," said Stillwell, gruffly, from the front

seat of a high vehicle.



Alfred bundled her up into the back seat, and Florence after her,

and wrapped them with robes.  Then he mounted his horse and

started off.  "Gid-eb!" growled Stillwell, and with a crack of

his whip the team jumped into a trot.  Florence whispered into

Madeline's ear:



"Bill's grouchy early in the mawnin'.  He'll thaw out soon as it

gets warm."



It was still so gray that Madeline could not distinguish objects

at any considerable distance, and she left El Cajon without

knowing what the town really looked like.  She did know that she

was glad to get out of it, and found an easier task of dispelling

persistent haunting memory.



"Here come the cowboys," said Florence.



A line of horsemen appeared coming from the right and fell in

behind Alfred, and gradually they drew ahead, to disappear from

sight.  While Madeline watched them the gray gloom lightened into

dawn.  All about her was bare and dark; the horizon seemed close;

not a hill nor a tree broke the monotony.  The ground appeared to

be flat, but the road went up and down over little ridges. 

Madeline glanced backward in the direction of El Cajon and the

mountains she had seen the day before, and she saw only bare and

dark ground, like that which rolled before.



A puff of cold wind struck her face and she shivered. Florence

noticed her and pulled up the second robe and tucked it closely

round her up to her chin.



"If we have a little wind you'll sure feel it," said the Western

girl.



Madeline replied that she already felt it.  The wind appeared to

penetrate the robes.  it was cold, pure, nipping. It was so thin

she had to breathe as fast as if she were under ordinary

exertion.  It hurt her nose and made her lungs ache.



"Aren't you co-cold?" asked Madeline.



"I?" Florence laughed.  "I'm used to it.  I never get cold."



The Western girl sat with ungloved hands on the outside of the

robe she evidently did not need to draw up around her. Madeline

thought she had never seen such a clear-eyed, healthy, splendid

girl.



"Do you like to see the sun rise?" asked Florence.



"Yes, I think I do," replied Madeline, thoughtfully. "Frankly, I

have not seen it for years."



"We have beautiful sunrises, and sunsets from the ranch are

glorious."



Long lines of pink fire ran level with the eastern horizon, which

appeared to recede as day brightened.  A bank of thin, fleecy

clouds was turning rose.  To the south and west the sky was dark;

but every moment it changed, the blue turning bluer.  The eastern

sky was opalescent.  Then in one place gathered a golden light,

and slowly concentrated till it was like fire.  The rosy bank of

cloud turned to silver and pearl, and behind it shot up a great

circle of gold.  Above the dark horizon gleamed an intensely

bright disk.  It was the sun.  It rose swiftly, blazing out the

darkness between the ridges and giving color and distance to the

sweep of land.



"Wal, wal," drawled Stillwell, and stretched his huge arms as if

he had just awakened, "thet's somethin' like."



Florence nudged Madeline and winked at her.



"Fine mawnin', girls," went on old Bill, cracking his whip. 

"Miss Majesty, it'll be some oninterestin' ride all mawnin'.  But

when we get up a bit you'll sure like it.  There! Look to the

southwest, jest over thet farthest ridge."




Madeline swept her gaze along the gray, sloping horizon-line to

where dark-blue spires rose far beyond the ridge.



"Peloncillo Mountains," said Stillwell.  "Thet's home, when we

get there.  We won't see no more of them till afternoon, when

they rise up sudden-like."



Peloncillo!  Madeline murmured the melodious name. Where had she

heard it?  Then she remembered.  The cowboy Stewart had told the

little Mexican girl Bonita to "hit the Peloncillo trail." 

Probably the girl had ridden the big, dark horse over this very

road at night, alone.  Madeline had a little shiver that was not

occasioned by the cold wind.



"There's a jack!" cried Florence, suddenly.



Madeline saw her first jack-rabbit.  It was as large as a dog,

and its ears were enormous.  It appeared to be impudently tame,

and the horses kicked dust over it as they trotted by.  From then

on old Bill and Florence vied with each other in calling

Madeline's attention to many things along the way.  Coyotes

stealing away into the brush; buzzards flapping over the carcass

of a cow that had been mired in a wash; queer little lizards

running swiftly across the road; cattle grazing in the hollows;

adobe huts of Mexican herders; wild, shaggy horses, with heads

high, watching from the gray ridges--all these things Madeline

looked at, indifferently at first, because indifference had

become habitual with her, and then with an interest that

flourished up and insensibly grew as she rode on.  It grew until

sight of a little ragged; Mexican boy astride the most diminutive

burro she had ever seen awakened her to the truth.  She became

conscious of faint, unmistakable awakening of long-dead feelings-

-enthusiasm and delight.  When she realized that, she breathed

deep of the cold, sharp air and experienced an inward joy.  And

she divined then, though she did not know why, that henceforth

there was to be something new in her life, something she had

never felt before, something good for her soul in the homely, the

commonplace, the natural, and the wild.



Meanwhile, as Madeline gazed about her and listened to her

companions, the sun rose higher and grew warm and soared and grew

hot; the horses held tirelessly to their steady trot, and mile

after mile of rolling land slipped by.



From the top of a ridge Madeline saw down into a hollow where a

few of the cowboys had stopped and were sitting round a fire,

evidently busy at the noonday meal.  Their horses were feeding on

the long, gray grass.



"Wal, smell of thet burnin' greasewood makes my mouth water,"

said Stillwell.  "I'm sure hungry.  We'll noon hyar an' let the

hosses rest.  It's a long pull to the ranch."



He halted near the camp-fire, and, clambering down, began to

unharness the team.  Florence leaped out and turned to help

Madeline.



"Walk round a little," she said.  "You must be cramped from

sitting still so long.  I'll get lunch ready."



Madeline got down, glad to stretch her limbs, and began to stroll

about.  She heard Stillwell throw the harness on the ground and

slap his horses.  "Roll, you sons-of-guns!" he said. Both horses

bent their fore legs, heaved down on their sides, and tried to

roll over.  One horse succeeded on the fourth try, and then

heaved up with a satisfied snort and shook off the dust and

gravel.  The other one failed to roll over, and gave it up, half

rose to his feet, and then lay down on the other side.



"He's sure going to feel the ground," said Florence, smiling at

Madeline.  "Miss Hammond, I suppose that prize horse of yours--

White Stockings--would spoil his coat if he were heah to roll in

this greasewood and cactus."



During lunch-time Madeline observed that she was an object of

manifestly great interest to the three cowboys.  She returned the

compliment, and was amused to see that a g1ance their way caused

them painful embarrassment.  They were grown men--one of whom had

white hair--yet they acted like boys caught in the act of

stealing a forbidden look at a pretty girl.



"Cowboys are sure all flirts," said Florence, as if stating an

uninteresting fact.  But Madeline detected a merry twinkle in her

clear eyes.  The cowboys heard, and the effect upon them was

magical.  They fell to shamed confusion and to hurried useless

tasks.  Madeline found it difficult to see where they had been

bold, though evidently they were stricken with conscious guilt. 

She recalled appraising looks of critical English eyes, impudent

French stares, burning Spanish glances--gantlets which any

American girl had to run abroad. Compared with foreign eyes the

eyes of these cowboys were those of smiling, eager babies.



"Haw, haw!" roared Stillwell.  "Florence, you jest hit the nail

on the haid.  Cowboys are all plumb flirts.  I was wonderin' why

them boys nooned hyar.  This ain't no place to noon.  Ain't no

grazin' or wood wuth burnin' or nuthin'.  Them boys jest held up,

throwed the packs, an' waited fer us.  It ain't so surprisin' fer

Booly an' Ned--they're young an' coltish--but Nels there, why,

he's old enough to be the paw of both you girls.  It sure is

amazin' strange."



A silence ensued.  The white-haired cowboy, Nels, fussed

aimlessly over the camp-fire, and then straightened up with a

very red face.



"Bill, you're a dog-gone liar," he said.  "I reckon I won't stand

to be classed with Booly an' Ned.  There ain't no cowboy on this

range thet's more appreciatin' of the ladies than me, but I shore

ain't ridin' out of my way.  I reckon I hev enough ridin' to do. 

Now, Bill, if you've sich dog-gone good eyes mebbe you seen

somethin' on the way out?"



"Nels, I hevn't seen nothin'," he replied, bluntly. His levity

disappeared, and the red wrinkles narrowed round his searching

eyes.



"Jest take a squint at these hoss tracks," said Nels, and he drew

Stillwell a few paces aside and pointed to large hoofprints in

the dust.  "I reckon you know the hoss thet made them?"



"Gene Stewart's roan, or I'm a son-of-a-gun!" exclaimed

Stillwell, and he dropped heavily to his knees and began to

scrutinize the tracks.  "My eyes are sure pore; but, Nels, they

ain't fresh."



"I reckon them tracks was made early yesterday mornin'."



"Wal, what if they was?" Stillwell looked at his cowboy.  "It's

sure as thet red nose of yourn Gene wasn't ridin' the roan."



"Who's sayin' he was?  Bill, its more 'n your eyes thet's gettin'

old.  Jest foller them tracks.  Come on."



Stillwell walked slowly, with his head bent, muttering to

himself.  Some thirty paces or more from the camp-fire he stopped

short and again flopped to his knees.  Then he crawled about,

evidently examining horse tracks.



"Nels, whoever was straddlin' Stewart's hoss met somebody.  An'

they hauled up a bit, but didn't git down."



"Tolerable good for you, Bill, thet reasonin'," replied the

cowboy.



Stillwell presently got up and walked swiftly to the left for

some rods, halted, and faced toward the southwest, then retraced

his steps.  He looked at the imperturbable cowboy.



"Nels, I don't like this a little," he growled. "Them tracks make

straight fer the Peloncillo trail."



"Shore," replied Nels.



"Wal?" went on Stillwell, impatiently.



"I reckon you know what hoss made the other tracks?"



"I'm thinkin' hard, but I ain't sure"



"It was Danny Mains's bronc."



"How do you know thet?" demanded Stillwell, sharply. "Bill, the

left front foot of thet little hoss always wears a shoe thet sets

crooked.  Any of the boys can tell you.  I'd know thet track if I

was blind."



Stillwell's ruddy face clouded and he kicked at a cactus plant.



"Was Danny comin' or goin'?" he asked.



"I reckon he was hittin' across country fer the Peloncillo trail.

But I ain't shore of thet without back-trailin' him a ways.  I

was jest waitin' fer you to come up."



"Nels, you don't think the boy's sloped with thet little hussy,

Bonita?"



"Bill, he shore was sweet on Bonita, same as Gene was, an' Ed

Linton before he got engaged, an' all the boys.  She's shore

chain-lightnin', that little black-eyed devil.  Danny might hev

sloped with her all right.  Danny was held up on the way to town,

an' then in the shame of it he got drunk.  But he'll shew up

soon."



"Wal, mebbe you an' the boys are right.  I believe you are. 

Nels, there ain't no doubt on earth about who was ridin'

Stewart's hoss?"



"Thet's as plain as the hoss's tracks."



"Wal, it's all amazin' strange.  It beats me.  I wish the boys

would ease up on drinkin'.  I was pretty fond of Danny an' Gene. 

I'm afraid Gene's done fer, sure.  If he crosses the border where

he can fight it won't take long fer him to get plugged.  I guess

I'm gettin' old.  I don't stand things like I used to."



"Bill, I reckon I'd better hit the Peloncillo trail. Mebbe I can

find Danny."



"I reckon you had, Nels," replied Stillwell.  "But don't take

more 'n a couple of days.  We can't do much on the round-up

without you.  I'm short of boys."



That ended the conversation.  Stillwell immediately began to

hitch up his team, and the cowboys went out to fetch their

strayed horses.  Madeline had been curiously interested, and she

saw that Florence knew it.



"Things happen, Miss Hammond," she said, soberly, almost sadly.



Madeline thought.  And then straightway Florence began brightly

to hum a tune and to busy herself repacking what was left of the

lunch.  Madeline conceived a strong liking and respect for this

Western girl.  She admired the consideration or delicacy or

wisdom--what-ever it was--which kept Florence from asking her

what she knew or thought or felt about the events that had taken

place.



Soon they were once more bowling along the road down a gradual

incline, and then they began to climb a long ridge that had for

hours hidden what lay beyond.  That climb was rather tiresome,

owing to the sun and the dust and the restricted view.



When they reached the summit Madeline gave a little gasp of

pleasure.  A deep, gray, smooth valley opened below and sloped up

on the other side in little ridges like waves, and these led to

the foothills, dotted with clumps of brush or trees, and beyond

rose dark mountains, pine-fringed and crag-spired.



"Wal, Miss Majesty, now we're gettin' somewhere," said Stillwell,

cracking his whip.  "Ten miles across this valley an' we'll be in

the foothills where the Apaches used to run."



"Ten miles!" exclaimed Madeline.  "It looks no more than half a

mile to me."



"Wal, young woman, before you go to ridin' off alone you want to

get your eyes corrected to Western distance.  Now, what'd you

call them black things off there on the slope?"



"Horsemen.  No, cattle," replied Madeline, doubtfully. "Nope.

Jest plain, every-day cactus.  An' over hyar--look down the

valley.  Somethin' of a pretty forest, ain't thet?" he asked,

pointing.



Madeline saw a beautiful forest in the center of the valley

toward the south.



"Wal, Miss Majesty, thet's jest this deceivin' air. There's no

forest.  It's a mirage."



"Indeed!  How beautiful it is!"  Madeline strained her gaze on

the dark blot, and it seemed to float in the atmosphere, to have

no clearly defined margins, to waver and shimmer, and then it

faded and vanished.



The mountains dropped down again behind the horizon, and

presently the road began once more to slope up.  The horses

slowed to a walk.  There was a mile of rolling ridge, and then

came the foothills.  The road ascended through winding valleys.

Trees and brush and rocks began to appear in the dry ravines.

There was no water, yet all along the sandy washes were

indications of floods at some periods.  The heat and the dust

stifled Madeline, and she had already become tired.  Still she

looked with all her eyes and saw birds, and beautiful quail with

crests, and rabbits, and once she saw a deer.



"Miss Majesty," said Stillwell, "in the early days the Indians

made this country a bad one to live in.  I reckon you never heerd

much about them times.  Surely you was hardly born then.  I'll

hev to tell you some day how I fought Comanches in the Panhandle-

-thet was northern Texas--an' I had some mighty hair-raisin'

scares in this country with Apaches."



He told her about Cochise, chief of the Chiricahua Apaches, the

most savage and bloodthirsty tribe that ever made life a horror

for the pioneer.  Cochise befriended the whites once; but he was

the victim of that friendliness, and he became the most

implacable of foes.  Then, Geronimo, another Apache chief, had,

as late as 1885, gone on the war-path, and had left a bloody

trail down the New Mexico and Arizona line almost to the border. 

Lone ranchmen and cowboys had been killed, and mothers had shot

their children and then themselves at the approach of the Apache. 

The name Apache curdled the blood of any woman of the Southwest

in those days.



Madeline shuddered, and was glad when the old frontiersman

changed the subject and began to talk of the settling of that

country by the Spaniards, the legends of lost gold-mines handed

down to the Mexicans, and strange stories of heroism and mystery

and religion.  The Mexicans had not advanced much in spite of the

spread of civilization to the Southwest.  They were still

superstitious, and believed the legends of treasures hidden in

the walls of their missions, and that unseen hands rolled rocks

down the gullies upon the heads of prospectors who dared to hunt

for the lost mines of the padres.



"Up in the mountains back of my ranch there's a lost mine," said

Stillwell.  "Mebbe it's only a legend.  But somehow I believe

it's there.  Other lost mines hev been found.  An' as fer' the

rollin' stones, I sure know thet's true, as any one can find out

if he goes trailin' up the gulch.  Mebbe thet's only the

weatherin' of the cliffs.  It's a sleepy, strange country, this

Southwest, an', Miss Majesty, you're a-goin' to love it.  You'll

call it ro-mantic, Wal, I reckon ro-mantic is correct.  A feller

gets lazy out hyar an' dreamy, an' he wants to put off work till

to-morrow.  Some folks say it's a land of manana--a land of

to-morrow.  Thet's the Mexican of it.



"But I like best to think of what a lady said to me ouct--an

eddicated lady like you, Miss Majesty.  Wal, she said it's a land

where it's always afternoon.  I liked thet.  I always get up sore

in the mawnin's, an' don't feel good till noon.  But in the

afternoon I get sorta warm an' like things. An' sunset is my

time.  I reckon I don't want nothin' any finer than sunset from

my ranch.  You look out over a valley that spreads wide between

Guadalupe Mountains an' the Chiricahuas, down across the red

Arizona desert clear to the Sierra Madres in Mexico.  Two hundred

miles, Miss Majesty!  An' all as clear as print!  An' the sun

sets behind all thet! When my time comes to die I'd like it to be

on my porch smokin' my pipe an' facin' the west."



So the old cattleman talked on while Madeline listened, and

Florence dozed in her seat, and the sun began to wane, and the

horses climbed steadily.  Presently, at the foot of the steep

ascent, Stillwell got out and walked, leading the team. During

this long climb fatigue claimed Madeline, and she drowsily closed

her eyes, to find when she opened them again that the glaring

white sky had changed to a steel-blue.  The sun had sunk behind

the foothills and the air was growing chilly.  Stillwell had

returned to the driving-seat and was chuckling to the horses. 

Shadows crept up cut of the hollows.



"Wal, Flo," said Stillwell, "I reckon we'd better hev the rest of

thet there lunch before dark."



"You didn't leave much of it," laughed Florence, as she produced

the basket from under the seat.



While they ate, the short twilight shaded and gloom filled the

hollows.  Madeline saw the first star, a faint, winking point of

light.  The sky had now changed to a hazy gray.  Madeline saw it

gradually clear and darken, to show other faint stars.  After

that there was perceptible deepening of the gray and an enlarging

of the stars and a brightening of new-born ones.  Night seemed to

come on the cold wind. Madeline was glad to have the robes close

around her and to lean against Florence.  The hollows were now

black, but the tops of the foothills gleamed pale in a soft

light.  The steady tramp of the horses went on, and the creak of

wheels and crunching of gravel.  Madeline grew so sleepy that she

could not keep her weary eyelids from falling.  There were

drowsier spells in which she lost a feeling of where she was, and

these were disturbed by the jolt of wheels over a rough place. 

Then came a blank interval, short or long, which ended in a more

violent lurch of the buckboard.  Madeline awoke to find her head

on Florence's shoulder.  She sat up laughing and apologizing for

her laziness.  Florence assured her they would soon reach the

ranch.



Madeline observed then that the horses were once more trotting. 

The wind was colder, the night darker, the foot-hills flatter. 

And the sky was now a wonderful deep velvet-blue blazing with

millions of stars.  Some of them were magnificent.  How strangely

white and alive!  Again Madeline felt the insistence of familiar

yet baffling associations. These white stars called strangely to

her or haunted her.

