




II A Secret Kept



Because of that singular reply Madeline found faith to go farther

with the cowboy.  But at the moment she really did not think

about what he had said.  Any answer to her would have served if

it had been kind.  His silence had augmented her nervousness,

compelling her to voice her fear.  Still, even if he had not

replied at all she would have gone on with him.  She shuddered at

the idea of returning to the station, where she believed there

had been murder; she could hardly have forced herself to go back

to those dim lights in the street; she did not want to wander

around alone in the dark.



And as she walked on into the windy darkness, much relieved that

he had answered as he had, reflecting that he had yet to prove

his words true, she began to grasp the deeper significance of

them.  There was a revival of pride that made her feel that she

ought to scorn to think at all about such a man.  But Madeline

Hammond discovered that thought was involuntary, that there were

feelings in her never dreamed of before this night.



Presently Madeline's guide turned off the walk and rapped at a

door of a low-roofed house.



"Hullo--who's there?" a deep voice answered.



"Gene Stewart," said the cowboy.  "Call Florence--quick!"



Thump of footsteps followed, a tap on a door, and voices. 

Madeline heard a woman exclaim: "Gene! here when there's a dance

in town!  Something wrong out on the range." A light flared up

and shone bright through a window.  In another moment there came

a patter of soft steps, and the door opened to disclose a woman

holding a lamp.



"Gene!  Al's not--"



"Al is all right," interrupted the cowboy.



Madeline had two sensations then--one of wonder at the note of

alarm and love in the woman's voice, and the other of unutterable

relief to he safe with a friend of her brother's.



"It's Al's sister--came on to-night's train," the cowboy was

saying.  "I happened to be at the station, and I've fetched her

up to you."



Madeline came forward out of the shadow.



"Not--not really Majesty Hammond!" exclaimed Florence Kingsley. 

She nearly dropped the lamp, and she looked and looked, astounded

beyond belief.



"Yes, I am really she," replied Madeline.  "My train was late,

and for some reason Alfred did not meet me.  Mr.--Mr. Stewart saw

fit to bring me to you instead of taking me to a hotel."



"Oh, I'm so glad to meet you," replied Florence, warmly.  "Do

come in.  I'm so surprised, I forget my manners. Why, Al never

mentioned your coming."



"He surely could not have received my messages," said Madeline,

as she entered.



The cowboy, who came in with her satchel, had to stoop to enter

the door, and, once in, he seemed to fill the room. Florence set

the lamp down upon the table.  Madeline saw a young woman with a

smiling, friendly face, and a profusion of fair hair hanging down

over her dressing-gown.



"Oh, but Al will be glad!" cried Florence.  "Why, you are white

as a sheet.  You must he tired.  What a long wait you had at the

station!  I heard the train come in hours ago as I was going to

bed.  That station is lonely at night.  If I had known you were

coming!  Indeed, you are very pale.  Are you ill?"



"No.  Only I am very tired.  Traveling so far by rail is harder

than I imagined.  I did have rather a long wait after arriving at

the station, but I can't say that it was lonely."



Florence Kingsley searched Madeline's face with keen eyes, and

then took a long, significant look at the silent Stewart.  With

that she deliberately and quietly closed a door leading into

another room.



"Miss Hammond, what has happened?"  She had lowered her voice.



"I do not wish to recall all that has happened," replied

Madeline.  "I shall tell Alfred, however, that I would rather

have met a hostile Apache than a cowboy."



"Please don't tell Al that!" cried Florence.  Then she grasped

Stewart and pulled him close to the light.  "Gene, you're drunk!"



"I was pretty drunk," he replied, hanging his head.



"Oh, what have you done?"



"Now, see here, Flo, I only--"



"I don't want to know.  I'd tell it.  Gene, aren't you ever going

to learn decency?  Aren't you ever going to stop drinking? 

You'll lose all your friends.  Stillwell has stuck to you.  Al's

been your best friend.  Molly and I have pleaded with you, and

now you've gone and done--God knows what!"



"What do women want to wear veils for?" he growled. "I'd have

known her but for that veil."



"And you wouldn't have insulted her.  But you would the next girl

who came along.  Gene, you are hopeless.  Now, you get out of

here and don't ever come back."



"Flo!" he entreated.



"I mean it."



"I reckon then I'll come back to-morrow and take my medicine," he

replied.



"Don't you dare!" she cried.



Stewart went out and closed the door.



"Miss Hammond, you--you don't know how this hurts me," said

Florence.  "What you must think of us!  It's so unlucky that you

should have had this happen right at first. Now, maybe you won't

have the heart to stay.  Oh, I've known more than one Eastern

girl to go home without ever learning what we really are cut

here.  Miss Hammond, Gene Stewart is a fiend when he's drunk. 

All the same I know, whatever be did, he meant no shame to you. 

Come now, don't think about it again to-night."  She took up the

lamp and led Madeline into a little room.  "This is out West,"

she went on, smiling, as she indicated the few furnishings; "but

you can rest.  You're perfectly safe.  Won't you let me help you

undress--can't I do anything for you?"



"You are very kind, thank you, but I can manage," replied

Madeline.



"Well, then, good night.  The sooner I go the sooner you'll rest. 

Just forget what happened and think how fine a surprise you're to

give your brother to-morrow."



With that she slipped out and softly shut the door.



As Madeline laid her watch on the bureau she noticed that the

time was past two o'clock.  It seemed long since she had gotten

off the train.  When she had turned out the lamp and crept

wearily into bed she knew what it was to be utterly spent.  She

was too tired to move a finger.  But her brain whirled.



She had at first no control over it, and a thousand thronging

sensations came and went and recurred with little logical

relation.  There were the roar of the train; the feeling of being

lost; the sound of pounding hoofs; a picture of her brother's

face as she had last seen it five years before; a long, dim line

of lights; the jingle of silver spurs; night, wind, darkness,

stars.  Then the gloomy station, the shadowy blanketed Mexican,

the empty room, the dim lights across the square, the tramp of

the dancers and vacant laughs and discordant music, the door

flung wide and the entrance of the cowboy.  She did not recall

how he had looked or what he had done.  And the next instant she

saw him cool, smiling, devilish--saw him in violence; the next

his bigness, his apparel, his physical being were vague as

outlines in a dream. The white face of the padre flashed along in

the train of thought, and it brought the same dull, half-blind,

indefinable state of mind subsequent to that last nerve-breaking

pistol-shot.  That passed, and then clear and vivid rose memories

of the rest that had happened--strange voices betraying fury of

men, a deadened report, a moan of mortal pain, a woman's poignant

cry.  And Madeline saw the girl's great tragic eyes and the wild

flight of the big horse into the blackness, and the dark,

stalking figure of the silent cowboy, and the white stars that

seemed to look down remorselessly.



This tide of memory rolled over Madeline again and again, and

gradually lost its power and faded.  All distress left her, and

she felt herself drifting.  How black the room was--as black with

her eyes open as it was when they were shut!  And the silence--it

was like a cloak.  There was absolutely no sound.  She was in

another world from that which she knew.  She thought of this

fair-haired Florence and of Alfred; and, wondering about them,

she dropped to sleep.



When she awakened the room was bright with sunlight. A cool wind

blowing across the bed caused her to put her hands under the

blanket.  She was lazily and dreamily contemplating the mud walls

of this little room when she remembered where she was and how she

had come there.



How great a shock she had been subjected to was manifest in a

sensation of disgust that overwhelmed her.  She even shut her

eyes to try and blot out the recollection.  She felt that she had

been contaminated.



Presently Madeline Hammond again awoke to the fact she had

learned the preceding night--that there were emotions to which

she had heretofore been a stranger.  She did not try to analyze

them, but she exercised her self-control to such good purpose

that by the time she had dressed she was outwardly her usual

self.  She scarcely remembered when she had found it necessary to

control her emotions.  There had been no trouble, no excitement,

no unpleasantness in her life.  It had been ordered for her--

tranquil, luxurious, brilliant, varied, yet always the same.



She was not surprised to find the hour late, and was going to

make inquiry about her brother when a voice arrested her.  She

recognized Miss Kingsley's voice addressing some one outside, and

it had a sharpness she had not noted before.



"So you came back, did you?  Well, you don't look very proud of

yourself this mawnin'.  Gene Stewart, you look like a coyote."



"Say, Flo if I am a coyote I'm not going to sneak," he said.



"What 'd you come for?" she demanded.



"I said I was coming round to take my medicine."



"Meaning you'll not run from Al Hammond?  Gene, your skull is as

thick as an old cow's.  Al will never know anything about what

you did to his sister unless you tell him.  And if you do that

he'll shoot you.  She won't give you away.  She's a thoroughbred. 

Why, she was so white last night I thought she'd drop at my feet,

but she never blinked an eyelash.  I'm a woman, Gene Stewart and

if I couldn't feel like Miss Hammond I know how awful an ordeal

she must have had.  Why, she's one of the most beautiful, the

most sought after, the most exclusive women in New York City. 

There's a crowd of millionaires and lords and dukes after her. 

How terrible it 'd he for a woman like her to be kissed by a

drunken cowpuncher!  I say it--"



"Flo, I never insulted her that way," broke out Stewart.



"It was worse, then?" she queried, sharply.



"I made a bet that I'd marry the first girl who came to town.  I

was on the watch and pretty drunk.  When she came--well, I got

Padre Marcos and tried to bully her into marrying me."



"Oh, Lord!"  Florence gasped.  "It's worse than I feared. . .

.Gene, Al will kill you."



"That'll be a good thing," replied the cowboy, dejectedly.



"Gene Stewart, it certainly would, unless you turn over a new

leaf," retorted Florence.  "But don't be a fool."  And here she

became earnest and appealing.  "Go away, Gene.  Go join the

rebels across the border--you're always threatening that. 

Anyhow, don't stay here and run any chance of stirring Al up. 

He'd kill you just the same as you would kill another man for

insulting your sister.  Don't make trouble for Al. That'd only

make sorrow for her, Gene."



The subtle import was not host upon Madeline.  She was distressed

because she could not avoid hearing what was not meant for her

ears.  She made an effort not to listen, and it was futile.



"Flo, you can't see this a man's way," he replied, quietly. 

"I'll stay and take my medicine."



"Gene, I could sure swear at you or any other pig-head of a

cowboy.  Listen.  My brother-in-law, Jack, heard something of

what I said to you last night.  He doesn't like you.  I'm afraid

he'll tell Al.  For Heaven's sake, man, go down-town and shut him

up and yourself, too."



Then Madeline heard her come into the house and presently rap on

the door and call softly:



"Miss Hammond.  Are you awake?"



"Awake and dressed, Miss Kingsley.  Come in."



"Oh!  You've rested.  You look so--so different.  I'm sure glad. 

Come out now.  We'll have breakfast, and then you may expect to

meet your brother any moment."



"Wait, please.  I heard you speaking to Mr. Stewart. It was

unavoidable.  But I am glad.  I must see him.  Will you please

ask him to come into the parlor a moment?"



"Yes," replied Florence, quickly; and as she turned at the door

she flashed at Madeline a woman's meaning glance. "Make him keep

his mouth shut!"



Presently there were slow, reluctant steps outside the front

door, then a pause, and the door opened.  Stewart stood

bareheaded in the sunlight.  Madeline remembered with a kind of

shudder the tall form, the embroidered buckskin vest, the red

scarf, the bright leather wristbands, the wide silver-buckled

belt and chaps.  Her glance seemed to run over him swift as

lightning.  But as she saw his face now she did not recognize it. 

The man's presence roused in her a revolt.  Yet something in her,

the incomprehensible side of her nature, thrilled in the look of

this splendid dark-faced barbarian.



"Mr. Stewart, will you please come in?" she asked, after that

long pause.



"I reckon not," he said.  The hopelessness of his tone meant that

he knew he was not fit to enter a room with her, and did not care

or cared too much.



Madeline went to the door.  The man's face was hard, yet it was

sad, too.  And it touched her.



"I shall not tell my brother of your--your rudeness to me," she

began.  It was impossible for her to keep the chill out of her

voice, to speak with other than the pride and aloofness of her

class.  Nevertheless, despite her loathing, when she had spoken

so far it seemed that kindness and pity followed involuntarily. 

"I choose to overlook what you did because you were not wholly

accountable, and because there must be no trouble between Alfred

and you.  May I rely on you to keep silence and to seal the lips

of that priest?  And you know there was a man killed or injured

there last night.  I want to forget that dreadful thing.  I don't

want it known that I heard--"



"The Greaser didn't die," interrupted Stewart.



"Ah!  then that's not so bad, after all.  I am glad for the sake

of your friend--the little Mexican girl."



A slow scarlet wave overspread his face, and his shame was

painful to see.  That fixed in Madeline's mind a conviction that

if he was a heathen he was not wholly bad.  And it made so much

difference that she smiled down at him.



"You will spare me further distress, will you not, please?"  His

hoarse reply was incoherent, but she needed only to see his

working face to know his remorse and gratitude.



Madeline went back to her room; and presently Florence came for

her, and directly they were sitting at breakfast. Madeline

Hammond's impression of her brother's friend had to be

reconstructed in the morning light.  She felt a wholesome, frank,

sweet nature.  She liked the slow Southern drawl.  And she was

puzzled to know whether Florence Kingsley was pretty or striking

or unusual.  She had a youthful glow and flush, the clear tan of

outdoors, a face that lacked the soft curves and lines of Eastern

women, and her eyes were light gray, like crystal, steady, almost

piercing, and her hair was a beautiful bright, waving mass.



Florence's sister was the elder of the two, a stout woman with a

strong face and quiet eyes.  It was a simple fare and service

they gave to their guest; but they made no apologies for that. 

Indeed, Madeline felt their simplicity to be restful.  She was

sated with respect, sick of admiration, tired of adulation; and

it was good to see that these Western women treated her as very

likely they would have treated any other visitor.  They were

sweet, kind; and what Madeline had at first thought was a lack of

expression or vitality she soon discovered to be the natural

reserve of women who did not live superficial lives.  Florence

was breezy and frank, her sister quaint and not given much to

speech.  Madeline thought she would like to have these women near

her if she were ill or in trouble.  And she reproached herself

for a fastidiousness, a hypercritical sense of refinement that

could not help distinguishing what these women lacked.



"Can you ride?" Florence was asking.  "That's what a Westerner

always asks any one from the East.  Can you ride like a man--

astride, I mean?  Oh, that's fine.  You look strong enough to

hold a horse.  We have some fine horses out here.  I reckon when

Al comes we'll go out to Bill Stillwell's ranch. We'll have to

go, whether we want to or not, for when Bill learns you are here

he'll just pack us all off.  You'll love old Bill.  His ranch is

run down, but the range and the rides up in the mountains--they

are beautiful.  We'll hunt and climb, and most of all we'll ride. 

I love a horse--I love the wind in my face, and a wide stretch

with the mountains beckoning.  You must have the best horse on

the ranges.  And that means a scrap between Al and Bill and all

the cowboys.  We don't all agree about horses, except in case of

Gene Stewart's iron-gray."



"Does Mr. Stewart own the best horse in the country?" asked

Madeline.  Again she had an inexplicable thrill as she remembered

the wild flight of Stewart's big dark steed and rider.



"Yes, and that's all he does own," replied Florence. "Gene can't

keep even a quirt.  But he sure loves that horse and calls him--"



At this juncture a sharp knock on the parlor door interrupted the

conversation.  Florence's sister went to open it.  She returned

presently and said:



"It's Gene.  He's been dawdlin' out there on the front porch, and

he knocked to let us know Miss Hammond's brother is comin'."



Florence hurried into the parlor, followed by Madeline. The door

stood open, and disclosed Stewart sitting on the porch steps. 

From down the road came a clatter of hoofs.  Madeline looked cut

over Florence's shoulder and saw a cloud of dust approaching, and

in it she distinguished outlines of horses and riders.  A warmth

spread over her, a little tingle of gladness, and the feeling

recalled her girlish love for her brother. What would he be like

after long years?



"Gene, has Jack kept his mouth shut?" queried Florence; and again

Madeline was aware of a sharp ring in the girl's voice.



"No," replied Stewart.



"Gene!  You won't let it come to a fight?  Al can be managed. 

But Jack hates you and he'll have his friends with him."



"There won't be any fight."



"Use your brains now," added Florence; and then she turned to

push Madeline gently back into the parlor.



Madeline's glow of warmth changed to a blank dismay. Was she to

see her brother act with the violence she now associated with

cowboys?  The clatter of hoofs stopped before the door.  Looking

out, Madeline saw a bunch of dusty, wiry horses pawing the gravel

and tossing lean heads.  Her swift glance ran over the lithe

horsemen, trying to pick out the one who was her brother.  But

she could not.  Her glance, however, caught the same rough dress

and hard aspect that characterized the cowboy Stewart.  Then one

rider threw his bridle, leaped from the saddle, and came bounding

up the porch steps. Florence met him at the door.



"Hello, Flo.  Where is she?" he called, eagerly. With that he

looked over her shoulder to espy Madeline.  He actually jumped at

her.  She hardly knew the tall form and the bronzed face, but the

warm flash of blue eyes was familiar.  As for him, he had no

doubt of his sister, it appeared, for with broken welcome he

threw his arms around her, then held her off and looked

searchingly at her.



"Well, sister," he began, when Florence turned hurriedly from the

door and interrupted him.



"Al, I think you'd better stop the wrangling out there."  He

stared at her, appeared suddenly to hear the loud voices from the

street, and then, releasing Madeline, he said:



"By George!  I forgot, Flo.  There is a little business to see

to.  Keep my sister in here, please, and don't be fussed up now."



He went out on the porch and called to his men:



"Shut off your wind, Jack!  And you, too, Blaze!  I didn't want

you fellows to come here.  But as you would come, you've got to

shut up.  This is my business."



Whereupon he turned to Stewart, who was sitting on the fence.



"Hello, Stewart!" he said.



It was a greeting; but there was that in the voice which alarmed

Madeline.



Stewart leisurely got up and leisurely advanced to the porch.



"Hello, Hammond!" he drawled.



"Drunk again last night?"



"Well, if you want to know, and if it's any of your mix, yes, I

was-pretty drunk," replied Stewart.



It was a kind of cool speech that showed the cowboy in control of

himself and master of the situation--not an easy speech to follow

up with undue inquisitiveness.  There was a short silence.



"Damn it, Stewart," said the speaker, presently, "here's the

situation: It's all over town that you met my sister last night

at the station and--and insulted her. Jack's got it in for you,

so have these other boys.  But it's my affair.  Understand, I

didn't fetch them here.  They can see you square yourself, or

else--Gene, you've been on the wrong trail for some time,

drinking and all that.  You're going to the bad.  But Bill

thinks, and I think, you're still a man.  We never knew you to

lie.  Now what have you to say for yourself?"



"Nobody is insinuating that I am a liar?" drawled Stewart.



"No."



"Well, I'm glad to hear that.  You see, Al, I was pretty drunk

last night, but not drunk enough to forget the least thing I did. 

I told Pat Hawe so this morning when he was curious.  And that's

polite for me to be to Pat.  Well, I found Miss Hammond waiting

alone at the station.  She wore a veil, but I knew she was a

lady, of course.  I imagine, now that I think of it, that Miss

Hammond found my gallantry rather startling, and--"



At this point Madeline, answering to unconsidered impulse, eluded

Florence and walked out upon the porch.



Sombreros flashed down and the lean horses jumped.



"Gentlemen," said Madeline, rather breathlessly; and it did not

add to her calmness to feel a hot flush in her cheeks, "I am very

new to Western ways, but I think you are laboring under a

mistake, which, in justice to Mr. Stewart, I want to correct. 

Indeed, he was rather--rather abrupt and strange when he came up

to me last night; but as I understand him now, I can attribute

that to his gallantry.  He was somewhat wild and sudden and--

sentimental in his demand to protect me--and it was not clear

whether he meant his protection for last night or forever; but I

am happy to say be offered me no word that was not honorable. And

be saw me safely here to Miss Kingsley's home."

