





X Don Carlos's Vaqueros



Early the following morning Stewart, with a company of cowboys,

departed for Don Carlos's rancho.  As the day wore on without any

report from him, Stillwell appeared to grow more at ease; and at

nightfall he told Madeline that he guessed there was now no

reason for concern.



"Wal, though it's sure amazin' strange," he continued, "I've been

worryin' some about how we was goin' to fire Don Carlos.  But

Gene has a way of doin' things."



Next day Stillwell and Alfred decided to ride over Don Carlos's

place, taking Madeline and Florence with them, and upon the

return trip to stop at Alfred's ranch.  They started in the cool,

gray dawn, and after three hours' riding, as the sun began to get

bright, they entered a mesquite grove, surrounding corrals and

barns, and a number of low, squat buildings and a huge, rambling

structure, all built of adobe and mostly crumbling to ruin.  Only

one green spot relieved the bald red of grounds and walls; and

this evidently was made by the spring which had given both value

and fame to Don Carlos's range.  The approach to the house was

through a wide courtyard, bare, stony, hard packed, with

hitching-rails and watering-troughs in front of a long porch. 

Several dusty, tired horses stood with drooping heads and bridles

down, their wet flanks attesting to travel just ended.



"Wal, dog-gone it, Al, if there ain't Pat Hawe's hoss I'll eat

it," exclaimed Stillwell.



"What's Pat want here, anyhow?" growled Alfred.



No one was in sight; but Madeline heard loud voices coming from

the house.  Stillwell dismounted at the porch and stalked in at

the door.  Alfred leaped off his horse, helped Florence and

Madeline down, and, bidding them rest and wait on the porch, he

followed Stillwell.



"I hate these Greaser places," said Florence, with a grimace. 

"They're so mysterious and creepy.  Just watch now! They'll be

dark-skinned, beady-eyed, soft-footed Greasers slip right up out

of the ground!  There'll be an ugly face in every door and window

and crack."



"It's like a huge barn with its characteristic odor permeated by

tobacco smoke," replied Madeline, sitting down beside Florence. 

"I don't think very much of this end of my purchase.  Florence,

isn't that Don Carlos's black horse over there in the corral?"



"It sure is.  Then the Don's heah yet.  I wish we hadn't been in

such a hurry to come over.  There! that doesn't sound

encouraging."



From the corridor came the rattling of spurs, tramping of boots,

and loud voices.  Madeline detected Alfred's quick notes when he

was annoyed: "We'll rustle back home, then," he said.  The answer

came, "No!"  Madeline recognized Stewart's voice, and she quickly

straightened up.  "I won't have them in here," went on Alfred.



"Outdoors or in, they've got to be with us!" replied Stewart,

sharply.  "Listen, Al," came the boom of Stillwell's big voice,

"now that we've butted in over hyar with the girls, you let

Stewart run things."



Then a crowd of men tramped pell-mell out upon the porch. 

Stewart, dark-browed and somber, was in the lad.  Nels hung close

to him, and Madeline's quick glance saw that Nels had undergone

some indescribable change.  The grinning, brilliant-eyed Don

Carlos came jostling out beside a gaunt, sharp-featured man

wearing a silver shield.  This, no doubt, was Pat Hawe.  In the

background behind Stillwell and Alfred stood Nick Steele, head

and shoulders over a number of vaqueros and cowboys.



"Miss Hammond, I'm sorry you came," said Stewart, bluntly. 

"We're in a muddle here.  I've insisted that you and Flo be kept

close to us.  I'll explain later.  If you can't stop your ears I

beg you to overlook rough talk."



With that he turned to the men behind him: "Nick, take Booly, go

back to Monty and the boys.  Fetch out that stuff. All of it. 

Rustle, now!"



Stillwell and Alfred disengaged themselves from the crowd to take

up positions in front of Madeline and Florence. Pat Hawe leaned

against a post and insolently ogled Madeline and then Florence. 

Don Carlos pressed forward.  His whole figure filled Madeline's

reluctant but fascinated eyes.  He wore tight velveteen breeches,

with a heavy fold down the outside seam, which was ornamented

with silver buttons.  Round his waist was a sash, and a belt with

fringed holster, from which protruded a pearl-handled gun.  A

vest or waistcoat, richly embroidered, partly concealed a blouse

of silk and wholly revealed a silken scarf round his neck.  His

swarthy face showed dark lines, like cords, under the surface. 

His little eyes were exceedingly prominent and glittering.  To

Madeline his face seemed to be a bold, handsome mask through

which his eyes piercingly betrayed the evil nature of the man.



He bowed low with elaborate and sinuous grace.  His smile

revealed brilliant teeth, enhanced the brillance of his eyes.  He

slowly spread deprecatory hands.



"Senoritas, I beg a thousand pardons," he said.  How strange it

was for Madeline to hear English spoken in a soft, whiningly

sweet accent!  "The gracious hospitality of Don Carlos has passed

with his house."



Stewart stepped forward and, thrusting Don Carlos aside, he

called, "Make way, there!"



The crowd fell back to the tramp of heavy boots. Cowboys appeared

staggering out of the corridor with long boxes.  These they

placed side by side upon the floor of the porch.



"Now, Hawe, we'll proceed with our business," said Stewart.  "You

see these boxes, don't you?"



"I reckon I see a good many things round hyar," replied Hawe,

meaningly.



"Well, do you intend to open these boxes upon my say-so?"



"No!" retorted Hawe.  "It's not my place to meddle with property

as come by express an' all accounted fer regular."



"You call yourself a sheriff!" exclaimed Stewart, scornfully.



"Mebbe you'll think so before long," rejoined Hawe, sullenly.



"I'll open them.  Here, one of you boys, knock the tops off these

boxes," ordered Stewart.  "No, not you, Monty.  You use your

eyes.  Let Booly handle the ax.  Rustle, now!"



Monty Price had jumped out of the crowd into the middle of the

porch.  The manner in which he gave way to Booly and faced the

vaqueros was not significant of friendliness or trust.



"Stewart, you're dead wrong to bust open them boxes. Thet's

ag'in' the law," protested Hawe, trying to interfere.



Stewart pushed him back.  Then Don Carlos, who had been stunned

by the appearance of the boxes, suddenly became active in speech

and person.  Stewart thrust him back also.  The Mexican's

excitement increased.  He wildly gesticulated; he exclaimed

shrilly in Spanish.  When, however, the lids were wrenched open

and an inside packing torn away he grew rigid and silent. 

Madeline raised herself behind Stillwell to see that the boxes

were full of rifles and ammunition.



"There, Hawe!  What did I tell you?" demanded Stewart. "I came

over here to take charge of this ranch.  I found these boxes

hidden in an unused room.  I suspected what they were. Contraband

goods!"



"Wal, supposin' they are?  I don't see any call fer sech

all-fired fuss as you're makin'.  Stewart, I calkilate you're

some stuck on your new job an' want to make a big show before -"



"Hawe, stop slinging that kind of talk," interrupted Stewart. 

"You got too free with your mouth once before!  Now here, I'm

supposed to be consulting an officer of the law. Will you take

charge of these contraband goods?"



"Say, you're holdin' on high an' mighty," replied Hawe, in

astonishment that was plainly pretended.  "What 're you drivin'

at?"



Stewart muttered an imprecation.  He took several swift strides

across the porch; he held out his hands to Stillwell as if to

indicate the hopelessness of intelligent and reasonable

arbitration; he looked at Madeline with a glance eloquent of his

regret that he could not handle the situation to please her. 

Then as he wheeled he came face to face with Nels, who had

slipped forward out of the crowd.



Madeline gathered serious import from the steel-blue meaning

flash of eyes whereby Nels communicated something to Stewart. 

Whatever that something was, it dispelled Stewart's impatience. 

A slight movement of his hand brought Monty Price forward with a

jump.  In these sudden jumps of Monty's there was a suggestion of

restrained ferocity.  Then Nels and Monty lined up behind

Stewart.  It was a deliberate action, even to Madeline,

unmistakably formidable.  Pat Hawe's face took on an ugly look;

his eyes had a reddish gleam.  Don Carlos added a pale face and

extreme nervousness to his former expressions of agitation.  The

cowboys edged away from the vaqueros and the bronzed, bearded

horsemen who were evidently Hawe's assistants.



"I'm driving at this," spoke up Stewart, presently; and now he

was slow and caustic.  "Here's contraband of war!  Hawe, do you

get that?  Arms and ammunition for the rebels across the border! 

I charge you as an officer to confiscate these goods and to

arrest the smuggler--Don Carlos."



These words of Stewart's precipitated a riot among Don Carlos and

his followers, and they surged wildly around the sheriff.  There

was an upflinging of brown, clenching hands, a shrill, jabbering

babel of Mexican voices.  The crowd around Don Carlos grew louder

and denser with the addition of armed vaqueros and barefooted

stable-boys and dusty-booted herdsmen and blanketed Mexicans, the

last of whom suddenly slipped from doors and windows and round

comers.  It was a motley assemblage.  The laced, fringed,

ornamented vaqueros presented a sharp contrast to the

bare-legged, sandal-footed boys and the ragged herders.  Shrill

cries, evidently from Don Carlos, somewhat quieted the commotion. 

Then Don Carlos could be heard addressing Sheriff Hawe in an

exhortation of mingled English and Spanish.  He denied, he

avowed, he proclaimed, and all in rapid, passionate utterance. 

He tossed his black hair in his vehemence; he waved his fists and

stamped the floor; he rolled his glittering eyes; he twisted his

thin lips into a hundred different shapes, and like a cornered

wolf showed snarling white teeth.



It seemed to Madeline that Don Carlos denied knowledge of the

boxes of contraband goods, then knowledge of their real contents,

then knowledge of their destination, and, finally, everything

except that they were there in sight, damning witnesses to

somebody's complicity in the breaking of neutrality laws. 

Passionate as had been his denial of all this, it was as nothing

compared to his denunciation of Stewart.



"Senor Stewart, he keel my Vaquero!" shouted Don Carlos, as,

sweating and spent, he concluded his arraignment of the cowboy. 

"Him you must arrest!  Senor Stewart a bad man! He keel my

vaquero!"



"Do you hear thet?" yelled Hawe.  "The Don's got you figgered fer

thet little job at El Cajon last fall."



The clamor burst into a roar.  Hawe began shaking his finger in

Stewart's face and hoarsely shouting.  Then a lithe young

vaquero, swift as an Indian, glided under Hawe's uplifted arm. 

Whatever the action he intended, he was too late for its

execution.  Stewart lunged out, struck the vaquero, and knocked

him off the porch.  As he fell a dagger glittered in the sunlight

and rolled clinking over the stones.  The man went down hard and

did not move.  With the same abrupt violence, and a manner of

contempt, Stewart threw Hawe off the porch, then Don Carlos, who,

being less supple, fell heavily.  Then the mob backed before

Stewart's rush until all were down in the courtyard.



The shuffling of feet ceased, the clanking of spurs, and the

shouting.  Nels and Monty, now reinforced by Nick Steele, were as

shadows of Stewart, so closely did they follow him.  Stewart

waved them back and stepped down into the yard. He was absolutely

fearless; but what struck Madeline so keenly was his magnificent

disdain.  Manifestly, he knew the nature of the men with whom he

was dealing.  From the look of him it was natural for Madeline to

expect them to give way before him, which they did, even Hawe and

his attendants sullenly retreating.



Don Carlos got up to confront Stewart.  The prostrate vaquero

stirred and moaned, but did not rise.



"You needn't jibber Spanish to me," said Stewart.  "You can talk

American, and you can understand American.  If you start a

rough-house here you and your Greasers will be cleaned up. 

You've got to leave this ranch.  You can have the stock, the

packs and traps in the second corral.  There's grub, too. Saddle

up and hit the trail.  Don Carlos, I'm dealing more than square

with you.  You're lying about these boxes of guns and cartridges. 

You're breaking the laws of my country, and you're doing it on

property in my charge.  If I let smuggling go on here I'd be

implicated myself.  Now you get off the range.  If you don't I'll

have the United States cavalry here in six hours, and you can

gamble they'll get what my cowboys leave of you."



Don Carlos was either a capital actor and gratefully relieved at

Stewart's leniency or else he was thoroughly cowed by references

to the troops.  "Si, Senor!  Gracias, Senor!" he exclaimed; and

then, turning away, he called to his men.  They hurried after

him, while the fallen vaquero got to his feet with Stewart's help

and staggered across the courtyard.  In a moment they were gone,

leaving Hawe and his several comrades behind.



Hawe was spitefully ejecting a wad of tobacco from his mouth and

swearing in an undertone about "white-livered Greasers."  He

cocked his red eye speculatively at Stewart.



"Wal, I reckon as you're so hell-bent on doin' it up brown thet

you'll try to fire me off'n the range, too?"



"If I ever do, Pat, you'll need to be carried off," replied

Stewart.  "Just now I'm politely inviting you and your deputy

sheriffs to leave."



"We'll go; but we're comin' back one of these days, an' when we

do we'll put you in irons."



"Hawe, if you've got it in that bad for me, come over here in the

corral and let's fight it out."



"I'm an officer, an' I don't fight outlaws an' sich except when I

hev to make arrests."



"Officer!  You're a disgrace to the county.  If you ever did get

irons on me you'd take me some place out of sight, shoot me, and

then swear you killed me in self-defense.  It wouldn't be the

first time you pulled that trick, Pat Hawe."



"Ho, ho!" laughed Hawe, derisively.  Then he started toward the

horses.



Stewart's long arm shot out, his hand clapped on Hawe's shoulder,

spinning him round like a top.



"You're leaving, Pat, but before you leave you'll come out with

your play or you'll crawl," said Stewart.  "You've got it in for

me, man to man.  Speak up now and prove you're not the cowardly

skunk I've always thought you.  I've called your hand."



Pat Hawe's face turned a blackish-purple hue.



"You can jest bet thet I've got it in fer you," he shouted,

hoarsely.  "You're only a low-down cow-puncher.  You never hed a

dollar or a decent job till you was mixed up with thet Hammond

woman -"



Stewart's hand flashed out and hit Hawe's face in a ringing slap. 

The sheriff's head jerked back, his sombrero fell to the ground. 

As he bent over to reach it his hand shook, his arm shook, his

whole body shook.



Monty Price jumped straight forward and crouched down with a

strange, low cry.



Stewart seemed all at once rigid, bending a little.



"Say Miss Hammond, if there's occasion to use her name," said

Stewart, in a voice that seemed coolly pleasant, yet had a deadly

undernote.



Hawe did a moment's battle with strangling fury, which he

conquered in some measure.



"I said you was a low-down, drunken cow-puncher, a tough as damn

near a desperado as we ever hed on the border," went on Hawe,

deliberately.  His speech appeared to be addressed to Stewart,

although his flame-pointed eyes were riveted upon Monty Price. 

"I know you plugged that vaquero last fall, an' when I git my

proof I'm comin' after you."



"That's all right, Hawe.  You can call me what you like, and you

can come after me when you like," replied Stewart.  "But you're

going to get in bad with me.  You're in bad now with Monty and

Nels.  Pretty soon you'll queer yourself with all the cowboys and

the ranchers, too.  If that don't put sense into you-- Here,

listen to this.  You knew what these boxes contained.  You know

Don Carlos has been smuggling arms and ammunition across the

border.  You know he is hand and glove with the rebels.  You've

been wearing blinders, and it has been to your interest.  Take a

hunch from me.  That's all. Light out now, and the less we see of

your handsome mug the better we'll like you."



Muttering, cursing, pallid of face, Hawe climbed astride his

horse.  His comrades followed suit.  Certain it appeared that the

sheriff was contending with more than fear and wrath.  He must

have had an irresistible impulse to fling more invective and

threat upon Stewart, but he was speechless. Savagely he spurred

his horse, and as it snorted and leaped he turned in his saddle,

shaking his fist.  His comrades led the way, with their horses

clattering into a canter.  They disappeared through the gate.







When, later in the day, Madeline and Florence, accompanied by

Alfred and Stillwell, left Don Carlos's ranch it was not any too

soon for Madeline.  The inside of the Mexican's home was more

unprepossessing and uncomfortable than the outside.  The halls

were dark, the rooms huge, empty, and musty; and there was an air

of silence and secrecy and mystery about them most fitting to the

character Florence had bestowed upon the place.



On the other hand, Alfred's ranch-house, where the party halted

to spend the night, was picturesquely located, small and cozy,

camplike in its arrangement, and altogether agreeable to

Madeline.



The day's long rides and the exciting events had wearied her. 

She rested while Florence and the two men got supper.  During the

meal Stillwell expressed satisfaction over the good riddance of

the vaqueros, and with his usual optimism trusted he had seen the

last of them.  Alfred, too, took a decidedly favorable view of

the day's proceedings.  However, it was not lost upon Madeline

that Florence appeared unusually quiet and thoughtful.  Madeline

wondered a little at the cause. She remembered that Stewart had

wanted to come with them, or detail a few cowboys to accompany

them, but Alfred had laughed at the idea and would have none of

it.



After supper Alfred monopolized the conversation by describing

what he wanted to do to improve his home before he and Florence

were married.



Then at an early hour they all retired.



Madeline's deep slumbers were disturbed by a pounding upon the

wall, and then by Florence's crying out in answer to a call:



"Get up!  Throw some clothes on and come out!"



It was Alfred's voice.



"What's the matter?" asked Florence, as she slipped out of bed.



"Alfred, is there anything wrong?" added Madeline, sitting up.



The room was dark as pitch, but a faint glow seemed to mark the

position of the window.



"Oh, nothing much," replied Alfred.  "Only Don Carlos's rancho

going up in smoke."



"Fire!" cried Florence, sharply.



"You'll think so when you see it.  Hurry out.  Majesty, old girl,

now you won't have to tear down that heap of adobe, as you

threatened.  I don't believe a wall will stand after that fire."



"Well, I'm glad of it," said Madeline.  "A good healthy fire will

purify the atmosphere over there and save me expense. Ugh! that

haunted rancho got on my nerves!  Florence, I do believe you've

appropriated part of my riding-habit.  Doesn't Alfred have lights

in this house?"



Florence laughingly helped Madeline to dress.  Then they

hurriedly stumbled over chairs, and, passing through the

dining-room, went out upon the porch.



Away to the westward, low down along the horizon, she saw leaping

red flames and wind-swept columns of smoke.



Stillwell appeared greatly perturbed.



"Al, I'm lookin' fer that ammunition to blow up," he said. 

"There was enough of it to blow the roof off the rancho."



"Bill, surely the cowboys would get that stuff out the first

thing," replied Alfred, anxiously.



"I reckon so.  But all the same, I'm worryin'.  Mebbe there

wasn't time.  Supposin' thet powder went off as the boys was

goin' fer it or carryin' it out!  We'll know soon.  If the

explosion doesn't come quick now we can figger the boys got the

boxes out."



For the next few moments there was a silence of sustained and

painful suspense.  Florence gripped Madeline's arm.  Madeline

felt a fullness in her throat and a rapid beating of her heart. 

Presently she was relieved with the others when Stillwell

declared the danger of an explosion needed to be feared no

longer.



"Sure you can gamble on Gene Stewart," he added.



The night happened to be partly cloudy, with broken rifts showing

the moon, and the wind blew unusually strong. The brightness of

the fire seemed subdued.  It was like a huge bonfire smothered by

some great covering, penetrated by different, widely separated

points of flame.  These corners of flame flew up, curling in the

wind, and then died down.  Thus the scene was constantly changing

from dull light to dark. There came a moment when a blacker shade

overspread the wide area of flickering gleams and then

obliterated them.  Night enfolded the scene.  The moon peeped a

curved yellow rim from under broken clouds.  To all appearances

the fire had burned itself out.  But suddenly a pinpoint of light

showed where all had been dense black.  It grew and became long

and sharp.  It moved.  It had life.  It leaped up.  Its color

warmed from white to red.  Then from all about it burst flame on

flame, to leap into a great changing pillar of fire that climbed

high and higher.  Huge funnels of smoke, yellow, black, white,

all tinged with the color of fire, slanted skyward, drifting away

on the wind.



"Wal, I reckon we won't hev the good of them two thousand tons of

alfalfa we was figgerin' on," remarked Stillwell.



"Ah!  Then that last outbreak of fire was burning hay," said

Madeline.  "I do not regret the rancho.  But it's too bad to lose

such a quantity of good feed for the stock."



"It's lost, an' no mistake.  The fire's dyin' as quick as she

flared up.  Wal, I hope none of the boys got risky to save a

saddle or blanket.  Monty--he's hell on runnin' the gantlet of

fire.  He's like a boss that's jest been dragged out of a burnin'

stable an' runs back sure locoed.  There!  She's smolderin' down

now.  Reckon we-all might jest as well turn in again.  It's only

three o'clock."



"I wonder how the fire originated?" remarked Alfred. "Some

careless cowboy's cigarette, I'll bet."



Stillwell rolled out his laugh.



"Al, you sure are a free-hearted, trustin' feller.  I'm some

doubtin' the cigarette idee; but you can gamble if it was a

cigarette it belonged to a cunnin' vaquero, an' wasn't dropped

accident-like."



"Now, Bill, you don't mean Don Carlos burned the rancho?"

ejaculatcd Alfred, in mingled amaze and anger.



Again the old cattleman laughed.



"Powerful strange to say, my friend, ole Bill means jest thet."



"Of course Don Carlos set that fire," put in Florence, with

spirit.  "Al, if you live out heah a hundred years you'll never

learn that Greasers are treacherous.  I know Gene Stewart

suspected something underhand.  That's why he wanted us to hurry

away.  That's why he put me on the black horse of Don Carlos's. 

He wants that horse for himself, and feared the Don would steal

or shoot him.  And you, Bill Stillwell, you're as bad as Al.  You

never distrust anybody till it's too late. You've been singing

ever since Stewart ordered the vaqueros off the range.  But you

sure haven't been thinking."



"Wal, now, Flo, you needn't pitch into me jest because I hev a

natural Christian spirit," replied Stillwell, much aggrieved.  "I

reckon I've hed enough trouble in my life so's not to go lookin'

fer more.  Wal, I'm sorry about the hay burnin'.  But mebbe the

boys saved the stock.  An' as fer that ole adobe house of dark

holes an' under-ground passages, so long's Miss Majesty doesn't

mind, I'm darn glad it burned. Come, let's all turn in again. 

Somebody'll ride over early an' tell us what's what."



Madeline awakened early, but not so early as the others, who were

up and had breakfast ready when she went into the dining-room. 

Stillwell was not in an amiable frame of mind.  The furrows of

worry lined his broad brow and he continually glanced at his

watch, and growled because the cowboys were so late in riding

over with the news.  He gulped his breakfast, and while Madeline

and the others ate theirs he tramped up and down the porch. 

Madeline noted that Alfred grew nervous and restless.  Presently

he left the table to join Stillwell outside.



"They'll slope off to Don Carlos's rancho and leave us to ride

home alone," observed Florence.



"Do you mind?" questioned Madeline.



"No, I don't exactly mind; we've got the fastest horses in this

country.  I'd like to run that big black devil off his legs.  No,

I don't mind; but I've no hankering for a situation Gene Stewart

thinks--"



Florence began disconnectedly, and she ended evasively. Madeline

did not press the point, although she had some sense of

misgiving.  Stillwell tramped in, shaking the floor with his huge

boots; Alfred followed him, carrying a field-glass.



"Not a hoss in sight," complained Stillwell. "Some-thin' wrong

over Don Carlos's way.  Miss Majesty, it'll be jest as well fer

you an' Flo to hit the home trail.  We can telephone over an' see

that the boys know you're comin'."



Alfred, standing in the door, swept the gray valley with his

field-glass.



"Bill, I see running stock-horses or cattle; I can't make out

which.  I guess we'd better rustle over there."



Both men hurried out, and while the horses were being brought up

and saddled Madeline and Florence put away the breakfast-dishes,

then speedily donned spurs, sombreros, and gauntlets.



"Here are the horses ready," called Alfred.  "Flo, that black

Mexican horse is a prince."



The girls went out in time to hear Stillwell's good-by as he

mounted and spurred away.  Alfred went through the motions of

assisting Madeline and Florence to mount, which assistance they

always flouted, and then he, too, swung up astride.



"I guess it's all right," he said, rather dubiously. "You really

must not go over toward Don Carlos's.  It's only a few miles

home."



"Sure it's all right.  We can ride, can't we?" retorted Florence. 

"Better have a care for yourself, going off over there to mix in

goodness knows what."



Alfred said good-by, spurred his horse, and rode away.



"If Bill didn't forget to telephone!" exclaimed Florence.  "I

declare he and Al were sure rattled."



Florence dismounted and went into the house.  She left the door

open.  Madeline had some difficulty in holding Majesty.  It

struck Madeline that Florence stayed rather long indoors. 

Presently she came out with sober face and rather tight lips.



"I couldn't get anybody on the 'phone.  No answer.  I tried a

dozen times."



"Why, Florence!"  Madeline was more concerned by the girl's looks

than by the information she imparted.



"The wire's been cut," said Florence.  Her gray glance swept

swiftly after Alfred, who was now far out of earshot.  "I don't

like this a little bit.  Heah's where I've got to 'figger,' as

Bill says."



She pondered a moment, then hurried into the house, to return

presently with the field-glass that Alfred had used. With this

she took a survey of the valley, particularly in the direction of

Madeline's ranch-house.  This was hidden by low, rolling ridges

which were quite close by.



"Anyway, nobody in that direction can see us leave heah," she

mused.  "There's mesquite on the ridges.  We've got cover long

enough to save us till we can see what's ahead."



"Florence, what--what do you expect?" asked Madeline, nervously.



"I don't know.  There's never any telling about Greasers.  I wish

Bill and Al hadn't left us.  Still, come to think of that, they

couldn't help us much in case of a chase. We'd run right away

from them.  Besides, they'd shoot.  I guess I'm as well as

satisfied that we've got the job of getting home on our own

hands.  We don't dare follow Al toward Don Carlos's ranch.  We

know there's trouble over there.  So all that's left is to hit

the trail for home.  Come, let's ride.  You stick like a Spanish

needle to me."



A heavy growth of mesquite covered the top of the first ridge,

and the trail went through it.  Florence took the lead,

proceeding cautiously, and as soon as she could see over the

summit she used the field-glass.  Then she went on.  Madeline,

following closely, saw down the slope of the ridge to a bare,

wide, grassy hollow, and onward to more rolling land, thick with

cactus and mesquite.  Florence appeared cautious, deliberate, yet

she lost no time.  She was ominously silent. Madeline's

misgivings took definite shape in the fear of vaqueros in ambush.



Upon the ascent of the third ridge, which Madeline remembered was

the last uneven ground between the point she had reached and

home, Florence exercised even more guarded care in advancing. 

Before she reached the top of this ridge she dismounted, looped

her bridle round a dead snag, and, motioning Madeline to wait,

she slipped ahead through the mesquite out of sight.  Madeline

waited, anxiously listening and watching. Certain it was that she

could not see or hear anything alarming.  The sun began to have a

touch of heat; the morning breeze rustled the thin mesquite

foliage; the deep magenta of a cactus flower caught her eye; a

long-tailed, cruel-beaked, brown bird sailed so close to her she

could have touched it with her whip.  But she was only vaguely

aware of these things. She was watching for Florence, listening

for some sound fraught with untoward meaning.  All of a sudden

she saw Majesty's ears were held straight up.  Then Florence's

face, now strangely white, showed round the turn of the trail.



" 'S-s-s-sh!" whispered Florence, holding up a warning finger. 

She reached the black horse and petted him, evidently to still an

uneasiness he manifested.  "We're in for it," she went on.  "A

whole bunch of vaqueros hiding among the mesquite over the ridge! 

They've not seen or heard us yet.  We'd better risk riding ahead,

cut off the trail, and beat them to the ranch.  Madeline, you're

white as death!  Don't faint now!"



"I shall not faint.  But you frighten me.  Is there danger?  What

shall we do?"



"There's danger.  Madeline, I wouldn't deceive you," went on

Florence, in an earnest whisper.  "Things have turned out just as

Gene Stewart hinted.  Oh, we should--Al should have listened to

Gene!  I believe--I'm afraid Gene knew!"



"Knew what?" asked Madeline.



"Never mind now.  Listen.  We daren't take the back trail.  We'll

go on.  I've a scheme to fool that grinning Don Carlos.  Get

down, Madeline--hurry."



Madeline dismounted.



"Give me your white sweater.  Take it off--And that white hat! 

Hurry, Madeline."



"Florence, what on earth do you mean?" cried Madeline.



"Not so loud," whispered the other.  Her gray eyes snapped.  She

had divested herself of sombrero and jacket, which she held out

to Madeline.  "Heah.  Take these.  Give me yours.  Then get up on

the black.  I'll ride Majesty.  Rustle now, Madeline.  This is no

time to talk."



"But, dear, why--why do you want--?  Ah!  You're going to make

the vaqueros take you for me!"



"You guessed it.  Will you--"



"I shall not allow you to do anything of the kind," returned

Madeline.



It was then that Florence's face, changing, took on the hard,

stern sharpness so typical of a cowboy's.  Madeline had caught

glimpses of that expression in Alfred's face, and on Stewart's

when he was silent, and on Stillwell's always.  It was a look of

iron and fire--unchangeable, unquenchable will. There was even

much of violence in the swift action whereby Florence compelled

Madeline to the change of apparel.



"It 'd been my idea, anyhow, if Stewart hadn't told me to do it,"

said Florence, her words as swift as her hands. "Don Carlos is

after you--you, Miss Madeline Hammond!  He wouldn't ambush a

trail for any one else.  He's not killing cowboys these days.  He

wants you for some reason.  So Gene thought, and now I believe

him.  Well, we'll know for sure in five minutes.  You ride the

black; I'll ride Majesty.  We'll slip round through the brush,

out of sight and sound, till we can break out into the open. 

Then we'll split.  You make straight for the ranch.  I'll cut

loose for the valley where Gene said positively the cowboys were

with the cattle.  The vaqueros will take me for you.  They all

know those striking white things you wear.  They'll chase me. 

They'll never get anywhere near me.  And you'll be on a fast

horse.  He can take you home ahead of any vaqueros.  But you

won't be chased.  I'm staking all on that.  Trust me, Madeline. 

If it were only my calculation, maybe I'd--It's because I

remember Stewart.  That cowboy knows things.  Come, this heah's

the safest and smartest way to fool Don Carlos."  Madeline felt

herself more forced than persuaded into acquiescence.  She

mounted the black and took up the bridle.  In another moment she

was guiding her horse off the trail in the tracks of Majesty. 

Florence led off at right angles, threading a slow passage

through the mesquite. She favored sandy patches and open aisles

between the trees, and was careful not to break a branch.  Often

she stopped to listen.  This detour of perhaps half a mile

brought Madeline to where she could see open ground, the

ranch-house only a few miles off, and the cattle dotting the

valley.  She had not lost her courage, but it was certain that

these familiar sights somewhat lightened the pressure upon her

breast.  Excitement gripped her.  The shrill whistle of a horse

made both the black and Majesty jump.  Florence quickened the

gait down the slope. Soon Madeline saw the edge of the brush, the

gray-bleached grass and level ground.



Florence waited at the opening between the low trees. She gave

Madeline a quick, bright glance.



"All over but the ride!  That'll sure be easy.  Bolt now and keep

your nerve!"



When Florence wheeled the fiery roan and screamed in his ear

Madeline seemed suddenly to grow lax and helpless.  The big horse

leaped into thundering action.  This was memorable of Bonita of

the flying hair and the wild night ride.  Florence's hair

streamed on the wind and shone gold in the sunlight.  Yet

Madeline saw her with the same thrill with which she had seen the

wild-riding Bonita.  Then hoarse shouts unclamped Madeline's

power of movement, and she spurred the black into the open.



He wanted to run and he was swift.  Madeline loosened the reins--

laid them loose upon his neck.  His action was strange to her. 

He was hard to ride.  But he was fast, and she cared for nothing

else.  Madeline knew horses well enough to realize that the black

had found he was free and carrying a light weight.  A few times

she took up the bridle and pulled to right or left, trying to

guide him.  He kept a straight course, however, and crashed

through small patches of mesquite and jumped the cracks and

washes.  Uneven ground offered no perceptible obstacle to his

running.  To Madeline there was now a thrilling difference in the

lash of wind and the flash of the gray ground underneath.  She

was running away from something; what that was she did not know. 

But she remembered Florence, and she wanted to look back, yet

hated to do so for fear of the nameless danger Florence had

mentioned.



Madeline listened for the pounding of pursuing hoofs in her rear. 

Involuntarily she glanced back.  On the mile or more of gray

level between her and the ridge there was not a horse, a man, or

anything living.  She wheeled to look back on the other side,

down the valley slope.



The sight of Florence riding Majesty in zigzag flight before a

whole troop of vaqueros blanched Madeline's cheek and made her

grip the pommel of her saddle in terror.  That strange gait of

her roan was not his wonderful stride.  Could Majesty be running

wild?  Madeline saw one vaquero draw closer, whirling his lasso

round his head, but he did not get near enough to throw.  So it

seemed to Madeline.  Another vaquero swept across in front of the

first one.  Then, when Madeline gasped in breathless expectancy,

the roan swerved to elude the attack.  It flashed over Madeline

that Florence was putting the horse to some such awkward flight

as might have been expected of an Eastern girl frightened out of

her wits.  Madeline made sure of this when, after looking again,

she saw that Florence, in spite of the horse's breaking gait and

the irregular course, was drawing slowly and surely down the

valley.



Madeline had not lost her head to the extent of forgetting her

own mount and the nature of the ground in front. When, presently,

she turned again to watch Florence, uncertainty ceased in her

mind.  The strange features of that race between girl and

vaqueros were no longer in evidence. Majesty was in his

beautiful, wonderful stride, low down along the ground,

stretching, with his nose level and straight for the valley. 

Between him and the lean horses in pursuit lay an ever-increasing

space.  He was running away from the vaqueros. Florence was

indeed "riding the wind," as Stewart had aptly expressed his idea

of flight upon the fleet roan.



A dimness came over Madeline's eyes, and it was not all owing to

the sting of the wind.  She rubbed it away, seeing Florence as a

flying dot in a strange blur.  What a daring, intrepid girl! 

This kind of strength--and aye, splendid thought for a weaker

sister--was what the West inculcated in a woman.



The next time Madeline looked back Florence was far ahead of her

pursuers and going out of sight behind a low knoll.  Assured of

Florence's safety, Madeline put her mind to her own ride and the

possibilities awaiting at the ranch.  She remembered the failure

to get any of her servants or cowboys on the telephone.  To be

sure, a wind-storm had once broken the wire.  But she had little

real hope of such being the case in this instance.  She rode on,

pulling the black as she neared the ranch.  Her approach was from

the south and off the usual trail, so that she went up the long

slope of the knoll toward the back of the house.  Under these

circumstances she could not consider it out of the ordinary that

she did not see any one about the grounds.



It was perhaps fortunate for her, she thought, that the climb up

the slope cut the black's speed so she could manage him.  He was

not very hard to stop.  The moment she dismounted, however, he

jumped and trotted off.  At the edge of the slope, facing the

corrals, he halted to lift his head and shoot up his ears.  Then

he let out a piercing whistle and dashed down the lane.



Madeline, prepared by that warning whistle, tried to fortify

herself for a new and unexpected situation; but as she espied an

unfamiliar company of horsemen rapidly riding down a hollow

leading from the foothills she felt the return of fears gripping

at her like cold hands, and she fled precipitously into the

house.

