





XVI The Crags



Glad indeed was Madeline to be lifted off her horse beside a

roaring fire--to see steaming pots upon red-hot coals.  Except

about her shoulders, which had been protected by the slicker, she

was wringing wet.  The Mexican women came quickly to help her

change in a tent near by; but Madeline preferred for the moment

to warm her numb feet and hands and to watch the spectacle of her

arriving friends.



Dorothy plumped off her saddle into the arms of several waiting

cowboys.  She could scarcely walk.  Far removed in appearance was

she from her usual stylish self.  Her face was hidden by a limp

and lopsided hat.  From under the disheveled brim came a

plaintive moan: "O-h-h!  what a-an a-awful ride!" Mrs. Beck was

in worse condition; she had to be taken off her horse.  "I'm

paralyzed--I'm a wreck.  Bobby, get a roller-chair."  Bobby was

solicitous and willing, but there were no roller-chairs. 

Florence dismounted easily, and but for her mass of hair, wet and

tumbling, would have been taken for a handsome cowboy.  Edith

Wayne had stood the physical strain of the ride better than

Dorothy; however, as her mount was rather small, she had been

more at the mercy of cactus and brush.  Her habit hung in

tatters.  Helen had preserved a remnant of style, as well as of

pride, and perhaps a little strength.  But her face was white,

her eyes were big, and she limped.  "Majesty!" she exclaimed. 

"What did you want to do to us?  Kill us outright or make us

homesick?"  Of all of them, however, Ambrose's wife, Christine,

the little French maid, had suffered the most in that long ride. 

She was unaccustomed to horses. Ambrose had to carry her into the

big tent.  Florence persuaded Madeline to leave the fire, and

when they went in with the others Dorothy was wailing because her

wet boots would not come off, Mrs. Beck was weeping and trying to

direct a Mexican woman to unfasten her bedraggled dress, and

there was general pandemonium.



"Warm clothes--hot drinks and grub--warm blankets," rang out

Stewart's sharp order.



Then, with Florence helping the Mexican women, it was not long

until Madeline and the feminine side of the party were

comfortable, except for the weariness and aches that only rest

and sleep could alleviate.



Neither fatigue nor pains, however, nor the strangeness of being

packed sardine-like under canvas, nor the howls of coyotes, kept

Madeline's guests from stretching out with long, grateful sighs,

and one by one dropping into deep slumber. Madeline whispered a

little to Florence, and laughed with her once or twice, and then

the light flickering on the canvas faded and her eyelids closed. 

Darkness and roar of camp life, low voices of men, thump of

horses' hoofs, coyote serenade, the sense of warmth and sweet

rest--all drifted away.







When she awakened shadows of swaying branches moved on the sunlit

canvas above her.  She heard the ringing strokes of an ax, but no

other sound from outside.  Slow, regular breathing attested to

the deep slumbers of her tent comrades. She observed presently

that Florence was missing from the number.  Madeline rose and

peeped out between the flaps.



An exquisitely beautiful scene surprised and enthralled her gaze. 

She saw a level space, green with long grass, bright with

flowers, dotted with groves of graceful firs and pines and

spruces, reaching to superb crags, rosy and golden in the

sunlight.  Eager to get out where she could enjoy an unrestricted

view, she searched for her pack, found it in a corner, and then

hurriedly and quietly dressed.



Her favorite stag-hounds, Russ and Tartar, were asleep before the

door, where they had been chained.  She awakened them and

loosened them, thinking the while that it must have been Stewart

who had chained them near her.  Close at hand also was a cowboy's

bed rolled up in a tarpaulin.



The cool air, fragrant with pine and spruce and some subtle

nameless tang, sweet and tonic, made Madeline stand erect and

breathe slowly and deeply.  It was like drinking of a magic

draught.  She felt it in her blood, that it quickened its flow. 

Turning to look in the other direction, beyond the tent, she saw

the remnants of last night's temporary camp, and farther on a

grove of beautiful pines from which came the sharp ring of the

ax.  Wider gaze took in a wonderful park, not only surrounded by

lofty crags, but full of crags of lesser height, many lifting

their heads from dark-green groves of trees.  The morning sun,

not yet above the eastern elevations, sent its rosy and golden

shafts in between the towering rocks, to tip the pines.



Madeline, with the hounds beside her, walked through the nearest

grove.  The ground was soft and springy and brown with

pine-needles.  Then she saw that a clump of trees had prevented

her from seeing the most striking part of this natural park.  The

cowboys had selected a campsite where they would have the morning

sun and afternoon shade.  Several tents and flies were already

up; there was a huge lean-to made of spruce boughs; cowboys were

busy round several camp-fires; piles of packs lay covered with

tarpaulins, and beds were rolled up under the trees.  This space

was a kind of rolling meadow, with isolated trees here and there,

and other trees in aisles and circles; and it mounted up in low,

grassy banks to great towers of stone five hundred feet high. 

Other crags rose behind these.  From under a mossy cliff, huge

and green and cool, bubbled a full, clear spring.  Wild flowers

fringed its banks.  Out in the meadow the horses were knee-deep

in grass that waved in the morning breeze.



Florence espied Madeline under the trees and came running.  She

was like a young girl, with life and color and joy.  She wore a

flannel blouse, corduroy skirt, and moccasins. And her hair was

fastened under a band like an Indian's.



"Castleton's gone with a gun, for hours, it seems," said

Florence.  "Gene just went to hunt him up.  The other gentlemen

are still asleep.  I imagine they sure will sleep up heah in this

air."



Then, business-like, Florence fell to questioning Madeline about

details of camp arrangement which Stewart, and Florence herself,

could hardly see to without suggestion.



Before any of Madeline's sleepy guests awakened the camp was

completed.  Madeline and Florence had a tent under a pine-tree,

but they did not intend to sleep in it except during stormy

weather.  They spread a tarpaulin, made their bed on it, and

elected to sleep under the light of the stars.  After that,

taking the hounds with them, they explored.  To Madeline's

surprise, the park was not a little half-mile nook nestling among

the crags, but extended farther than they cared to walk, and was

rather a series of parks.  They were no more than small valleys

between gray-toothed peaks.  As the day advanced the charm of the

place grew upon Madeline.  Even at noon, with the sun beating

down, there was comfortable warmth rather than heat.  It was the

kind of warmth that Madeline liked to feel in the spring.  And

the sweet, thin, rare atmosphere began to affect her strangely. 

She breathed deeply of it until she felt light-headed, as if her

body lacked substance and might drift away like a thistledown. 

All at once she grew uncomfortably sleepy.  A dreamy languor

possessed her, and, lying under a pine with her head against

Florence, she went to sleep.  When she opened her eyes the

shadows of the crags stretched from the west, and between them

streamed a red-gold light.  It was hazy, smoky sunshine losing

its fire.  The afternoon had far advanced.  Madeline sat up. 

Florence was lazily reading.  The two Mexican women were at work

under the fly where the big stone fireplace had been erected.  No

one else was in sight.



Florence, upon being questioned, informed Madeline that incident

about camp had been delightfully absent.  Castleton had returned

and was profoundly sleeping with the other men. Presently a

chorus of merry calls attracted Madeline's attention, and she

turned to see Helen limping along with Dorothy, and Mrs. Beck and

Edith supporting each other.  They were all rested, but lame, and

delighted with the place, and as hungry as bears awakened from a

winter's sleep.  Madeline forthwith escorted them round the camp,

and through the many aisles between the trees, and to the mossy,

pine-matted nooks under the crags.



Then they had dinner, sitting on the ground after the manner of

Indians; and it was a dinner that lacked merriment only because

everybody was too busily appeasing appetite.



Later Stewart led them across a neck of the park, up a rather

steep climb between towering crags, to take them out upon a

grassy promontory that faced the great open west--a vast, ridged,

streaked, and reddened sweep of earth rolling down, as it seemed,

to the golden sunset end of the world. Castleton said it was a

jolly fine view; Dorothy voiced her usual languid enthusiasm;

Helen was on fire with pleasure and wonder; Mrs. Beck appealed to

Bobby to see how he liked it before she ventured, and she then

reiterated his praise; and Edith Wayne, like Madeline and

Florence, was silent.  Boyd was politely interested; he was the

kind of man who appeared to care for things as other people cared

for them.



Madeline watched the slow transformation of the changing west,

with its haze of desert dust, through which mountain and cloud

and sun slowly darkened.  She watched until her eyes ached, and

scarcely had a thought of what she was watching.  When her eyes

shifted to encounter the tall form of Stewart standing motionless

on the rim, her mind became active again.  As usual, he stood

apart from the others, and now he seemed aloof and unconscious. 

He made a dark, powerful figure, and he fitted that wild

promontory.



She experienced a strange, annoying surprise when she discovered

both Helen and Dorothy watching Stewart with peculiar interest. 

Edith, too, was alive to the splendid picture the cowboy made. 

But when Edith smiled and whispered in her ear, "It's so good to

look at a man like that," Madeline again felt the surprise, only

this time the accompaniment was a vague pleasure rather than

annoyance.  Helen and Dorothy were flirts, one deliberate and

skilled, the other unconscious and natural.  Edith Wayne,

occasionally--and Madeline reflected that the occasions were

infrequent--admired a man sincerely. Just here Madeline might

have fallen into a somewhat revealing state of mind if it had not

been for the fact that she believed Stewart was only an object of

deep interest to her, not as a man, but as a part of this wild

and wonderful West which was claiming her.  So she did not

inquire of herself why Helen's coquetry and Dorothy's languishing

allurement annoyed her, or why Edith's eloquent smile and words

had pleased her.  She got as far, however, as to think scornfully

how Helen and Dorothy would welcome and meet a flirtation with

this cowboy and then go back home and forget him as utterly as if

he had never existed.  She wondered, too, with a curious twist of

feeling that was almost eagerness, how the cowboy would meet

their advances.  Obviously the situation was unfair to him; and

if by some strange accident he escaped unscathed by Dorothy's

beautiful eyes he would never be able to withstand Helen's subtle

and fascinating and imperious personality.



They returned to camp in the cool of the evening and made merry

round a blazing camp-fire.  But Madeline's guests soon succumbed

to the persistent and irresistible desire to sleep.



Then Madeline went to bed with Florence under the pine-tree. 

Russ lay upon one side and Tartar upon the other. The cool night

breeze swept over her, fanning her face, waving her hair.  It was

not strong enough to make any sound through the branches, but it

stirred a faint, silken rustle in the long grass.  The coyotes

began their weird bark and howl.  Russ raised his head to growl

at their impudence.



Madeline faced upward, and it seemed to her that under those

wonderful white stars she would never be able to go to sleep. 

They blinked down through the black-barred, delicate crisscross

of pine foliage, and they looked so big and so close.  Then she

gazed away to open space, where an expanse of sky glittered with

stars, and the longer she gazed the larger they grew and the more

she saw.



It was her belief that she had come to love all the physical

things from which sensations of beauty and mystery and strength

poured into her responsive mind; but best of all she loved these

Western stars, for they were to have something to do with her

life, were somehow to influence her destiny.







For a few days the prevailing features of camp life for

Madeline's guests were sleep and rest.  Dorothy Coombs slept

through twenty-four hours, and then was so difficult to awaken

that for a while her friends were alarmed.  Helen almost fell

asleep while eating and talking.  The men were more visibly

affected by the mountain air than the women.  Castleton, however,

would not succumb to the strange drowsiness while he had a chance

to prowl around with a gun.



This languorous spell disappeared presently, and then the days

were full of life and action.  Mrs. Beck and Bobby and Boyd,

however, did not go in for anything very strenuous. Edith Wayne,

too, preferred to walk through the groves or sit upon the grassy

promontory.  It was Helen and Dorothy who wanted to explore the

crags and canons, and when they could not get the others to

accompany them they went alone, giving the cowboy guides many a

long climb.



Necessarily, of course, Madeline and her guests were now thrown

much in company with the cowboys.  And the party grew to be like

one big family.  Her friends not only adapted themselves

admirably to the situation, but came to revel in it.  As for

Madeline, she saw that outside of a certain proclivity of the

cowboys to be gallant and on dress-parade and alive to

possibilities of fun and excitement, they were not greatly

different from what they were at all times.  If there were a

leveling process here it was made by her friends coming down to

meet the Westerners.  Besides, any class of people would tend to

grow natural in such circumstances and environment.



Madeline found the situation one of keen and double interest for

her.  If before she had cared to study her cowboys, particularly

Stewart, now, with the contrasts afforded by her guests, she felt

by turns she was amused and mystified and perplexed and saddened,

and then again subtly pleased.



Monty, once he had overcome his shyness, became a source of

delight to Madeline, and, for that matter, to everybody.  Monty

had suddenly discovered that he was a success among the ladies. 

Either he was exalted to heroic heights by this knowledge or he

made it appear so.  Dorothy had been his undoing, and in justice

to her Madeline believed her innocent. Dorothy thought Monty

hideous to look at, and, accordingly, if he had been a hero a

hundred times and had saved a hundred poor little babies' lives,

he could not have interested her.  Monty followed her around,

reminding her, she told Madeline, of a little adoring dog one

moment and the next of a huge, devouring gorilla.



Nels and Nick stalked at Helen's heels like grenadiers on duty,

and if she as much as dropped her glove they almost came to blows

to see who should pick it up.



In a way Castleton was the best feature of the camping party.  He

was such an absurd-looking little man, and his abilities were at

such tremendous odds with what might have been expected of him

from his looks.  He could ride, tramp, climb, shoot.  He liked to

help around the camp, and the cowboys could not keep him from it. 

He had an insatiable desire to do things that were new to him. 

The cowboys played innumerable tricks upon him, not one of which

he ever discovered.  He was serious, slow in speech and action,

and absolutely imperturbable.  If imperturbability could ever be

good humor, then he was always good-humored.  Presently the

cowboys began to understand him, and then to like him. When they

liked a man it meant something.  Madeline had been sorry more

than once to see how little the cowboys chose to speak to Boyd

Harvey.  With Castleton, however, they actually became friends. 

They did not know it, and certainly such a thing never occurred

to him; all the same, it was a fact.  And it grew solely out of

the truth that the Englishman was manly in the only way cowboys

could have interpreted manliness. When, after innumerable

attempts, he succeeded in throwing the diamond-hitch on a

pack-horse the cowboys began to respect him. Castleton needed

only one more accomplishment to claim their hearts, and he kept

trying that--to ride a bucking bronco. One of the cowboys had a

bronco that they called Devil.  Every day for a week Devil threw

the Englishman all over the park, ruined his clothes, bruised

him, and finally kicked him.  Then the cowboys solicitously tried

to make Castleton give up; and this was remarkable enough, for

the spectacle of an English lord on a bucking bronco was one that

any Westerner would have ridden a thousand miles to see. 

Whenever Devil threw Castleton the cowboys went into spasms.  But

Castleton did not know the meaning of the word fail, and there

came a day when Devil could not throw him.  Then it was a

singular sight to see the men line up to shake hands with the

cool Englishman.  Even Stewart, who had watched from the

background, came forward with a warm and pleasant smile on his

dark face.  When Castleton went to his tent there was much

characteristic cowboy talk, and this time vastly different from

the former persiflage.



"By Gawd!" ejaculated Monty Price, who seemed to be the most

amazed and elated of them all.  "Thet's the fust Englishman I

ever seen!  He's orful deceivin' to look at, but I know now why

England rules the wurrld.  Jest take a peek at thet bronco.  His

spirit is broke.  Rid by a leetle English dook no bigger 'n a

grasshopper!  Fellers, if it hain't dawned on you yit, let Monty

Price give you a hunch.  There's no flies on Castleton.  An' I'll

bet a million steers to a rawhide rope thet next he'll be

throwin' a gun as good as Nels."



It was a distinct pleasure for Madeline to realize that she liked

Castleton all the better for the traits brought out so forcibly

by his association with the cowboys.  On the other hand, she

liked the cowboys better for something in them that contact with

Easterners brought out.  This was especially true in Stewart's

case.  She had been wholly wrong when she had imagined he would

fall an easy victim to Dorothy's eyes and Helen's lures.  He was

kind, helpful, courteous, and watchful. But he had no sentiment. 

He did not see Dorothy's charms or feel Helen's fascination.  And

their efforts to captivate him were now so obvious that Mrs. Beck

taunted them, and Edith smiled knowingly, and Bobby and Boyd made

playful remarks.  All of which cut Helen's pride and hurt

Dorothy's vanity.  They essayed open conquest of Stewart.



So it came about that Madeline unconsciously admitted the cowboy

to a place in her mind never occupied by any other. The instant

it occurred to her why he was proof against the wiles of the

other women she drove that amazing and strangely disturbing

thought from her.  Nevertheless, as she was human, she could not

help thinking and being pleased and enjoying a little the

discomfiture of the two coquettes.



Moreover, from this thought of Stewart, and the watchfulness

growing out of it she discovered more about him. He was not

happy; he often paced up and down the grove at night; he absented

himself from camp sometimes during the afternoon when Nels and

Nick and Monty were there; he was always watching the trails, as

if he expected to see some one come riding up.  He alone of the

cowboys did not indulge in the fun and talk around the camp-fire. 

He remained preoccupied and sad, and was always looking away into

distance.  Madeline had a strange sense of his guardianship over

her; and, remembering Don Carlos, she imagined he worried a good

deal over his charge, and, indeed, over the safety of all the

party.



But if he did worry about possible visits from wandering

guerrillas, why did he absent himself from camp? Suddenly into

Madeline's inquisitive mind flashed a remembrance of the

dark-eyed Mexican girl, Bonita, who had never been heard of since

that night she rode Stewart's big horse out of El Cajon.  The

remembrance of her brought an idea.  Perhaps Stewart had a

rendezvous in the mountains, and these lonely trips of his were

to meet Bonita.  With the idea hot blood flamed into Madeline's

cheek.  Then she was amazed at her own feelings--amazed because

her swiftest succeeding thought was to deny the idea--amazed that

its conception had fired her cheek with shame.  Then her old

self, the one aloof from this red-blooded new self, gained

control over her emotions.



But Madeline found that new-born self a creature of strange power

to return and govern at any moment.  She found it fighting

loyally for what intelligence and wisdom told her was only her

romantic conception of a cowboy.  She reasoned: If Stewart were

the kind of man her feminine skepticism wanted to make him, he

would not have been so blind to the coquettish advances of Helen

and Dorothy.  He had once been--she did not want to recall what

he had once been.  But he had been uplifted.  Madeline Hammond

declared that.  She was swayed by a strong, beating pride, and

her instinctive woman's faith told her that he could not stoop to

such dishonor.  She reproached herself for having momentarily

thought of it.







One afternoon a huge storm-cloud swooped out of the sky and

enveloped the crags.  It obscured the westering sun and laid a

mantle of darkness over the park.  Madeline was uneasy because

several of her party, including Helen and Dorothy, had ridden off

with the cowboys that afternoon and had not returned.  Florence

assured her that even if they did not get back before the storm

broke there was no reason for apprehension.  Nevertheless,

Madeline sent for Stewart and asked him to go or send some one in

search of them.



Perhaps half an hour later Madeline heard the welcome pattering

of hoofs on the trail.  The big tent was brightly lighted by

several lanterns.  Edith and Florence were with her.  It was so

black outside that Madeline could not see a rod before her face. 

The wind was moaning in the trees, and big drops of rain were

pelting upon the canvas.



Presently, just outside the door, the horses halted, and there

was a sharp bustle of sound, such as would naturally result from

a hurried dismounting and confusion in the dark. Mrs. Beck came

running into the tent out of breath and radiant because they had

beaten the storm.  Helen entered next, and a little later came

Dorothy, but long enough to make her entrance more noticeable. 

The instant Madeline saw Dorothy's blazing eyes she knew

something unusual had happened.  Whatever it was might have

escaped comment had not Helen caught sight of Dorothy.



"Heavens, Dot, but you're handsome occasionally!" remarked Helen. 

"When you get some life in your face and eyes!"



Dorothy turned her face away from the others, and perhaps it was

only accident that she looked into a mirror hanging on the tent

wall.  Swiftly she put her hand up to feel a wide red welt on her

cheek.  Dorothy had been assiduously careful of her soft, white

skin, and here was an ugly mark marring its beauty.



"Look at that!" she cried, in distress. "My complexion's ruined!"



"How did you get such a splotch?" inquired Helen, going closer.



"I've been kissed!" exclaimed Dorothy, dramatically.



"What?" queried Helen, more curiously, while the others laughed.



"I've been kissed--hugged and kissed by one of those shameless

cowboys!  It was so pitch-dark outside I couldn't see a thing. 

And so noisy I couldn't hear.  But somebody was trying to help me

off my horse.  My foot caught in the stirrup, and away I went--

right into somebody's arms.  Then he did it, the wretch!  He

hugged and kissed me in a most awful bearish manner.  I couldn't

budge a finger.  I'm simply boiling with rage!"



When the outburst of mirth subsided Dorothy turned her big,

dilated eyes upon Florence.



"Do these cowboys really take advantage of a girl when she's

helpless and in the dark?"



"Of course they do," replied Florence, with her frank smile.



"Dot, what in the world could you expect?" asked Helen. "Haven't

you been dying to be kissed?"



"No."



"Well, you acted like it, then.  I never before saw you in a rage

over being kissed."



"I--I wouldn't care so much if the brute hadn't scoured the skin

off my face.  He had whiskers as sharp and stiff as sandpaper. 

And when I jerked away he rubbed my cheek with them."



This revelation as to the cause of her outraged dignity almost

prostrated her friends with glee.



"Dot, I agree with you; it's one thing to be kissed, and quite

another to have your beauty spoiled," replied Helen, presently. 

"Who was this particular savage?"



"I don't know!" burst out Dorothy.  "If I did I'd--I'd--"



Her eyes expressed the direful punishment she could not speak.



"Honestly now, Dot, haven't you the least idea who did it?"

questioned Helen.



"I hope--I think it was Stewart," replied Dorothy.



"Ah!  Dot, your hope is father to the thought.  My dear, I'm

sorry to riddle your little romance.  Stewart did not--could not

have been the offender or hero."



"How do you know he couldn't?" demanded Dorothy, flushing.



"Because he was clean-shaven to-day at noon, before we rode out. 

I remember perfectly how nice and smooth and brown his face

looked."



"Oh, do you?  Well, if your memory for faces is so good, maybe

you can tell me which one of these cowboys wasn't clean-shaven."



"Merely a matter of elimination," replied Helen, merrily.  "It

was not Nick; it was not Nels; it was not Frankie.  There was

only one other cowboy with us, and he had a short, stubby growth

of black beard, much like that cactus we passed on the trail."



"Oh, I was afraid of it," moaned Dorothy.  "I knew he was going

to do it.  That horrible little smiling demon, Monty Price!"







A favorite lounging-spot of Madeline's was a shaded niche under

the lee of crags facing the east.  Here the outlook was entirely

different from that on the western side.  It was not red and

white and glaring, nor so changeable that it taxed attention. 

This eastern view was one of the mountains and valleys, where, to

be sure, there were arid patches; but the restful green of pine

and fir was there, and the cool gray of crags.  Bold and rugged

indeed were these mountain features, yet they were companionably

close, not immeasurably distant and unattainable like the desert. 

Here in the shade of afternoon Madeline and Edith would often

lounge under a low-branched tree.  Seldom they talked much, for

it was afternoon and dreamy with the strange spell of this

mountain fastness.  There was smoky haze in the valleys, a fleecy

cloud resting over the peaks, a sailing eagle in the blue sky,

silence that was the unbroken silence of the wild heights, and a

soft wind laden with incense of pine.



One afternoon, however, Edith appeared prone to talk seriously.



"Majesty, I must go home soon.  I cannot stay out here forever. 

Are you going back with me?"



"Well, maybe," replied Madeline, thoughtfully.  "I have

considered it.  I shall have to visit home some time.  But this

summer mother and father are going to Europe."



"See here, Majesty Hammond, do you intend to spend the rest of

your life in this wilderness?" asked Edith, bluntly.



Madeline was silent.



"Oh, it is glorious!  Don't misunderstand me, dear," went on

Edith, earnestly, as she laid her hand on Madeline's. "This trip

has been a revelation to me.  I did not tell you, Majesty, that I

was ill when I arrived.  Now I'm well.  So well!  Look at Helen,

too.  Why, she was a ghost when we got here.  Now she is brown

and strong and beautiful.  If it were for nothing else than this

wonderful gift of health I would love the West.  But I have come

to love it for other things--even spiritual things.  Majesty, I

have been studying you.  I see and feel what this life has made

of you.  When I came I wondered at your strength, your virility,

your serenity, your happiness.  And I was stunned.  I wondered at

the causes of your change.  Now I know.  You were sick of

idleness, sick of uselessness, if not of society--sick of the

horrible noises and smells and contacts one can no longer escape

in the cities. I am sick of all that, too, and I could tell you

many women of our kind who suffer in a like manner.  You have

done what many of us want to do, but have not the courage.  You

have left it. I am not blind to the splendid difference you have

made in your life.  I think I would have discovered, even if your

brother had not told me, what good you have done to the Mexicans

and cattlemen of your range.  Then you have work to do.  That is

much the secret of your happiness, is it not?  Tell me.  Tell me

something of what it means to you?"



"Work, of course, has much to do with any one's happiness,"

replied Madeline.  "No one can be happy who has no work.  As

regards myself--for the rest I can hardly tell you. I have never

tried to put it in words.  Frankly, I believe, if I had not had

money that I could not have found such contentment here.  That is

not in any sense a judgment against the West.  But if I had been

poor I could not have bought and maintained my ranch.  Stillwell

tells me there are many larger ranches than mine, but none just

like it.  Then I am almost paying my expenses out of my business. 

Think of that!  My income, instead of being wasted, is mostly

saved.  I think--I hope I am useful.  I have been of some little

good to the Mexicans--eased the hardships of a few cowboys.  For

the rest, I think my life is a kind of dream.  Of course my ranch

and range are real, my cowboys are typical.  If I were to tell

you how I feel about them it would simply be a story of how

Madeline Hammond sees the West.  They are true to the West.  It

is I who am strange, and what I feel for them may be strange,

too.  Edith, hold to your own impressions."



"But, Majesty, my impressions have changed.  At first I did not

like the wind, the dust, the sun, the endless open stretches. 

But now I do like them.  Where once I saw only terrible wastes of

barren ground now I see beauty and something noble.  Then, at

first, your cowboys struck me as dirty, rough, loud, crude,

savage--all that was primitive.  I did not want them near me.  I

imagined them callous, hard men, their only joy a carouse with

their kind.  But I was wrong.  I have changed.  The dirt was only

dust, and this desert dust is clean.  They are still rough, loud,

crude, and savage in my eyes, but with a difference.  They are

natural men.  They are little children.  Monty Price is one of

nature's noblemen.  The hard thing is to discover it.  All his

hideous person, all his actions and speech, are masks of his real

nature.  Nels is a joy, a simple, sweet, kindly, quiet man whom

some woman should have loved.  What would love have meant to him! 

He told me that no woman ever loved him except his mother, and he

lost her when he was ten.  Every man ought to be loved--

especially such a man as Nels.  Somehow his gun record does not

impress me.  I never could believe he killed a man.  Then take

your foreman, Stewart.  He is a cowboy, his work and life the

same as the others.  But he has education and most of the graces

we are in the habit of saying make a gentleman.  Stewart is a

strange fellow, just like this strange country.  He's a man,

Majesty, and I admire him.  So, you see, my impressions are

developing with my stay out here."



"Edith, I am so glad you told me that," replied Madeline, warmly.



"I like the country, and I like the men," went on Edith.  "One

reason I want to go home soon is because I am discontented enough

at home now, without falling in love with the West.  For, of

course, Majesty, I would.  I could not live out here.  And that

brings me to my point.  Admitting all the beauty and charm and

wholesomeness and good of this wonderful country, still it is no

place for you, Madeline Hammond.  You have your position, your

wealth, your name, your family.  You must marry.  You must have

children.  You must not give up all that for a quixotic life in a

wilderness."



"I am convinced, Edith, that I shall live here all the rest of my

life."



"Oh, Majesty!  I hate to preach this way.  But I promised your

mother I would talk to you.  And the truth is I hate--I hate what

I'm saying.  I envy you your courage and wisdom.  I know you have

refused to marry Boyd Harvey.  I could see that in his face.  I

believe you will refuse Castleton. Whom will you marry?  What

chance is there for a woman of your position to marry out here? 

What in the world will become of you?"



"Quien sabe?" replied Madeline, with a smile that was almost sad.







Not so many hours after this conversation with Edith Madeline sat

with Boyd Harvey upon the grassy promontory overlooking the west,

and she listened once again to his suave courtship.



Suddenly she turned to him and said, "Boyd, if I married you

would you be willing--glad to spend the rest of your life here in

the West?"



"Majesty!" he exclaimed.  There was amaze in the voice usually so

even and well modulated--amaze in the handsome face usually so

indifferent.  Her question had startled him.  She saw him look

down the iron-gray cliffs, over the barren slopes and cedared

ridges, beyond the cactus-covered foothills to the grim and

ghastly desert.  Just then, with its red veils of sunlit

dust-clouds, its illimitable waste of ruined and upheaved earth,

it was a sinister spectacle.



"No," he replied, with a tinge of shame in his cheek. Madeline

said no more, nor did he speak.  She was spared the pain of

refusing him, and she imagined he would never ask her again. 

There was both relief and regret in the conviction. Humiliated

lovers seldom made good friends.



It was impossible not to like Boyd Harvey.  The thought of that,

and why she could not marry him, concentrated her never-satisfied

mind upon the man.  She looked at him, and she thought of him.



He was handsome, young, rich, well born, pleasant, cultivated--he

was all that made a gentleman of his class.  If he had any vices

she had not heard of them.  She knew he had no thirst for drink

or craze for gambling.  He was considered a very desirable and

eligible young man.  Madeline admitted all this.



Then she thought of things that were perhaps exclusively her own

strange ideas.  Boyd Harvey's white skin did not tan even in this

southwestern sun and wind.  His hands were whiter than her own,

and as soft.  They were really beautiful, and she remembered what

care he took of them.  They were a proof that he never worked. 

His frame was tall, graceful, elegant.  It did not bear evidence

of ruggedness.  He had never indulged in a sport more strenuous

than yachting.  He hated effort and activity.  He rode horseback

very little, disliked any but moderate motoring, spent much time

in Newport and Europe, never walked when he could help it, and

had no ambition unless it were to pass the days pleasantly.  If

he ever had any sons they would be like him, only a generation

more toward the inevitable extinction of his race.



Madeline returned to camp in just the mood to make a sharp,

deciding contrast.  It happened--fatefully, perhaps--that the

first man she saw was Stewart.  He had just ridden into camp, and

as she came up he explained that he had gone down to the ranch

for the important mail about which she had expressed anxiety.



"Down and back in one day!" she exclaimed.



"Yes," he replied.  "It wasn't so bad."



"But why did you not send one of the boys, and let him make the

regular two-day trip?"



"You were worried about your mail," he answered, briefly, as he

delivered it.  Then he bent to examine the fetlocks of his weary

horse.



It was midsummer now, Madeline reflected and exceedingly hot and

dusty on the lower trail.  Stewart had ridden down the mountain

and back again in twelve hours. Probably no horse in the outfit,

except his big black or Majesty, could have stood that trip.  And

his horse showed the effects of a grueling day.  He was caked

with dust and lame and weary.



Stewart looked as if he had spared the horse his weight on many a

mile of that rough ascent.  His boots were evidence of it.  His

heavy flannel shirt, wet through with perspiration, adhered

closely to his shoulders and arms, so that every ripple of muscle

plainly showed.  His face was black, except round the temples and

forehead, where it was bright red.  Drops of sweat, running off

his blackened hands dripped to the ground.  He got up from

examining the lame foot, and then threw off the saddle. The black

horse snorted and lunged for the watering-pool. Stewart let him

drink a little, then with iron arms dragged him away.  In this

action the man's lithe, powerful form impressed Madeline with a

wonderful sense of muscular force.  His brawny wrist was bare;

his big, strong hand, first clutching the horse's mane, then

patting his neck, had a bruised knuckle, and one finger was bound

up.  That hand expressed as much gentleness and thoughtfulness

for the horse as it had strength to drag him back from too much

drinking at a dangerous moment.



Stewart was a combination of fire, strength, and action.  These

attributes seemed to cling about him.  There was something vital

and compelling in his presence.  Worn and spent and drawn as he

was from the long ride, he thrilled Madeline with his potential

youth and unused vitality and promise of things to be,

red-blooded deeds, both of flesh and spirit.  In him she saw the

strength of his forefathers unimpaired.  The life in him was

marvelously significant.  The dust, the dirt, the sweat, the

soiled clothes, the bruised and bandaged hand, the brawn and

bone--these had not been despised by the knights of ancient days,

nor by modern women whose eyes shed soft light upon coarse and

bloody toilers.



Madeline Hammond compared the man of the East with the man of the

West; and that comparison was the last parting regret for her old

standards.

