





XVIII Bonita



Florence's story of the lost mine fired Madeline's guests with

the fever for gold-hunting.  But after they had tried it a few

times and the glamour of the thing wore off they gave up and

remained in camp.  Having exhausted all the resources of the

mountain, such that had interest for them, they settled quietly

down for a rest, which Madeline knew would soon end in a desire

for civilized comforts.  They were almost tired of roughing it.

Helen's discontent manifested itself in her remark, "I guess

nothing is going to happen, after all."



Madeline awaited their pleasure in regard to the breaking of

camp; and meanwhile, as none of them cared for more exertion, she

took her walks without them, sometimes accompanied by one of the

cowboys, always by the stag-hounds. These walks furnished her

exceeding pleasure.  And, now that the cowboys would talk to her

without reserve, she grew fonder of listening to their simple

stories.  The more she knew of them the more she doubted the

wisdom of shut-in lives. Companionship with Nels and most of the

cowboys was in its effect like that of the rugged pines and crags

and the untainted wind.  Humor, their predominant trait when a

person grew to know them, saved Madeline from finding their

hardness trying.  They were dreamers, as all men who lived lonely

lives in the wilds were dreamers.



The cowboys all had secrets.  Madeline learned some of them.  She

marveled most at the strange way in which they hid emotions,

except of violence of mirth and temper so easily aroused.  It was

all the more remarkable in view of the fact that they felt

intensely over little things to which men of the world were blind

and dead.  Madeline had to believe that a hard and perilous life

in a barren and wild country developed great principles in men. 

Living close to earth, under the cold, bleak peaks, on the

dust-veiled desert, men grew like the nature that developed them-

-hard, fierce, terrible, perhaps, but big--big with elemental

force.



But one day, while out walking alone, before she realized it she

had gone a long way down a dim trail winding among the rocks.  It

was the middle of a summer afternoon, and all about her were

shadows of the crags crossing the sunlit patches.  The quiet was

undisturbed.  She went on and on, not blind to the fact that she

was perhaps going too far from camp, but risking it because she

was sure of her way back, and enjoying the wild, craggy recesses

that were new to her. Finally she came out upon a bank that broke

abruptly into a beautiful little glade.  Here she sat down to

rest before undertaking the return trip.



Suddenly Russ, the keener of the stag-hounds, raised his head and

growled.  Madeline feared he might have scented a mountain-lion

or wildcat.  She quieted him and carefully looked around.  To

each side was an irregular line of massive blocks of stone that

had weathered from the crags.  The little glade was open and

grassy, with here a pine-tree, there a boulder. The outlet seemed

to go down into a wilderness of canons and ridges.  Looking in

this direction, Madeline saw the slight, dark figure of a woman

coming stealthily along under the pines. Madeline was amazed,

then a little frightened, for that stealthy walk from tree to

tree was suggestive of secrecy, if nothing worse.



Presently the woman was joined by a tall man who carried a

package, which he gave to her.  They came on up the glade and

appeared to be talking earnestly.  In another moment Madeline

recognized Stewart.  She had no greater feeling of surprise than

had at first been hers.  But for the next moment she scarcely

thought at all--merely watched the couple approaching.  In a

flash came back her former curiosity as to Stewart's strange

absences from camp, and then with the return of her doubt of him

the recognition of the woman.  The small, dark head, the brown

face, the big eyes--Madeline now saw distinctly--belonged to the

Mexican girl Bonita.  Stewart had met her there.  This was the

secret of his lonely trips, taken ever since he had come to work

for Madeline.  This secluded glade was a rendezvous.  He had her

hidden there.



Quietly Madeline arose, with a gesture to the dogs, and went back

along the trail toward camp.  Succeeding her surprise was a

feeling of sorrow that Stewart's regeneration had not been

complete.  Sorrow gave place to insufferable distrust that while

she had been romancing about this cowboy, dreaming of her good

influence over him, he had been merely base.  Somehow it stung

her.  Stewart had been nothing to her, she thought, yet she had

been proud of him.  She tried to revolve the thing, to be fair to

him, when every instinctive tendency was to expel him, and all

pertaining to him, from her thoughts.  And her effort at

sympathy, at extenuation, failed utterly before her pride. 

Exerting her will-power, she dismissed Stewart from her mind.



Madeline did not think of him again till late that afternoon,

when, as she was leaving her tent to join several of her guests,

Stewart appeared suddenly in her path.



"Miss Hammond, I saw your tracks down the trail," he began,

eagerly, but his tone was easy and natural.  "I'm thinking--well,

maybe you sure got the idea--"



"I do not wish for an explanation," interrupted Madeline.



Stewart gave a slight start.  His manner had a semblance of the

old, cool audacity.  As he looked down at her it subtly changed.



What effrontery, Madeline thought, to face her before her guests

with an explanation of his conduct!  Suddenly she felt an inward

flash of fire that was pain, so strange, so incomprehensible,

that her mind whirled.  Then anger possessed her, not at Stewart,

but at herself, that anything could rouse in her a raw emotion. 

She stood there, outwardly cold, serene, with level, haughty eyes

upon Stewart; but inwardly she was burning with rage and shame.



"I'm sure not going to have you think--"  He began passionately,

but he broke off, and a slow, dull crimson blotted over the

healthy red-brown of his neck and cheeks.



"What you do or think, Stewart, is no concern of mine."



"Miss--Miss Hammond!  You don't believe--" faltered Stewart.



The crimson receded from his face, leaving it pale. His eyes were

appealing.  They had a kind of timid look that struck Madeline

even in her anger.  There was something boyish about him then. 

He took a step forward and reached out with his hand open-palmed

in a gesture that was humble, yet held a certain dignity.



"But listen.  Never mind now what you--you think about me. 

There's a good reason--"



"I have no wish to hear your reason."



"But you ought to," he persisted.



"Sir!''



Stewart underwent another swift change.  He started violently.  A

dark tide shaded his face and a glitter leaped to his eyes.  He

took two long strides--loomed over her.



"I'm not thinking about myself," he thundered.  "Will you

listen?"



"No," she replied; and there was freezing hauteur in her voice. 

With a slight gesture of dismissal, unmistakable in its finality,

she turned her back upon him.  Then she joined her guests.



Stewart stood perfectly motionless.  Then slowly he began to lift

his right hand in which he held his sombrero.  He swept it up and

up high over his head.  His tall form towered. With fierce

suddenness he flung his sombrero down.  He leaped at his black

horse and dragged him to where his saddle lay. With one pitch he

tossed the saddle upon the horse's back.  His strong hands

flashed at girths and straps.  Every action was swift, decisive,

fierce.  Bounding for his bridle, which hung over a bush, he ran

against a cowboy who awkwardly tried to avoid the onslaught.



"Get out of my way!" he yelled.



Then with the same savage haste he adjusted the bridle on his

horse.



"Mebbe you better hold on a minnit, Gene, ole feller," said Monty

Price.



"Monty, do you want me to brain you?" said Stewart, with the

short, hard ring in his voice.



"Now, considerin' the high class of my brains, I oughter be real

careful to keep 'em," replied Monty.  "You can betcher life,

Gene, I ain't goin' to git in front of you.  But I jest says--

Listen!"



Stewart raised his dark face.  Everybody listened.  And everybody

heard the rapid beat of a horse's hoofs.  The sun had set, but

the park was light.  Nels appeared down the trail, and his horse

was running.  In another moment he was in the circle, pulling his

bay back to a sliding halt.  He leaped off abreast of Stewart.



Madeline saw and felt a difference in Nels's presence.



"What's up, Gene?" he queried, sharply.



"I'm leaving camp," replied Stewart, thickly.  His black horse

began to stamp as Stewart grasped bridle and mane and kicked the

stirrup round.



Nels's long arm shot out, and his hand fell upon Stewart, holding

him down.



"Shore I'm sorry," said Nels, slowly.  "Then you was goin' to hit

the trail?"



"I am going to.  Let go, Nels."



"Shore you ain't goin', Gene?"



"Let go, damn you!" cried Stewart, as he wrestled free.



"What's wrong?" asked Nels, lifting his hand again.



"Man!  Don't touch me!"



Nels stepped back instantly.  He seemed to become aware of

Stewart's white, wild passion.  Again Stewart moved to mount.



"Nels, don't make me forget we've been friends," he said.



"Shore I ain't fergettin'," replied Nels.  "An' I resign my job

right here an' now!"



His strange speech checked the mounting cowboy. Stewart stepped

down from the stirrup.  Then their hard faces were still and cold

while their eyes locked glances.



Madeline was as much startled by Nels's speech as Stewart.  Quick

to note a change in these men, she now sensed one that was

unfathomable.



"Resign?" questioned Stewart.



"Shore.  What 'd you think I'd do under circumstances sich as has

come up?"



"But see here, Nels, I won't stand for it."



"You're not my boss no more, an' I ain't beholdin' to Miss

Hammond, neither.  I'm my own boss, an' I'll do as I please. 

Sabe, senor?"



Nels's words were at variance with the meaning in his face.



"Gene, you sent me on a little scout down in the mountains,

didn't you?" he continued.



"Yes, I did," replied Stewart, with a new sharpness in his voice.



"Wal, shore you was so good an' right in your figgerin', as

opposed to mine, that I'm sick with admirin' of you.  If you

hedn't sent me--wal, I'm reckonin' somethin' might hev happened. 

As it is we're shore up against a hell of a proposition!"



How significant was the effect of his words upon all the cowboys! 

Stewart made a fierce and violent motion, terrible where his

other motions had been but passionate. Monty leaped straight up

into the air in a singular action as suggestive of surprise as it

was of wild acceptance of menace. Like a stalking giant Nick

Steele strode over to Nels and Stewart.  The other cowboys rose

silently, without a word.



Madeline and her guests, in a little group, watched and listened,

unable to divine what all this strange talk and action meant.



"Hold on, Nels, they don't need to hear it," said Stewart,

hoarsely, as he waved a hand toward Madeline's silent group.



"Wal, I'm sorry, but I reckon they'd as well know fust as last. 

Mebbe thet yearnin' wish of Miss Helen's fer somethin' to happen

will come true.  Shore I--"



"Cut out the joshin'," rang out Monty's strident voice.



It had as decided an effect as any preceding words or action. 

Perhaps it was the last thing needed to transform these men,

doing unaccustomed duty as escorts of beautiful women, to their

natural state as men of the wild.



"Tell us what's what," said Stewart, cool and grim. "Don Carlos

an' his guerrillas are campin' on the trails thet lead up here. 

They've got them trails blocked.  By to-morrer they'd hed us

corralled.  Mebbe they meant to surprise us. He's got a lot of

Greasers an' outlaws.  They're well armed. Now what do they mean? 

You-all can figger it out to suit yourselves.  Mebbe the Don

wants to pay a sociable call on our ladies.  Mebbe his gang is

some hungry, as usual.  Mebbe they want to steal a few hosses, or

anythin' they can lay hands on. Mebbe they mean wuss, too.  Now

my idee is this, an' mebbe it's wrong.  I long since separated

from love with Greasers.  Thet black-faced Don Carlos has got a

deep game.  Thet two-bit of a revolution is hevin' hard times. 

The rebels want American intervention.  They'd stretch any point

to make trouble.  We're only ten miles from the border.  Suppose

them guerrillas got our crowd across thet border?  The U. S.

cavalry would foller. You-all know what thet'd mean.  Mebbe Don

Carlos's mind works thet way.  Mebbe it don't.  I reckon we'll

know soon.  An' now, Stewart, whatever the Don's game is, shore

you're the man to outfigger him.  Mebbe it's just as well you're

good an' mad about somethin'.  An' I resign my job because I want

to feel unbeholdin' to anybody.  Shore it struck me long since

thet the old days hed come back fer a little spell, an' there I

was trailin' a promise not to hurt any Greaser."


