





XXV At the End of the Road



Madeline saw that the car was surrounded by armed Mexicans. They

presented a contrast to the others she had seen that day; she

wondered a little at their silence, at their respectful front.



Suddenly a sharp spoken order opened up the ranks next to the

house.  Senor Montes appeared in the break, coming swiftly.  His

dark face wore a smile; his manner was courteous, important,

authoritative.



"Senora, it is not too late!"



He spoke her language with an accent strange to her, so that it

seemed to hinder understanding.



"Senora, you got here in time," he went on.  "El Capitan Stewart

will be free."



"Free!" she whispered.



She rose, reeling.



"Come," replied Montes, taking her arm.  "Perdoneme, Senora."



Without his assistance she would have fallen wholly upon Nels,

who supported her on the other side.  They helped her alight from

the car.  For a moment the white walls, the hazy red sky, the

dark figures of the rebels, whirled before Madeline's eyes.  She

took a few steps, swaying between her escorts; then the confusion

of her sight and mind passed away. It was as if she quickened

with a thousand vivifying currents, as if she could see and hear

and feel everything in the world, as if nothing could be

overlooked, forgotten, neglected.



She turned back, remembering Link.  He was lurching from the car,

helmet and goggles thrust back, the gray shade gone from his

face, the cool, bright gleam of his eyes disappearing for

something warmer.



Senor Montes led Madeline and her cowboys through a hall to a

patio, and on through a large room with flooring of rough, bare

boards that rattled, into a smaller room full of armed quiet

rebels facing an open window.



Madeline scanned the faces of these men, expecting to see Don

Carlos.  But he was not present.  A soldier addressed her in

Spanish too swiftly uttered, too voluble for her to translate. 

But, like Senor Montes, he was gracious and, despite his ragged

garb and uncouth appearance, he bore the unmistakable stamp of

authority.



Montes directed Madeline's attention to a man by the window.  A

loose scarf of vivid red hung from his hand.



"Senora, they were waiting for the sun to set when we arrived,"

said Montes.  "The signal was about to be given for Senor

Stewart's walk to death."



"Stewart's walk!" echoed Madeline.



"Ah, Senora, let me tell you his sentence--the sentence I have

had the honor and happiness to revoke for you."



Stewart had been court-martialed and sentenced according to a

Mexican custom observed in cases of brave soldiers to whom

honorable and fitting executions were due. His hour had been set

for Thursday when the sun had sunk.  Upon signal he was to be

liberated and was free to walk out into the road, to take any

direction he pleased.  He knew his sentence; knew that death

awaited him, that every possible avenue of escape was blocked by

men with rifles ready.  But he had not the slightest idea at what

moment or from what direction the bullets were to come.



"Senora, we have sent messengers to every squad of waiting

soldiers--an order that El Capitan is not to be shot. He is

ignorant of his release.  I shall give the signal for his

freedom."



Montes was ceremonious, gallant, emotional.  Madeline saw his

pride, and divined that the situation was one which brought out

the vanity, the ostentation, as well as the cruelty of his race. 

He would keep her in an agony of suspense, let Stewart start upon

that terrible walk in ignorance of his freedom.  It was the

motive of a Spaniard.  Suddenly Madeline had a horrible quaking

fear that Montes lied, that he meant her to be a witness of

Stewart's execution.  But no, the man was honest; he was only

barbarous.  He would satisfy certain instincts of his nature--

sentiment, romance, cruelty--by starting Stewart upon that walk,

by watching Stewart's actions in the face of seeming death, by

seeing Madeline's agony of doubt, fear, pity, love.  Almost

Madeline felt that she could not endure the situation.  She was

weak and tottering.



"Senora!  Ah, it will be one beautiful thing!"  Montes caught the

scarf from the rebel's hand.  He was glowing, passionate; his

eyes had a strange, soft, cold flash; his voice was low, intense. 

He was living something splendid to him. "I'll wave the scarf,

Senora.  That will be the signal.  It will be seen down at the

other end of the road.  Senor Stewart's jailer will see the

signal, take off Stewart's irons, release him, open the door for

his walk.  Stewart will be free. But he will not know.  He will

expect death.  As he is a brave man, he will face it.  He will

walk this way.  Every step of that walk he will expect to be shot

from some unknown quarter. But he will not be afraid.  Senora, I

have seen El Captain fighting in the field.  What is death to

him?  Ah, will it not be magnificent to see him come forth--to

walk down?  Senora, you will see what a man he is.  All the way

he will expect cold, swift death.  Here at this end of the road

he will meet his beautiful lady!"



"Is there no--no possibility of a mistake?" faltered Madeline.



"None.  My order included unloading of rifles."



"Don Carlos?"



"He is in irons, and must answer to General Salazar," replied

Montes.



Madeline looked down the deserted road.  How strange to see the

last ruddy glow of the sun over the brow of the mountain range! 

The thought of that sunset had been torture for her.  Yet it had

passed, and now the afterlights were luminous, beautiful,

prophetic.



With a heart stricken by both joy and agony, she saw Montes wave

the scarf.



Then she waited.  No change manifested itself down the length of

that lonely road.  There was absolute silence in the room behind

her.  How terribly, infinitely long seemed the waiting!  Never in

all her future life would she forget the quaint pink, blue, and

white walled houses with their colored roofs.  That dusty bare

road resembled one of the uncovered streets of Pompeii with its

look of centuries of solitude.



Suddenly a door opened and a tall man stepped out.



Madeline recognized Stewart.  She had to place both hands on the

window-sill for support, while a storm of emotion swayed her. 

Like a retreating wave it rushed away.  Stewart lived.  He was

free.  He had stepped out into the light.  She had saved him. 

Life changed for her in that instant of realization and became

sweet, full, strange.



Stewart shook hands with some one in the doorway.  Then he looked

up and down the road.  The door closed behind him. Leisurely he

rolled a cigarette, stood close to the wall while he scratched a

match.  Even at that distance Madeline's keen eyes caught the

small flame, the first little puff of smoke.



Stewart then took to the middle of the road and leisurely began

his walk.



To Madeline he appeared natural, walked as unconcernedly as if he

were strolling for pleasure; but the absence of any other living

thing, the silence, the red haze, the surcharged atmosphere--

these were all unnatural.  From time to time Stewart stopped to

turn face forward toward houses and corners.  Only silence

greeted these significant moves of his.  Once he halted to roll

and light another cigarette. After that his step quickened.



Madeline watched him, with pride, love, pain, glory combating for

a mastery over her.  This walk of his seemingly took longer than

all her hours of awakening, of strife, of remorse, longer than

the ride to find him.  She felt that it would be impossible for

her to wait till he reached the end of the road.  Yet in the

hurry and riot of her feelings she had fleeting panics.  What

could she say to him?  How meet him? Well she remembered the

tall, powerful form now growing close enough to distinguish its

dress.  Stewart's face was yet only a dark gleam.  Soon she would

see it--long before he could know she was there.  She wanted to

run to meet him.  Nevertheless, she stood rooted to her covert

behind the window, living that terrible walk with him to the

uttermost thought of home, sister, mother, sweetheart, wife, life

itself--every thought that could come to a man stalking to meet

his executioners. With all that tumult in her mind and heart

Madeline still fell prey to the incomprehensible variations of

emotion possible to a woman.  Every step Stewart took thrilled

her.  She had some strange, subtle intuition that he was not

unhappy, and that he believed beyond shadow of doubt that he was

walking to his death.  His steps dragged a little, though they

had begun to be swift.  The old, hard, physical, wild nerve of

the cowboy was perhaps in conflict with spiritual growth of the

finer man, realizing too late that life ought not to be

sacrificed.



Then the dark gleam that was his face took shape, grew sharper

and clearer.  He was stalking now, and there was a suggestion of

impatience in his stride.  It took these hidden Mexicans a long

time to kill him!  At a point in the middle of the road, even

with the corner of a house and opposite to Madeline's position,

Stewart halted stock-still.  He presented a fair, bold mark to

his executioners, and he stood there motionless a full moment.



Only silence greeted him.  Plain it was to Madeline, and she

thought to all who had eyes to see, that to Stewart, since for

some reason he had been spared all along his walk, this was the

moment when he ought to be mercifully shot.  But as no shots came

a rugged dignity left him for a reckless scorn manifest in the

way he strolled, across to the corner of the house, rolled yet

another cigarette, and, presenting a broad breast to the window,

smoked and waited.



That wait was almost unendurable for Madeline.  Perhaps it was

only a moment, several moments at the longest, but the time

seemed a year.  Stewart's face was scornful, hard.  Did he

suspect treachery on the part of his captors, that they meant to

play with him as a cat with a mouse, to murder him at leisure? 

Madeline was sure she caught the old, inscrutable, mocking smile

fleeting across his lips.  He held that position for what must

have been a reasonable time to his mind, then with a laugh and a

shrug he threw the cigarette into the road. He shook his head as

if at the incomprehensible motives of men who could have no fair

reasons now for delay.



He made a sudden violent action that was more than a

straightening of his powerful frame.  It was the old instinctive

violence.  Then he faced north.  Madeline read his thought, knew

he was thinking of her, calling her a last silent farewell.  He

would serve her to his last breath, leave her free, keep his

secret.  That picture of him, dark-browed, fire-eyed, strangely

sad and strong, sank indelibly into Madeline's heart of hearts.



The next instant he was striding forward, to force by bold and

scornful presence a speedy fulfilment of his sentence.



Madeline stepped into the door, crossed the threshold. Stewart

staggered as if indeed the bullets he expected had pierced him in

mortal wound.  His dark face turned white.  His eyes had the rapt

stare, the wild fear of a man who saw an apparition, yet who

doubted his sight.  Perhaps he had called to her as the Mexicans

called to their Virgin; perhaps he imagined sudden death had come

unawares, and this was her image appearing to him in some other

life.



"Who--are--you?" he whispered, hoarsely.



She tried to lift her hands, failed, tried again, and held them

out, trembling.



"It is I.  Majesty.  Your wife!"











End 