





XVII The Lost Mine of the Padres



In the cool, starry evenings the campers sat around a blazing

fire and told and listened to stories thrillingly fitted to the

dark crags and the wild solitude.



Monty Price had come to shine brilliantly as a storyteller.  He

was an atrocious liar, but this fact would not have been evident

to his enthralled listeners if his cowboy comrades, in base

jealousy, had not betrayed him.  The truth about his remarkable

fabrications, however, had not become known to Castleton, solely

because of the Englishman's obtuseness.  And there was another

thing much stranger than this and quite as amusing.  Dorothy

Coombs knew Monty was a liar; but she was so fascinated by the

glittering, basilisk eyes he riveted upon her, so taken in by his

horrible tales of blood, that despite her knowledge she could not

help believing them.



Manifestly Monty was very proud of his suddenly acquired gift. 

Formerly he had hardly been known to open his lips in the

presence of strangers.  Monty had developed more than one

singular and hitherto unknown trait since his supremacy at golf

had revealed his possibilities.  He was as sober and vain and

pompous about his capacity for lying as about anything else. 

Some of the cowboys were jealous of him because he held the

attention and, apparently, the admiration of the ladies; and Nels

was jealous, not because Monty made himself out to be a wonderful

gun-man, but because Monty could tell a story.  Nels really had

been the hero of a hundred fights; he had never been known to

talk about them; but Dorothy's eyes and Helen's smile had somehow

upset his modesty.  Whenever Monty would begin to talk Nels would

growl and knock his pipe on a log, and make it appear he could

not stay and listen, though he never really left the charmed

circle of the camp-fire.  Wild horses could not have dragged him

away.



One evening at twilight, as Madeline was leaving her tent, she

encountered Monty.  Evidently, he had way-laid her. With the most

mysterious of signs and whispers he led her a little aside.



"Miss Hammond, I'm makin' bold to ask a favor of you," he said.



Madeline smiled her willingness.



"To-night, when they've all shot off their chins an' it's

quiet-like, I want you to ask me, jest this way, 'Monty, seein'

as you've hed more adventures than all them cow-punchers put

together, tell us about the most turrible time you ever hed.' 

Will you ask me, Miss Hammond, jest kinda sincere like?"



"Certainly I will, Monty," she replied.



His dark, seared face had no more warmth than a piece of cold,

volcanic rock, which it resembled.  Madeline appreciated how

monstrous Dorothy found this burned and distorted visage, how

deformed the little man looked to a woman of refined

sensibilities.  It was difficult for Madeline to look into his

face.  But she saw behind the blackened mask. And now she saw in

Monty's deep eyes a spirit of pure fun.



So, true to her word, Madeline remembered at an opportune moment,

when conversation had hushed and only the long, dismal wail of

coyotes broke the silence, to turn toward the little cowboy.



"Monty," she said, and paused for effect--"Monty, seeing that you

have had more adventures than all the cowboys together, tell us

about the most terrible time you ever had."



Monty appeared startled at the question that fastened all eyes

upon him.  He waved a deprecatory hand.



"Aw, Miss Hammond, thankin' you all modest-like fer the

compliment, I'll hev to refuse," replied Monty, laboring in

distress.  "It's too harrowin' fer tender-hearted gurls to listen

to."



"Go on?" cried everybody except the cowboys.  Nels began to nod

his head as if he, as well as Monty, understood human nature. 

Dorothy hugged her knees with a kind of shudder.  Monty had

fastened the hypnotic eyes upon her. Castleton ceased smoking,

adjusted his eyeglass, and prepared to listen in great

earnestness.



Monty changed his seat to one where the light from the blazing

logs fell upon his face; and he appeared plunged into melancholy

and profound thought.



"Now I tax myself, I can't jest decide which was the orfulest

time I ever hed," he said, reflectively.



Here Nels blew forth an immense cloud of smoke, as if he desired

to hide himself from sight.  Monty pondered, and then when the

smoke rolled away he turned to Nels.



"See hyar, old pard, me an' you seen somethin' of each other in

the Panhandle, more 'n thirty years ago--"



"Which we didn't," interrupted Nels, bluntly.  "Shore you can't

make me out an ole man."



"Mebbe it wasn't so darn long.  Anyhow, Nels, you recollect them

three hoss-thieves I hung all on one cottonwood-tree, an'

likewise thet boo-tiful blond gurl I rescooed from a band of

cutthroats who murdered her paw, ole Bill Warren, the

buffalo-hunter?  Now, which of them two scraps was the

turriblest, in your idee?"



"Monty, my memory's shore bad," replied the unimpeachable Nels.



"Tell us about the beautiful blonde," cried at least three of the

ladies.  Dorothy, who had suffered from nightmare because of a

former story of hanging men on trees, had voicelessly appealed to

Monty to spare her more of that.



"All right, we'll hev the blond gurl," said Monty, settling back,

"though I ain't thinkin' her story is most turrible of the two,

an' it'll rake over tender affections long slumberin' in my

breast."



As he paused there came a sharp, rapping sound.  This appeared to

be Nels knocking the ashes out of his pipe on a stump--a true

indication of the passing of content from that jealous cowboy.



"It was down in the Panhandle, 'way over in the west end of thet

Comanche huntin'-ground, an' all the redskins an' outlaws in thet

country were hidin' in the river-bottoms, an' chasin' some of the

last buffalo herds thet hed wintered in there.  I was a young

buck them days, an' purty much of a desperado, I'm thinkin'. 

Though of all the seventeen notches on my gun--an' each notch

meant a man killed face to face--there was only one thet I was

ashamed of.  Thet one was fer an express messenger who I hit on

the head most unprofessional like, jest because he wouldn't hand

over a leetle package.  I hed the kind of a reputashun thet made

all the fellers in saloons smile an' buy drinks.



"Well, I dropped into a place named Taylor's Bend, an' was

peaceful standin' to the bar when three cow-punchers come in,

an', me bein' with my hack turned, they didn't recognize me an'

got playful.  I didn't stop drinkin', an' I didn't turn square

round; but when I stopped shootin' under my arm the saloon-keeper

hed to go over to the sawmill an' fetch a heap of sawdust to

cover up what was left of them three cow-punchers, after they was

hauled out.  You see, I was rough them days, an' would shoot ears

off an' noses off an' hands off; when in later days I'd jest kill

a man quick, same as Wild Bill.



"News drifts into town thet night thet a gang of cut-throats hed

murdered ole Bill Warren an' carried off his gurl.  I gathers up

a few good gun-men, an' we rid out an' down the river-bottom, to

an ole log cabin, where the outlaws hed a rondevoo.  We rid up

boldlike, an' made a hell of a racket. Then the gang began to

throw lead from the cabin, an' we all hunted cover.  Fightin'

went on all night.  In the mornin' all my outfit was killed but

two, an' they was shot up bad.  We fought all day without eatin'

or drinkin', except some whisky I hed, an' at night I was on the

job by my lonesome.



"Bein' bunged up some myself, I laid off an' went down to the

river to wash the blood off, tie up my wounds, an' drink a

leetle.  While I was down there along comes one of the cutthroats

with a bucket.  Instead of gettin' water he got lead, an' as be

was about to croak he tells me a whole bunch of outlaws was

headin' in there, doo to-morrer.  An' if I wanted to rescoo the

gurl I hed to be hurryin'.  There was five fellers left in the

cabin.



I went hack to the thicket where I hed left my hoss, an' loaded

up with two more guns an' another belt, an' busted a fresh box of

shells.  If I recollect proper, I got some cigarettes, too. 

Well, I mozied back to the cabin.  It was a boo-tiful moonshiny

night, an' I wondered if ole Bill's gun was as purty as I'd

heerd.  The grass growed long round the cabin, an' I crawled up

to the door without startin' anythin'.  Then I figgered.  There

was only one door in thet cabin, an' it was black dark inside.  I

jest grabbed open the door an' slipped in quick.  It worked all

right.  They heerd me, but hedn't been quick enough to ketch me

in the light of the door.  Of course there was some shots, but I

ducked too quick, an' changed my position.



"Ladies an' gentlemen, thet there was some dool by night.  An' I

wasn't often in the place where they shot.  I was most wonderful

patient, an' jest waited until one of them darned ruffians would

get so nervous he'd hev to hunt me up. When mornin' come there

they was all piled up on the floor, all shot to pieces.  I found

the gurl.  Purty!  Say, she was boo-tiful.  We went down to the

river, where she begun to bathe my wounds.  I'd collected a dozen

more or so, an' the sight of tears in her lovely eyes, an' my

blood a-stainin' of her little hands, jest nat'rally wakened a

trembly spell in my heart.  I seen she was took the same way, an'

thet settled it.



"We was comin' up from the river, an' I hed jest straddled my

hoss, with the gurl behind, when we run right into thet cutthroat

gang thet was doo about then.  Bein' some handicapped, I couldn't

drop more 'n one gun-round of them, an' then I hed to slope.  The

whole gang follered me, an' some miles out chased me over a ridge

right into a big herd of buffalo.  Before I knowed what was what

thet herd broke into a stampede, with me in the middle.  Purty

soon the buffalo closed in tight.  I knowed I was in some peril

then.  But the gurl trusted me somethin' pitiful.  I seen again

thet she hed fell in love with me.  I could tell from the way she

hugged me an' yelled.  Before long I was some put to it to keep

my boss on his feet.  Far as I could see was dusty, black,

bobbin', shaggy humps.  A huge cloud of dust went along over our

heads.  The roar of tramplin' hoofs was turrible.  My hoss

weakened, went down, an' was carried along a leetle while I

slipped off with the gurl on to the backs of the buffalo.



"Ladies, I ain't denyin' that then Monty Price was some scairt. 

Fust time in my life!  But the trustin' face of thet boo-tiful

gurl, as she lay in my arms an' hugged me an' yelled, made my

spirit leap like a shootin' star.  I just began to jump from

buffalo to buffalo.  I must hev jumped a mile of them bobbin'

backs before I come to open places.  An' here's where I performed

the greatest stunts of my life.  I hed on my big spurs, an' I

jest sit down an' rid an' spurred till thet pertickler buffalo I

was on got near another, an' then I'd flop over.  Thusly I got to

the edge of the herd, tumbled off'n the last one, an' rescooed

the gurl.



"Well, as my memory takes me back, thet was a most affectin' walk

home to the little town where she lived.  But she wasn't troo to

me, an' married another feller.  I was too much a sport to kill

him.  But thet low-down trick rankled in my breast.  Gurls is

strange.  I've never stopped wonderin' how any gurl who has been

hugged an' kissed by one man could marry another.  But matoor

experience teaches me thet sich is the case."



The cowboys roared; Helen and Mrs. Beck and Edith laughed till

they cried; Madeline found repression absolutely impossible;

Dorothy sat hugging her knees, her horror at the story no greater

than at Monty's unmistakable reference to her and to the

fickleness of women; and Castleton for the first time appeared to

be moved out of his imperturbability, though not in any sense by

humor.  Indeed, when he came to notice it, he was dumfounded by

the mirth.



"By Jove! you Americans are an extraordinary people," he said. 

"I don't see anything blooming funny in Mr. Price's story of his

adventure.  By Jove! that was a bally warm occasion.  Mr. Price,

when you speak of being frightened for the only time in your

life, I appreciate what you mean.  I have experienced that.  I

was frightened once."



"Dook, I wouldn't hev thought it of you," replied Monty.  "I'm

sure tolerable curious to hear about it."



Madeline and her friends dared not break the spell, for fear that

the Englishman might hold to his usual modest reticence.  He had

explored in Brazil, seen service in the Boer War, hunted in India

and Africa--matters of experience of which he never spoke.  Upon

this occasion, however, evidently taking Monty's recital word for

word as literal truth, and excited by it into a Homeric mood, he

might tell a story.  The cowboys almost fell upon their knees in

their importunity. There was a suppressed eagerness in their

solicitations, a hint of something that meant more than desire,

great as it was, to hear a story told by an English lord. 

Madeline divined instantly that the cowboys had suddenly fancied

that Castleton was not the dense and easily fooled person they

had made such game of; that he had played his part well; that he

was having fun at their expense; that he meant to tell a story, a

lie which would simply dwarf Monty's.  Nels's keen, bright

expectation suggested how he would welcome the joke turned upon

Monty.  The slow closing of Monty's cavernous smile, the gradual

sinking of his proud bearing, the doubt with which he began to

regard Castleton--these were proofs of his fears.



"I have faced charging tigers and elephants in India, and

charging rhinos and lions in Africa," began Castleton, his quick

and fluent speech so different from the drawl of his ordinary

conversation; "but I never was frightened but once. It will not

do to hunt those wild beasts if you are easily balled up.  This

adventure I have in mind happened in British East Africa, in

Uganda.  I was out with safari, and we were in a native district

much infested by man-eating lions.  Perhaps I may as well state

that man-eaters are very different from ordinary lions.  They are

always matured beasts, and sometimes--indeed, mostly--are old. 

They become man-eaters most likely by accident or necessity. 

When old they find it more difficult to make a kill, being

slower, probably, and with poorer teeth. Driven by hunger, they

stalk and kill a native, and, once having tasted human blood,

they want no other.  They become absolutely fearless and terrible

in their attacks.



"The natives of this village near where we camped were in a

terrorized state owing to depredations of two or more man-eaters. 

The night of our arrival a lion leaped a stockade fence, seized a

native from among others sitting round a fire, and leaped out

again, carrying the screaming fellow away into the darkness.  I

determined to kill these lions, and made a permanent camp in the

village for that purpose.  By day I sent beaters into the brush

and rocks of the river-valley, and by night I watched.  Every

night the lions visited us, but I did not see one.  I discovered

that when they roared around the camp they were not so liable to

attack as when they were silent.  It was indeed remarkable how

silently they could stalk a man.  They could creep through a

thicket so dense you would not believe a rabbit could get

through, and do it without the slightest sound.  Then, when ready

to charge, they did so with terrible onslaught and roar.  They

leaped right into a circle of fires, tore down huts, even dragged

natives from the low trees.  There was no way to tell at which

point they would make an attack.



"After ten days or more of this I was worn out by loss of sleep. 

And one night, when tired out with watching, I fell asleep.  My

gun-bearer was alone in the tent with me.  A terrible roar

awakened me, then an unearthly scream pierced right into my ears. 

I always slept with my rifle in my hands, and, grasping it, I

tried to rise.  But I could not for the reason that a lion was

standing over me.  Then I lay still. The screams of my gun-bearer

told me that the lion had him.  I was fond of this fellow and

wanted to save him.  I thought it best, however, not to move

while the lion stood over me. Suddenly he stepped, and I felt

poor Luki's feet dragging across me.  He screamed, 'Save me,

master!'  And instinctively I grasped at him and caught his foot. 

The lion walked out of the tent dragging me as I held to Luki's

foot.  The night was bright moonlight.  I could see the lion

distinctly.  He was a huge, black-maned brute, and he held Luki

by the shoulder.  The poor lad kept screaming frightfully.  The

man-eater must have dragged me forty yards before he became aware

of a double incumbrance to his progress.  Then he halted and

turned.  By Jove! he made a devilish fierce object with his

shaggy, massive head, his green-fire eyes, and his huge jaws

holding Luki.  I let go of Luki's foot and bethought myself of

the gun.  But as I lay there on my side, before attempting to

rise, I made a horrible discovery.  I did not have my rifle at

all.  I had Luki's iron spear, which he always had near him.  My

rifle had slipped out of the hollow of my arm, and when the lion

awakened me, in my confusion I picked up Luki's spear instead. 

The bloody brute dropped Luki and uttered a roar that shook the

ground.  It was then I felt frightened.  For an instant I was

almost paralyzed.  The lion meant to charge, and in one spring he

could reach me.  Under circumstances like those a man can think

many things in little time.  I knew to try to run would be fatal. 

I remembered how strangely lions had been known to act upon

occasion.  One had been frightened by an umbrella; one had been

frightened by a blast from a cow-horn; another had been

frightened by a native who in running from one lion ran right at

the other which he had not seen.  Accordingly, I wondered if I

could frighten the lion that meant to leap at me.  Acting upon

wild impulse, I prodded him in the hind quarters with the spear. 

Ladies and gentlemen, I am a blooming idiot if that lion did not

cower like a whipped dog, put his tail down, and begin to slink

away.  Quick to see my chance, I jumped up yelling, and made

after him, prodding him again.  He let out a bellow such as you

could imagine would come from an outraged king of beasts.  I

prodded again, and then he loped off.  I found Luki not badly

hurt.  In fact, he got well.  But I've never forgotten that

scare."



When Castleton finished his narrative there was a trenchant

silence.  All eyes were upon Monty.  He looked beaten, disgraced,

a disgusted man.  Yet there shone from his face a wonderful

admiration for Castleton.



"Dook, you win!" he said; and, dropping his head, he left the

camp-fire circle with the manner of a deposed emperor.



Then the cowboys exploded.  The quiet, serene, low-voiced Nels

yelled like a madman and he stood upon his head.  All the other

cowboys went through marvelous contortions.  Mere noise was

insufficient to relieve their joy at what they considered the

fall and humiliation of the tyrant Monty.



The Englishman stood there and watched then in amused

consternation.  They baffled his understanding.  Plain it was to

Madeline and her friends that Castleton had told the simple

truth.  But never on the earth, or anywhere else, could Nels and

his comrades have been persuaded that Castleton had not lied

deliberately to humble their great exponent of Ananias.



Everybody seemed reluctant to break the camp-fire spell.  The

logs had burned out to a great heap of opal and gold and red

coals, in the heart of which quivered a glow alluring to the

spirit of dreams.  As the blaze subsided the shadows of the pines

encroached darker and darker upon the circle of fading light.  A

cool wind fanned the embers, whipped up flakes of white ashes,

and moaned through the trees.  The wild yelps of coyotes were

dying in the distance, and the sky was a wonderful dark-blue dome

spangled with white stars.



"What a perfect night!" said Madeline.  "This. is a night to

understand the dream, the mystery, the wonder of the Southwest. 

Florence, for long you have promised to tell us the story of the

lost mine of the padres.  It will give us all pleasure, make us

understand something of the thrall in which this land held the

Spaniards who discovered it so many years ago.  It will be

especially interesting now, because this mountain hides somewhere

under its crags the treasures of the lost mine of the padres."







'In the sixteenth century," Florence began, in her soft, slow

voice so suited to the nature of the legend, "a poor young padre

of New Spain was shepherding his goats upon a hill when the

Virgin appeared before him.  He prostrated himself at her feet,

and when he looked up she was gone.  But upon the maguey plant

near where she had stood there were golden ashes of a strange and

wonderful substance.  He took the incident as a good omen and

went again to the hilltop.  Under the maguey had sprung up

slender stalks of white, bearing delicate gold flowers, and as

these flowers waved in the wind a fine golden dust, as fine as

powdered ashes, blew away toward the north. Padre Juan was

mystified, but believed that great fortune attended upon him and

his poor people.  So he went again and again to the hilltop in

hope that the Virgin would appear to him.



"One morning, as the sun rose gloriously, he looked across the

windy hill toward the waving grass arid golden flowers under the

maguey, and he saw the Virgin beckoning to him.  Again he fell

upon his knees; but she lifted him and gave him of the golden

flowers, and bade him leave his home and people to follow where

these blowing golden ashes led.  There he would find gold--pure

gold--wonderful fortune to bring back to his poor people to build

a church for them, and a city.



"Padre Juan took the flowers and left his home, promising to

return, and he traveled northward over the hot and dusty desert,

through the mountain passes, to a new country where fierce and

warlike Indians menaced his life.  He was gentle and good, and of

a persuasive speech.  Moreover, he was young and handsome of

person.  The Indians were Apaches, and among them he became a

missionary, while always he was searching for the flowers of

gold.  He heard of gold lying in pebbles upon the mountain

slopes, but he never found any.  A few of the Apaches he

converted; the most of them, however, were prone to be hostile to

him and his religion.  But Padre Juan prayed and worked on.



"There came a time when the old Apache chief, imagining the padre

had designs upon his influence with the tribe, sought to put him

to death by fire.  The chief's daughter, a beautiful, dark-eyed

maiden, secretly loved Juan and believed in his mission, and she

interceded for his life and saved him. Juan fell in love with

her.  One day she came to him wearing golden flowers in her dark

hair, and as the wind blew the flowers a golden dust blew upon

it.  Juan asked her where to find such flowers, and she told him

that upon a certain day she would take him to the mountain to

look for them.  And upon the day she led up to the mountain-top

from which they could see beautiful valleys and great trees and

cool waters.  There at the top of a wonderful slope that looked

down upon the world, she showed Juan the flowers.  And Juan found

gold in such abundance that he thought he would go out of his

mind.  Dust of gold!  Grains of gold!  Pebbles of gold!  Rocks of

gold!  He was rich beyond all dreams.  He remembered the Virgin

and her words.  He must return to his people and build their

church, and the great city that would bear his name.



"But Juan tarried.  Always he was going manana.  He loved the

dark-eyed Apache girl so well that he could not leave her.  He

hated himself for his infidelity to his Virgin, to his people. 

He was weak and false, a sinner.  But he could not go, and he

gave himself up to love of the Indian maiden.



"The old Apache chief discovered the secret love of his daughter

and the padre.  And, fierce in his anger, he took her up into the

mountains and burned her alive and cast her ashes upon the wind. 

He did not kill Padre Juan.  He was too wise, and perhaps too

cruel, for he saw the strength of Juan's love. Besides, many of

his tribe had learned much from the Spaniard.



"Padre Juan fell into despair.  He had no desire to live.  He

faded and wasted away.  But before he died he went to the old

Indians who had burned the maiden, and he begged them, when he

was dead, to burn his body and to cast his ashes to the wind from

that wonderful slope, where they would blow away to mingle

forever with those of his Indian sweetheart.



"The Indians promised, and when Padre Juan died they burned his

body and took his ashes to the mountain heights and cast them to

the wind, where they drifted and fell to mix with the ashes of

the Indian girl he had loved.



"Years passed.  More padres traveled across the desert to the

home of the Apaches, and they heard the story of Juan. Among

their number was a padre who in his youth had been one of Juan's

people.  He set forth to find Juan's grave, where he believed he

would also find the gold.  And he came back with pebbles of gold

and flowers that shed a golden dust, and he told a wonderful

story.  He had climbed and climbed into the mountains, and he had

come to a wonderful slope under the crags.  That slope was yellow

with golden flowers.  When he touched them golden ashes drifted

from them and blew down among the rocks.  There the padre found

dust of gold, grains of gold, pebbles of gold, rocks of gold.



"Then all the padres went into the mountains.  But the discoverer

of the mine lost his way.  They searched and searched until they

were old and gray, but never found the wonderful slope and

flowers that marked the grave and the mine of Padre Juan.



"In the succeeding years the story was handed down from father to

son.  But of the many who hunted for the lost mine of the padres

there was never a Mexican or an Apache.  For the Apache the

mountain slopes were haunted by the spirit of an Indian maiden

who had been false to her tribe and forever accursed.  For the

Mexican the mountain slopes were haunted by the spirit of the

false padre who rolled stones upon the heads of those adventurers

who sought to find his grave and his accursed gold."


