





VIII El Capitan



Stillwell's interest in the revolution across the Mexican line

had manifestly increased with the news that Gene Stewart had

achieved distinction with the rebel forces.  Thereafter the old

cattleman sent for El Paso and Douglas newspapers, wrote to

ranchmen he knew on the big bend of the Rio Grande, and he would

talk indefinitely to any one who would listen to him. There was

not any possibility of Stillwell's friends at the ranch

forgetting his favorite cowboy.  Stillwell always prefaced his

eulogy with an apologetic statement that Stewart had gone to the

bad.  Madeline liked to listen to him, though she was not always

sure which news was authentic and which imagination.



There appeared to be no doubt, however, that the cowboy had

performed some daring feats for the rebels.  Madeline found his

name mentioned in several of the border papers.  When the rebels

under Madero stormed and captured the city of Juarez, Stewart did

fighting that won him the name of El Capitan.  This battle

apparently ended the revolution.  The capitulation of President

Diaz followed shortly, and there was a feeling of relief among

ranchers on the border from Texas to California. Nothing more was

heard of Gene Stewart until April, when a report reached

Stillwell that the cowboy had arrived in El Cajon, evidently

hunting trouble.  The old cattleman saddled a horse and started

post-haste for town.  In two days he returned, depressed in

spirit.  Madeline happened to be present when Stillwell talked to

Alfred.



"I got there too late, Al," said the cattleman.  "Gene was gone. 

An' what do you think of this?  Danny Mains hed jest left with a

couple of burros packed.  I couldn't find what way he went, but

I'm bettin' he hit the Peloncillo trail."



"Danny will show up some day," replied Alfred.  "What did you

learn about Stewart?  Maybe he left with Danny."



"Not much," said Stillwell, shortly.  "Gene's hell-bent fer

election!  No mountains fer him."



"Well tell us about him."



Stillwell wiped his sweaty brow and squared himself to talk.



"Wal, it's sure amazin' strange about Gene.  Its got me locoed. 

He arrived in El Cajon a week or so ago.  He was trained down

like as if he'd been ridin' the range all winter. He hed plenty

of money--Mex, they said.  An' all the Greasers was crazy about

him.  Called him El Capitan.  He got drunk an' went roarin' round

fer Pat Hawe.  You remember that Greaser who was plugged last

October--the night Miss Majesty arrived? Wal, he's daid.  He's

daid, an' people says thet Pat is a-goin' to lay thet killin'

onto Gene.  I reckon thet's jest talk, though Pat is mean enough

to do it, if he hed the nerve. Anyway, if he was in El Cajon he

kept mighty much to hisself. Gene walked up an' down, up an'

down, all day an' night, lookin' fer Pat.  But he didn't find

him.  An', of course, he kept gettin' drunker.  He jest got plumb

bad.  He made lots of trouble, but there wasn't no gun-play. 

Mebbe thet made him sore, so he went an' licked Flo's

brother-in-law.  Thet wasn't so bad.  Jack sure needed a good

lickin'.  Wal, then Gene met Danny an' tried to get Danny drunk. 

An' he couldn't!  What do you think of that?  Danny hedn't been

drinkin'--wouldn't touch a drop.  I'm sure glad of thet, but it's

amazin' strange.  Why, Danny was a fish fer red liquor.  I guess

he an' Gene had some pretty hard words, though I'm not sure about

thet.  Anyway, Gene went down to the railroad an' he got on an

engine, an' he was in the engine when it pulled out.  Lord, I

hope he doesn't hold up the train!  If he gets gay over in

Arizona he'll go to the pen at Yuma.  An' thet pen is a graveyard

fer cowboys.  I wired to agents along the railroad to look out

fer Stewart, an' to wire back to me if he's located."



"Suppose you do find him, Stillwell, what can you do?" inquired

Alfred.



The old man nodded gloomily.



"I straightened him up once.  Mebbe I can do it again." Then,

brightening somewhat, be turned to Madeline.  "I jest hed an

idee, Miss Majesty.  If I can get him, Gene Steward is the cowboy

I want fer my foreman.  He can manage this bunch of cow-punchers

thet are drivin' me dotty.  What's more, since he's fought fer

the rebels an' got that name El Capitan, all the Greasers in the

country will kneel to him.  Now, Miss Majesty, we hevn't got rid

of Don Carlos an' his vaqueros yet. To be sure, he sold you his

house an' ranch an' stock.  But you remember nothin' was put in

black and white about when he should get out.  An' Don Carlos

ain't gettin' out.  I don't like the looks of things a little

bit.  I'll tell you now thet Don Carlos knows somethin' about the

cattle I lost, an' thet you've been losin' right along.  Thet

Greaser is hand an' glove with the rebels.  I'm willin' to gamble

thet when he does get out he an' his vaqueros will make another

one of the bands of guerrillas thet are harassin' the border. 

This revolution ain't over' yet.  It's jest commenced.  An' all

these gangs of outlaws are goin' to take advantage of it.  We'll

see some old times, mebbe.  Wal, I need Gene Stewart.  I need him

bad.  Will you let me hire him, Miss Majesty, if I can get him

straightened up?"



The old cattleman ended huskily.



"Stillwell, by all means find Stewart, and do not wait to

straighten him up.  Bring him to the ranch," replied Madeline.



Thanking her, Stillwell led his horse away.



"Strange how he loves that cowboy!" murmured Madeline.



"Not so strange, Majesty," replied her brother.  "Not when you

know.  Stewart has been with Stillwell on some hard trips into

the desert alone.  There's no middle course of feeling between

men facing death in the desert.  Either hey hate each other or

love each other.  I don't know, but I imagine Stewart did

something for Stillwell--saved us life, perhaps.  Besides,

Stewart's a lovable chap when he's going straight.  I hope

Stillwell brings him back.  We do need him, Majesty.  He's a born

leader.  Once I saw him ride into a bunch of Mexicans whom we

suspected of rustling.  It was fine to see him.  Well, I'm sorry

to tell you that we are worried about Don Carlos.  Some of his

vaqueros came into my yard the other day when I had left Flo

alone.  She had a bad scare.  These vaqueros have been different

since Don Carlos sold the ranch. For that matter, I never would

have trusted a white woman alone with them.  But they are bolder

now.  Something's in the wind. They've got assurance.  They can

ride off any night and cross the border."



During the succeeding week Madeline discovered that a good deal

of her sympathy for Stillwell in his hunt for the reckless

Stewart had insensibly grown to be sympathy for the cowboy.  It

was rather a paradox, she thought, that opposed to the continual

reports of Stewart's wildness as he caroused from town to town

were the continual expressions of good will and faith and hope

universally given out by those near her at the ranch.  Stillwell

loved the cowboy; Florence was fond of him; Alfred liked and

admired him, pitied him; the cowboys swore their regard for him

the more he disgraced himself.  The Mexicans called him El Gran

Capitan.  Madeline's personal opinion of Stewart had not changed

in the least since the night it had been formed.  But certain

attributes of his, not clearly defined in her mind, and the gift

of his beautiful horse, his valor with the fighting rebels, and

all this strange regard for him, especially that of her brother,

made her exceedingly regret the cowboy's present behavior.



Meanwhile Stillwell was so earnest and zealous that one not

familiar with the situation would have believed he was trying to

find and reclaim his own son.  He made several trips to little

stations in the valley, and from these he returned with a gloomy

face.  Madeline got the details from Alfred. Stewart was going

from bad to worse--drunk, disorderly, savage, sure to land in the

penitentiary.  Then came a report that hurried Stillwell off to

Rodeo.  He returned on the third day, a crushed man.  He bad been

so bitterly hurt that no one, not even Madeline, could get out of

him what had happened.  He admitted finding Stewart, failing to

influence him; and when the old cattleman got so far he turned

purple in the face and talked to himself, as if dazed: "But Gene

was drunk.  He was drunk, or he couldn't hev treated old Bill

like thet!"



Madeline was stirred with an anger toward the brutal cowboy that

was as strong as her sorrow for the loyal old cattleman.  And it

was when Stillwell gave up that she resolved to take a hand.  The

persistent faith of Stillwell, his pathetic excuses in the face

of what must have been Stewart's violence, perhaps baseness,

actuated her powerfully, gave her new insight into human nature. 

She honored a faith that remained unshaken.  And the strange

thought came to her that Stewart must somehow be worthy of such a

faith, or he never could have inspired it.  Madeline discovered

that she wanted to believe that somewhere deep down in the most

depraved and sinful wretch upon earth there was some grain of

good.  She yearned to have the faith in human nature that

Stillwell had in Stewart.



She sent Nels, mounted upon his own horse, and leading Majesty,

to Rodeo in search of Stewart.  Nels had instructions to bring

Stewart back to the ranch.  In due time Nels returned, leading

the roan without a rider.



"Yep, I shore found him," replied Nels, when questioned.  "Found

him half sobered up.  He'd been in a scrap, an' somebody hed put

him to sleep, I guess.  Wal, when he seen thet roan hoss he let

out a yell an' grabbed him round the neck.  The hoss knowed him,

all right.  Then Gene hugged the hoss an' cried--cried like--I

never seen no one who cried like he did.  I waited awhile, an'

was jest goin' to say somethin' to him when he turned on me

red-eyed, mad as fire. 'Nels,' he said, 'I care a hell of a lot

fer thet boss, an' I liked you pretty well, but if you don't take

him away quick I'll shoot you both.'  Wal, I lit out.  I didn't

even git to say howdy to him."



Nels, you think it useless--any attempt to see him--persuade

him?" asked Madeline.



"I shore do, Miss Hammond," replied Nels, gravely. "I've seen a

few sun-blinded an' locoed an' snake-poisoned an' skunk-bitten

cow-punchers in my day, but Gene Stewart beats 'em all.  He's

shore runnin' wild fer the divide."



Madeline dismissed Nels, but before he got out of earshot she

heard him speak to Stillwell, who awaited him on the porch.



"Bill, put this in your pipe an' smoke it--none of them scraps

Gene has hed was over a woman!  It used to be thet when he was

drank he'd scrap over every pretty Greaser girl he'd run across. 

Thet's why Pat Hawe thinks Gene plugged the strange vaquero who

was with little Bonita thet night last fall.  Wal, Gene's

scrappin' now jest to git shot up hisself, for some reason thet

only God Almighty knows."



Nels's story of how Stewart wept over his horse influenced

Madeline powerfully.  Her next move was to persuade Alfred to see

if he could not do better with this doggedly bent cowboy.  Alfred

needed only a word of persuasion, for he said he had considered

going to Rodeo of his own accord.  He went, and returned alone.



"Majesty, I can't explain Stewart's singular actions," said

Alfred.  "I saw him, talked with him.  He knew me, but nothing I

said appeared to get to him.  He has changed terribly.  I fancy

his once magnificent strength is breaking. It--it actually hurt

me to look at him.  I couldn't have fetched him back here--not as

he is now.  I heard all about him, and if he isn't downright out

of his mind he's hell-bent, as Bill says, on getting killed. 

Some of his escapades are--are not for your ears.  Bill did all

any man could do for another.  We've all done our best for

Stewart.  If you'd been given a chance perhaps you could have

saved him.  But it's too late.  Put it out of mind now, dear."



Madeline, however, did not forget nor give it up.  If she had

forgotten or surrendered, she felt that she would have been

relinquishing infinitely more than hope to aid one ruined man. 

But she was at a loss to know what further steps to take.  Days

passed, and each one brought additional gossip of Stewart's

headlong career toward the Yuma penitentiary.  For he had crossed

the line into Cochise County, Arizona, where sheriffs kept a

stricter observance of law.  Finally a letter came from a friend

of Nels's in Chiricahua saying that Stewart had been hurt in a

brawl there.  His hurt was not serious, but it would probably

keep him quiet long enough to get sober, and this opportunity,

Nels's informant said, would be a good one for Stewart's friends

to take him home before he got locked up. This epistle inclosed a

letter to Stewart from his sister. Evidently, it had been found

upon him.  It told a story of illness and made an appeal for aid. 

Nels's friend forwarded this letter without Stewart's knowledge,

thinking Stillwell might care to help Stewart's family.  Stewart

had no money, he said.



The sister's letter found its way to Madeline.  She read it,

tears in her eyes.  It told Madeline much more than its brief

story of illness and poverty and wonder why Gene had not written

home for so long.  It told of motherly love, sisterly love,

brotherly love--dear family ties that had not been broken.  It

spoke of pride in this El Capitan brother who had become famous. 

It was signed "your loving sister Letty."



Not improbably, Madeline revolved in mind, this letter was one

reason for Stewart's headstrong, long-continued abasement.  It

had been received too late--after he had squandered the money

that would have meant so much to mother and sister.  Be that as

it might, Madeline immediately sent a bank-draft to Stewart's

sister with a letter explaining that the money was drawn in

advance on Stewart's salary.  This done, she impulsively

determined to go to Chiricahua herself.



The horseback-rides Madeline had taken to this little Arizona

hamlet had tried her endurance to the utmost; but the journey by

automobile, except for some rocky bits of road and sandy

stretches, was comfortable, and a matter of only a few hours. 

The big touring-car was still a kind of seventh wonder to the

Mexicans and cowboys; not that automobiles were very new and

strange, but because this one was such an enormous machine and

capable of greater speed than an express-train.  The chauffeur

who had arrived with the car found his situation among the

jealous cowboys somewhat far removed from a bed of roses.  He had

been induced to remain long enough to teach the operating and

mechanical technique of the car.  And choice fell upon Link

Stevens, for the simple reason that of all the cowboys he was the

only one with any knack for mechanics.  Now Link had been a

hard-riding, hard-driving cowboy, and that winter he had

sustained an injury to his leg, caused by a bad fall, and was

unable to sit his horse.  This had been gall and wormwood to him. 

But when the big white automobile came and he was elected to

drive it, life was once more worth living for him.  But all the

other cowboys regarded Link and his machine as some correlated

species of demon.  They were deathly afraid of both.



It was for this reason that Nels, when Madeline asked him to

accompany her to Chiricahua, replied, reluctantly, that he would

rather follow on his horse.  However, she prevailed over his

hesitancy, and with Florence also in the car they set out.  For

miles and miles the valley road was smooth, hard-packed, and

slightly downhill.  And when speeding was perfectly safe,

Madeline was not averse to it.  The grassy plain sailed backward

in gray sheets, and the little dot in the valley grew larger and

larger.  From time to time Link glanced round at unhappy Nels,

whose eyes were wild and whose hands clutched his seat.  While

the car was crossing the sandy and rocky places, going slowly,

Nels appeared to breathe easier. And when it stopped in the wide,

dusty street of Chiricahua Nels gladly tumbled out.



"Nels, we shall wait here in the car while you find Stewart,"

said Madeline.



"Miss Hammond, I reckon Gene'll run when he sees us, if he's able

to run," replied Nels.  "Wal, I'll go find him an' make up my

mind then what we'd better do."



Nels crossed the railroad track and disappeared behind the low,

flat houses.  After a little time he reappeared and hurried up to

the car.  Madeline felt his gray gaze searching her face.



"Miss Hammond, I found him," said Nels.  "He was sleepin'.  I

woke him.  He's sober an' not bad hurt; but I don't believe you

ought to see him.  Mebbe Florence -"



"Nels, I want to see him myself.  Why not?  What did he say when

you told him I was here?"



"Shore I didn't tell him that.  I jest says, 'Hullo, Gene!' an'

he says, 'My Gawd!  Nels! mebbe I ain't glad to see a human

bein'.'  He asked me who was with me, an' I told him Link an'

some friends.  I said I'd fetch them in.  He hollered at thet. 

But I went, anyway.  Now, if you really will see him, Miss

Hammond, it's a good chance.  But shore it's a touchy matter, an'

you'll be some sick at sight of him.  He's layin' in a Greaser

hole over here.  Likely the Greasers hev been kind to him.  But

they're shore a poor lot."



Madeline did not hesitate a moment.



"Thank you, Nels.  Take me at once.  Come, Florence."



They left the car, now surrounded by gaping-eyed Mexican

children, and crossed the dusty space to a narrow lane between

red adobe walls.  Passing by several houses, Nels stopped at the

door of what appeared to be an alleyway leading back.  I was

filthy.



"He's in there, around thet first corner.  It's a patio, open an'

sunny.  An', Miss Hammond, if you don't mind, I'll wait here for

you.  I reckon Gene wouldn't like any fellers around when he sees

you girls."



It was that which made Madeline hesitate then and go forward

slowly.  She had given no thought at all to what Stewart might

feel when suddenly surprised by her presence.



"Florence, you wait also," said Madeline, at the doorway, and

turned in alone.



And she had stepped into a broken-down patio littered with

alfalfa straw and debris, all clear in the sunlight.  Upon a

bench, back toward her, sat a man looking out through the rents

in the broken wall.  He had not heard her.  The place was not

quite so filthy and stifling as the passages Madeline had come

through to get there.  Then she saw that it had been used as a

corral.  A rat ran boldly across the dirt floor.  The air swarmed

with flies, which the man brushed at with weary hand. Madeline

did not recognize Stewart.  The side of his face exposed to her

gaze was black, bruised, bearded.  His clothes were ragged and

soiled.  There were bits of alfalfa in his hair.  His shoulders

sagged.  He made a wretched and hopeless figure sitting there. 

Madeline divined something of why Nels shrank from being present.



"Mr. Stewart.  It is I, Miss Hammond, come to see you," she said.



He grew suddenly perfectly motionless, as if he had been changed

to stone.  She repeated her greeting.



His body jerked.  He moved violently as if instinctively to turn

and face this intruder; but a more violent movement checked him.



Madeline waited.  How singular that this ruined cowboy had pride

which kept him from showing his face!  And was it not shame more

than pride?



"Mr. Stewart, I have come to talk with you, if you will let me."



"Go away," he muttered.



"Mr. Stewart!" she began, with involuntary hauteur. But instantly

she corrected herself, became deliberate and cool, for she saw

that she might fail to be even heard by this man.  "I have come

to help you.  Will you let me?"



"For God's sake!  You--you--" he choked over the words.  "Go

away!"



"Stewart, perhaps it was for God's sake that I came," said

Madeline, gently.  "Surely it was for yours--and your sister's -"

Madeline bit her tongue, for she had not meant to betray her

knowledge of Letty.



He groaned, and, staggering up to the broken wall, he leaned

there with his face hidden.  Madeline reflected that perhaps the

slip of speech had been well.



"Stewart, please let me say what I have to say?"



He was silent.  And she gathered courage and inspiration.



"Stillwell is deeply hurt, deeply grieved that he could not turn

you back from this--this fatal course.  My brother is also.  They

wanted to help you.  And so do I.  I have come, thinking somehow

I might succeed where they have failed.  Nels brought your

sister's letter.  I--I read it.  I was only the more determined

to try to help you, and indirectly help your mother and Letty. 

Stewart, we want you to come to the ranch. Stillwell needs you

for his foreman.  The position is open to you, and you can name

your salary.  Both Al and Stillwell are worried about Don Carlos,

the vaqueros, and the raids down along the border.  My cowboys

are without a capable leader. Will you come?"



"No," he answered.



"But Stillwell wants you so badly."



"No."



"Stewart, I want you to come."



"No."



His replies had been hoarse, loud, furious.  They disconcerted

Madeline, and she paused, trying to think of a way to proceed. 

Stewart staggered away from the wall, and, falling upon the

bench, he hid his face in his hands.  All his motions, like his

speech, had been violent.



"Will you please go away?" he asked.



"Stewart, certainly I cannot remain here longer if you insist

upon my going.  But why not listen to me when I want so much to

help you?  Why?"



"I'm a damned blackguard," he burst out.  "But I was a gentleman

once, and I'm not so low that I can stand for you seeing me

here."



"When I made up my mind to help you I made it up to see you

wherever you were.  Stewart, come away, come back with us to the

ranch.  You are in a bad condition now.  Everything looks black

to you.  But that will pass.  When you are among friends again

you will get well.  You will he your old self. The very fact that

you were once a gentleman, that you come of good family, makes

you owe so much more to yourself.  Why, Stewart, think how young

you are!  It is a shame to waste your life.  Come back with me."



"Miss Hammond, this was my last plunge," he replied,

despondently.  "It's too late."



"Oh no, it is not so bad as that."



"It's too late."



"At least make an effort, Stewart.  Try!"



"No.  There's no use.  I'm done for.  Please leave me--thank you

for -"



He had been savage, then sullen, and now he was grim. Madeline

all but lost power to resist his strange, deadly, cold finality. 

No doubt he knew he was doomed.  Yet something halted her--held

her even as she took a backward step.  And she became conscious

of a subtle change in her own feeling. She had come into that

squalid hole, Madeline Hammond, earnest enough, kind enough in

her own intentions; but she had been almost imperious--a woman

habitually, proudly used to being obeyed.  She divined that all

the pride, blue blood, wealth, culture, distinction, all the

impersonal condescending persuasion, all the fatuous philanthropy

on earth would not avail to turn this man a single hair's-breadth

from his downward career to destruction.  Her coming had terribly

augmented his bitter hate of himself.  She was going to fail to

help him.  She experienced a sensation of impotence that amounted

almost to distress.   The situation assumed a tragic keenness. 

She had set forth to reverse the tide of a wild cowboy's

fortunes; she faced the swift wasting of his life, the damnation

of his soul.  The subtle consciousness of change in her was the

birth of that faith she had revered in Stillwell. And all at once

she became merely a woman, brave and sweet and indomitable.



"Stewart, look at me," she said.



He shuddered.  She advanced and laid a hand on his bent shoulder. 

Under the light touch he appeared to sink.



"Look at me," she repeated.



But he could not lift his head.  He was abject, crushed.  He

dared not show his swollen, blackened face.  His fierce, cramped

posture revealed more than his features might have shown; it

betrayed the torturing shame of a man of pride and passion, a man

who had been confronted in his degradation by the woman he had

dared to enshrine in his heart.  It betrayed his love.



"Listen, then," went on Madeline, and her voice was unsteady. 

"Listen to me, Stewart.  The greatest men are those who have

fallen deepest into the mire, sinned most, suffered most, and

then have fought their evil natures and conquered.  I think you

can shake off this desperate mood and be a man."



"No!" he cried.



"Listen to me again.  Somehow I know you're worthy of Stillwell's

love.  Will you come back with us--for his sake?"



"No.  It's too late, I tell you."



"Stewart, the best thing in life is faith in human nature.  I

have faith in you.  I believe yen are worth it."



"You're only kind and good--saying that.  You can't mean it."



"I mean it with all my heart," she replied, a sudden rich warmth

suffusing her body as she saw the first sign of his softening. 

"Will you come back--if not for your own sake or Stillwell's--

then for mine?"



"What am I to such a woman as you?"



"A man in trouble, Stewart.  But I have come to help you, to show

my faith in you."



"If I believed that I might try," he said.



"Listen," she began, softly, hurriedly.  "My word is not lightly

given.  Let it prove my faith in you.  Look at me now and say you

will come."



He heaved up his big frame as if trying to cast off a giant's

burden, and then slowly he turned toward her.  His face was a

blotched and terrible thing.  The physical brutalizing marks were

there, and at that instant all that appeared human to Madeline

was the dawning in dead, furnace-like eyes of a beautiful light.



"I'll come," he whispered, huskily.  "Give me a few days to

straighten up, then I'll come."


