





V The Round-Up



It was a crackling and roaring of fire that awakened Madeline

next morning, and the first thing she saw was a huge stone

fireplace in which lay a bundle of blazing sticks.  Some one had

kindled a fire while she slept.  For a moment the curious

sensation of being lost returned to her.  She just dimly

remembered reaching the ranch and being taken into a huge house

and a huge, dimly lighted room.  And it seemed to her that she

had gone to sleep at once, and had awakened without remembering

how she had gotten to bed.



But she was wide awake in an instant.  The bed stood near one end

of an enormous chamber.  The adobe walls resembled a hall in an

ancient feudal castle, stone-floored, stone-walled, with great

darkened rafters running across the ceiling.  The few articles of

furniture were worn out and sadly dilapidated.  Light flooded

into the room from two windows on the right of the fireplace and

two on the left, and another large window near the bedstead. 

Looking out from where she lay, Madeline saw a dark, slow

up-sweep of mountain.  Her eyes returned to the cheery, snapping

fire, and she watched it while gathering courage to get up.  The

room was cold.  When she did slip her bare feet out upon the

stone floor she very quickly put them back under the warm

blankets.  And she was still in bed trying to pluck up her

courage when, with a knock on the door and a cheerful greeting,

Florence entered, carrying steaming hot water.



"Good mawnin', Miss Hammond.  Hope you slept well. You sure were

tired last night.  I imagine you'll find this old rancno house as

cold as a barn.  It'll warm up directly.  Al's gone with the boys

and Bill.  We're to ride down on the range after a while when

your baggage comes."



Florence wore a woolen blouse with a scarf round her neck, a

short corduroy divided skirt, and boots; and while she talked she

energetically heaped up the burning wood in the fireplace, and

laid Madeline's clothes at the foot of the bed, and heated a rug

and put that on the floor by the bedside.  And lastly, with a

sweet, direct smile, she said:



"Al told me--and I sure saw myself--that you weren't used to

being without your maid.  Will you let me help you?"



"Thank you, I am going to be my own maid for a while. I expect I

do appear a very helpless individual, but really I do not feel

so.  Perhaps I have had just a little too much waiting on."



"All right.  Breakfast will be ready soon, and after that we'll

look about the place."



Madeline was charmed with the old Spanish house, and the more she

saw of it the more she thought what a delightful home it could be

made.  All the doors opened into a courtyard, or patio, as

Florence called it.  The house was low, in the shape of a

rectangle, and so immense in size that Madeline wondered if it

had been a Spanish barracks.  Many of the rooms were dark,

without windows, and they were empty.  Others were full of

ranchers' implements and sacks of grain and bales of hay. 

Florence called these last alfalfa.  The house itself appeared

strong and well preserved, and it was very picturesque.  But in

the living-rooms were only the barest necessities, and these were

worn out and comfortless.



However, when Madeline went outdoors she forgot the cheerless,

bare interior.  Florence led the way out on a porch and waved a

hand at a vast, colored void.  "That's what Bill likes," she

said.



At first Madeline could not tell what was sky and what was land. 

The immensity of the scene stunned her faculties of conception. 

She sat down in one of the old rocking-chairs and looked and

looked, and knew that she was not grasping the reality of what

stretched wondrously before her.



"We're up at the edge of the foothills," Florence said. "You

remember we rode around the northern end of the mountain range? 

Well, that's behind us now, and you look down across the line

into Arizona and Mexico.  That long slope of gray is the head of

the San Bernardino Valley.  Straight across you see the black

Chiricahua Mountains, and away down to the south the Guadalupe

Mountains.  That awful red gulf between is the desert, and far,

far beyond the dim, blue peaks are the Sierra Madres in Mexico."



Madeline listened and gazed with straining eyes, and wondered if

this was only a stupendous mirage, and why it seemed so different

from all else that she had seen, and so endless, so baffling, so

grand.



" It'll sure take you a little while to get used to being up high

and seeing so much," explained Florence.  "That's the secret--

we're up high, the air is clear, and there's the whole bare world

beneath us.  Don't it somehow rest you?  Well, it will.  Now see

those specks in the valley.  They are stations, little towns. 

The railroad goes down that way.  The largest speck is

Chiricahua.  It's over forty miles by trail. Here round to the

north you can see Don Carlos's rancho.  He's fifteen miles off,

and I sure wish he were a thousand.  That little green square

about half-way between here and Don Carlos--that's Al's ranch. 

Just below us are the adobe houses of the Mexicans.  There's a

church, too.  And here to the left you see Stillwell's corrals

and bunk-houses and his stables all falling to pieces.  The ranch

has gone to ruin.  All the ranches are going to ruin.  But most

of them are little one-horse affairs. And here--see that cloud of

dust down in the valley?  It's the round-up.  The boys are there,

and the cattle.  Wait, I'll get the glasses."



By their aid Madeline saw in the foreground a great, dense herd

of cattle with dark, thick streams and dotted lines of cattle

leading in every direction.  She saw streaks and clouds of dust,

running horses, and a band of horses grazing; and she descried

horsemen standing still like sentinels, and others in action.



"The round-up!  I want to know all about it--to see it," declared

Madeline.  "Please tell me what it means, what it's for, and then

take me down there."



"It's sure a sight, Miss Hammond.  I'll be glad to take you down,

but I fancy you'll not want to go close.  Few Eastern people who

regularly eat their choice cuts of roast beef and porterhouse

have any idea of the open range and the struggle cattle have to

live and the hard life of cowboys.  It'll sure open your eyes,

Miss Hammond.  I'm glad you care to know.  Your brother would

have made a big success in this cattle business if it hadn't been

for crooked work by rival ranchers.  He'll make it yet, in spite

of them."



"Indeed he shall," replied Madeline.  "But tell me, please, all

about the round-up."



"Well, in the first place, every cattleman has to have a brand to

identify his stock.  Without it no cattleman, nor half a hundred

cowboys, if he had so many, could ever recognize all the cattle

in a big herd.  There are no fences on our ranges.  They are all

open to everybody.  Some day I hope we'll be rich enough to fence

a range.  The different herds graze together.  Every calf has to

be caught, if possible, and branded with the mark of its mother. 

That's no easy job.  A maverick is an unbranded calf that has

been weaned and shifts for itself.  The maverick then belongs to

the man who finds it and brands it.  These little calves that

lose their mothers sure have a cruel time of it.  Many of them

die.  Then the coyotes and wolves and lions prey on them.  Every

year we have two big round-ups, but the boys do some branding all

the year. A calf should be branded as soon as it's found.  This

is a safeguard against cattle-thieves.  We don't have the

rustling of herds and bunches of cattle like we used to.  But

there's always the calf-thief, and always will be as long as

there's cattle-raising.  The thieves have a good many cunning

tricks. They kill the calf's mother or slit the calf's tongue so

it can't suck and so loses its mother.  They steal and hide a

calf and watch it till it's big enough to fare for itself, and

then brand it.  They make imperfect brands and finish them at a

later time.



"We have our big round-up in the fall, when there's plenty of

grass and water, and all the riding-stock as well as the cattle

are in fine shape.  The cattlemen in the valley meet with their

cowboys and drive in all the cattle they can find. Then they

brand and cut out each man's herd and drive it toward home.  Then

they go on up or down the valley, make another camp, and drive in

more cattle.  It takes weeks.  There are so many Greasers with

little bands of stock, and they are crafty and greedy.  Bill says

he knows Greaser cowboys, vaqueros, who never owned a steer or a

cow, and now they've got growing herds.  The same might be said

of more than one white cowboy. But there's not as much of that as

there used to be."



"And the horses?  I want to know about them," said Madeline, when

Florence paused.



"Oh, the cow-ponies!  Well, they sure are interesting. Broncos,

the boys call them.  Wild! they're wilder than the steers they

have to chase.  Bill's got broncos heah that never have been

broken and never will be.  And not every boy can ride them,

either.  The vaqueros have the finest horses.  Don Carlos has a

black that I'd give anything to own.  And he has other fine

stock.  Gene Stewart's big roan is a Mexican horse, the swiftest

and proudest I ever saw.  I was up on him once and--oh, he can

run!  He likes a woman, too, and that's sure something I want in

a horse.  I heard Al and Bill talking at breakfast about a horse

for you.  They were wrangling.  Bill wanted you to have one, and

Al another.  It was funny to hear them.  Finally they left the

choice to me, until the round-up is over.  Then I suppose every

cowboy on the range will offer you his best mount.  Come, let's

go out to the corrals and look over the few horses left."



For Madeline the morning hours flew by, with a goodly part of the

time spent on the porch gazing out over that ever-changing vista. 

At noon a teamster drove up with her trunks.  Then while Florence

helped the Mexican woman get lunch Madeline unpacked part of her

effects and got out things for which she would have immediate

need.  After lunch she changed her dress for a riding-habit and,

going outside, found Florence waiting with the horses.



The Western girl's clear eyes seemed to take stock of Madeline's

appearance in one swift, inquisitive glance and then shone with

pleasure.



"You sure look--you're a picture, Miss Hammond.  That

riding-outfit is a new one.  What it 'd look like on me or

another woman I can't imagine, but on you it's--it's stunning.

Bill won't let you go within a mile of the cowboys.  If they see

you that'll be the finish of the round-up."



While they rode down the slope Florence talked about the open

ranges of New Mexico and Arizona.



"Water is scarce," she said.  "If Bill could afford to pipe water

down from the mountains he'd have the finest ranch in the

valley."



She went on to tell that the climate was mild in winter and hot

in summer.  Warm, sunshiny days prevailed nearly all the year

round.  Some summers it rained, and occasionally there would be a

dry year, the dreaded ano seco of the Mexicans. Rain was always

expected and prayed for in the midsummer months, and when it came

the grama-grass sprang up, making the valleys green from mountain

to mountain.  The intersecting valleys, ranging between the long

slope of foothills, afforded the best pasture for cattle, and

these were jealously sought by the Mexicans who had only small

herds to look after. Stillwell's cowboys were always chasing

these vaqueros off land that belonged to Stillwell.  He owned

twenty thousand acres of unfenced land adjoining the open range. 

Don Carlos possessed more acreage than that, and his cattle were

always mingling with Stillwell's.  And in turn Don Carlos's

vaqueros were always chasing Stillwell's cattle away from the

Mexican's watering-place.  Bad feeling had been manifested for

years, and now relations were strained to the breaking-point.



As Madeline rode along she made good use of her eyes. The soil

was sandy and porous, and she understood why the rain and water

from the few springs disappeared so quickly.  At a little

distance the grama-grass appeared thick, but near at hand it was

seen to be sparse.  Bunches of greasewood and cactus plants were

interspersed here and there in the grass. What surprised Madeline

was the fact that, though she and Florence had seemed to be

riding quite awhile, they had apparently not drawn any closer to

the round-up.  The slope of the valley was noticeable only after

some miles had been traversed.  Looking forward, Madeline

imagined the valley only a few miles wide.  She would have been

sure she could walk her horse across it in an hour.  Yet that

black, bold range of Chiricahua Mountains was distant a long

day's journey for even a hard-riding cowboy.  It was only by

looking back that Madeline could grasp the true relation of

things; she could not be deceived by distance she had covered.



Gradually the black dots enlarged and assumed shape of cattle and

horses moving round a great dusty patch.  In another half-hour

Madeline rode behind Florence to the outskirts of the scene of

action.  They drew rein near a huge wagon in the neighborhood of

which were more than a hundred horses grazing and whistling and

trotting about and lifting heads to watch the new-comers.  Four

cowboys stood mounted guard over this drove of horses.  Perhaps a

quarter of a mile farther out was a dusty melee.  A roar of

tramping hoofs filled Madeline's ears.  The lines of marching

cattle had merged into a great, moving herd half obscured by

dust.



"I can make little of what is going on," said Madeline. "I want

to go closer."



They trotted across half the intervening distance, and when

Florence halted again Madeline was still not satisfied and asked

to be taken nearer.  This time, before they reined in again, Al

Hammond saw them and wheeled his horse in their direction.  He

yelled something which Madeline did not understand, and then

halted them.



"Close enough," he called; and in the din his voice was not very

clear.  "It's not safe.  Wild steers!  I'm glad you came, girls. 

Majesty, what do you think of that bunch of cattle?"



Madeline could scarcely reply what she thought, for the noise and

dust and ceaseless action confused her.



"They're milling, Al," said Florence.



"We just rounded them up.  They're milling, and that's bad.  The

vaqueros are hard drivers.  They beat us all hollow, and we drove

some, too."  He was wet with sweat, black with dust, and out of

breath.  "I'm off now.  Flo, my sister will have enough of this

in about two minutes.  Take her back to the wagon.  I'll tell

Bill you're here, and run in whenever I get a minute."



The bawling and bellowing, the crackling of horns and pounding of

hoofs, the dusty whirl of cattle, and the flying cowboys

disconcerted Madeline and frightened her a little; but she was

intensely interested and meant to stay there until she saw for

herself what that strife of sound and action meant. When she

tried to take in the whole scene she did not make out anything

clearly and she determined to see it little by little.



"Will you stay longer?" asked Florence; and, receiving an

affirmative reply, she warned Madeline: "If a runaway steer or

angry cow comes this way let your horse go.  He'll get out of the

way."



That lent the situation excitement, and Madeline became absorbed. 

The great mass of cattle seemed to be eddying like a whirlpool,

and from that Madeline understood the significance of the range

word "milling."  But when Madeline looked at one end of the herd

she saw cattle standing still, facing outward, and calves

cringing close in fear.  The motion of the cattle slowed from the

inside of the herd to the outside and gradually ceased.  The roar

and tramp of hoofs and crack of horns and thump of heads also

ceased in degree, but the bawling and bellowing continued.  While

she watched, the herd spread, grew less dense, and stragglers

appeared to be about to bolt through the line of mounted cowboys.



From that moment so many things happened, and so swiftly, that

Madeline could not see a tenth of what was going on within

eyesight.  It seemed horsemen darted into the herd and drove out

cattle.  Madeline pinned her gaze on one cowboy who rode a white

horse and was chasing a steer.  He whirled a lasso around his

head and threw it; the rope streaked out and the loop caught the

leg of the steer.  The white horse stopped with wonderful

suddenness, and the steer slid in the dust. Quick as a flash the

cowboy was out of the saddle, and, grasping the legs of the steer

before it could rise, he tied them with a rope.  It had all been

done almost as quickly as thought.  Another man came with what

Madeline divined was a branding-iron.  He applied it to the flank

of the steer.  Then it seemed the steer was up with a jump,

wildly looking for some way to run, and the cowboy was circling

his lasso.  Madeline saw fires in the background, with a man in

charge, evidently heating the irons.  Then this same cowboy roped

a heifer which bawled lustily when the hot iron seared its hide. 

Madeline saw the smoke rising from the touch of the iron, and the

sight made her shrink and want to turn away, but she resolutely

fought her sensitiveness.  She bad never been able to bear the

sight of any animal suffering.  The rough work in men's lives was

as a sealed book to her; and now, for some reason beyond her

knowledge, she wanted to see and hear and learn some of the

every-day duties that made up those lives.



"Look, Miss Hammond, there's Don Carlos!" said Florence.  "Look

at that black horse!"



Madeleine saw a dark-faced Mexican riding by.  He was too far

away for her to distinguish his features, but he reminded her of

an Italian brigand.  He bestode a magnificent horse.



Stillwell rode up to the girls then and greeted them in his big

voice.



"Right in the thick of it, hey?  Wal, thet's sure fine. I'm glad

to see, Miss Majesty, thet you ain't afraid of a little dust or

smell of burnin' hide an' hair."



"Couldn't you brand the calves without hurting them?" asked

Madeline.



"Haw, haw!  Why, they ain't hurt none.  They jest bawl for their

mammas.  Sometimes, though, we hev to hurt one jest to find which

is his mamma."



"I want to know how you tell what brand to put on those calves

that are separated from their mothers," asked Madeline.



"Thet's decided by the round-up bosses.  I've one boss an' Don

Carlos has one.  They decide everything, an' they hev to be

obyed.  There's Nick Steele, my boss.  Watch him!  He's ridin' a

bay in among the cattle there.  He orders the calves an' steers

to be cut out.  Then the cowboys do the cuttin' out an' the

brandin'.  We try to divide up the mavericks as near as

possible."



At this juncture Madeline's brother joined the group, evidently

in search of Stillwell.



"Bill, Nels just rode in," he said.



"Good!  We sure need him.  Any news of Danny Mains?"



"No.  Nels said he lost the trail when he got on hard ground."



"Wal, wal.  Say, Al, your sister is sure takin' to the round-up. 

An' the boys are gettin' wise.  See thet sun-of-a-gun Ambrose

cuttin' capers all around.  He'll sure do his prettiest. Ambrose

is a ladies' man, he thinks."



The two men and Florence joined in a little pleasant teasing of

Madeline, and drew her attention to what appeared to be really

unnecessary feats of horsemanship all made in her vicinity.  The

cowboys evinced their interest in covert glances while recoiling

a lasso or while passing to and fro.  It was all too serious for

Madeline to be amused at that moment.  She did not care to talk. 

She sat her horse and watched.



The lithe, dark vaqueros fascinated her.  They were here, there,

everywhere, with lariats flying, horses plunging back, jerking

calves and yearlings to the grass.  They were cruel to their

mounts, cruel to their cattle.  Madeline winced as the great

silver rowels of the spurs went plowing into the flanks of their

horses.  She saw these spurs stained with blood, choked with

hair.  She saw the vaqueros break the legs of calves and let them

lie till a white cowboy came along and shot them.  Calves were

jerked down and dragged many yards; steers were pulled by one

leg.  These vaqueros were the most superb horsemen Madeline had

ever seen, and she had seen the Cossacks and Tatars of the

Russian steppes.  They were swift, graceful, daring; they never

failed to catch a running steer, and the lassoes always went

true.  What sharp dashes the horses made, and wheelings here and

there, and sudden stops, and how they braced themselves to

withstand the shock!



The cowboys, likewise, showed wonderful horsemanship, and,

reckless as they were, Madeline imagined she saw consideration

for steed and cattle that was wanting in the vaqueros.  They

changed mounts oftener than the Mexican riders, and the horses

they unsaddled for fresh ones were not so spent, so wet, so

covered with lather.  It was only after an hour or more of

observation that Madeline began to realize the exceedingly

toilsome and dangerous work cowboys had to perform. There was

little or no rest for them.  They were continually among wild and

vicious and wide-horned steers.  In many instances they owed

their lives to their horses.  The danger came mostly when the

cowboy leaped off to tie and brand a calf he had thrown.  Some of

the cows charged with lowered, twisting horns.  Time and again

Madeline's heart leaped to her throat for fear a man would be

gored.  One cowboy roped a calf that bawled loudly.  Its mother

dashed in and just missed the kneeling cowboy as he rolled over. 

Then he had to run, and he could not run very fast.  He was

bow-legged and appeared awkward.  Madeline saw another cowboy

thrown and nearly run over by a plunging steer.  His horse bolted

as if it intended to leave the range.  Then close by Madeline a

big steer went down at the end of a lasso.  The cowboy who had

thrown it nimbly jumped down, and at that moment his horse began

to rear and prance and suddenly to lower his head close to the

ground and kick high.  He ran round in a circle, the fallen steer

on the taut lasso acting as a pivot.  The cowboy loosed the rope

from the steer, and then was dragged about on the grass.  It was

almost frightful for Madeline to see that cowboy go at his horse. 

But she recognized the mastery and skill.  Then two horses came

into collision on the run.  One horse went down; the rider of the

other was unseated and was kicked before he could get up.  This

fellow limped to his mount and struck at him, while the horse

showed his teeth in a vicious attempt to bite.



All the while this ceaseless activity was going on there was a

strange uproar--bawl and bellow, the shock of heavy bodies

meeting and falling, the shrill jabbering of the vaqueros, and

the shouts and banterings of the cowboys.  They took sharp orders

and replied in jest.  They went about this stern toil as if it

were a game to be played in good humor. One sang a rollicking

song, another whistled, another smoked a cigarette.  The sun was

hot, and they, like their horses, were dripping with sweat.  The

characteristic red faces had taken on so much dust that cowboys

could not be distinguished from vaqueros except by the difference

in dress.  Blood was not wanting on tireless hands.  The air was

thick, oppressive, rank with the smell of cattle and of burning

hide.



Madeline began to sicken.  She choked with dust, was almost

stifled by the odor.  But that made her all the more determined

to stay there.  Florence urged her to come away, or at least move

back out of the worst of it.  Stillwell seconded Florence. 

Madeline, however, smilingly refused.  Then her brother said:

"Here, this is making you sick.  You're pale." And she replied

that she intended to stay until the day's work ended.  Al gave

her a strange look, and made no more comment. The kindly

Stillwell then began to talk.



"Miss Majesty, you're seein' the life of the cattleman an,

cowboy--the real thing--same as it was in the early days. The

ranchers in Texas an' some in Arizona hev took on style,

new-fangled idees thet are good, an' I wish we could follow them. 

But we've got to stick to the old-fashioned, open-range

round-tip.  It looks cruel to you, I can see thet.  Wal, mebbe

so, mebbe so.  Them Greasers are cruel, thet's certain.  Fer thet

matter, I never seen a Greaser who wasn't cruel.  But I reckon

all the strenuous work you've seen to-day ain't any tougher than

most any day of a cowboy's life.  Long hours on hossback, poor

grub, sleepin' on the ground, lonesome watches, dust an' sun an,

wind an' thirst, day in an' day out all the year round--thet's

what a cowboy has.



"Look at Nels there.  See, what little hair be has is snow-white. 

He's red an' thin an' hard--burned up.  You notice thet hump of

his shoulders.  An' his hands, when he gets close--jest take a

peep at his hands.  Nels can't pick up a pin.  He can't hardly

button his shirt or untie a knot in his rope.  He looks sixty

years--an old man.  Wal, Nels 'ain't seen forty.  He's a young

man, but he's seen a lifetime fer every year.  Miss Majesty, it

was Arizona thet made Nels what he is, the Arizona desert an' the

work of a cowman.  He's seen ridin' at Canon Diablo an' the Verdi

an' Tonto Basin.  He knows every mile of Aravaipa Valley an' the

Pinaleno country.  He's ranged from Tombstone to Douglas.  He hed

shot bad white men an' bad Greasers before he was twenty-one. 

He's seen some life, Nels has.  My sixty years ain't nothin'; my

early days in the Staked Plains an' on the border with Apaches

ain't nothin' to what Nels has seen an' lived through.  He's just

come to be part of the desert; you might say he's stone an' fire

an' silence an' cactus an' force.  He's a man, Miss Majesty, a

wonderful man.  Rough he'll seem to you.  Wal, I'll show you

pieces of quartz from the mountains back of my ranch an' they're

thet rough they'd cut your hands.  But there's pure gold in them. 

An' so it is with Nels an' many of these cowboys.



"An' there's Price--Monty Price.  Monty stands fer Montana, where

he hails from.  Take a good look at him, Miss Majesty.  He's been

hurt, I reckon.  Thet accounts fer him bein' without hoss or

rope; an' thet limp.  Wal, he's been ripped a little.  It's sure

rare an seldom thet a cowboy gets foul of one of them thousands

of sharp horns; but it does happen."



Madeline saw a very short, wizened little man, ludicrously

bow-legged, with a face the color and hardness of a burned-out

cinder.  He was hobbling by toward the wagon, and one of his

short, crooked legs dragged.



"Not much to look at, is he?" went on Stillwell. "Wal; I know

it's natural thet we're all best pleased by good looks in any

one, even a man.  It hedn't ought to be thet way. Monty Price

looks like hell.  But appearances are sure deceivin'.  Monty saw

years of ridin' along the Missouri bottoms, the big prairies,

where there's high grass an' sometimes fires.  In Montana they

have blizzards that freeze cattle standin' in their tracks.  An'

hosses freeze to death. They tell me thet a drivin' sleet in the

face with the mercury forty below is somethin' to ride against. 

You can't get Monty to say much about cold.  All you hev to do is

to watch him, how he hunts the sun.  It never gets too hot fer

Monty.  Wal, I reckon he was a little more prepossessin' once. 

The story thet come to us about Monty is this: He got caught out

in a prairie fire an' could hev saved himself easy, but there was

a lone ranch right in the line of fire, an' Monty knowed the

rancher was away, an' his wife an' baby was home.  He knowed,

too, the way the wind was, thet the ranch-house would burn.  It

was a long chance he was takin'.  But he went over, put the woman

up behind him, wrapped the baby an' his hoss's haid in a wet

blanket, an' rode away.  Thet was sure some ride, I've heerd. But

the fire ketched Monty at the last.  The woman fell an' was lost,

an' then his hoss.  An' Monty ran an' walked an' crawled through

the fire with thet baby, an' he saved it.  Monty was never much

good as a cowboy after thet.  He couldn't hold no jobs.  Wal,

he'll have one with me as long as I have a steer left."

