






APPENDIX







CHAPTER I



A Word for Lavengro.





LAVENGRO is the history up to a certain period of one of 

rather a peculiar mind and system of nerves, with an exterior 

shy and cold, under which lurk much curiosity, especially 

with regard to what is wild and extraordinary, a considerable 

quantity of energy and industry, and an unconquerable love of 

independence.  It narrates his earliest dreams and feelings, 

dwells with minuteness on the ways, words, and characters of 

his father, mother, and brother, lingers on the occasional 

resting-places of his wandering half military childhood, 

describes the gradual hardening of his bodily frame by robust 

exercises, his successive struggles, after his family and 

himself have settled down in a small local capital, to obtain 

knowledge of every kind, but more particularly philological 

lore; his visits to the tent of the Romany chal, and the 

parlour of the Anglo-German philosopher; the effect produced 

upon his character by his flinging himself into contact with 

people all widely differing from each other, but all 

extraordinary; his reluctance to settle down to the ordinary 

pursuits of life; his struggles after moral truth; his 

glimpses of God and the obscuration of the Divine Being, to 

his mind's eye; and his being cast upon the world of London 

by the death of his father, at the age of nineteen.  In the 

world within a world, the world of London, it shows him 

playing his part for some time as he best can, in the 

capacity of a writer for reviews and magazines, and describes 

what he saw and underwent whilst labouring in that capacity; 

it represents him, however, as never forgetting that he is 

the son of a brave but poor gentleman, and that if he is a 

hack author, he is likewise a scholar.  It shows him doing no 

dishonourable jobs, and proves that if he occasionally 

associates with low characters, he does so chiefly to gratify 

the curiosity of a scholar.  In his conversations with the 

apple-woman of London Bridge, the scholar is ever apparent, 

so again in his acquaintance with the man of the table, for 

the book is no raker up of the uncleanness of London, and if 

it gives what at first sight appears refuse, it invariably 

shows that a pearl of some kind, generally a philological 

one, is contained amongst it; it shows its hero always 

accompanied by his love of independence, scorning in the 

greatest poverty to receive favours from anybody, and 

describes him finally rescuing himself from peculiarly 

miserable circumstances by writing a book, an original book, 

within a week, even as Johnson is said to have written his 

"Rasselas," and Beckford his "Vathek," and tells how, leaving 

London, he betakes himself to the roads and fields.



In the country it shows him leading a life of roving 

adventure, becoming tinker, gypsy, postillion, ostler; 

associating with various kinds of people, chiefly of the 

lower classes, whose ways and habits are described; but, 

though leading this erratic life, we gather from the book 

that his habits are neither vulgar nor vicious, that he still 

follows to a certain extent his favourite pursuits, hunting 

after strange characters, or analysing strange words and 

names.  At the conclusion of the last chapter, which 

terminates the first part of the history, it hints that he is 

about to quit his native land on a grand philological 

expedition.



Those who read this book with attention - and the author begs 

to observe that it would be of little utility to read it 

hurriedly - may derive much information with respect to 

matters of philology and literature; it will be found 

treating of most of the principal languages from Ireland to 

China, and of the literature which they contain; and it is 

particularly minute with regard to the ways, manners, and 

speech of the English section of the most extraordinary and 

mysterious clan or tribe of people to be found in the whole 

world - the children of Roma.  But it contains matters of 

much more importance than anything in connection with 

philology, and the literature and manners of nations.  

Perhaps no work was ever offered to the public in which the 

kindness and providence of God have been set forth by more 

striking examples, or the machinations of priestcraft been 

more truly and lucidly exposed, or the dangers which result 

to a nation when it abandons itself to effeminacy, and a rage 

for what is novel and fashionable, than the present.



With respect to the kindness and providence of God, are they 

not exemplified in the case of the old apple-woman and her 

son?  These are beings in many points bad, but with warm 

affections, who, after an agonizing separation, are restored 

to each other, but not until the hearts of both are changed 

and purified by the influence of affliction.  Are they not 

exemplified in the case of the rich gentleman, who touches 

objects in order to avert the evil chance?  This being has 

great gifts and many amiable qualifies, but does not 

everybody see that his besetting sin is selfishness?  He 

fixes his mind on certain objects, and takes inordinate 

interest in them, because they are his own, and those very 

objects, through the providence of God, which is kindness in 

disguise, become snakes and scorpions to whip him.  Tired of 

various pursuits, he at last becomes an author, and publishes 

a book, which is very much admired, and which he loves with 

his usual inordinate affection; the book, consequently, 

becomes a viper to him, and at last he flings it aside and 

begins another; the book, however, is not flung aside by the 

world, who are benefited by it, deriving pleasure and 

knowledge from it: so the man who merely wrote to gratify 

self, has already done good to others, and got himself an 

honourable name.  But God will not allow that man to put that 

book under his head and use it as a pillow: the book has 

become a viper to him, he has banished it, and is about 

another, which he finishes and gives to the world; it is a 

better book than the first, and every one is delighted with 

it; but it proves to the writer a scorpion, because he loves 

it with inordinate affection; but it was good for the world 

that he produced this book, which stung him as a scorpion.  

Yes; and good for himself, for the labour of writing it 

amused him, and perhaps prevented him from dying of apoplexy; 

but the book is banished, and another is begun, and herein, 

again, is the providence of God manifested; the man has the 

power of producing still, and God determines that he shall 

give to the world what remains in his brain, which he would 

not do, had he been satisfied with the second work; he would 

have gone to sleep upon that as he would upon the first, for 

the man is selfish and lazy.  In his account of what he 

suffered during the composition of this work, his besetting 

sin of selfishness is manifest enough; the work on which he 

is engaged occupies his every thought, it is his idol, his 

deity, it shall be all his own, he won't borrow a thought 

from any one else, and he is so afraid lest, when he 

publishes it, that it should be thought that he had borrowed 

from any one, that he is continually touching objects, his 

nervous system, owing to his extreme selfishness, having 

become partly deranged.  He is left touching, in order to 

banish the evil chance from his book, his deity.  No more of 

his history is given; but does the reader think that God will 

permit that man to go to sleep on his third book, however 

extraordinary it may be?  Assuredly not.  God will not permit 

that man to rest till he has cured him to a certain extent of 

his selfishness, which has, however, hitherto been very 

useful to the world.



Then, again, in the tale of Peter Williams, is not the hand 

of Providence to be seen?  This person commits a sin in his 

childhood, utters words of blasphemy, the remembrance of 

which, in after life, preying upon his imagination, unfits 

him for quiet pursuits, to which he seems to have been 

naturally inclined; but for the remembrance of that sin, he 

would have been Peter Williams the quiet and respectable 

Welsh farmer, somewhat fond of reading the ancient literature 

of his country in winter evenings, after his work was done.  

God, however, was aware that there was something in Peter 

Williams to entitle him to assume a higher calling; he 

therefore permits this sin, which, though a childish affair, 

was yet a sin, and committed deliberately, to prey upon his 

mind till he becomes at last an instrument in the hand of 

God, a humble Paul, the great preacher, Peter Williams, who, 

though he considers himself a reprobate and a castaway, 

instead of having recourse to drinking in mad desperation, as 

many do who consider themselves reprobates, goes about Wales 

and England preaching the word of God, dilating on his power 

and majesty, and visiting the sick and afflicted, until God 

sees fit to restore to him his peace of mind; which he does 

not do, however, until that mind is in a proper condition to 

receive peace, till it has been purified by the pain of the 

one idea which has so long been permitted to riot in his 

brain; which pain, however, an angel, in the shape of a 

gentle faithful wife, had occasionally alleviated; for God is 

merciful even in the blows which He bestoweth, and will not 

permit any one to be tempted beyond the measure which he can 

support.  And here it will be as well for the reader to 

ponder upon the means by which the Welsh preacher is relieved 

from his mental misery: he is not relieved by a text from the 

Bible, by the words of consolation and wisdom addressed to 

him by his angel-minded wife, nor by the preaching of one yet 

more eloquent than himself; but by a quotation made by 

Lavengro from the life of Mary Flanders, cut-purse and 

prostitute, which life Lavengro had been in the habit of 

reading at the stall of his old friend the apple-woman, on 

London Bridge, who had herself been very much addicted to the 

perusal of it, though without any profit whatever.  Should 

the reader be dissatisfied with the manner in which Peter 

Williams is made to find relief, the author would wish to 

answer, that the Almighty frequently accomplishes his 

purposes by means which appear very singular to the eyes of 

men, and at the same time to observe that the manner in which 

that relief is obtained, is calculated to read a lesson to 

the proud, fanciful, and squeamish, who are ever in a fidget 

lest they should be thought to mix with low society, or to 

bestow a moment's attention on publications which are not 

what is called of a perfectly unobjectionable character.  Had 

not Lavengro formed the acquaintance of the apple-woman on 

London Bridge, he would not have had an opportunity of 

reading the life of Mary Flanders; and, consequently, of 

storing in a memory, which never forgets anything, a passage 

which contained a balm for the agonized mind of poor Peter 

Williams.  The best medicines are not always found in the 

finest shops.  Suppose, for example, if, instead of going to 

London Bridge to read, he had gone to Albemarle Street, and 

had received from the proprietors of the literary 

establishment in that very fashionable street, permission to 

read the publications on the tables of the saloons there, 

does the reader think he would have met any balm in those 

publications for the case of Peter Williams? does the reader 

suppose that he would have found Mary Flanders there?  He 

would certainly have found that highly unobjectionable 

publication, "Rasselas," and the "Spectator," or "Lives of 

Royal and Illustrious Personages," but, of a surety, no Mary 

Flanders; so when Lavengro met with Peter Williams, he would 

have been unprovided with a balm to cure his ulcerated mind, 

and have parted from him in a way not quite so satisfactory 

as the manner in which he took his leave of him; for it is 

certain that he might have read "Rasselas," and all other 

unexceptionable works to be found in the library of Albemarle 

Street, over and over again, before he would have found any 

cure in them for the case of Peter Williams.  Therefore the 

author requests the reader to drop any squeamish nonsense he 

may wish to utter about Mary Flanders, and the manner in 

which Peter Williams was cured.



And now with respect to the old man who knew Chinese, but 

could not tell what was o'clock.  This individual was a man 

whose natural powers would have been utterly buried and lost 

beneath a mountain of sloth and laziness, had not God 

determined otherwise.  He had in his early years chalked out 

for himself a plan of life in which he had his own ease and 

self-indulgence solely in view; he had no particular bad 

passions to gratify, he only wished to live a happy quiet 

life, just as if the business of this mighty world could be 

carried on by innocent people fond of ease or quiet, or that 

Providence would permit innocent quiet drones to occupy any 

portion of the earth and to cumber it.  God had at any rate 

decreed that this man should not cumber it as a drone.  He 

brings a certain affliction upon him, the agony of which 

produces that terrible whirling of the brain which, unless it 

is stopped in time, produces madness; he suffers 

indescribable misery for a period, until one morning his 

attention is arrested, and his curiosity is aroused, by 

certain Chinese letters on a teapot; his curiosity increases 

more and more, and, of course, in proportion as his curiosity 

is increased with respect to the Chinese marks, the misery in 

his brain, produced by his mental affliction, decreases.  He 

sets about learning Chinese, and after the lapse of many 

years, during which his mind subsides into a certain state of 

tranquillity, he acquires sufficient knowledge of Chinese to 

be able to translate with ease the inscriptions to be found 

on its singular crockery.  Yes, the laziest of human beings, 

through the Providence of God, a being too of rather inferior 

capacity, acquires the written part of a language so 

difficult that, as Lavengro said on a former occasion, none 

but the cleverest people in Europe, the French, are able to 

acquire it.  But God did not intend that man should merely 

acquire Chinese.  He intended that he should be of use to his 

species, and by the instrumentality of the first Chinese 

inscription which he translates, the one which first arrested 

his curiosity, he is taught the duty of hospitality; yes, by 

means of an inscription in the language of a people, who have 

scarcely an idea of hospitality themselves, God causes the 

slothful man to play a useful and beneficent part in the 

world, relieving distressed wanderers, and, amongst others, 

Lavengro himself.  But a striking indication of the man's 

surprising sloth is still apparent in what he omits to do; he 

has learnt Chinese, the most difficult of languages, and he 

practises acts of hospitality, because he believes himself 

enjoined to do so by the Chinese inscription, but he cannot 

tell the hour of the day by the clock within his house; he 

can get on, he thinks, very well without being able to do so; 

therefore from this one omission, it is easy to come to a 

conclusion as to what a sluggard's part the man would have 

played in life, but for the dispensation of Providence; 

nothing but extreme agony could have induced such a man to do 

anything useful.  He still continues, with all he has 

acquired, with all his usefulness, and with all his innocence 

of character, without any proper sense of religion, though he 

has attained a rather advanced age.  If it be observed, that 

this want of religion is a great defect in the story, the 

author begs leave to observe that he cannot help it.  

Lavengro relates the lives of people so far as they were 

placed before him, but no further.  It was certainly a great 

defect in so good a man to be without religion; it was 

likewise a great defect in so learned a man not to be able to 

tell what was o'clock.  It is probable that God, in his 

loving kindness, will not permit that man to go out of the 

world without religion; who knows but some powerful minister 

of the church full of zeal for the glory of God, will illume 

that man's dark mind; perhaps some clergyman will come to the 

parish who will visit him and teach him his duty to his God.  

Yes, it is very probable that such a man, before he dies, 

will have been made to love his God; whether he will ever 

learn to know what's o'clock is another matter.  It is 

probable that he will go out of the world without knowing 

what's o'clock.  It is not so necessary to be able to tell 

the time of day by the clock as to know one's God through His 

inspired word; a man cannot get to heaven without religion, 

but a man can get there very comfortably without knowing 

what's o'clock.



But, above all, the care and providence of God are manifested 

in the case of Lavengro himself, by the manner in which he is 

enabled to make his way in the world up to a certain period, 

without falling a prey either to vice or poverty.  In his 

history, there is a wonderful illustration of part of the 

text, quoted by his mother, "I have been young, but now am 

old, yet never saw I the righteous forsaken, or his seed 

begging his bread."  He is the son of good and honourable 

parents, but at the critical period of life, that of entering 

into the world, he finds himself without any earthly friend 

to help him, yet he manages to make his way; he does not 

become a Captain in the Life Guards, it is true, nor does he 

get into Parliament, nor does the last volume conclude in the 

most satisfactory and unobjectionable manner, by his marrying 

a dowager countess, as that wise man Addison did, or by his 

settling down as a great country gentleman, perfectly happy 

and contented, like the very moral Roderick Random, or the 

equally estimable Peregrine Pickle; he is hack author, gypsy, 

tinker, and postillion, yet, upon the whole, he seems to be 

quite as happy as the younger sons of most earls, to have as 

high feelings of honour; and when the reader loses sight of 

him, he has money in his pocket honestly acquired, to enable 

him to commence a journey quite as laudable as those which 

the younger sons of earls generally undertake.  Surely all 

this is a manifestation of the kindness and providence of 

God: and yet he is not a religious person; up to the time 

when the reader loses sight of him, he is decidedly not a 

religious person; he has glimpses, it is true, of that God 

who does not forsake him, but he prays very seldom, is not 

fond of going to church; and, though he admires Tate and 

Brady's version of the Psalms, his admiration is rather 

caused by the beautiful poetry which that version contains 

than the religion; yet his tale is not finished - like the 

tale of the gentleman who touched objects, and that of the 

old man who knew Chinese without knowing what was o'clock; 

perhaps, like them, he is destined to become religious, and 

to have, instead of occasional glimpses, frequent and 

distinct views of his God; yet, though he may become 

religious, it is hardly to be expected that he will become a 

very precise and straightlaced person; it is probable that he 

will retain, with his scholarship, something of his gypsyism, 

his predilection for the hammer and tongs, and perhaps some 

inclination to put on certain gloves, not white kid, with any 

friend who may be inclined for a little old English 

diversion, and a readiness to take a glass of ale, with 

plenty of malt in it, and as little hop as may well be - ale 

at least two years old - with the aforesaid friend, when the 

diversion is over; for, as it is the belief of the writer 

that a person may get to heaven very comfortably without 

knowing what's o'clock, so it is his belief that he will not 

be refused admission there, because to the last he has been 

fond of healthy and invigorating exercises, and felt a 

willingness to partake of any of the good things which it 

pleases the Almighty to put within the reach of his children 

during their sojourn upon earth.







CHAPTER II







On Priestcraft.





THE writer will now say a few words about priestcraft, and 

the machinations of Rome, and will afterwards say something 

about himself, and his motives for writing against them.



With respect to Rome, and her machinations, much valuable 

information can be obtained from particular parts of 

Lavengro, and its sequel.  Shortly before the time when the 

hero of the book is launched into the world, the Popish 

agitation in England had commenced.  The Popish propaganda 

had determined to make a grand attempt on England; Popish 

priests were scattered over the land, doing the best they 

could to make converts to the old superstition.  With the 

plans of Rome, and her hopes, and the reasons on which those 

hopes are grounded, the hero of the book becomes acquainted, 

during an expedition which he makes into the country, from 

certain conversations which he holds with a priest in a 

dingle, in which the hero had taken up his residence; he 

likewise learns from the same person much of the secret 

history of the Roman See, and many matters connected with the 

origin and progress of the Popish superstition.  The 

individual with whom he holds these conversations is a 

learned, intelligent, but highly-unprincipled person, of a 

character however very common amongst the priests of Rome, 

who in general are people void of all religion, and who, 

notwithstanding they are tied to Rome by a band which they 

have neither the power nor wish to break, turn her and her 

practices, over their cups with their confidential 

associates, to a ridicule only exceeded by that to which they 

turn those who become the dupes of their mistress and 

themselves.



It is now necessary that the writer should say something with 

respect to himself, and his motives for waging war against 

Rome.  First of all, with respect to himself, he wishes to 

state, that to the very last moment of his life, he will do 

and say all that in his power may be to hold up to contempt 

and execration the priestcraft and practices of Rome; there 

is, perhaps, no person better acquainted than himself, not 

even among the choicest spirits of the priesthood, with the 

origin and history of Popery.  From what he saw and heard of 

Popery in England, at a very early period of his life, his 

curiosity was aroused, and he spared himself no trouble, 

either by travel or study, to make himself well acquainted 

with it in all its phases, the result being a hatred of it, 

which he hopes and trusts he shall retain till the moment 

when his spirit quits the body.  Popery is the great lie of 

the world; a source from which more misery and social 

degradation have flowed upon the human race, than from all 

the other sources from which those evils come.  It is the 

oldest of all superstitions; and though in Europe it assumes 

the name of Christianity, it existed and flourished amidst 

the Himalayan hills at least two thousand years before the 

real Christ was born in Bethlehem of Judea; in a word, it is 

Buddhism; and let those who may be disposed to doubt this 

assertion, compare the Popery of Rome, and the superstitious 

practices of its followers, with the doings of the priests 

who surround the grand Lama; and the mouthings, bellowing, 

turnings round, and, above all, the penances of the followers 

of Buddh with those of Roman devotees.  But he is not going 

to dwell here on this point; it is dwelt upon at tolerable 

length in the text, and has likewise been handled with 

extraordinary power by the pen of the gifted but irreligious 

Volney; moreover, the ELITE of the Roman priesthood are 

perfectly well aware that their system is nothing but 

Buddhism under a slight disguise, and the European world in 

general has entertained for some time past an inkling of the 

fact.



And now a few words with respect to the motives of the writer 

for expressing a hatred for Rome.



This expressed abhorrence of the author for Rome might be 

entitled to little regard, provided it were possible to 

attribute it to any self-interested motive.  There have been 

professed enemies of Rome, or of this or that system; but 

their professed enmity may frequently be traced to some cause 

which does them little credit; but the writer of these lines 

has no motive, and can have no motive, for his enmity to 

Rome, save the abhorrence of an honest heart for what is 

false, base, and cruel.  A certain clergyman wrote with much 

heat against the Papists in the time of - who was known to 

favour the Papists, but was not expected to continue long in 

office, and whose supposed successor, the person, indeed, who 

did succeed him, was thought to be hostile to the Papists.  

This divine, who obtained a rich benefice from the successor 

of - who during -'s time had always opposed him in everything 

he proposed to do, and who, of course, during that time 

affected to be very inimical to Popery - this divine might 

well be suspected of having a motive equally creditable for 

writing against the Papists, as that which induced him to 

write for them, as soon as his patron, who eventually did 

something more for him, had espoused their cause; but what 

motive, save an honest one, can the present writer have, for 

expressing an abhorrence of Popery?  He is no clergyman, and 

consequently can expect neither benefices nor bishoprics, 

supposing it were the fashion of the present, or likely to be 

the fashion of any future administration, to reward clergymen 

with benefices or bishoprics, who, in the defence of the 

religion of their country write, or shall write, against 

Popery, and not to reward those who write, or shall write, in 

favour of it, and all its nonsense and abominations.



"But if not a clergyman, he is the servant of a certain 

society, which has the overthrow of Popery in view, and 

therefore," etc.  This assertion, which has been frequently 

made, is incorrect, even as those who have made it probably 

knew it to be.  He is the servant of no society whatever.  He 

eats his own bread, and is one of the very few men in England 

who are independent in every sense of the word.



It is true he went to Spain with the colours of that society 

on his hat - oh! the blood glows in his veins! oh! the marrow 

awakes in his old bones when he thinks of what he 

accomplished in Spain in the cause of religion and 

civilization with the colours of that society in his hat, and 

its weapon in his hand, even the sword of the word of God; 

how with that weapon he hewed left and right, making the 

priests fly before him, and run away squeaking: "Vaya! que 

demonio es este!"  Ay, and when he thinks of the plenty of 

Bible swords which he left behind him, destined to prove, and 

which have already proved, pretty calthrops in the heels of 

Popery.  "Halloo! Batuschca," he exclaimed the other night, 

on reading an article in a newspaper; "what do you think of 

the present doings in Spain?  Your old friend the zingaro, 

the gitano who rode about Spain, to say nothing of Galicia, 

with the Greek Buchini behind him as his squire, had a hand 

in bringing them about; there are many brave Spaniards 

connected with the present movement who took Bibles from his 

hands, and read them and profited by them, learning from the 

inspired page the duties of one man towards another, and the 

real value of a priesthood and their head, who set at nought 

the word of God, and think only of their own temporal 

interests; ay, and who learned Gitano - their own Gitano - 

from the lips of the London Caloro, and also songs in the 

said Gitano, very fit to dumbfounder your semi-Buddhist 

priests when they attempt to bewilder people's minds with 

their school-logic and pseudo-ecclesiastical nonsense, songs 

such as -





"Un Erajai

Sinaba chibando un sermon - ."





- But with that society he has long since ceased to have any 

connection; he bade it adieu with feelings of love and 

admiration more than fourteen years ago; so, in continuing to 

assault Popery, no hopes of interest founded on that society 

can sway his mind - interest! who, with worldly interest in 

view, would ever have anything to do with that society?  It 

is poor and supported, like its founder Christ, by poor 

people; and so far from having political influence, it is in 

such disfavour, and has ever been, with the dastardly great, 

to whom the government of England has for many years past 

been confided, that they having borne its colours only for a 

month would be sufficient to exclude any man, whatever his 

talents, his learning, or his courage may be, from the 

slightest chance of being permitted to serve his country 

either for fee, or without.  A fellow who unites in himself 

the bankrupt trader, the broken author, or rather book-maker, 

and the laughed-down single speech spouter of the House of 

Commons, may look forward, always supposing that at one time 

he has been a foaming radical, to the government of an 

important colony.  Ay, an ancient fox who has lost his tail 

may, provided he has a score of radical friends, who will 

swear that he can bark Chinese, though Chinese is not barked 

but sung, be forced upon a Chinese colony, though it is well 

known that to have lost one's tail is considered by the 

Chinese in general as an irreparable infamy, whilst to have 

been once connected with a certain society, to which, to its 

honour be it said, all the radical party are vehemently 

hostile, would be quite sufficient to keep any one not only 

from a government, but something much less, even though he 

could translate the rhymed "Sessions of Hariri," and were 

versed, still retaining his tail, in the two languages in 

which Kien-Loung wrote his Eulogium on Moukden, that piece 

which, translated by Amyot, the learned Jesuit, won the 

applause of the celebrated Voltaire.



No! were the author influenced by hopes of fee or reward, he 

would, instead of writing against Popery, write for it; all 

the trumpery titled - he will not call them great again - 

would then be for him, and their masters the radicals, with 

their hosts of newspapers, would be for him, more especially 

if he would commence maligning the society whose colours he 

had once on his hat - a society which, as the priest says in 

the text, is one of the very few Protestant institutions for 

which the Popish Church entertains any fear, and consequently 

respect, as it respects nothing which it does not fear.  The 

writer said that certain "rulers" would never forgive him for 

having been connected with that society; he went perhaps too 

far in saying "never."  It is probable that they would take 

him into favour on one condition, which is, that he should 

turn his pen and his voice against that society; such a mark 

"of a better way of thinking" would perhaps induce them to 

give him a government, nearly as good as that which they gave 

to a certain ancient radical fox at the intercession of his 

radical friends (who were bound to keep him from the pauper's 

kennel), after he had promised to foam, bark, and snarl at 

corruption no more; he might even entertain hopes of 

succeeding, nay, of superseding, the ancient creature in his 

government; but even were he as badly off as he is well off, 

he would do no such thing.  He would rather exist on crusts 

and water; he has often done so, and been happy; nay, he 

would rather starve than be a rogue - for even the feeling of 

starvation is happiness compared with what he feels who knows 

himself to be a rogue, provided he has any feeling at all.  

What is the use of a mitre or knighthood to a man who has 

betrayed his principles?  What is the use of a gilt collar, 

nay, even of a pair of scarlet breeches, to a fox who has 

lost his tail?  Oh! the horror which haunts the mind of a fox 

who has lost his tail; and with reason, for his very mate 

loathes him, and more especially if, like himself, she has 

lost her brush.  Oh! the horror which haunts the mind of the 

two-legged rogue who has parted with his principles, or those 

which he professed - for what?  We'll suppose a government.  

What's the use of a government, if the next day after you 

have received it, you are obliged for very shame to scurry 

off to it with the hoot of every honest man sounding in your 

ears?





"Lightly liar leaped and away ran."

PIERS PLOWMAN.





But bigotry, it has been said, makes the author write against 

Popery; and thorough-going bigotry, indeed, will make a 

person say or do anything.  But the writer is a very pretty 

bigot truly!  Where will the public find traces of bigotry in 

anything he has written?  He has written against Rome with 

all his heart, with all his mind, with all his soul, and with 

all his strength; but as a person may be quite honest, and 

speak and write against Rome, in like manner he may speak and 

write against her, and be quite free from bigotry; though it 

is impossible for any one but a bigot or a bad man to write 

or speak in her praise; her doctrines, actions, and 

machinations being what they are.



Bigotry!  The author was born, and has always continued in 

the wrong church for bigotry, the quiet, unpretending Church 

of England; a church which, had it been a bigoted church, and 

not long suffering almost to a fault, might with its 

opportunities, as the priest says in the text, have stood in 

a very different position from that which it occupies at 

present.  No! let those who are in search of bigotry, seek 

for it in a church very different from the inoffensive Church 

of England, which never encourages cruelty or calumny.  Let 

them seek for it amongst the members of the Church of Rome, 

and more especially amongst those who have renegaded to it.  

There is nothing, however false and horrible, which a pervert 

to Rome will not say for his church, and which his priests 

will not encourage him in saying; and there is nothing, 

however horrible - the more horrible indeed and revolting to 

human nature, the more eager he would be to do it - which he 

will not do for it, and which his priests will not encourage 

him in doing.



Of the readiness which converts to Popery exhibit to 

sacrifice all the ties of blood and affection on the shrine 

of their newly-adopted religion, there is a curious 

illustration in the work of Luigi Pulci.  This man, who was 

born at Florence in the year 1432, and who was deeply versed 

in the Bible, composed a poem, called the "Morgante 

Maggiore," which he recited at the table of Lorenzo de 

Medici, the great patron of Italian genius.  It is a mock-

heroic and religious poem, in which the legends of knight-

errantry, and of the Popish Church, are turned to unbounded 

ridicule.  The pretended hero of it is a converted giant, 

called Morgante; though his adventures do not occupy the 

twentieth part of the poem, the principal personages being 

Charlemagne, Orlando, and his cousin Rinaldo of Montalban.  

Morgante has two brothers, both of them giants, and in the 

first canto of the poem, Morgante is represented with his 

brothers as carrying on a feud with the abbot and monks of a 

certain convent, built upon the confines of heathenesse; the 

giants being in the habit of flinging down stones, or rather 

huge rocks, on the convent.  Orlando, however, who is 

banished from the court of Charlemagne, arriving at the 

convent, undertakes to destroy them, and, accordingly, kills 

Passamonte and Alabastro, and converts Morgante, whose mind 

had been previously softened by a vision, in which the 

"Blessed Virgin" figures.  No sooner is he converted than, as 

a sign of his penitence, what does he do, but hastens and 

cuts off the hands of his two brothers, saying -





"Io vo' tagliar le mani a tutti quanti

E porterolle a que' monaci santi."





And he does cut off the hands of his brethren, and carries 

them to the abbot, who blesses him for so doing.  Pulci here 

is holding up to ridicule and execration the horrid butchery 

or betrayal of friends by popish converts, and the 

encouragement they receive from the priest.  No sooner is a 

person converted to Popery, than his principal thought is how 

he can bring the hands and feet of his brethren, however 

harmless they may be, and different from the giants, to the 

"holy priests," who, if he manages to do so, never fail to 

praise him, saying to the miserable wretch, as the abbot said 

to Morgante:-





"Tu sarai or perfetto e vero amico

A Cristo, quanto tu gli eri nemico."





Can the English public deny the justice of Pulci's 

illustration, after something which it has lately witnessed?  

Has it not seen equivalents for the hands and feet of 

brothers carried by popish perverts to the "holy priests," 

and has it not seen the manner in which the offering has been 

received?  Let those who are in quest of bigotry seek for it 

among the perverts to Rome, and not amongst those who, born 

in the pale of the Church of England, have always continued 

in it.







CHAPTER III







On Foreign Nonsense.





WITH respect to the third point, various lessons which the 

book reads to the nation at large, and which it would be well 

for the nation to ponder and profit by.



There are many species of nonsense to which the nation is 

much addicted, and of which the perusal of Lavengro ought to 

give them a wholesome shame.  First of all, with respect to 

the foreign nonsense so prevalent now in England.  The hero 

is a scholar; but, though possessed of a great many tongues, 

he affects to be neither Frenchman, nor German, nor this or 

that foreigner; he is one who loves his country, and the 

language and literature of his country, and speaks up for 

each and all when there is occasion to do so.  Now what is 

the case with nine out of ten amongst those of the English 

who study foreign languages?  No sooner have they picked up a 

smattering of this or that speech than they begin to abuse 

their own country, and everything connected with it, more 

especially its language.  This is particularly the case with 

those who call themselves German students.  It is said, and 

the writer believes with truth, that when a woman falls in 

love with a particularly ugly fellow, she squeezes him with 

ten times more zest than she would a handsome one, if 

captivated by him.  So it is with these German students; no 

sooner have they taken German in hand than there is nothing 

like German.  Oh, the dear delightful German!  How proud I am 

that it is now my own, and that its divine literature is 

within my reach!  And all this whilst mumbling the most 

uncouth speech, and crunching the most crabbed literature in 

Europe.  The writer is not an exclusive admirer of everything 

English; he does not advise his country people never to go 

abroad, never to study foreign languages, and he does not 

wish to persuade them that there is nothing beautiful or 

valuable in foreign literature; he only wishes that they 

would not make themselves fools with respect to foreign 

people, foreign languages or reading; that if they chance to 

have been in Spain, and have picked up a little Spanish, they 

would not affect the airs of Spaniards; that if males they 

would not make Tomfools of themselves by sticking cigars into 

their mouths, dressing themselves in zamarras, and saying, 

carajo! (2) and if females that they would not make zanies of 

themselves by sticking cigars into their mouths, flinging 

mantillas over their heads, and by saying carai, and perhaps 

carajo too; or if they have been in France or Italy, and have 

picked up a little French or Italian, they would not affect 

to be French or Italians; and particularly, after having been 

a month or two in Germany, or picked up a little German in 

England, they would not make themselves foolish about 

everything German, as the Anglo-German in the book does - a 

real character, the founder of the Anglo-German school in 

England, and the cleverest Englishman who ever talked or 

wrote encomiastic nonsense about Germany and the Germans.  Of 

all infatuations connected with what is foreign, the 

infatuation about everything that is German, to a certain 

extent prevalent in England, is assuredly the most 

ridiculous.  One can find something like a palliation for 

people making themselves somewhat foolish about particular 

languages, literatures, and people.  The Spanish certainly is 

a noble language, and there is something wild and captivating 

in the Spanish character, and its literature contains the 

grand book of the world.  French is a manly language.  The 

French are the great martial people in the world; and French 

literature is admirable in many respects.  Italian is a sweet 

language, and of beautiful simplicity - its literature 

perhaps the first in the world.  The Italians! - wonderful 

men have sprung up in Italy.  Italy is not merely famous for 

painters, poets, musicians, singers, and linguists - the 

greatest linguist the world ever saw, the late Cardinal 

Mezzofanti, was an Italian; but it is celebrated for men - 

men emphatically speaking: Columbus was an Italian, Alexander 

Farnese was an Italian, so was the mightiest of the mighty, 

Napoleon Bonaparte; - but the German language, German 

literature, and the Germans!  The writer has already stated 

his opinion with respect to German; he does not speak from 

ignorance or prejudice; he has heard German spoken, and many 

other languages.  German literature!  He does not speak from 

ignorance, he has read that and many a literature, and he 

repeats -  However, he acknowledges that there is one fine 

poem in the German language, that poem is the "Oberon;" a 

poem, by the bye, ignored by the Germans - a speaking fact - 

and of course, by the Anglo-Germanists.  The Germans! he has 

been amongst them, and amongst many other nations, and 

confesses that his opinion of the Germans, as men, is a very 

low one.  Germany, it is true, has produced one very great 

man, the monk who fought the Pope, and nearly knocked him 

down; but this man his countrymen - a telling fact - affect 

to despise, and, of course, the Anglo-Germanists: the father 

of Anglo-Germanism was very fond of inveighing against 

Luther.



The madness, or rather foolery, of the English for foreign 

customs, dresses, and languages, is not an affair of to-day, 

or yesterday - it is of very ancient date, and was very 

properly exposed nearly three centuries ago by one Andrew 

Borde, who under the picture of a "Naked man, with a pair of 

shears in one hand, and a roll of cloth in the other," (3) 

inserted the following lines along with others:-





"I am an Englishman, and naked I stand here,

Musing in my mind what garment I shall weare;

For now I will weare this, and now I will weare that,

Now I will weare, I cannot tell what.

All new fashions be pleasant to mee,

I will have them, whether I thrive or thee;

What do I care if all the world me fail?

I will have a garment reach to my taile;

Then am I a minion, for I wear the new guise.

The next yeare after I hope to be wise,

Not only in wearing my gorgeous array,

For I will go to learning a whole summer's day;

I will learn Latine, Hebrew, Greek, and French,

And I will learn Dutch, sitting on my bench.

I had no peere if to myself I were true,

Because I am not so, divers times do I rue.

Yet I lacke nothing, I have all things at will

If I were wise and would hold myself still,

And meddle with no matters but to me pertaining,

But ever to be true to God and my king.

But I have such matters rowling in my pate,

That I will and do - I cannot tell what," etc.







CHAPTER IV







On Gentility Nonsense - Illustrations of Gentility.





WHAT is gentility?  People in different stations in England - 

entertain different ideas of what is genteel, (4) but it must 

be something gorgeous, glittering, or tawdry, to be 

considered genteel by any of them.  The beau-ideal of the 

English aristocracy, of course with some exceptions, is some 

young fellow with an imperial title, a military personage of 

course, for what is military is so particularly genteel, with 

flaming epaulets, a cocked hat and plume, a prancing charger, 

and a band of fellows called generals and colonels, with 

flaming epaulets, cocked hats and plumes, and prancing 

chargers vapouring behind him.  It was but lately that the 

daughter of an English marquis was heard to say, that the 

sole remaining wish of her heart - she had known misfortunes, 

and was not far from fifty - was to be introduced to - whom?  

The Emperor of Austria!  The sole remaining wish of the heart 

of one who ought to have been thinking of the grave and 

judgment, was to be introduced to the miscreant who had 

caused the blood of noble Hungarian females to be whipped out 

of their shoulders, for no other crime than devotion to their 

country, and its tall and heroic sons.  The middle classes - 

of course there are some exceptions - admire the aristocracy, 

and consider them pinks, the aristocracy who admire the 

Emperor of Austria, and adored the Emperor of Russia, till he 

became old, ugly, and unfortunate, when their adoration 

instantly terminated; for what is more ungenteel than age, 

ugliness, and misfortune!  The beau-ideal with those of the 

lower classes, with peasants and mechanics, is some 

flourishing railroad contractor: look, for example, how they 

worship Mr. Flamson.  This person makes his grand debut in 

the year 'thirty-nine, at a public meeting in the principal 

room of a country inn.  He has come into the neighbourhood 

with the character of a man worth a million pounds, who is to 

make everybody's fortune; at this time, however, he is not 

worth a shilling of his own, though he flashes about 

dexterously three or four thousand pounds, part of which sum 

he has obtained by specious pretences, and part from certain 

individuals who are his confederates.  But in the year 

'forty-nine, he is really in possession of the fortune which 

he and his agents pretended to be worth ten years before - he 

is worth a million pounds.  By what means has he come by 

them?  By railroad contracts, for which he takes care to be 

paid in hard cash before he attempts to perform them, and to 

carry out which he makes use of the sweat and blood of 

wretches who, since their organization, have introduced 

crimes and language into England to which it was previously 

almost a stranger - by purchasing, with paper, shares by 

hundreds in the schemes to execute which he contracts, and 

which are his own devising; which shares he sells as soon as 

they are at a high premium, to which they are speedily forced 

by means of paragraphs, inserted by himself and agents, in 

newspapers devoted to his interest, utterly reckless of the 

terrible depreciation to which they are almost instantly 

subjected.  But he is worth a million pounds, there can be no 

doubt of the fact - he has not made people's fortunes, at 

least those whose fortunes it was said he would make; he has 

made them away; but his own he has made, emphatically made 

it; he is worth a million pounds.  Hurrah for the 

millionnaire!  The clown who views the pandemonium of red 

brick which he has built on the estate which he has purchased 

in the neighbourhood of the place of his grand debut, in 

which every species of architecture, Greek, Indian, and 

Chinese, is employed in caricature - who hears of the grand 

entertainment he gives at Christmas in the principal dining-

room, the hundred wax-candles, the waggon-load of plate, and 

the ocean of wine which form parts of it, and above all the 

two ostrich poults, one at the head, and the other at the 

foot of the table, exclaims, "Well! if he a'n't bang up, I 

don't know who be; why he beats my lord hollow!"  The 

mechanic of the borough town, who sees him dashing through 

the streets in an open landau, drawn by four milk-white 

horses, amidst his attendant out-riders; his wife, a monster 

of a woman, by his side, stout as the wife of Tamerlane, who 

weighed twenty stone, and bedizened out like her whose person 

shone with the jewels of plundered Persia, stares with silent 

wonder, and at last exclaims "That's the man for my vote!"  

You tell the clown that the man of the mansion has 

contributed enormously to corrupt the rural innocence of 

England; you point to an incipient branch railroad, from 

around which the accents of Gomorrah are sounding, and beg 

him to listen for a moment, and then close his ears.  Hodge 

scratches his head and says, "Well, I have nothing to say to 

that; all I know is, that he is bang up, and I wish I were 

he;" perhaps he will add - a Hodge has been known to add - 

"He has been kind enough to put my son on that very railroad; 

'tis true the company is somewhat queer, and the work rather 

killing, but he gets there half-a-crown a day, whereas from 

the farmers he would only get eighteen-pence."  You remind 

the mechanic that the man in the landau has been the ruin of 

thousands and you mention people whom he himself knows, 

people in various grades of life, widows and orphans amongst 

them, whose little all has been dissipated, and whom he has 

reduced to beggary by inducing them to become sharers in his 

delusive schemes.  But the mechanic says, "Well, the more 

fools they to let themselves be robbed.  But I don't call 

that kind of thing robbery, I merely call it out-witting; and 

everybody in this free country has a right to outwit others 

if he can.  What a turn-out he has!"  One was once heard to 

add, "I never saw a more genteel-looking man in all my life 

except one, and that was a gentleman's walley, who was much 

like him.  It is true that he is rather under-sized, but then 

madam, you know, makes up for all."







CHAPTER V







Subject of Gentility continued.





IN the last chapter have been exhibited specimens of 

gentility, so considered by different classes; by one class 

power, youth, and epaulets are considered the ne plus ultra 

of gentility; by another class pride, stateliness, and title; 

by another, wealth and flaming tawdriness.  But what 

constitutes a gentleman?  It is easy to say at once what 

constitutes a gentleman, and there are no distinctions in 

what is gentlemanly, (5) as there are in what is genteel.  

The characteristics of a gentleman are high feeling - a 

determination never to take a cowardly advantage of another - 

a liberal education - absence of narrow views - generosity 

and courage, propriety of behaviour.  Now a person may be 

genteel according to one or another of the three standards 

described above, and not possess one of the characteristics 

of a gentleman.  Is the emperor a gentleman, with spatters of 

blood on his clothes, scourged from the backs of noble 

Hungarian women?  Are the aristocracy gentlefolks, who admire 

him?  Is Mr. Flamson a gentleman, although he has a million 

pounds?  No! cowardly miscreants, admirers of cowardly 

miscreants, and people who make a million pounds by means 

compared with which those employed to make fortunes by the 

getters up of the South Sea Bubble might be called honest 

dealing, are decidedly not gentlefolks.  Now as it is clearly 

demonstrable that a person may be perfectly genteel according 

to some standard or other, and yet be no gentleman, so it is 

demonstrable that a person may have no pretensions to 

gentility, and yet be a gentleman.  For example, there is 

Lavengro!  Would the admirers of the emperor, or the admirers 

of those who admire the emperor, or the admirers of Mr. 

Flamson, call him genteel? and gentility with them is 

everything!  Assuredly they would not; and assuredly they 

would consider him respectively as a being to be shunned, 

despised, or hooted.  Genteel!  Why at one time he is a hack 

author - writes reviewals for eighteenpence a page - edits a 

Newgate chronicle.  At another he wanders the country with a 

face grimy from occasionally mending kettles; and there is no 

evidence that his clothes are not seedy and torn, and his 

shoes down at the heel; but by what process of reasoning will 

they prove that he is no gentleman?  Is he not learned?  Has 

he not generosity and courage?  Whilst a hack author, does he 

pawn the books entrusted to him to review?  Does he break his 

word to his publisher?  Does he write begging letters?  Does 

he get clothes or lodgings without paying for them?  Again, 

whilst a wanderer, does he insult helpless women on the road 

with loose proposals or ribald discourse?  Does he take what 

is not his own from the hedges?  Does he play on the fiddle, 

or make faces in public-houses, in order to obtain pence or 

beer? or does he call for liquor, swallow it, and then say to 

a widowed landlady, "Mistress, I have no brass?"  In a word, 

what vice and crime does he perpetrate - what low acts does 

he commit?  Therefore, with his endowments, who will venture 

to say that he is no gentleman? - unless it be an admirer of 

Mr. Flamson - a clown - who will, perhaps, shout - "I say he 

is no gentleman; for who can be a gentleman who keeps no 

gig?"



The indifference exhibited by Lavengro for what is merely 

genteel, compared with his solicitude never to infringe the 

strict laws of honour, should read a salutary lesson.  The 

generality of his countrymen are far more careful not to 

transgress the customs of what they call gentility, than to 

violate the laws of honour or morality.  They will shrink 

from carrying their own carpet-bag, and from speaking to a 

person in seedy raiment, whilst to matters of much higher 

importance they are shamelessly indifferent.  Not so 

Lavengro; he will do anything that he deems convenient, or 

which strikes his fancy, provided it does not outrage 

decency, or is unallied to profligacy; is not ashamed to 

speak to a beggar in rags, and will associate with anybody, 

provided he can gratify a laudable curiosity.  He has no 

abstract love for what is low, or what the world calls low.  

He sees that many things which the world looks down upon are 

valuable, so he prizes much which the world condemns; he sees 

that many things which the world admires are contemptible, so 

he despises much which the world does not; but when the world 

prizes what is really excellent, he does not contemn it, 

because the world regards it.  If he learns Irish, which all 

the world scoffs at, he likewise learns Italian, which all 

the world melts at.  If he learns Gypsy, the language of the 

tattered tent, he likewise learns Greek, the language of the 

college-hall.  If he learns smithery, he also learns - ah! 

what does he learn to set against smithery? - the law?  No; 

he does not learn the law, which, by the way, is not very 

genteel.  Swimming?  Yes, he learns to swim.  Swimming, 

however, is not genteel; and the world - at least the genteel 

part of it - acts very wisely in setting its face against it; 

for to swim you must be naked, and how would many a genteel 

person look without his clothes?  Come, he learns 

horsemanship; a very genteel accomplishment, which every 

genteel person would gladly possess, though not all genteel 

people do.



Again as to associates: if he holds communion when a boy with 

Murtagh, the scarecrow of an Irish academy, he associates in 

after life with Francis Ardry, a rich and talented young 

Irish gentleman about town.  If he accepts an invitation from 

Mr. Petulengro to his tent, he has no objection to go home 

with a rich genius to dinner; who then will say that he 

prizes a thing or a person because they are ungenteel?  That 

he is not ready to take up with everything that is ungenteel 

he gives a proof, when he refuses, though on the brink of 

starvation, to become bonnet to the thimble-man, an office, 

which, though profitable, is positively ungenteel.  Ah! but 

some sticker-up for gentility will exclaim, "The hero did not 

refuse this office from an insurmountable dislike to its 

ungentility, but merely from a feeling of principle."  Well! 

the writer is not fond of argument, and he will admit that 

such was the case; he admits that it was a love of principle, 

rather than an over-regard for gentility, which prevented the 

hero from accepting, when on the brink of starvation, an 

ungenteel though lucrative office, an office which, the 

writer begs leave to observe, many a person with a great 

regard for gentility, and no particular regard for principle, 

would in a similar strait have accepted; for when did a mere 

love for gentility keep a person from being a dirty 

scoundrel, when the alternatives were "either be a dirty 

scoundrel or starve?"  One thing, however, is certain, which 

is, that Lavengro did not accept the office, which if a love 

for what is low had been his ruling passion he certainly 

would have done; consequently, he refuses to do one thing 

which no genteel person would willingly do, even as he does 

many things which every genteel person would gladly do, for 

example, speaks Italian, rides on horseback, associates with 

a fashionable young man, dines with a rich genius, et cetera.  

Yet - and it cannot be minced - he and gentility with regard 

to many things are at strange divergency; he shrinks from 

many things at which gentility placidly hums a tune, or 

approvingly simpers, and does some things at which gentility 

positively shrinks.  He will not run into debt for clothes or 

lodgings, which he might do without any scandal to gentility; 

he will not receive money from Francis Ardry, and go to 

Brighton with the sister of Annette Le Noir, though there is 

nothing ungenteel in borrowing money from a friend, even when 

you never intend to repay him, and something poignantly 

genteel in going to a watering-place with a gay young 

Frenchwoman; but he has no objection, after raising twenty 

pounds by the sale of that extraordinary work "Joseph Sell," 

to set off into the country, mend kettles under hedge-rows, 

and make pony and donkey shoes in a dingle.  Here, perhaps, 

some plain, well-meaning person will cry - and with much 

apparent justice - how can the writer justify him in this 

act?  What motive, save a love for what is low, could induce 

him to do such a thing?  Would the writer have everybody who 

is in need of recreation go into the country, mend kettles 

under hedges, and make pony shoes in dingles?  To such an 

observation the writer would answer, that Lavengro had an 

excellent motive in doing what he did, but that the writer is 

not so unreasonable as to wish everybody to do the same.  It 

is not everybody who can mend kettles.  It is not everybody 

who is in similar circumstances to those in which Lavengro 

was.  Lavengro flies from London and hack authorship, and 

takes to the roads from fear of consumption; it is expensive 

to put up at inns, and even at public-houses, and Lavengro 

has not much money; so he buys a tinker's cart and apparatus, 

and sets up as tinker, and subsequently as blacksmith; a 

person living in a tent, or in anything else, must do 

something or go mad; Lavengro had a mind, as he himself well 

knew, with some slight tendency to madness, and had he not 

employed himself, he must have gone wild; so to employ 

himself he drew upon one of his resources, the only one 

available at the time.  Authorship had nearly killed him, he 

was sick of reading, and had besides no books; but he 

possessed the rudiments of an art akin to tinkering; he knew 

something of smithery, having served a kind of apprenticeship 

in Ireland to a fairy smith; so he draws upon his smithery to 

enable him to acquire tinkering, he speedily acquires that 

craft, even as he had speedily acquired Welsh, owing to its 

connection with Irish, which language he possessed; and with 

tinkering he amuses himself until he lays it aside to resume 

smithery.  A man who has an innocent resource, has quite as 

much right to draw upon it in need, as he has upon a banker 

in whose hands he has placed a sum; Lavengro turns to 

advantage, under particular circumstances, a certain resource 

which he has, but people who are not so forlorn as Lavengro, 

and have not served the same apprenticeship which he had, are 

not advised to follow his example.  Surely he was better 

employed in plying the trades of tinker and smith than in 

having recourse to vice, in running after milk-maids, for 

example.  Running after milk-maids is by no means an 

ungenteel rural diversion; but let any one ask some 

respectable casuist (the Bishop of London for example), 

whether Lavengro was not far better employed, when in the 

country, at tinkering and smithery than he would have been in 

running after all the milk-maids in Cheshire, though 

tinkering is in general considered a very ungenteel 

employment, and smithery little better, notwithstanding that 

an Orcadian poet, who wrote in Norse about eight hundred 

years ago, reckons the latter among nine noble arts which he 

possessed, naming it along with playing at chess, on the 

harp, and ravelling runes, or as the original has it, 

"treading runes" - that is, compressing them into a small 

compass by mingling one letter with another, even as the 

Turkish caligraphists ravel the Arabic letters, more 

especially those who write talismans.





"Nine arts have I, all noble;

I play at chess so free,

At ravelling runes I'm ready,

At books and smithery;

I'm skilled o'er ice at skimming

On skates, I shoot and row,

And few at harping match me,

Or minstrelsy, I trow."





But though Lavengro takes up smithery, which, though the 

Orcadian ranks it with chess-playing and harping, is 

certainly somewhat of a grimy art, there can be no doubt 

that, had he been wealthy and not so forlorn as he was, he 

would have turned to many things, honourable, of course, in 

preference.  He has no objection to ride a fine horse when he 

has the opportunity: he has his day-dream of making a fortune 

of two hundred thousand pounds by becoming a merchant and 

doing business after the Armenian fashion; and there can be 

no doubt that he would have been glad to wear fine clothes, 

provided he had had sufficient funds to authorize him in 

wearing them.  For the sake of wandering the country and 

plying the hammer and tongs, he would not have refused a 

commission in the service of that illustrious monarch George 

the Fourth, provided he had thought that he could live on his 

pay, and not be forced to run in debt to tradesmen, without 

any hope of paying them, for clothes and luxuries, as many 

highly genteel officers in that honourable service were in 

the habit of doing.  For the sake of tinkering, he would 

certainly not have refused a secretaryship of an embassy to 

Persia, in which he might have turned his acquaintance with 

Persian, Arabic, and the Lord only knows what other 

languages, to account.  He took to tinkering and smithery, 

because no better employments were at his command.  No war is 

waged in the book against rank, wealth, fine clothes, or 

dignified employments; it is shown, however, that a person 

may be a gentleman and a scholar without them.  Rank, wealth, 

fine clothes, and dignified employments, are no doubt very 

fine things, but they are merely externals, they do not make 

a gentleman, they add external grace and dignity to the 

gentleman and scholar, but they make neither; and is it not 

better to be a gentleman without them than not a gentleman 

with them?  Is not Lavengro, when he leaves London on foot 

with twenty pounds in his pocket, entitled to more respect 

than Mr. Flamson flaming in his coach with a million?  And is 

not even the honest jockey at Horncastle, who offers a fair 

price to Lavengro for his horse, entitled to more than the 

scoundrel lord, who attempts to cheat him of one-fourth of 

its value?



Millions, however, seem to think otherwise, by their servile 

adoration of people whom without rank, wealth, and fine 

clothes they would consider infamous, but whom possessed of 

rank, wealth, and glittering habiliments they seem to admire 

all the more for their profligacy and crimes.  Does not a 

blood-spot, or a lust-spot, on the clothes of a blooming 

emperor, give a kind of zest to the genteel young god?  Do 

not the pride, superciliousness, and selfishness of a certain 

aristocracy make it all the more regarded by its worshippers? 

and do not the clownish and gutter-blood admirers of Mr. 

Flamson like him all the more because they are conscious that 

he is a knave?  If such is the case  - and, alas! is it not 

the case? - they cannot be too frequently told that fine 

clothes, wealth, and titles adorn a person in proportion as 

he adorns them; that if worn by the magnanimous and good they 

are ornaments indeed, but if by the vile and profligate they 

are merely san benitos, and only serve to make their infamy 

doubly apparent; and that a person in seedy raiment and 

tattered hat, possessed of courage, kindness, and virtue, is 

entitled to more respect from those to whom his virtues are 

manifested than any cruel profligate emperor, selfish 

aristocrat, or knavish millionaire in the world.



The writer has no intention of saying that all in England are 

affected with the absurd mania for gentility; nor is such a 

statement made in the book; it is shown therein that 

individuals of certain classes can prize a gentleman, 

notwithstanding seedy raiment, dusty shoes or tattered hat, - 

for example, the young Irishman, the rich genius, the 

postillion, and his employer.  Again, when the life of the 

hero is given to the world, amidst the howl about its lowness 

and vulgarity, raised by the servile crew whom its 

independence of sentiment has stung, more than one powerful 

voice has been heard testifying approbation of its learning 

and the purity of its morality.  That there is some salt in 

England, minds not swayed by mere externals, he is fully 

convinced; if he were not, he would spare himself the trouble 

of writing; but to the fact that the generality of his 

countrymen are basely grovelling before the shrine of what 

they are pleased to call gentility, he cannot shut his eyes.



 Oh! what a clever person that Cockney was, who, travelling 

in the Aberdeen railroad carriage, after edifying the company 

with his remarks on various subjects, gave it as his opinion 

that Lieutenant P- would, in future, be shunned by all 

respectable society!  And what a simple person that elderly 

gentleman was, who, abruptly starting, asked in rather an 

authoritative voice, "and why should Lieutenant P- be shunned 

by respectable society?" and who, after entering into what 

was said to be a masterly analysis of the entire evidence of 

the case, concluded by stating, "that having been accustomed 

to all kinds of evidence all his life, he had never known a 

case in which the accused had obtained a more complete and 

triumphant justification than Lieutenant P- had done in the 

late trial."



Now the Cockney, who is said to have been a very foppish 

Cockney, was perfectly right in what he said, and therein 

manifested a knowledge of the English mind and character, and 

likewise of the modern English language, to which his 

catechist, who, it seems, was a distinguished member of the 

Scottish bar, could lay no pretensions.  The Cockney knew 

what the Lord of Session knew not, that the British public is 

gentility crazy, and he knew, moreover, that gentility and 

respectability are synonymous.  No one in England is genteel 

or respectable that is "looked at," who is the victim of 

oppression; he may be pitied for a time, but when did not 

pity terminate in contempt?  A poor, harmless young officer - 

but why enter into the details of the infamous case? they are 

but too well known, and if ever cruelty, pride, and 

cowardice, and things much worse than even cruelty, 

cowardice, and pride were brought to light, and, at the same 

time, countenanced, they were in that case.  What availed the 

triumphant justification of the poor victim?  There was at 

first a roar of indignation against his oppressors, but how 

long did it last?  He had been turned out of the service, 

they remained in it with their red coats and epaulets; he was 

merely the son of a man who had rendered good service to his 

country, they were, for the most part, highly connected - 

they were in the extremest degree genteel, he quite the 

reverse; so the nation wavered, considered, thought the 

genteel side was the safest after all, and then with the cry 

of, "Oh! there is nothing like gentility," ratted bodily.  

Newspaper and public turned against the victim, scouted him, 

apologized for the - what should they be called? - who were 

not only admitted into the most respectable society, but 

courted to come, the spots not merely of wine on their 

military clothes, giving them a kind of poignancy.  But there 

is a God in heaven; the British glories are tarnished - 

Providence has never smiled on British arms since that case - 

oh!  Balaklava! thy name interpreted is net of fishes, and 

well dost thou deserve that name.  How many a scarlet golden 

fish has of late perished in the mud amidst thee, cursing the 

genteel service, and the genteel leader which brought him to 

such a doom.



Whether the rage for gentility is most prevalent amongst the 

upper, middle, or lower classes it is difficult to say; the 

priest in the text seems to think that it is exhibited in the 

most decided manner in the middle class; it is the writer's 

opinion, however, that in no class is it more strongly 

developed than in the lower: what they call being well-born 

goes a great way amongst them, but the possession of money 

much farther, whence Mr. Flamson's influence over them.  

Their rage against, and scorn for, any person who by his 

courage and talents has advanced himself in life, and still 

remains poor, are indescribable; "he is no better than 

ourselves," they say, "why should he be above us?" - for they 

have no conception that anybody has a right to ascendency 

over themselves except by birth or money.  This feeling 

amongst the vulgar has been, to a certain extent, the bane of 

two services, naval and military.  The writer does not make 

this assertion rashly; he observed this feeling at work in 

the army when a child, and he has good reason for believing 

that it was as strongly at work in the navy at the same time, 

and is still as prevalent in both.  Why are not brave men 

raised from the ranks? is frequently the cry; why are not 

brave sailors promoted?  The Lord help brave soldiers and 

sailors who are promoted; they have less to undergo from the 

high airs of their brother officers, and those are hard 

enough to endure, than from the insolence of the men.  

Soldiers and sailors promoted to command are said to be in 

general tyrants; in nine cases out of ten, when they are 

tyrants, they have been obliged to have recourse to extreme 

severity in order to protect themselves from the insolence 

and mutinous spirit of the men, - "He is no better than 

ourselves: shoot him, bayonet him, or fling him overboard!" 

they say of some obnoxious individual raised above them by 

his merit.  Soldiers and sailors, in general, will bear any 

amount of tyranny from a lordly sot, or the son of a man who 

has "plenty of brass" - their own term - but will mutiny 

against the just orders of a skilful and brave officer who 

"is no better than themselves."  There was the affair of the 

"Bounty," for example: Bligh was one of the best seamen that 

ever trod deck, and one of the bravest of men; proofs of his 

seamanship he gave by steering, amidst dreadful weather, a 

deeply-laden boat for nearly four thousand miles over an 

almost unknown ocean - of his bravery, at the fight of 

Copenhagen, one of the most desperate ever fought, of which 

after Nelson he was the hero: he was, moreover, not an unkind 

man; but the crew of the "Bounty" mutinied against him, and 

set him half naked in an open boat, with certain of his men 

who remained faithful to him, and ran away with the ship.  

Their principal motive for doing so was an idea, whether true 

or groundless the writer cannot say, that Bligh was "no 

better than themselves;" he was certainly neither a lord's 

illegitimate, nor possessed of twenty thousand pounds.  The 

writer knows what he is writing about, having been acquainted 

in his early years with an individual who was turned adrift 

with Bligh, and who died about the year '22, a lieutenant in 

the navy, in a provincial town in which the writer was 

brought up.  The ringleaders in the mutiny were two 

scoundrels, Christian and Young, who had great influence with 

the crew, because they were genteelly connected.  Bligh, 

after leaving the "Bounty," had considerable difficulty in 

managing the men who had shared his fate, because they 

considered themselves "as good men as he," notwithstanding, 

that to his conduct and seamanship they had alone to look, 

under Heaven, for salvation from the ghastly perils that 

surrounded them.  Bligh himself, in his journal, alludes to 

this feeling.  Once, when he and his companions landed on a 

desert island, one of them said, with a mutinous look, that 

he considered himself "as good a man as he;" Bligh, seizing a 

cutlass, called upon him to take another and defend himself, 

whereupon the man said that Bligh was going to kill him, and 

made all manner of concessions; now why did this fellow 

consider himself as good a man as Bligh?  Was he as good a 

seaman? no, nor a tenth part as good.  As brave a man? no, 

nor a tenth part as brave; and of these facts he was 

perfectly well aware, but bravery and seamanship stood for 

nothing with him, as they still stand with thousands of his 

class; Bligh was not genteel by birth or money, therefore 

Bligh was no better than himself.  Had Bligh, before he 

sailed, got a twenty-thousand pound prize in the lottery, he 

would have experienced no insolence from this fellow, for 

there would have been no mutiny in the "Bounty."  "He is our 

betters," the crew would have said, "and it is our duty to 

obey him."



The wonderful power of gentility in England is exemplified in 

nothing more than in what it is producing amongst Jews, 

Gypsies, and Quakers.  It is breaking up their venerable 

communities.  All the better, some one will say.  Alas! alas!  

It is making the wealthy Jews forsake the synagogue for the 

opera-house, or the gentility chapel, in which a disciple of 

Mr. Platitude, in a white surplice, preaches a sermon at 

noon-day from a desk, on each side of which is a flaming 

taper.  It is making them abandon their ancient literature, 

their "Mischna," their "Gemara," their "Zohar," for gentility 

novels, "The Young Duke," the most unexceptionably genteel 

book ever written, being the principal favourite.  It makes 

the young Jew ashamed of the young Jewess, it makes her 

ashamed of the young Jew.  The young Jew marries an opera-

dancer, or if the dancer will not have him, as is frequently 

the case, the cast-off Miss of the Honourable Spencer So-and-

so.  It makes the young Jewess accept the honourable offer of 

a cashiered lieutenant of the Bengal Native Infantry; or, if 

such a person does not come forward, the dishonourable offer 

of a cornet of a regiment of crack hussars.  It makes poor 

Jews, male and female, forsake the synagogue for the sixpenny 

theatre or penny hop; the Jew to take up with an Irish female 

of loose character, and the Jewess with a musician of the 

Guards, or the Tipperary servant of Captain Mulligan.  With 

respect to the gypsies, it is making the women what they 

never were before - harlots; and the men what they never were 

before - careless fathers and husbands.  It has made the 

daughter of Ursula the chaste take up with the base drummer 

of a wild-beast show.  It makes Gorgiko Brown, the gypsy man, 

leave his tent and his old wife, of an evening, and thrust 

himself into society which could well dispense with him.  

"Brother," said Mr. Petulengro to the Romany Rye, after 

telling him many things connected with the decadence of 

gypsyism, "there is one Gorgiko Brown, who, with a face as 

black as a tea-kettle, wishes to be mistaken for a Christian 

tradesman; he goes into the parlour of a third-rate inn of an 

evening, calls for rum and water, and attempts to enter into 

conversation with the company about politics and business; 

the company flout him and give him the cold shoulder, or 

perhaps complain to the landlord, who comes and asks him what 

business he has in the parlour, telling him if he wants to 

drink to go into the tap-room, and perhaps collars him and 

kicks him out, provided he refuses to move."  With respect to 

the Quakers, it makes the young people like the young Jews, 

crazy after gentility diversions, worship, marriages, or 

connections, and makes old Pease do what it makes Gorgiko 

Brown do, thrust himself into society which could well 

dispense with him, and out of which he is not kicked, because 

unlike the gypsy he is not poor.  The writer would say much 

more on these points, but want of room prevents him; he must 

therefore request the reader to have patience until he can 

lay before the world a pamphlet, which he has been long 

meditating, to be entitled "Remarks on the strikingly similar 

Effects which a Love for Gentility has produced, and is 

producing, amongst Jews, Gypsies, and Quakers."



The Priest in the book has much to say on the subject of this 

gentility-nonsense; no person can possibly despise it more 

thoroughly than that very remarkable individual seems to do, 

yet he hails its prevalence with pleasure, knowing the 

benefits which will result from it to the church of which he 

is the sneering slave.  "The English are mad after 

gentility," says he; "well, all the better for us; their 

religion for a long time past has been a plain and simple 

one, and consequently by no means genteel; they'll quit it 

for ours, which is the perfection of what they admire; with 

which Templars, Hospitalers, mitred abbots, Gothic abbeys, 

long-drawn aisles, golden censers, incense, et cetera, are 

connected; nothing, or next to nothing, of Christ, it is 

true, but weighed in the balance against gentility, where 

will Christianity be? why, kicking against the beam - ho! 

ho!"  And in connection with the gentility-nonsense, he 

expatiates largely, and with much contempt, on a species of 

literature by which the interests of his church in England 

have been very much advanced - all genuine priests have a 

thorough contempt for everything which tends to advance the 

interests of their church - this literature is made up of 

pseudo Jacobitism, Charlie o'er the waterism, or nonsense 

about Charlie o'er the water.  And the writer will now take 

the liberty of saying a few words about it on his own 

account.







CHAPTER VI







On Scotch Gentility-Nonsense - Charlie o'er the Waterism.





OF the literature just alluded to Scott was the inventor.  It 

is founded on the fortunes and misfortunes of the Stuart 

family, of which Scott was the zealous defender and 

apologist, doing all that in his power lay to represent the 

members of it as noble, chivalrous, high-minded, unfortunate 

princes; though, perhaps, of all the royal families that ever 

existed upon the earth, this family was the worst.  It was 

unfortunate enough, it is true; but it owed its misfortunes 

entirely to its crimes, viciousness, bad faith, and 

cowardice.  Nothing will be said of it here until it made its 

appearance in England to occupy the English throne.



The first of the family which we have to do with, James, was 

a dirty, cowardly miscreant, of whom the less said the 

better.  His son, Charles the First, was a tyrant - 

exceedingly cruel and revengeful, but weak and dastardly; he 

caused a poor fellow to be hanged in London, who was not his 

subject, because he had heard that the unfortunate creature 

had once bitten his own glove at Cadiz, in Spain, at the 

mention of his name; and he permitted his own bull-dog, 

Strafford, to be executed by his own enemies, though the only 

crime of Strafford was, that he had barked furiously at those 

enemies, and had worried two or three of them, when Charles 

shouted, "Fetch 'em."  He was a bitter, but yet a despicable 

enemy, and the coldest and most worthless of friends; for 

though he always hoped to be able, some time or other, to 

hang his enemies, he was always ready to curry favour with 

them, more especially if he could do so at the expense of his 

friends.  He was the haughtiest, yet meanest of mankind.  He 

once caned a young nobleman for appearing before him in the 

drawing-room not dressed exactly according to the court 

etiquette; yet he condescended to flatter and compliment him 

who, from principle, was his bitterest enemy, namely, 

Harrison, when the republican colonel was conducting him as a 

prisoner to London.  His bad faith was notorious; it was from 

abhorrence of the first public instance which he gave of his 

bad faith, his breaking his word to the Infanta of Spain, 

that the poor Hiberno-Spaniard bit his glove at Cadiz; and it 

was his notorious bad faith which eventually cost him his 

head; for the Republicans would gladly have spared him, 

provided they could put the slightest confidence in any 

promise, however solemn, which he might have made to them.  

Of them, it would be difficult to say whether they most hated 

or despised him.  Religion he had none.  One day he favoured 

Popery; the next, on hearing certain clamours of the people, 

he sent his wife's domestics back packing to France, because 

they were Papists.  Papists, however, should make him a 

saint, for he was certainly the cause of the taking of 

Rochelle.



His son, Charles the Second, though he passed his youth in 

the school of adversity, learned no other lesson from it than 

the following one - take care of yourself, and never do an 

action, either good or bad, which is likely to bring you into 

any great difficulty; and this maxim he acted up to as soon 

as he came to the throne.  He was a Papist, but took especial 

care not to acknowledge his religion, at which he frequently 

scoffed, till just before his last gasp, when he knew that he 

could lose nothing, and hoped to gain everything by it.  He 

was always in want of money, but took care not to tax the 

country beyond all endurable bounds; preferring to such a 

bold and dangerous course, to become the pensioner of Louis, 

to whom, in return for his gold, he sacrificed the honour and 

interests of Britain.  He was too lazy and sensual to delight 

in playing the part of a tyrant himself; but he never checked 

tyranny in others save in one instance.  He permitted beastly 

butchers to commit unmentionable horrors on the feeble, 

unarmed, and disunited Covenanters of Scotland, but checked 

them when they would fain have endeavoured to play the same 

game on the numerous united, dogged, and warlike Independents 

of England.  To show his filial piety, he bade the hangman 

dishonour the corpses of some of his father's judges, before 

whom, when alive, he ran like a screaming hare; but permitted 

those who had lost their all in supporting his father's 

cause, to pine in misery and want.  He would give to a 

painted harlot a thousand pounds for a loathsome embrace, and 

to a player or buffoon a hundred for a trumpery pun, but 

would refuse a penny to the widow or orphan of an old 

Royalist soldier.  He was the personification of selfishness; 

and as he loved and cared for no one, so did no one love or 

care for him.  So little had he gained the respect or 

affection of those who surrounded him, that after his body 

had undergone an after-death examination, parts of it were 

thrown down the sinks of the palace, to become eventually the 

prey of the swine and ducks of Westminster.



His brother, who succeeded him, James the Second, was a 

Papist, but sufficiently honest to acknowledge his Popery, 

but upon the whole, he was a poor creature; though a tyrant, 

he was cowardly, had he not been a coward he would never have 

lost his throne.  There were plenty of lovers of tyranny in 

England who would have stood by him, provided he would have 

stood by them, and would, though not Papists, have encouraged 

him in his attempt to bring back England beneath the sway of 

Rome, and perhaps would eventually have become Papists 

themselves; but the nation raising a cry against him, and his 

son-in-law, the Prince of Orange, invading the country, he 

forsook his friends, of whom he had a host, but for whom he 

cared little - left his throne, for which he cared a great 

deal - and Popery in England, for which he cared yet more, to 

their fate, and escaped to France, from whence, after taking 

a little heart, he repaired to Ireland, where he was speedily 

joined by a gallant army of Papists whom he basely abandoned 

at the Boyne, running away in a most lamentable condition, at 

the time when by showing a little courage he might have 

enabled them to conquer.  This worthy, in his last will, 

bequeathed his heart to England - his right arm to Scotland - 

and his bowels to Ireland.  What the English and Scotch said 

to their respective bequests is not known, but it is certain 

that an old Irish priest, supposed to have been a great-

grand-uncle of the present Reverend Father Murtagh, on 

hearing of the bequest to Ireland, fell into a great passion, 

and having been brought up at "Paris and Salamanca," 

expressed his indignation in the following strain:- "Malditas 

sean tus tripas! teniamos bastante del olor de tus tripas al 

tiempo de tu nuida dela batalla del Boyne!"



His son, generally called the Old Pretender, though born in 

England, was carried in his infancy to France, where he was 

brought up in the strictest principles of Popery, which 

principles, however, did not prevent him becoming (when did 

they ever prevent any one?) a worthless and profligate 

scoundrel; there are some doubts as to the reality of his 

being a son of James, which doubts are probably unfounded, 

the grand proof of his legitimacy being the thorough baseness 

of his character.  It was said of his father that he could 

speak well, and it may be said of him that he could write 

well, the only thing he could do which was worth doing, 

always supposing that there is any merit in being able to 

write.  He was of a mean appearance, and, like his father, 

pusillanimous to a degree.  The meanness of his appearance 

disgusted, and his pusillanimity discouraged the Scotch when 

he made his appearance amongst them in the year 1715, some 

time after the standard of rebellion had been hoisted by Mar.  

He only stayed a short time in Scotland, and then, seized 

with panic, retreated to France, leaving his friends to shift 

for themselves as they best could.  He died a pensioner of 

the Pope.



The son of this man, Charles Edward, of whom so much in later 

years has been said and written, was a worthless ignorant 

youth, and a profligate and illiterate old man.  When young, 

the best that can be said of him is, that he had occasionally 

springs of courage, invariably at the wrong time and place, 

which merely served to lead his friends into inextricable 

difficulties.  When old, he was loathsome and contemptible to 

both friend and foe.  His wife loathed him, and for the most 

terrible of reasons; she did not pollute his couch, for to do 

that was impossible - he had made it so vile; but she 

betrayed it, inviting to it not only Alfieri the Filthy, but 

the coarsest grooms.  Doctor King, the warmest and almost 

last adherent of his family, said, that there was not a vice 

or crime of which he was not guilty; as for his foes, they 

scorned to harm him even when in their power.  In the year 

1745 he came down from the Highlands of Scotland, which had 

long been a focus of rebellion.  He was attended by certain 

clans of the Highlands, desperadoes used to free-bootery from 

their infancy, and, consequently, to the use of arms, and 

possessed of a certain species of discipline; with these he 

defeated at Prestonpans a body of men called soldiers, but 

who were in reality peasants and artizans, levied about a 

month before, without discipline or confidence in each other, 

and who were miserably massacred by the Highland army; he 

subsequently invaded England, nearly destitute of regular 

soldiers, and penetrated as far as Derby, from which place he 

retreated on learning that regular forces which had been 

hastily recalled from Flanders were coming against him, with 

the Duke of Cumberland at their head; he was pursued, and his 

rearguard overtaken and defeated by the dragoons of the duke 

at Clifton, from which place the rebels retreated in great 

confusion across the Eden into Scotland, where they commenced 

dancing Highland reels and strathspeys on the bank of the 

river, for joy at their escape, whilst a number of wretched 

girls, paramours of some of them, were perishing in the 

waters of the swollen river in an attempt to follow them; 

they themselves passed over by eighties and by hundreds, arm 

in arm, for mutual safety, without the loss of a man, but 

they left the poor paramours to shift for themselves, nor did 

any of these canny people after passing the stream dash back 

to rescue a single female life, - no, they were too well 

employed upon the bank in dancing strathspeys to the tune of 

"Charlie o'er the water."  It was, indeed, Charlie o'er the 

water, and canny Highlanders o'er the water, but where were 

the poor prostitutes meantime?  IN THE WATER.



The Jacobite farce, or tragedy, was speedily brought to a 

close by the battle of Culloden; there did Charlie wish 

himself back again o'er the water, exhibiting the most 

unmistakable signs of pusillanimity; there were the clans cut 

to pieces, at least those who could be brought to the charge, 

and there fell Giles Mac Bean, or as he was called in Gaelic, 

Giliosa Mac Beathan, a kind of giant, six feet four inches 

and a quarter high, "than whom," as his wife said in a 

coronach she made upon him, "no man who stood at Cuiloitr was 

taller" - Giles Mac Bean the Major of the clan Cattan - a 

great drinker - a great fisher - a great shooter, and the 

champion of the Highland host.



The last of the Stuarts was a cardinal.



Such were the Stuarts, such their miserable history.  They 

were dead and buried in every sense of the word until Scott 

resuscitated them - how? by the power of fine writing and by 

calling to his aid that strange divinity, gentility.  He 

wrote splendid novels about the Stuarts, in which he 

represents them as unlike what they really were as the 

graceful and beautiful papillon is unlike the hideous and 

filthy worm.  In a word, he made them genteel, and that was 

enough to give them paramount sway over the minds of the 

British people.  The public became Stuart-mad, and everybody, 

specially the women, said, "What a pity it was that we hadn't 

a Stuart to govern."  All parties, Whig, Tory, or Radical, 

became Jacobite at heart, and admirers of absolute power.  

The Whigs talked about the liberty of the subject, and the 

Radicals about the rights of man still, but neither party 

cared a straw for what it talked about, and mentally swore 

that, as soon as by means of such stuff they could get 

places, and fill their pockets, they would be as Jacobite as 

the Jacobs themselves.  As for Tories, no great change in 

them was necessary; everything favouring absolutism and 

slavery being congenial to them.  So the whole nation, that 

is, the reading part of the nation, with some exceptions, for 

thank God there has always been some salt in England, went 

over the water to Charlie.  But going over to Charlie was not 

enough, they must, or at least a considerable part of them, 

go over to Rome too, or have a hankering to do so.  As the 

Priest sarcastically observes in the text, "As all the Jacobs 

were Papists, so the good folks who through Scott's novels 

admire the Jacobs must be Papists too."  An idea got about 

that the religion of such genteel people as the Stuarts must 

be the climax of gentility, and that idea was quite 

sufficient.  Only let a thing, whether temporal or spiritual, 

be considered genteel in England, and if it be not followed 

it is strange indeed; so Scott's writings not only made the 

greater part of the nation Jacobite, but Popish.



Here some people will exclaim - whose opinions remain sound 

and uncontaminated - what you say is perhaps true with 

respect to the Jacobite nonsense at present so prevalent 

being derived from Scott's novels, but the Popish nonsense, 

which people of the genteeler classes are so fond of, is 

derived from Oxford.  We sent our sons to Oxford nice honest 

lads, educated in the principles of the Church of England, 

and at the end of the first term they came home puppies, 

talking Popish nonsense, which they had learned from the 

pedants to whose care we had entrusted them; ay, not only 

Popery but Jacobitism, which they hardly carried with them 

from home, for we never heard them talking Jacobitism before 

they had been at Oxford; but now their conversation is a 

farrago of Popish and Jacobite stuff - "Complines and 

Claverse."  Now, what these honest folks say is, to a certain 

extent, founded on fact; the Popery which has overflowed the 

land during the last fourteen or fifteen years, has come 

immediately from Oxford, and likewise some of the Jacobitism, 

Popish and Jacobite nonsense, and little or nothing else, 

having been taught at Oxford for about that number of years.  

But whence did the pedants get the Popish nonsense with which 

they have corrupted youth?  Why, from the same quarter from 

which they got the Jacobite nonsense with which they have 

inoculated those lads who were not inoculated with it before 

- Scott's novels.  Jacobitism and Laudism, a kind of half 

Popery, had at one time been very prevalent at Oxford, but 

both had been long consigned to oblivion there, and people at 

Oxford cared as little about Laud as they did about the 

Pretender.  Both were dead and buried there, as everywhere 

else, till Scott called them out of their graves, when the 

pedants of Oxford hailed both - ay, and the Pope, too, as 

soon as Scott had made the old fellow fascinating, through 

particular novels, more especially the "Monastery" and 

"Abbot."  Then the quiet, respectable, honourable Church of 

England would no longer do for the pedants of Oxford; they 

must belong to a more genteel church - they were ashamed at 

first to be downright Romans - so they would be Lauds.  The 

pale-looking, but exceedingly genteel non-juring clergyman in 

Waverley was a Laud; but they soon became tired of being 

Lauds, for Laud's Church, gew-gawish and idolatrous as it 

was, was not sufficiently tinselly and idolatrous for them, 

so they must be Popes, but in a sneaking way, still calling 

themselves Church-of-England men, in order to batten on the 

bounty of the church which they were betraying, and likewise 

have opportunities of corrupting such lads as might still 

resort to Oxford with principles uncontaminated.



So the respectable people, whose opinions are still sound, 

are, to a certain extent, right when they say that the tide 

of Popery, which has flowed over the land, has come from 

Oxford.  It did come immediately from Oxford, but how did it 

get to Oxford?  Why, from Scott's novels.  Oh! that sermon 

which was the first manifestation of Oxford feeling, preached 

at Oxford some time in the year '38 by a divine of a weak and 

confused intellect, in which Popery was mixed up with 

Jacobitism!  The present writer remembers perfectly well, on 

reading some extracts from it at the time in a newspaper, on 

the top of a coach, exclaiming - "Why, the simpleton has been 

pilfering from Walter Scott's novels!"



O Oxford pedants!  Oxford pedants! ye whose politics and 

religion are both derived from Scott's novels! what a pity it 

is that some lad of honest parents, whose mind ye are 

endeavouring to stultify with your nonsense about "Complines 

and Claverse," has not the spirit to start up and cry, 

"Confound your gibberish!  I'll have none of it.  Hurrah for 

the Church, and the principles of my FATHER!"







CHAPTER VII







Same Subject continued.





NOW what could have induced Scott to write novels tending to 

make people Papists and Jacobites, and in love with arbitrary 

power?  Did he think that Christianity was a gaudy mummery?  

He did not, he could not, for he had read the Bible; yet was 

he fond of gaudy mummeries, fond of talking about them.  Did 

he believe that the Stuarts were a good family, and fit to 

govern a country like Britain?  He knew that they were a 

vicious, worthless crew, and that Britain was a degraded 

country as long as they swayed the sceptre; but for those 

facts he cared nothing, they governed in a way which he 

liked, for he had an abstract love of despotism, and an 

abhorrence of everything savouring of freedom and the rights 

of man in general.  His favourite political picture was a 

joking, profligate, careless king, nominally absolute - the 

heads of great houses paying court to, but in reality 

governing, that king, whilst revelling with him on the 

plunder of a nation, and a set of crouching, grovelling 

vassals (the literal meaning of vassal is a wretch), who, 

after allowing themselves to be horsewhipped, would take a 

bone if flung to them, and be grateful; so that in love with 

mummery, though he knew what Christianity was, no wonder he 

admired such a church as that of Rome, and that which Laud 

set up; and by nature formed to be the holder of the candle 

to ancient worm-eaten and profligate families, no wonder that 

all his sympathies were with the Stuarts and their dissipated 

insolent party, and all his hatred directed against those who 

endeavoured to check them in their proceedings, and to raise 

the generality of mankind something above a state of 

vassalage, that is, wretchedness.  Those who were born great, 

were, if he could have had his will, always to remain great, 

however worthless their characters.  Those who were born low, 

were always to remain so, however great their talents; 

though, if that rule were carried out, where would he have 

been himself?



In the book which he called the "History of Napoleon 

Bonaparte," in which he plays the sycophant to all the 

legitimate crowned heads in Europe, whatever their crimes, 

vices, or miserable imbecilities, he, in his abhorrence of 

everything low which by its own vigour makes itself 

illustrious, calls Murat of the sabre the son of a pastry-

cook, of a Marseilleise pastry-cook.  It is a pity that 

people who give themselves hoity-toity airs - and the Scotch 

in general are wonderfully addicted to giving themselves 

hoity-toity airs, and checking people better than themselves 

with their birth (6) and their country - it is a great pity 

that such people do not look at home-son of a pastry-cook, of 

a Marseilleise pastry-cook!  Well, and what was Scott 

himself?  Why, son of a pettifogger, of an Edinburgh 

pettifogger.  "Oh, but Scott was descended from the old cow-

stealers of Buccleuch, and therefore - " descended from old 

cow-stealers, was he?  Well, had he nothing to boast of 

beyond such a pedigree, he would have lived and died the son 

of a pettifogger, and been forgotten, and deservedly so; but 

he possessed talents, and by his talents rose like Murat, and 

like him will be remembered for his talents alone, and 

deservedly so.  "Yes, but Murat was still the son of a 

pastry-cook, and though he was certainly good at the sabre, 

and cut his way to a throne, still - "  Lord! what fools 

there are in the world; but as no one can be thought anything 

of in this world without a pedigree, the writer will now give 

a pedigree for Murat, of a very different character from the 

cow-stealing one of Scott, but such a one as the proudest he 

might not disdain to claim.  Scott was descended from the old 

cow-stealers of Buccleuch - was he?  Good! and Murat was 

descended from the old Moors of Spain, from the Abencerages 

(sons of the saddle) of Granada.  The name Murat is Arabic, 

and is the same as Murad (Le Desire, or the wished-for one).  

Scott in his genteel Life of Bonaparte, says that "when Murat 

was in Egypt, the similarity between the name of the 

celebrated Mameluke Mourad and that of Bonaparte's Meilleur 

Sabreur was remarked, and became the subject of jest amongst 

the comrades of the gallant Frenchman."  But the writer of 

the novel of Bonaparte did not know that the names were one 

and the same.  Now which was the best pedigree, that of the 

son of the pastry-cook, or that of the son of the 

pettifogger?  Which was the best blood?  Let us observe the 

workings of the two bloods.  He who had the blood of the 

"sons of the saddle" in him, became the wonderful cavalier of 

the most wonderful host that ever went forth to conquest, won 

for himself a crown, and died the death of a soldier, leaving 

behind him a son, only inferior to himself in strength, in 

prowess, and in horsemanship.  The descendant of the cow-

stealer became a poet, a novel writer, the panegyrist of 

great folk and genteel people; became insolvent because, 

though an author, he deemed it ungenteel to be mixed up with 

the business part of the authorship; died paralytic and 

broken-hearted because he could no longer give entertainments 

to great folks, leaving behind him, amongst other children, 

who were never heard of, a son, who, through his father's 

interest, had become lieutenant-colonel in a genteel cavalry 

regiment.  A son who was ashamed of his father because his 

father was an author; a son who - paugh - why ask which was 

the best blood?



So, owing to his rage for gentility, Scott must needs become 

the apologist of the Stuarts and their party; but God made 

this man pay dearly for taking the part of the wicked against 

the good; for lauding up to the skies the miscreants and 

robbers, and calumniating the noble spirits of Britain, the 

salt of England, and his own country.  As God had driven the 

Stuarts from their throne, and their followers from their 

estates, making them vagabonds and beggars on the face of the 

earth, taking from them all that they cared for, so did that 

same God, who knows perfectly well how and where to strike, 

deprive the apologist of that wretched crew of all that 

rendered life pleasant in his eyes, the lack of which 

paralysed him in body and mind, rendered him pitiable to 

others, loathsome to himself, - so much so, that he once 

said, "Where is the beggar who would change places with me, 

notwithstanding all my fame?"  Ah! God knows perfectly well 

how to strike.  He permitted him to retain all his literary 

fame to the very last - his literary fame for which he cared 

nothing; but what became of the sweetness of life, his fine 

house, his grand company, and his entertainments?  The grand 

house ceased to be his; he was only permitted to live in it 

on sufferance, and whatever grandeur it might still retain, 

it soon became as desolate a looking house as any misanthrope 

could wish to see - where were the grand entertainments and 

the grand company? there are no grand entertainments where 

there is no money; no lords and ladies where there are no 

entertainments - and there lay the poor lodger in the 

desolate house, groaning on a bed no longer his, smitten by 

the hand of God in the part where he was most vulnerable.  Of 

what use telling such a man to take comfort, for he had 

written the "Minstrel" and "Rob Roy," - telling him to think 

of his literary fame?  Literary fame, indeed! he wanted back 

his lost gentility:-





"Retain my altar,

I care nothing for it - but, oh! touch not my BEARD."

PORNY'S WAR OF THE GODS.





He dies, his children die too, and then comes the crowning 

judgment of God on what remains of his race and the house 

which he had built.  He was not a Papist himself, nor did he 

wish any one belonging to him to be Popish, for he had read 

enough of the Bible to know that no one can be saved through 

Popery, yet had he a sneaking affection for it, and would at 

times in an underhand manner, give it a good word both in 

writing and discourse, because it was a gaudy kind of 

worship, and ignorance and vassalage prevailed so long as it 

flourished - but he certainly did not wish any of his people 

to become Papists, nor the house which he had built to become 

a Popish house, though the very name he gave it savoured of 

Popery; but Popery becomes fashionable through his novels and 

poems - the only one that remains of his race, a female 

grandchild, marries a person who, following the fashion, 

becomes a Papist, and makes her a Papist too.  Money abounds 

with the husband, who buys the house, and then the house 

becomes the rankest Popish house in Britain.  A superstitious 

person might almost imagine that one of the old Scottish 

Covenanters, whilst the grand house was being built from the 

profits resulting from the sale of writings favouring Popery 

and persecution, and calumniatory of Scotland's saints and 

martyrs, had risen from the grave, and banned Scott, his 

race, and his house, by reading a certain psalm.



In saying what he has said about Scott, the author has not 

been influenced by any feeling of malice or ill-will, but 

simply by a regard for truth, and a desire to point out to 

his countrymen the harm which has resulted from the perusal 

of his works; - he is not one of those who would depreciate 

the talents of Scott - he admires his talents, both as a 

prose writer and a poet; as a poet especially he admires him, 

and believes him to have been by far the greatest, with 

perhaps the exception of Mickiewicz, who only wrote for 

unfortunate Poland, that Europe has given birth to during the 

last hundred years.  As a prose writer he admires him, less, 

it is true, but his admiration for him in that capacity is 

very high, and he only laments that he prostituted his 

talents to the cause of the Stuarts and gentility.  What book 

of fiction of the present century can you read twice, with 

the exception of "Waverley" and "Rob Roy?"  There is 

"Pelham," it is true, which the writer of these lines has 

seen a Jewess reading in the steppe of Debreczin, and which a 

young Prussian Baron, a great traveller, whom he met at 

Constantinople in '44 told him he always carried in his 

valise.  And, in conclusion, he will say, in order to show 

the opinion which he entertains of the power of Scott as a 

writer, that he did for the sceptre of the wretched Pretender 

what all the kings of Europe could not do for his body - 

placed it on the throne of these realms; and for Popery, what 

Popes and Cardinals strove in vain to do for three centuries 

- brought back its mummeries and nonsense into the temples of 

the British Isles.



Scott during his lifetime had a crowd of imitators, who, 

whether they wrote history so called - poetry so called - or 

novels - nobody would call a book a novel if he could call it 

anything else - wrote Charlie o'er the water nonsense; and 

now that he has been dead nearly a quarter of a century, 

there are others daily springing up who are striving to 

imitate Scott in his Charlie o'er the water nonsense - for 

nonsense it is, even when flowing from his pen.  They, too, 

must write Jacobite histories, Jacobite songs, and Jacobite 

novels, and much the same figure as the scoundrel menials in 

the comedy cut when personating their masters, and retailing 

their masters' conversation, do they cut as Walter Scotts.  

In their histories, they too talk about the Prince and 

Glenfinnan, and the pibroch; and in their songs about 

"Claverse" and "Bonny Dundee."  But though they may be Scots, 

they are not Walter Scotts.  But it is perhaps chiefly in the 

novel that you see the veritable hog in armour; the time of 

the novel is of course the '15 or '45; the hero a Jacobite, 

and connected with one or other of the enterprises of those 

periods; and the author, to show how unprejudiced he is, and 

what ORIGINAL views he takes of subjects, must needs speak up 

for Popery, whenever he has occasion to mention it; though, 

with all his originality, when he brings his hero and the 

vagabonds with which he is concerned before a barricadoed 

house, belonging to the Whigs, he can make them get into it 

by no other method than that which Scott makes his rioters 

employ to get into the Tolbooth, BURNING DOWN the door.



To express the more than utter foolishness of this latter 

Charlie o'er the water nonsense, whether in rhyme or prose, 

there is but one word, and that word a Scotch word.  Scotch, 

the sorriest of jargons, compared with which even Roth Welsch 

is dignified and expressive, has yet one word to express what 

would be inexpressible by any word or combination of words in 

any language, or in any other jargon in the world; and very 

properly; for as the nonsense is properly Scotch, so should 

the word be Scotch which expresses it - that word is 

"fushionless," pronounced FOOSHIONLESS; and when the writer 

has called the nonsense fooshionless - and he does call it 

fooshionless - he has nothing more to say, but leaves the 

nonsense to its fate.







CHAPTER VIII







On Canting Nonsense.





THE writer now wishes to say something on the subject of 

canting nonsense, of which there is a great deal in England.  

There are various cants in England, amongst which is the 

religious cant.  He is not going to discuss the subject of 

religious cant: lest, however, he should be misunderstood, he 

begs leave to repeat that he is a sincere member of the 

Church of England, in which he believes there is more 

religion, and consequently less cant, than in any other 

church in the world; nor is he going to discuss many other 

cants; he shall content himself with saying something about 

two - the temperance cant and the unmanly cant.  Temperance 

canters say that "it is unlawful to drink a glass of ale."  

Unmanly canters say that "it is unlawful to use one's fists."  

The writer begs leave to tell both these species of canters 

that they do not speak words of truth.



It is very lawful to take a cup of ale, or wine, for the 

purpose of cheering or invigorating yourself when you are 

faint and down-hearted; and likewise to give a cup of ale or 

wine to others when they are in a similar condition.  The 

Holy Scripture sayeth nothing to the contrary, but rather 

encourageth people in so doing by the text, "Wine maketh glad 

the heart of man."  But it is not lawful to intoxicate 

yourself with frequent cups of ale or wine, nor to make 

others intoxicated, nor does the Holy Scripture say it is.  

The Holy Scripture no more says that it is lawful to 

intoxicate yourself or others, than it says that it is 

unlawful to take a cup of ale or wine yourself, or to give 

one to others.  Noah is not commended in the Scripture for 

making himself drunken on the wine he brewed.  Nor is it said 

that the Saviour, when he supplied the guests with first-rate 

wine at the marriage-feast, told them to make themselves 

drunk upon it.  He is said to have supplied them with first-

rate wine, but He doubtless left the quantity which each 

should drink to each party's reason and discretion.  When you 

set a good dinner before your guests, you do not expect that 

they should gorge themselves with the victuals you set before 

them.  Wine may be abused, and so may a leg of mutton.



Second.  It is lawful for any one to use his fists in his own 

defence, or in the defence of others, provided they can't 

help themselves; but it is not lawful to use them for 

purposes of tyranny or brutality.  If you are attacked by a 

ruffian, as the elderly individual in Lavengro is in the inn-

yard, it is quite lawful, if you can, to give him as good a 

thrashing as the elderly individual gave the brutal coachman; 

and if you see a helpless woman - perhaps your own sister - 

set upon by a drunken lord, a drunken coachman, or a drunken 

coalheaver, or a brute of any description, either drunk or 

sober, it is not only lawful but laudable, to give them, if 

you can, a good drubbing; but it is not lawful because you 

have a strong pair of fists, and know how to use them, to go 

swaggering through a fair, jostling against unoffending 

individuals; should you do so, you would be served quite 

right if you were to get a drubbing, more particularly if you 

were served out by some one less strong, but more skilful 

than yourself - even as the coachman was served out by a 

pupil of the immortal Broughton - sixty years old, it is 

true, but possessed of Broughton's guard and chop.  Moses is 

not blamed in the Scripture for taking part with the 

oppressed, and killing an Egyptian persecutor.  We are not 

told how Moses killed the Egyptian; but it is quite as 

creditable to Moses to suppose that he killed the Egyptian by 

giving him a buffet under the left ear, as by stabbing him 

with a knife.  It is true that the Saviour in the New 

Testament tells His disciples to turn the left cheek to be 

smitten, after they had received a blow on the right; but He 

was speaking to people divinely inspired, or whom He intended 

divinely to inspire - people selected by God for a particular 

purpose.  He likewise tells these people to part with various 

articles of raiment when asked for them, and to go a-

travelling without money, and take no thought of the morrow.  

Are those exhortations carried out by very good people in the 

present day?  Do Quakers, when smitten on the right cheek, 

turn the left to the smiter?  When asked for their coat, do 

they say, "Friend, take my shirt also?"  Has the Dean of 

Salisbury no purse?  Does the Archbishop of Canterbury go to 

an inn, run up a reckoning, and then say to his landlady, 

"Mistress, I have no coin?"  Assuredly the Dean has a purse, 

and a tolerably well-filled one; and, assuredly, the 

Archbishop, on departing from an inn, not only settles his 

reckoning, but leaves something handsome for the servants, 

and does not say that he is forbidden by the gospel to pay 

for what he has eaten, or the trouble he has given, as a 

certain Spanish cavalier said he was forbidden by the 

statutes of chivalry.  Now, to take the part of yourself, or 

the part of the oppressed, with your fists, is quite as 

lawful in the present day as it is to refuse your coat and 

shirt also to any vagabond who may ask for them, and not to 

refuse to pay for supper, bed, and breakfast, at the 

Feathers, or any other inn, after you have had the benefit of 

all three.



The conduct of Lavengro with respect to drink may, upon the 

whole, serve as a model.  He is no drunkard, nor is he fond 

of intoxicating other people; yet when the horrors are upon 

him he has no objection to go to a public-house and call for 

a pint of ale, nor does he shrink from recommending ale to 

others when they are faint and downcast.  In one instance, it 

is true, he does what cannot be exactly justified; he 

encourages the Priest in the dingle, in more instances than 

one, in drinking more hollands and water than is consistent 

with decorum.  He has a motive indeed in doing so; a desire 

to learn from the knave in his cups the plans and hopes of 

the Propaganda of Rome.  Such conduct, however, was 

inconsistent with strict fair dealing and openness; and the 

author advises all those whose consciences never reproach 

them for a single unfair or covert act committed by them, to 

abuse him heartily for administering hollands and water to 

the Priest of Rome.  In that instance the hero is certainly 

wrong; yet in all other cases with regard to drink, he is 

manifestly right.  To tell people that they are never to 

drink a glass of ale or wine themselves, or to give one to 

others, is cant; and the writer has no toleration for cant of 

any description.  Some cants are not dangerous; but the 

writer believes that a more dangerous cant than the 

temperance cant, or as it is generally called, teetotalism, 

is scarcely to be found.  The writer is willing to believe 

that it originated with well meaning, though weak people; but 

there can be no doubt that it was quickly turned to account 

by people who were neither well meaning nor weak.  Let the 

reader note particularly the purpose to which this cry has 

been turned in America; the land, indeed, par excellence, of 

humbug and humbug cries.  It is there continually in the 

mouth of the most violent political party, and is made an 

instrument of almost unexampled persecution.  The writer 

would say more on the temperance cant, both in England and 

America, but want of space prevents him.  There is one point 

on which he cannot avoid making a few brief remarks - that 

is, the inconsistent conduct of its apostles in general.  The 

teetotal apostle says, it is a dreadful thing to be drunk.  

So it is, teetotaller; but if so, why do you get drunk?  I 

get drunk?  Yes, unhappy man, why do you get drunk on smoke 

and passion?  Why are your garments impregnated with the 

odour of the Indian weed?  Why is there a pipe or a cigar 

always in your mouth?  Why is your language more dreadful 

than that of a Poissarde?  Tobacco-smoke is more deleterious 

than ale, teetotaller; bile more potent than brandy.  You are 

fond of telling your hearers what an awful thing it is to die 

drunken.  So it is, teetotaller.  Then take good care that 

you do not die with smoke and passion, drunken, and with 

temperance language on your lips; that is, abuse and calumny 

against all those who differ from you.  One word of sense you 

have been heard to say, which is, that spirits may be taken 

as a medicine.  Now you are in a fever of passion, 

teetotaller; so, pray take this tumbler of brandy; take it on 

the homoeopathic principle, that heat is to be expelled by 

heat.  You are in a temperance fury, so swallow the contents 

of this tumbler, and it will, perhaps, cure you.  You look at 

the glass wistfully - you occasionally take a glass 

medicinally - and it is probable you do.  Take one now.  

Consider what a dreadful thing it would be to die passion 

drunk; to appear before your Maker with intemperate language 

on your lips.  That's right!  You don't seem to wince at the 

brandy.  That's right! - well done!  All down in two pulls.  

Now you look like a reasonable being!



If the conduct of Lavengro with retard to drink is open to 

little censure, assuredly the use which he makes of his fists 

is entitled to none at all.  Because he has a pair of 

tolerably strong fists, and knows to a certain extent how to 

use them, is he a swaggerer or oppressor?  To what ill 

account does he turn them?  Who more quiet, gentle, and 

inoffensive than he?  He beats off a ruffian who attacks him 

in a dingle; has a kind of friendly tuzzle with Mr. 

Petulengro, and behold the extent of his fistic exploits.



Ay, but he associates with prize-fighters; and that very 

fellow, Petulengro, is a prize-fighter, and has fought for a 

stake in a ring.  Well, and if he had not associated with 

prize-fighters, how could he have used his fists?  Oh, 

anybody can use his fists in his own defence, without being 

taught by prize-fighters.  Can they?  Then why does not the 

Italian, or Spaniard, or Affghan use his fists when insulted 

or outraged, instead of having recourse to the weapons which 

he has recourse to?  Nobody can use his fists without being 

taught the use of them by those who have themselves been 

taught, no more than any one can "whiffle" without being 

taught by a master of the art.  Now let any man of the 

present day try to whiffle.  Would not any one who wished to 

whiffle have to go to a master of the art?  Assuredly! but 

where would he find one at the present day?  The last of the 

whifflers hanged himself about a fortnight ago on a bell-rope 

in a church steeple of "the old town," from pure grief that 

there was no further demand for the exhibition of his art, 

there being no demand for whiffling since the discontinuation 

of Guildhall banquets.  Whiffling is lost.  The old chap left 

his sword behind him; let any one take up the old chap's 

sword and try to whiffle.  Now much the same hand as he would 

make who should take up the whiffler's sword and try to 

whiffle, would he who should try to use his fists who had 

never had the advantage of a master.  Let no one think that 

men use their fists naturally in their own disputes - men 

have naturally recourse to any other thing to defend 

themselves or to offend others; they fly to the stick, to the 

stone, to the murderous and cowardly knife, or to abuse as 

cowardly as the knife, and occasionally more murderous.  Now 

which is best when you hate a person, or have a pique against 

a person, to clench your fist and say "Come on," or to have 

recourse to the stone, the knife, - or murderous calumny?  

The use of the fist is almost lost in England.  Yet are the 

people better than they were when they knew how to use their 

fists?  The writer believes not.  A fisty combat is at 

present a great rarity, but the use of the knife, the noose, 

and of poison, to say nothing of calumny, are of more 

frequent occurrence in England than perhaps in any country in 

Europe.  Is polite taste better than when it could bear the 

details of a fight?  The writer believes not.  Two men cannot 

meet in a ring to settle a dispute in a manly manner without 

some trumpery local newspaper letting loose a volley of abuse 

against "the disgraceful exhibition," in which abuse it is 

sure to be sanctioned by its dainty readers; whereas some 

murderous horror, the discovery for example of the mangled 

remains of a woman in some obscure den, is greedily seized 

hold of by the moral journal, and dressed up for its readers, 

who luxuriate and gloat upon the ghastly dish.  Now, the 

writer of Lavengro has no sympathy with those who would 

shrink from striking a blow, but would not shrink from the 

use of poison or calumny; and his taste has little in common 

with that which cannot tolerate the hardy details of a prize-

fight, but which luxuriates on descriptions of the murder 

dens of modern England.  But prize-fighters and pugilists are 

blackguards, a reviewer has said; and blackguards they would 

be provided they employed their skill and their prowess for 

purposes of brutality and oppression; but prize-fighters and 

pugilists are seldom friends to brutality and oppression; and 

which is the blackguard, the writer would ask, he who uses 

his fists to take his own part, or instructs others to use 

theirs for the same purpose, or the being who from envy and 

malice, or at the bidding of a malicious scoundrel, 

endeavours by calumny, falsehood, and misrepresentation to 

impede the efforts of lonely and unprotected genius?



One word more about the race, all but extinct, of the people 

opprobriously called prize-fighters.  Some of them have been 

as noble, kindly men as the world ever produced.  Can the 

rolls of the English aristocracy exhibit names belonging to 

more noble, more heroic men than those who were called 

respectively Pearce, Cribb, and Spring?  Did ever one of the 

English aristocracy contract the seeds of fatal consumption 

by rushing up the stairs of a burning edifice, even to the 

topmost garret, and rescuing a woman from seemingly 

inevitable destruction?  The writer says no.  A woman was 

rescued from the top of a burning house; but the man who 

rescued her was no aristocrat; it was Pearce, not Percy, who 

ran up the burning stairs.  Did ever one of those glittering 

ones save a fainting female from the libidinous rage of six 

ruffians?  The writer believes not.  A woman was rescued from 

the libidinous fury of six monsters on - Down; but the man 

who rescued her was no aristocrat; it was Pearce not Paulet, 

who rescued the woman, and thrashed my lord's six gamekeepers 

- Pearce, whose equal never was, and probably never will be, 

found in sturdy combat.  Are there any of the aristocracy of 

whom it can be said that they never did a cowardly, cruel, or 

mean action, and that they invariably took the part of the 

unfortunate and weak against cruelty and oppression?  As much 

can be said of Cribb, of Spring, and the other; but where is 

the aristocrat of whom as much can be said?  Wellington?  

Wellington indeed! a skilful general, and a good man of 

valour, it is true, but with that cant word of "duty" 

continually on his lips, did he rescue Ney from his butchers?  

Did he lend a helping hand to Warner?



In conclusion, the writer would advise those of his country-

folks who read his book to have nothing to do with the two 

kinds of canting nonsense described above, but in their 

progress through life to enjoy as well as they can, but 

always with moderation, the good things of this world, to put 

confidence in God, to be as independent as possible, and to 

take their own parts.  If they are low-spirited, let them not 

make themselves foolish by putting on sackcloth, drinking 

water, or chewing ashes, but let them take wholesome 

exercise, and eat the most generous food they can get, taking 

up and reading occasionally, not the lives of Ignatius Loyola 

and Francis Spira, but something more agreeable; for example, 

the life and adventures of Mr. Duncan Campbell, the deaf and 

dumb gentleman; the travels of Captain Falconer in America, 

and the journal of John Randall, who went to Virginia and 

married an Indian wife; not forgetting, amidst their eating 

and drinking, their walks over heaths, and by the sea-side, 

and their agreeable literature, to be charitable to the poor, 

to read the Psalms and to go to church twice on a Sunday.  In 

their dealings with people, to be courteous to everybody, as 

Lavengro was, but always independent like him; and if people 

meddle with them, to give them as good as they bring, even as 

he and Isopel Berners were in the habit of doing; and it will 

be as well for him to observe that he by no means advises 

women to be too womanly, but bearing the conduct of Isopel 

Berners in mind, to take their own parts, and if anybody 

strikes them, to strike again.



Beating of women by the lords of the creation has become very 

prevalent in England since pugilism has been discountenanced.  

Now the writer strongly advises any woman who is struck by a 

ruffian to strike him again; or if she cannot clench her 

fists, and he advises all women in these singular times to 

learn to clench their fists, to go at him with tooth and 

nail, and not to be afraid of the result, for any fellow who 

is dastard enough to strike a woman, would allow himself to 

be beaten by a woman, were she to make at him in self-

defence, even if, instead of possessing the stately height 

and athletic proportions of the aforesaid Isopel, she were as 

diminutive in stature, and had a hand as delicate, and foot 

as small, as a certain royal lady, who was some time ago 

assaulted by a fellow upwards of six feet high, whom the 

writer has no doubt she could have beaten had she thought 

proper to go at him.  Such is the deliberate advice of the 

author to his countrymen and women - advice in which he 

believes there is nothing unscriptural or repugnant to common 

sense.



The writer is perfectly well aware that, by the plain 

language which he has used in speaking of the various kinds 

of nonsense prevalent in England, he shall make himself a 

multitude of enemies; but he is not going to conceal the 

truth or to tamper with nonsense, from the fear of provoking 

hostility.  He has a duty to perform and he will perform it 

resolutely; he is the person who carried the Bible to Spain; 

and as resolutely as he spoke in Spain against the 

superstitions of Spain, will he speak in England against the 

nonsense of his own native land.  He is not one of those who, 

before they sit down to write a book, say to themselves, what 

cry shall we take up? what principles shall we advocate? what 

principles shall we abuse? before we put pen to paper we must 

find out what cry is the loudest, what principle has the most 

advocates, otherwise, after having written our book, we may 

find ourselves on the weaker side.



A sailor of the "Bounty," waked from his sleep by the noise 

of the mutiny, lay still in his hammock for some time, quite 

undecided whether to take part with the captain or to join 

the mutineers.  "I must mind what I do," said he to himself, 

"lest, in the end, I find myself on the weaker side;" 

finally, on hearing that the mutineers were successful, he 

went on deck, and seeing Bligh pinioned to the mast, he put 

his fist to his nose, and otherwise insulted him.  Now, there 

are many writers of the present day whose conduct is very 

similar to that of the sailor.  They lie listening in their 

corners till they have ascertained which principle has most 

advocates; then, presently, they make their appearance on the 

deck of the world with their book; if truth has been 

victorious, then has truth the hurrah! but if truth is 

pinioned against the mast, then is their fist thrust against 

the nose of truth, and their gibe and their insult spirted in 

her face.  The strongest party had the sailor, and the 

strongest party has almost invariably the writer of the 

present day.







CHAPTER IX







Pseudo-Critics.





A CERTAIN set of individuals calling themselves critics have 

attacked Lavengro with much virulence and malice.  If what 

they call criticism had been founded on truth, the author 

would have had nothing to say.  The book contains plenty of 

blemishes, some of them, by the bye, wilful ones, as the 

writer will presently show; not one of these, however, has 

been detected and pointed out; but the best passages in the 

book, indeed whatever was calculated to make the book 

valuable, have been assailed with abuse and 

misrepresentation.  The duty of the true critic is to play 

the part of a leech, and not of a viper.  Upon true and upon 

malignant criticism there is an excellent fable by the 

Spaniard Iriarte.  The viper says to the leech, "Why do 

people invite your bite, and flee from mine?"  "Because," 

says the leech, "people receive health from my bite, and 

poison from yours."  "There is as much difference," says the 

clever Spaniard, "between true and malignant criticism, as 

between poison and medicine."  Certainly a great many 

meritorious writers have allowed themselves to be poisoned by 

malignant criticism; the writer, however, is not one of those 

who allow themselves to be poisoned by pseudo-critics; no! 

no! he will rather hold them up by their tails, and show the 

creatures wriggling, blood and foam streaming from their 

broken jaws.  First of all, however, he will notice one of 

their objections.  "The book isn't true," say they.  Now one 

of the principal reasons with those that have attacked 

Lavengro for their abuse of it is, that it is particularly 

true in one instance, namely, that it exposes their own 

nonsense, their love of humbug, their slavishness, their 

dressings, their goings out, their scraping and bowing to 

great people; it is the showing up of "gentility-nonsense" in 

Lavengro that has been one principal reason for raising the 

above cry; for in Lavengro is denounced the besetting folly 

of the English people, a folly which those who call 

themselves guardians of the public taste are far from being 

above.  "We can't abide anything that isn't true!" they 

exclaim.  Can't they?  Then why are they so enraptured with 

any fiction that is adapted to purposes of humbug, which 

tends to make them satisfied with their own proceedings, with 

their own nonsense, which does not tell them to reform, to 

become more alive to their own failings, and less sensitive 

about the tyrannical goings on of the masters, and the 

degraded condition, the sufferings, and the trials of the 

serfs in the star Jupiter?  Had Lavengro, instead of being 

the work of an independent mind, been written in order to 

further any of the thousand and one cants, and species of 

nonsense prevalent in England, the author would have heard 

much less about its not being true, both from public 

detractors and private censurers.



"But Lavengro pretends to be an autobiography," say the 

critics; and here the writer begs leave to observe, that it 

would be well for people who profess to have a regard for 

truth, not to exhibit in every assertion which they make a 

most profligate disregard of it; this assertion of theirs is 

a falsehood, and they know it to be a falsehood.  In the 

preface Lavengro is stated to be a dream; and the writer 

takes this opportunity of stating that he never said it was 

an autobiography; never authorized any person to say that it 

was one; and that he has in innumerable instances declared in 

public and private, both before and after the work was 

published, that it was not what is generally termed an 

autobiography: but a set of people who pretend to write 

criticisms on books, hating the author for various reasons, - 

amongst others, because, having the proper pride of a 

gentleman and a scholar, he did not, in the year '43, choose 

to permit himself to be exhibited and made a zany of in 

London, and especially because he will neither associate 

with, nor curry favour with, them who are neither gentlemen 

nor scholars, - attack his book with abuse and calumny.  He 

is, perhaps, condescending too much when he takes any notice 

of such people; as, however, the English public is 

wonderfully led by cries and shouts, and generally ready to 

take part against any person who is either unwilling or 

unable to defend himself, he deems it advisable not to be 

altogether quiet with those who assail him.  The best way to 

deal with vipers is to tear out their teeth; and the best way 

to deal with pseudo-critics is to deprive them of their 

poison-bag, which is easily done by exposing their ignorance.  

The writer knew perfectly well the description of people with 

whom he would have to do, he therefore very quietly prepared 

a stratagem, by means of which he could at any time exhibit 

them, powerless and helpless, in his hand.  Critics, when 

they review books, ought to have a competent knowledge of the 

subjects which those books discuss.



Lavengro is a philological book, a poem if you choose to call 

it so.  Now, what a fine triumph it would have been for those 

who wished to vilify the book and its author, provided they 

could have detected the latter tripping in his philology - 

they might have instantly said that he was an ignorant 

pretender to philology - they laughed at the idea of his 

taking up a viper by its tail, a trick which hundreds of 

country urchins do every September, but they were silent 

about the really wonderful part of the book, the philological 

matter - they thought philology was his stronghold, and that 

it would be useless to attack him there; they of course would 

give him no credit as a philologist, for anything like fair 

treatment towards him was not to be expected at their hands, 

but they were afraid to attack his philology - yet that was 

the point, and the only point in which they might have 

attacked him successfully; he was vulnerable there.  How was 

this?  Why, in order to have an opportunity of holding up 

pseudo-critics by the tails, he wilfully spelt various 

foreign words wrong - Welsh words, and even Italian words - 

did they detect these misspellings? not one of them, even as 

he knew they would not, and he now taunts them with 

ignorance; and the power of taunting them with ignorance is 

the punishment which he designed for them - a power which 

they might but for their ignorance have used against him.  

The writer besides knowing something of Italian and Welsh, 

knows a little of Armenian language and literature; but who 

knowing anything of the Armenian language, unless he had an 

end in view, would say, that the word sea in Armenian is 

anything like the word tide in English?  The word for sea in 

Armenian is dzow, a word connected with the Tebetian word for 

water, and the Chinese shuy, and the Turkish su, signifying 

the same thing; but where is the resemblance between dzow and 

tide?  Again, the word for bread in ancient Armenian is hats; 

yet the Armenian on London Bridge is made to say zhats, which 

is not the nominative of the Armenian noun for bread, but the 

accusative: now, critics, ravening against a man because he 

is a gentleman and a scholar, and has not only the power but 

also the courage to write original works, why did you not 

discover that weak point?  Why, because you were ignorant, so 

here ye are held up!  Moreover, who with a name commencing 

with Z, ever wrote fables in Armenian?  There are two writers 

of fables in Armenian - Varthan and Koscht, and illustrious 

writers they are, one in the simple, and the other in the 

ornate style of Armenian composition, but neither of their 

names begins with a Z.  Oh, what a precious opportunity ye 

lost, ye ravening crew, of convicting the poor, half-starved, 

friendless boy of the book, of ignorance or 

misrepresentation, by asking who with a name beginning with Z 

ever wrote fables in Armenian; but ye couldn't help 

yourselves, ye are duncie.  We duncie!  Ay, duncie.  So here 

ye are held up by the tails, blood and foam streaming from 

your jaws.



The writer wishes to ask here, what do you think of all this, 

Messieurs les Critiques?  Were ye ever served so before?  But 

don't you richly deserve it?  Haven't you been for years past 

bullying and insulting everybody whom you deemed weak, and 

currying favour with everybody whom you thought strong?  "We 

approve of this.  We disapprove of that.  Oh, this will never 

do.  These are fine lines!"  The lines perhaps some horrid 

sycophantic rubbish addressed to Wellington, or Lord So-and-

so.  To have your ignorance thus exposed, to be shown up in 

this manner, and by whom?  A gypsy!  Ay, a gypsy was the very 

right person to do it.  But is it not galling, after all?



"Ah, but WE don't understand Armenian, it cannot be expected 

that WE should understand Armenian, or Welsh, or - Hey, 

what's this?  The mighty WE not understand Armenian or Welsh, 

or - Then why does the mighty WE pretend to review a book 

like Lavengro?  From the arrogance with which it continually 

delivers itself, one would think that the mighty WE is 

omniscient; that it understands every language; is versed in 

every literature; yet the mighty WE does not even know the 

word for bread in Armenian.  It knows bread well enough by 

name in England, and frequently bread in England only by its 

name, but the truth is, that the mighty WE, with all its 

pretension, is in general a very sorry creature, who, instead 

of saying nous disons, should rather say nous dis: Porny in 

his "Guerre des Dieux," very profanely makes the three in one 

say, Je faisons; now, Lavengro, who is anything but profane, 

would suggest that critics, especially magazine and Sunday 

newspaper critics, should commence with nous dis, as the 

first word would be significant of the conceit and assumption 

of the critic, and the second of the extent of the critic's 

information.  The WE says its say, but when fawning 

sycophancy or vulgar abuse are taken from that say, what 

remains?  Why a blank, a void like Ginnungagap.



As the writer, of his own accord, has exposed some of the 

blemishes of his book - a task, which a competent critic 

ought to have done - he will now point out two or three of 

its merits, which any critic, not altogether blinded with 

ignorance might have done, or not replete with gall and envy 

would have been glad to do.  The book has the merit of 

communicating a fact connected with physiology, which in all 

the pages of the multitude of books was never previously 

mentioned - the mysterious practice of touching objects to 

baffle the evil chance.  The miserable detractor will, of 

course, instantly begin to rave about such a habit being 

common: well and good; but was it ever before described in 

print, or all connected with it dissected?  He may then 

vociferate something about Johnson having touched:- the 

writer cares not whether Johnson, who, by the bye, during the 

last twenty or thirty years, owing to people having become 

ultra Tory mad from reading Scott's novels and the "Quarterly 

Review," has been a mighty favourite, especially with some 

who were in the habit of calling him a half crazy old fool - 

touched, or whether he did or not; but he asks where did 

Johnson ever describe the feelings which induced him to 

perform the magic touch, even supposing that he did perform 

it?  Again, the history gives an account of a certain book 

called the "Sleeping Bard," the most remarkable prose work of 

the most difficult language but one, of modern Europe, - a 

book, for a notice of which, he believes, one might turn over 

in vain the pages of any review printed in England, or, 

indeed, elsewhere. - So here are two facts, one literary and 

the other physiological, for which any candid critic was 

bound to thank the author, even as in Romany Rye there is a 

fact connected with Iro Norman Myth, for the disclosing of 

which, any person who pretends to have a regard for 

literature is bound to thank him, namely, that the mysterious 

Finn or Fingal of "Ossian's Poems" is one and the same person 

as the Sigurd Fofnisbane of the Edda and the Wilkina, and the 

Siegfried Horn of the Lay of the Niebelungs.



The writer might here conclude, and, he believes, most 

triumphantly; as, however, he is in the cue for writing, 

which he seldom is, he will for his own gratification, and 

for the sake of others, dropping metaphors about vipers and 

serpents, show up in particular two or three sets or cliques 

of people, who, he is happy to say, have been particularly 

virulent against him and his work, for nothing indeed could 

have given him greater mortification than their praise.



In the first place, he wishes to dispose of certain 

individuals who call themselves men of wit and fashion - 

about town - who he is told have abused his book "vaustly" - 

their own word.  These people paint their cheeks, wear white 

kid gloves, and dabble in literature, or what they conceive 

to be literature.  For abuse from such people, the writer was 

prepared.  Does any one imagine that the writer was not well 

aware, before he published his book, that, whenever he gave 

it to the world, he should be attacked by every literary 

coxcomb in England who had influence enough to procure the 

insertion of a scurrilous article in a magazine or newspaper!  

He has been in Spain, and has seen how invariably the mule 

attacks the horse; now why does the mule attack the horse?  

Why, because the latter carries about with him that which the 

envious hermaphrodite does not possess.



They consider, forsooth, that his book is low - but he is not 

going to waste words about them - one or two of whom, he is 

told, have written very duncie books about Spain, and are 

highly enraged with him, because certain books which he wrote 

about Spain were not considered duncie.  No, he is not going 

to waste words upon them, for verily he dislikes their 

company, and so he'll pass them by, and proceed to others.



The Scotch Charlie o'er the water people have been very loud 

in the abuse of Lavengro - this again might be expected; the 

sarcasms of the Priest about the Charlie o'er the water 

nonsense of course stung them.  Oh! it is one of the claims 

which Lavengro has to respect, that it is the first, if not 

the only work, in which that nonsense is, to a certain 

extent, exposed.  Two or three of their remarks on passages 

of Lavengro, he will reproduce and laugh at.  Of course your 

Charlie o'er the water people are genteel exceedingly, and 

cannot abide anything low.  Gypsyism they think is 

particularly low, and the use of gypsy words in literature 

beneath its gentility; so they object to gypsy words being 

used in Lavengro where gypsies are introduced speaking - 

"What is Romany forsooth?" say they.  Very good!  And what is 

Scotch? has not the public been nauseated with Scotch for the 

last thirty years?  "Ay, but Scotch is not" - the writer 

believes he knows much better than the Scotch what Scotch is 

and what it is not; he has told them before what it is, a 

very sorry jargon.  He will now tell them what it is not - a 

sister or an immediate daughter of the Sanscrit, which Romany 

is.  "Ay, but the Scotch are" - foxes, foxes, nothing else 

than foxes, even like the gypsies - the difference between 

the gypsy and Scotch fox being that the first is wild, with a 

mighty brush, the other a sneak with a gilt collar and 

without a tail.



A Charlie o'er the water person attempts to be witty, because 

the writer has said that perhaps a certain old Edinburgh 

High-School porter, of the name of Boee, was perhaps of the 

same blood as a certain Bui, a Northern Kemp who 

distinguished himself at the battle of Horinger Bay.  A 

pretty matter, forsooth, to excite the ridicule of a 

Scotchman!  Why, is there a beggar or trumpery fellow in 

Scotland, who does not pretend to be somebody, or related to 

somebody?  Is not every Scotchman descended from some king, 

kemp, or cow-stealer of old, by his own account at least?  

Why, the writer would even go so far as to bet a trifle that 

the poor creature, who ridicules Boee's supposed ancestry, 

has one of his own, at least as grand and as apocryphal as 

old Boee's of the High School.



The same Charlie o'er the water person is mightily indignant 

that Lavengro should have spoken disrespectfully of William 

Wallace; Lavengro, when he speaks of that personage, being a 

child of about ten years old, and repeating merely what he 

had heard.  All the Scotch, by the bye, for a great many 

years past, have been great admirers of William Wallace, 

particularly the Charlie o'er the water people, who in their 

nonsense-verses about Charlie generally contrive to bring in 

the name of William, Willie, or Wullie Wallace.  The writer 

begs leave to say that he by no means wishes to bear hard 

against William Wallace, but he cannot help asking why, if 

William, Willie, or Wullie Wallace was such a particularly 

nice person, did his brother Scots betray him to a certain 

renowned southern warrior, called Edward Longshanks, who 

caused him to be hanged and cut into four in London, and his 

quarters to be placed over the gates of certain towns?  They 

got gold, it is true, and titles, very nice things, no doubt; 

but, surely, the life of a patriot is better than all the 

gold and titles in the world - at least Lavengro thinks so - 

but Lavengro has lived more with gypsies than Scotchmen, and 

gypsies do not betray their brothers.  It would be some time 

before a gypsy would hand over his brother to the harum-beck, 

even supposing you would not only make him a king, but a 

justice of the peace, and not only give him the world, but 

the best farm on the Holkham estate; but gypsies are wild 

foxes, and there is certainly a wonderful difference between 

the way of thinking of the wild fox who retains his brush, 

and that of the scurvy kennel creature who has lost his tail.



Ah! but thousands of Scotch, and particularly the Charlie 

o'er the water people, will say, "We didn't sell Willie 

Wallace, it was our forbears who sold Willie Wallace - If 

Edward Longshanks had asked us to sell Wullie Wallace, we 

would soon have shown him that - "  Lord better ye, ye poor 

trumpery set of creatures, ye would not have acted a bit 

better than your forefathers; remember how ye have ever 

treated the few amongst ye who, though born in the kennel, 

have shown something of the spirit of the wood.  Many of ye 

are still alive who delivered over men, quite as honest and 

patriotic as William Wallace, into the hands of an English 

minister, to be chained and transported for merely venturing 

to speak and write in the cause of humanity, at the time when 

Europe was beginning to fling off the chains imposed by kings 

and priests.  And it is not so very long since Burns, to whom 

ye are now building up obelisks rather higher than he 

deserves, was permitted by his countrymen to die in poverty 

and misery, because he would not join with them in songs of 

adulation to kings and the trumpery great.  So say not that 

ye would have acted with respect to William Wallace one whit 

better than your fathers - and you in particular, ye children 

of Charlie, whom do ye write nonsense-verses about?  A family 

of dastard despots, who did their best, during a century and 

more, to tread out the few sparks of independent feeling 

still glowing in Scotland - but enough has been said about 

ye.



Amongst those who have been prodigal in abuse and defamation 

of Lavengro, have been your modern Radicals, and particularly 

a set of people who filled the country with noise against the 

King and Queen, Wellington, and the Tories, in '32.  About 

these people the writer will presently have occasion to say a 

good deal, and also of real Radicals.  As, however, it may be 

supposed that he is one of those who delight to play the 

sycophant to kings and queens, to curry favour with Tories, 

and to bepraise Wellington, he begs leave to state that such 

is not the case.



About kings and queens he has nothing to say; about Tories, 

simply that he believes them to be a bad set; about 

Wellington, however, it will be necessary for him to say a 

good deal, of mixed import, as he will subsequently 

frequently have occasion to mention him in connection with 

what he has to say about pseudo-Radicals.







CHAPTER X







Pseudo-Radicals.





ABOUT Wellington, then, he says, that he believes him at the 

present day to be infinitely overrated.  But there certainly 

was a time when he was shamefully underrated.  Now what time 

was that?  Why the time of pseudo-Radicalism, par excellence, 

from '20 to '32.  Oh, the abuse that was heaped on Wellington 

by those who traded in Radical cant - your newspaper editors 

and review writers! and how he was sneered at then by your 

Whigs, and how faintly supported he was by your Tories, who 

were half ashamed of him; for your Tories, though capital 

fellows as followers, when you want nobody to back you, are 

the faintest creatures in the world when you cry in your 

agony, "Come and help me!"  Oh, assuredly Wellington was 

infamously used at that time, especially by your traders in 

Radicalism, who howled at and hooted him; said he had every 

vice - was no general - was beaten at Waterloo - was a 

poltroon - moreover a poor illiterate creature, who could 

scarcely read or write; nay, a principal Radical paper said 

boldly he could not read, and devised an ingenious plan for 

teaching Wellington how to read.  Now this was too bad; and 

the writer, being a lover of justice, frequently spoke up for 

Wellington, saying, that as for vice, he was not worse than 

his neighbours; that he was brave; that he won the fight at 

Waterloo, from a half-dead man, it is true, but that he did 

win it.  Also, that he believed he had read "Rules for the 

Manual and Platoon Exercises" to some purpose; moreover, that 

he was sure he could write, for that he the writer had once 

written to Wellington, and had received an answer from him; 

nay, the writer once went so far as to strike a blow for 

Wellington; for the last time he used his fists was upon a 

Radical sub-editor, who was mobbing Wellington in the street, 

from behind a rank of grimy fellows; but though the writer 

spoke up for Wellington to a certain extent, when he was 

shamefully underrated, and once struck a blow for him when he 

was about being hustled, he is not going to join in the 

loathsome sycophantic nonsense which it has been the fashion 

to use with respect to Wellington these last twenty years.  

Now what have those years been to England!  Why the years of 

ultra-gentility, everybody in England having gone gentility 

mad during the last twenty years, and no people more so than 

your pseudo-Radicals.  Wellington was turned out, and your 

Whigs and Radicals got in, and then commenced the period of 

ultra-gentility in England.  The Whigs and Radicals only 

hated Wellington as long as the patronage of the country was 

in his hands, none of which they were tolerably sure he would 

bestow on them; but no sooner did they get it into their own, 

than they forthwith became admirers of Wellington.  And why?  

Because he was a duke, petted at Windsor and by foreign 

princes, and a very genteel personage.  Formerly many of your 

Whigs and Radicals had scarcely a decent coat on their backs; 

but now the plunder of the country was at their disposal, and 

they had as good a chance of being genteel as any people.  So 

they were willing to worship Wellington because he was very 

genteel, and could not keep the plunder of the country out of 

their hands.  And Wellington has been worshipped, and 

prettily so, during the last fifteen or twenty years.  He is 

now a noble fine-hearted creature; the greatest general the 

world ever produced; the bravest of men; and - and - mercy 

upon us! the greatest of military writers!  Now the present 

writer will not join in such sycophancy.  As he was not 

afraid to take the part of Wellington when he was scurvily 

used by all parties, and when it was dangerous to take his 

part, so he is not afraid to speak the naked truth about 

Wellington in these days, when it is dangerous to say 

anything about him but what is sycophantically laudatory.  He 

said in '32, that as to vice, Wellington was not worse than 

his neighbours; but he is not going to say, in '54, that 

Wellington was a noble-hearted fellow; for he believes that a 

more cold-hearted individual never existed.  His conduct to 

Warner, the poor Vaudois, and Marshal Ney, showed that.  He 

said, in '32, that he was a good general and a brave man; but 

he is not going, in '54, to say that he was the best general, 

or the bravest man the world ever saw.  England has produced 

a better general - France two or three - both countries many 

braver men.  The son of the Norfolk clergyman was a brave 

man; Marshal Ney was a braver man.  Oh, that battle of 

Copenhagen!  Oh, that covering the retreat of the Grand Army!  

And though he said in '32 that he could write, he is not 

going to say in '54 that he is the best of all military 

writers.  On the contrary, he does not hesitate to say that 

any Commentary of Julius Caesar, or any chapter in Justinus, 

more especially the one about the Parthians, is worth the ten 

volumes of Wellington's Despatches; though he has no doubt 

that, by saying so, he shall especially rouse the indignation 

of a certain newspaper, at present one of the most genteel 

journals imaginable - with a slight tendency to Liberalism, 

it is true, but perfectly genteel - which is nevertheless the 

very one which, in '32, swore bodily that Wellington could 

neither read nor write, and devised an ingenious plan for 

teaching him how to read.



Now, after the above statement, no one will venture to say, 

if the writer should be disposed to bear hard upon Radicals, 

that he would be influenced by a desire to pay court to 

princes, or to curry favour with Tories, or from being a 

blind admirer of the Duke of Wellington; but the writer is 

not going to declaim against Radicals, that is, real 

Republicans, or their principles; upon the whole, he is 

something of an admirer of both.  The writer has always had 

as much admiration for everything that is real and honest as 

he has had contempt for the opposite.  Now real Republicanism 

is certainly a very fine thing, a much finer thing than 

Toryism, a system of common robbery, which is nevertheless 

far better than Whiggism (7) - a compound of petty larceny, 

popular instruction, and receiving of stolen goods.  Yes, 

real Republicanism is certainly a very fine thing, and your 

real Radicals and Republicans are certainly very fine 

fellows, or rather were fine fellows, for the Lord only knows 

where to find them at the present day - the writer does not.  

If he did, he would at any time go five miles to invite one 

of them to dinner, even supposing that he had to go to a 

workhouse in order to find the person he wished to invite.  

Amongst the real Radicals of England, those who flourished 

from the year '16 to '20, there were certainly extraordinary 

characters, men partially insane, perhaps, but honest and 

brave - they did not make a market of the principles which 

they professed, and never intended to do so; they believed in 

them, and were willing to risk their lives in endeavouring to 

carry them out.  The writer wishes to speak in particular of 

two of these men, both of whom perished on the scaffold - 

their names were Thistlewood and Ings.  Thistlewood, the best 

known of them, was a brave soldier, and had served with 

distinction as an officer in the French service; he was one 

of the excellent swordsmen of Europe; had fought several 

duels in France, where it is no child's play to fight a duel; 

but had never unsheathed his sword for single combat, but in 

defence of the feeble and insulted - he was kind and open-

hearted, but of too great simplicity; he had once ten 

thousand pounds left him, all of which he lent to a friend, 

who disappeared and never returned a penny.  Ings was an 

uneducated man, of very low stature, but amazing strength and 

resolution; he was a kind husband and father, and though a 

humble butcher, the name he bore was one of the royal names 

of the heathen Anglo-Saxons.  These two men, along with five 

others, were executed, and their heads hacked off, for 

levying war against George the Fourth; the whole seven dying 

in a manner which extorted cheers from the populace; the most 

of then uttering philosophical or patriotic sayings.  

Thistlewood, who was, perhaps, the most calm and collected of 

all, just before he was turned off, said, "We are now going 

to discover the great secret."  Ings, the moment before he 

was choked, was singing "Scots wha ha' wi' Wallace bled."  

Now there was no humbug about those men, nor about many more 

of the same time and of the same principles.  They might be 

deluded about Republicanism, as Algernon Sidney was, and as 

Brutus was, but they were as honest and brave as either 

Brutus or Sidney; and as willing to die for their principles.  

But the Radicals who succeeded them were beings of a very 

different description; they jobbed and traded in 

Republicanism, and either parted with it, or at the present 

day are eager to part with it for a consideration.  In order 

to get the Whigs into power, and themselves places, they 

brought the country by their inflammatory language to the 

verge of a revolution, and were the cause that many perished 

on the scaffold; by their incendiary harangues and newspaper 

articles they caused the Bristol conflagration, for which six 

poor creatures were executed; they encouraged the mob to 

pillage, pull down and burn, and then rushing into garrets 

looked on.  Thistlewood tells the mob the Tower is a second 

Bastile; let it be pulled down.  A mob tries to pull down the 

Tower; but Thistlewood is at the head of that mob; he is not 

peeping from a garret on Tower Hill like Gulliver at Lisbon.  

Thistlewood and Ings say to twenty ragged individuals, 

Liverpool and Castlereagh are two satellites of despotism; it 

would be highly desirable to put them out of the way.  And a 

certain number of ragged individuals are surprised in a 

stable in Cato Street, making preparations to put Castlereagh 

and Liverpool out of the way, and are fired upon with muskets 

by Grenadiers, and are hacked at with cutlasses by Bow Street 

runners; but the twain who encouraged those ragged 

individuals to meet in Cato Street are not far off, they are 

not on the other side of the river, in the Borough, for 

example, in some garret or obscure cellar.  The very first to 

confront the Guards and runners are Thistlewood and Ings; 

Thistlewood whips his long thin rapier through Smithers' 

lungs, and Ings makes a dash at Fitzclarence with his 

butcher's knife.  Oh, there was something in those fellows! 

honesty and courage - but can as much be said for the 

inciters of the troubles of '32?  No; they egged on poor 

ignorant mechanics and rustics, and got them hanged for 

pulling down and burning, whilst the highest pitch to which 

their own daring ever mounted was to mob Wellington as he 

passed in the streets.



Now, these people were humbugs, which Thistlewood and Ings 

were not.  They raved and foamed against kings, queens, 

Wellington, the aristocracy, and what not, till they had got 

the Whigs into power, with whom they were in secret alliance, 

and with whom they afterwards openly joined in a system of 

robbery and corruption, more flagitious than the old Tory 

one, because there was more cant about it; for themselves 

they got consulships, commissionerships, and in some 

instances governments; for their sons clerkships in public 

offices; and there you may see those sons with the never-

failing badge of the low scoundrel-puppy, the gilt chain at 

the waistcoat pocket; and there you may hear and see them 

using the languishing tones, and employing the airs and 

graces which wenches use and employ, who, without being in 

the family way, wish to make their keepers believe that they 

are in the family way.  Assuredly great is the cleverness of 

your Radicals of '32, in providing for themselves and their 

families.  Yet, clever as they are, there is one thing they 

cannot do - they get governments for themselves, 

commissionerships for their brothers, clerkships for their 

sons, but there is one thing beyond their craft - they cannot 

get husbands for their daughters, who, too ugly for marriage, 

and with their heads filled with the nonsense they have 

imbibed from gentility-novels, go over from Socinus to the 

Pope, becoming sisters in fusty convents, or having heard a 

few sermons in Mr. Platitude's "chapelle," seek for admission 

at the establishment of mother S-, who, after employing them 

for a time in various menial offices, and making them pluck 

off their eyebrows hair by hair, generally dismisses them on 

the plea of sluttishness; whereupon they return to their 

papas to eat the bread of the country, with the comfortable 

prospect of eating it still in the shape of a pension after 

their sires are dead.  Papa (ex uno disce omnes) living as 

quietly as he can; not exactly enviably, it is true, being 

now and then seen to cast an uneasy and furtive glance 

behind, even as an animal is wont, who has lost by some 

mischance a very slight appendage; as quietly however as he 

can, and as dignifiedly, a great admirer of every genteel 

thing and genteel personage, the Duke in particular, whose 

"Despatches," bound in red morocco, you will find on his 

table.  A disliker of coarse expressions, and extremes of 

every kind, with a perfect horror for revolutions and 

attempts to revolutionize, exclaiming now and then, as a 

shriek escapes from whipped and bleeding Hungary, a groan 

from gasping Poland, and a half-stifled curse from down-

trodden but scowling Italy, "Confound the revolutionary 

canaille, why can't it be quiet!" in a word, putting one in 

mind of the parvenu in the "Walpurgis Nacht."  The writer is 

no admirer of Gothe, but the idea of that parvenu was 

certainly a good one.  Yes, putting one in mind of the 

individual who says -





"Wir waren wahrlich auch nicht dumm,

Und thaten oft was wir nicht sollten;

Doch jetzo kehrt sich alles um und um,

Und eben da wir's fest erhalten wollten."



We were no fools, as every one discern'd,

And stopp'd at nought our projects in fulfilling;

But now the world seems topsy-turvy turn'd,

To keep it quiet just when we were willing.





Now, this class of individuals entertain a mortal hatred for 

Lavengro and its writer, and never lose an opportunity of 

vituperating both.  It is true that such hatred is by no 

means surprising.  There is certainly a great deal of 

difference between Lavengro and their own sons; the one 

thinking of independence and philology, whilst he is clinking 

away at kettles, and hammering horse-shoes in dingles; the 

others stuck up at public offices with gilt chains at their 

waistcoat-pockets, and giving themselves the airs and graces 

of females of a certain description.  And there certainly is 

a great deal of difference between the author of Lavengro and 

themselves - he retaining his principles and his brush; they 

with scarlet breeches on, it is true, but without their 

Republicanism, and their tails.  Oh, the writer can well 

afford to be vituperated by your pseudo-Radicals of '32!



Some time ago the writer was set upon by an old Radical and 

his wife; but the matter is too rich not to require a chapter 

to itself.







CHAPTER XI







The Old Radical.





"This very dirty man, with his very dirty face,

Would do any dirty act, which would get him a place."





SOME time ago the writer was set upon by an old Radical and 

his wife; but before he relates the manner in which they set 

upon him, it will be as well to enter upon a few particulars 

tending to elucidate their reasons for so doing.



The writer had just entered into his eighteenth year, when he 

met at the table of a certain Anglo-Germanist an individual, 

apparently somewhat under thirty, of middle stature, a thin 

and weaselly figure, a sallow complexion, a certain obliquity 

of vision, and a large pair of spectacles.  This person, who 

had lately come from abroad, and had published a volume of 

translations, had attracted some slight notice in the 

literary world, and was looked upon as a kind of lion in a 

small provincial capital.  After dinner he argued a great 

deal, spoke vehemently against the church, and uttered the 

most desperate Radicalism that was perhaps ever heard, 

saying, he hoped that in a short time there would not be a 

king or queen in Europe, and inveighing bitterly against the 

English aristocracy, and against the Duke of Wellington in 

particular, whom he said, if he himself was ever president of 

an English republic - an event which he seemed to think by no 

means improbable - he would hang for certain infamous acts of 

profligacy and bloodshed which he had perpetrated in Spain.  

Being informed that the writer was something of a 

philologist, to which character the individual in question 

laid great pretensions, he came and sat down by him, and 

talked about languages and literature.  The writer, who was 

only a boy, was a little frightened at first, but, not 

wishing to appear a child of absolute ignorance, he summoned 

what little learning he had, and began to blunder out 

something about the Celtic languages and literature, and 

asked the Lion who he conceived Finn-Ma-Coul to be? and 

whether he did not consider the "Ode to the Fox," by Red Rhys 

of Eryry, to be a masterpiece of pleasantry?  Receiving no 

answer to these questions from the Lion, who, singular 

enough, would frequently, when the writer put a question to 

him, look across the table, and flatly contradict some one 

who was talking to some other person, the writer dropped the 

Celtic languages and literature, and asked him whether he did 

not think it a funny thing that Temugin, generally called 

Genghis Khan, should have married the daughter of Prester 

John?  (8) The Lion, after giving a side-glance at the writer 

through his left spectacle glass, seemed about to reply, but 

was unfortunately prevented, being seized with an 

irresistible impulse to contradict a respectable doctor of 

medicine, who was engaged in conversation with the master of 

the house at the upper and farther end of the table, the 

writer being a poor ignorant lad, sitting of course at the 

bottom.  The doctor, who had served in the Peninsula, having 

observed that Ferdinand the Seventh was not quite so bad as 

had been represented, the Lion vociferated that he was ten 

times worse, and that he hoped to see him and the Duke of 

Wellington hanged together.  The doctor, who, being a 

Welshman, was somewhat of a warm temper, growing rather red, 

said that at any rate he had been informed that Ferdinand the 

Seventh knew sometimes how to behave himself like a gentleman 

- this brought on a long dispute, which terminated rather 

abruptly.  The Lion having observed that the doctor must not 

talk about Spanish matters with one who had visited every 

part of Spain, the doctor bowed, and said he was right, for 

that he believed no people in general possessed such accurate 

information about countries as those who had travelled them 

as bagmen.  On the Lion asking the doctor what he meant, the 

Welshman, whose under jaw began to move violently, replied, 

that he meant what he said.  Here the matter ended, for the 

Lion, turning from him, looked at the writer.  The writer, 

imagining that his own conversation hitherto had been too 

trivial and common-place for the Lion to consider worth his 

while to take much notice of it, determined to assume a 

little higher ground, and after repeating a few verses of the 

Koran, and gabbling a little Arabic, asked the Lion what he 

considered to be the difference between the Hegira and the 

Christian era, adding, that he thought the general 

computation was in error by about one year; and being a 

particularly modest person, chiefly, he believes, owing to 

his having been at school in Ireland, absolutely blushed at 

finding that the Lion returned not a word in answer.  "What a 

wonderful individual I am seated by," thought he, "to whom 

Arabic seems a vulgar speech, and a question about the Hegira 

not worthy of an answer!" not reflecting that as lions come 

from the Sahara, they have quite enough of Arabic at home, 

and that the question about the Hegira was rather mal a 

propos to one used to prey on the flesh of hadjis.  "Now I 

only wish he would vouchsafe me a little of his learning," 

thought the boy to himself, and in this wish he was at last 

gratified; for the Lion, after asking him whether he was 

acquainted at all with the Sclavonian languages, and being 

informed that he was not, absolutely dumb-foundered him by a 

display of Sclavonian erudition.



Years rolled by - the writer was a good deal about, sometimes 

in London, sometimes in the country, sometimes abroad; in 

London he occasionally met the man of the spectacles, who was 

always very civil to him, and, indeed, cultivated his 

acquaintance.  The writer thought it rather odd that, after 

he himself had become acquainted with the Sclavonian 

languages and literature, the man of the spectacles talked 

little or nothing about them.  In a little time, however, the 

matter ceased to cause him the slightest surprise, for he had 

discovered a key to the mystery.  In the mean time the man of 

spectacles was busy enough; he speculated in commerce, 

failed, and paid his creditors twenty pennies in the pound; 

published translations, of which the public at length became 

heartily tired; having, indeed, got an inkling of the manner 

in which those translations were got up.  He managed, 

however, to ride out many a storm, having one trusty sheet-

anchor - Radicalism.  This he turned to the best advantage - 

writing pamphlets and articles in reviews, all in the Radical 

interest, and for which he was paid out of the Radical fund; 

which articles and pamphlets, when Toryism seemed to reel on 

its last legs, exhibited a slight tendency to Whiggism.  

Nevertheless, his abhorrence of desertion of principle was so 

great in the time of the Duke of Wellington's administration, 

that when S- left the Whigs and went over, he told the 

writer, who was about that time engaged with him in a 

literary undertaking, that the said S- was a fellow with a 

character so infamous, that any honest man would rather that 

you spit in his face than insult his ears with the mention of 

the name of S-.



The literary project having come to nothing, - in which, by 

the bye, the writer was to have all the labour, and his 

friend all the credit, provided any credit should accrue from 

it, - the writer did not see the latter for some years, 

during which time considerable political changes took place; 

the Tories were driven from, and the Whigs placed in, office, 

both events being brought about by the Radicals coalescing 

with the Whigs, over whom they possessed great influence for 

the services which they had rendered.  When the writer next 

visited his friend, he found him very much altered; his 

opinions were by no means so exalted as they had been - he 

was not disposed even to be rancorous against the Duke of 

Wellington, saying that there were worse men than he, and 

giving him some credit as a general; a hankering after 

gentility seeming to pervade the whole family, father and 

sons, wife and daughters, all of whom talked about genteel 

diversions - gentility novels, and even seemed to look with 

favour on High Churchism, having in former years, to all 

appearance, been bigoted Dissenters.  In a little time the 

writer went abroad; as, indeed, did his friend; not, however, 

like the writer, at his own expense, but at that of the 

country - the Whigs having given him a travelling 

appointment, which he held for some years, during which he 

received upwards of twelve thousand pounds of the money of 

the country, for services which will, perhaps, be found 

inscribed on certain tablets, when another Astolfo shall 

visit the moon.  This appointment, however, he lost on the 

Tories resuming power - when the writer found him almost as 

Radical and patriotic as ever, just engaged in trying to get 

into Parliament, into which he got by the assistance of his 

Radical friends, who, in conjunction with the Whigs, were 

just getting up a crusade against the Tories, which they 

intended should be a conclusive one.



A little time after the publication of "The Bible in Spain," 

the Tories being still in power, this individual, full of the 

most disinterested friendship for the author, was 

particularly anxious that he should be presented with an 

official situation, in a certain region a great many miles 

off.  "You are the only person for that appointment," said 

he; "you understand a great deal about the country, and are 

better acquainted with the two languages spoken there than 

any one in England.  Now I love my country, and have, 

moreover, a great regard for you, and as I am in Parliament, 

and have frequent opportunities of speaking to the Ministry, 

I shall take care to tell them how desirable it would be to 

secure your services.  It is true they are Tories, but I 

think that even Tories would give up their habitual love of 

jobbery in a case like yours, and for once show themselves 

disposed to be honest men and gentlemen; indeed, I have no 

doubt they will, for having so deservedly an infamous 

character, they would be glad to get themselves a little 

credit, by a presentation which could not possibly be traced 

to jobbery or favouritism."



The writer begged his friend to give himself no trouble about 

the matter, as he was not desirous of the appointment, being 

in tolerably easy circumstances, and willing to take some 

rest after a life of labour.  All, however, that he could say 

was of no use, his friend indignantly observing, that the 

matter ought to be taken entirely out of his hands, and the 

appointment thrust upon him for the credit of the country.  

"But may not many people be far more worthy of the 

appointment than myself?" said the writer.  "Where?" said the 

friendly Radical.  "If you don't get it, it will be made a 

job of, given to the son of some steward, or, perhaps, to 

some quack who has done dirty work; I tell you what, I shall 

ask it for you, in spite of you; I shall, indeed!" and his 

eyes flashed with friendly and patriotic fervour through the 

large pair of spectacles which he wore.



And, in fact, it would appear that the honest and friendly 

patriot put his threat into execution.  "I have spoken," said 

he, "more than once to this and that individual in 

Parliament, and everybody seems to think that the appointment 

should be given to you.  Nay, that you should be forced to 

accept it.  I intend next to speak to Lord A- "  And so he 

did, at least it would appear so.  On the writer calling upon 

him one evening, about a week afterwards, in order to take 

leave of him, as the writer was about to take a long journey 

for the sake of his health, his friend no sooner saw him than 

he started up in a violent fit of agitation, and glancing 

about the room, in which there were several people, amongst 

others two Whig members of Parliament, said, "I am glad you 

are come, I was just speaking about you.  This," said he, 

addressing the two members, "is so and so, the author of so 

and so, the well-known philologist; as I was telling you, I 

spoke to Lord A- this day about him, and said that he ought 

forthwith to have the head appointment in - and what did the 

fellow say?  Why, that there was no necessity for such an 

appointment at all, and if there were, why - and then he 

hummed and ha'd.  Yes," said he, looking at the writer, "he 

did indeed.  What a scandal! what an infamy!  But I see how 

it will be, it will be a job.  The place will be given to 

some son of a steward or to some quack, as I said before.  

Oh, these Tories!  Well, if this does not make one -  "  Here 

he stopped short, crunched his teeth, and looked the image of 

desperation.



Seeing the poor man in this distressed condition, the writer 

begged him to be comforted, and not to take the matter so 

much to heart; but the indignant Radical took the matter very 

much to heart, and refused all comfort whatever, bouncing 

about the room, and, whilst his spectacles flashed in the 

light of four spermaceti candles, exclaiming, "It will be a 

job - a Tory job!  I see it all, I see it all, I see it all!"



And a job it proved, and a very pretty job, but no Tory job.  

Shortly afterwards the Tories were out, and the Whigs were 

in.  From that time the writer heard not a word about the 

injustice done to the country in not presenting him with the 

appointment to -; the Radical, however, was busy enough to 

obtain the appointment, not for the writer, but for himself, 

and eventually succeeded, partly through Radical influence, 

and partly through that of a certain Whig lord, for whom the 

Radical had done, on a particular occasion, work of a 

particular kind.  So, though the place was given to a quack, 

and the whole affair a very pretty job, it was one in which 

the Tories had certainly no hand.



In the meanwhile, however, the friendly Radical did not drop 

the writer.  Oh, no!  On various occasions he obtained from 

the writer all the information about the country in question, 

and was particularly anxious to obtain from the writer, and 

eventually did obtain, a copy of a work written in the court 

language of that country, edited by the writer, a language 

exceedingly difficult, which the writer, at the expense of a 

considerable portion of his eyesight, had acquired, at least 

as far as by the eyesight it could be acquired.  What use the 

writer's friend made of the knowledge he had gained from him, 

and what use he made of the book, the writer can only guess; 

but he has little doubt that when the question of sending a 

person to - was mooted in a Parliamentary Committee - which 

it was at the instigation of the writer's friend - the 

Radical on being examined about the country, gave the 

information which he had obtained from the writer as his own, 

and flashed the book and its singular characters in the eyes 

of the Committee; and then of course his Radical friends 

would instantly say, "This is the man! there is no one like 

him.  See what information he possesses; and see that book 

written by himself in the court language of Serendib.  This 

is the only man to send there.  What a glory, what a triumph 

it would be to Britain, to send out a man so deeply versed in 

the mysterious lore of - as our illustrious countryman; a 

person who with his knowledge could beat with their own 

weapons the wise men of -  Is such an opportunity to be lost?  

Oh, no! surely not; if it is, it will be an eternal disgrace 

to England, and the world will see that Whigs are no better 

than Tories."



Let no one think the writer uncharitable in these 

suppositions.  The writer is only too well acquainted with 

the antecedents of the individual, to entertain much doubt 

that he would shrink from any such conduct, provided he 

thought that his temporal interest would be forwarded by it.  

The writer is aware of more than one instance in which he has 

passed off the literature of friendless young men for his 

own, after making them a slight pecuniary compensation and 

deforming what was originally excellent by interpolations of 

his own.  This was his especial practice with regard to 

translation, of which he would fain be esteemed the king.  

This Radical literato is slightly acquainted with four or 

five of the easier dialects of Europe, on the strength of 

which knowledge be would fain pass for a universal linguist, 

publishing translations of pieces originally written in 

various difficult languages; which translations, however, 

were either made by himself from literal renderings done for 

him into French or German, or had been made from the 

originals into English, by friendless young men, and then 

deformed by his alterations.



Well, the Radical got the appointment, and the writer 

certainly did not grudge it him.  He, of course, was aware 

that his friend had behaved in a very base manner towards 

him, but he bore him no ill-will, and invariably when he 

heard him spoken against, which was frequently the case, took 

his part when no other person would; indeed, he could well 

afford to bear him no ill-will.  He had never sought for the 

appointment, nor wished for it, nor, indeed, ever believed 

himself to be qualified for it.  He was conscious, it is 

true, that he was not altogether unacquainted with the 

language and literature of the country with which the 

appointment was connected.  He was likewise aware that he was 

not altogether deficient in courage and in propriety of 

behaviour.  He knew that his appearance was not particularly 

against him; his face not being like that of a convicted 

pickpocket, nor his gait resembling that of a fox who has 

lost his tail; yet he never believed himself adapted for the 

appointment, being aware that he had no aptitude for the 

doing of dirty work, if called to do it, nor pliancy which 

would enable him to submit to scurvy treatment, whether he 

did dirty work or not - requisites, at the time of which he 

is speaking, indispensable in every British official; 

requisites, by the bye, which his friend the Radical 

possessed in a high degree; but though he bore no ill-will 

towards his friend, his friend bore anything but good-will 

towards him; for from the moment that he had obtained the 

appointment for himself, his mind was filled with the most 

bitter malignity against the writer, and naturally enough; 

for no one ever yet behaved in a base manner towards another, 

without forthwith conceiving a mortal hatred against him.  

You wrong another, know yourself to have acted basely, and 

are enraged, not against yourself - for no one hates himself 

- but against the innocent cause of your baseness; reasoning 

very plausibly, "But for that fellow, I should never have 

been base; for had he not existed I could not have been so, 

at any rate against him;" and this hatred is all the more 

bitter, when you reflect that you have been needlessly base.



Whilst the Tories are in power the writer's friend, of his 

own accord, raves against the Tories because they do not give 

the writer a certain appointment, and makes, or says he 

makes, desperate exertions to make them do so; but no sooner 

are the Tories out, with whom he has no influence, and the 

Whigs in, with whom he, or rather his party, has influence, 

than he gets the place for himself, though, according to his 

own expressed opinion - an opinion with which the writer does 

not, and never did, concur - the writer was the only person 

competent to hold it.  Now had he, without saying a word to 

the writer, or about the writer with respect to the 

employment, got the place for himself when he had an 

opportunity, knowing, as he very well knew, himself to be 

utterly unqualified for it, the transaction, though a piece 

of jobbery, would not have merited the title of a base 

transaction; as the matter stands, however, who can avoid 

calling the whole affair not only a piece of - come, come, 

out with the word - scoundrelism on the part of the writer's 

friend, but a most curious piece of uncalled-for 

scoundrelism? and who, with any knowledge of fallen human 

nature, can wonder at the writer's friend entertaining 

towards him a considerable portion of gall and malignity?



This feeling on the part of the writer's friend was 

wonderfully increased by the appearance of Lavengro, many 

passages of which the Radical in his foreign appointment 

applied to himself and family - one or two of his children 

having gone over to Popery, the rest become members of Mr. 

Platitude's chapel, and the minds of all being filled with 

ultra notions of gentility.



The writer, hearing that his old friend had returned to 

England, to apply, he believes, for an increase of salary, 

and for a title, called upon him, unwillingly, it is true, 

for he had no wish to see a person for whom, though he bore 

him no ill-will, he could not avoid feeling a considerable 

portion of contempt; the truth is, that his sole object in 

calling was to endeavour to get back a piece of literary 

property which his friend had obtained from him many years 

previously, and which, though he had frequently applied for 

it, he never could get back.  Well, the writer called; he did 

not get his property, which, indeed, he had scarcely time to 

press for, being almost instantly attacked by his good friend 

and his wife - yes, it was then that the author was set upon 

by an old Radical and his wife - the wife, who looked the 

very image of shame and malignity, did not say much, it is 

true, but encouraged her husband in all he said.  Both of 

their own accord introduced the subject of Lavengro.  The 

Radical called the writer a grumbler, just as if there had 

ever been a greater grumbler than himself until, by the means 

above described, he had obtained a place: he said that the 

book contained a melancholy view of human nature - just as if 

anybody could look in his face without having a melancholy 

view of human nature.  On the writer quietly observing that 

the book contained an exposition of his principles, the 

pseudo-Radical replied, that he cared nothing for his 

principles - which was probably true, it not being likely 

that he would care for another person's principles after 

having shown so thorough a disregard for his own.  The writer 

said that the book, of course, would give offence to humbugs; 

the Radical then demanded whether he thought him a humbug? - 

the wretched wife was the Radical's protection, even as he 

knew she would be; it was on her account that the writer did 

not kick his good friend; as it was, he looked at him in the 

face and thought to himself, "How is it possible I should 

think you a humbug, when only last night I was taking your 

part in a company in which everybody called you a humbug?"



The Radical, probably observing something in the writer's eye 

which he did not like, became all on a sudden abjectly 

submissive, and, professing the highest admiration for the 

writer, begged him to visit him in his government; this the 

writer promised faithfully to do, and he takes the present 

opportunity of performing his promise.



This is one of the pseudo-Radical calumniators of Lavengro 

and its author; were the writer on his deathbed he would lay 

his hand on his heart and say, that he does not believe that 

there is one trait of exaggeration in the portrait which he 

has drawn.  This is one of the pseudo-Radical calumniators of 

Lavengro and its author; and this is one of the genus, who, 

after having railed against jobbery for perhaps a quarter of 

a century, at present batten on large official salaries which 

they do not earn.  England is a great country, and her 

interests require that she should have many a well-paid 

official both at home and abroad; but will England long 

continue a great country if the care of her interests, both 

at home and abroad, is in many instances intrusted to beings 

like him described above, whose only recommendation for an 

official appointment was that he was deeply versed in the 

secrets of his party and of the Whigs?



Before he concludes, the writer will take the liberty of 

saying of Lavengro that it is a book written for the express 

purpose of inculcating virtue, love of country, learning, 

manly pursuits, and genuine religion, for example, that of 

the Church of England, and for awakening a contempt for 

nonsense of every kind, and a hatred for priestcraft, more 

especially that of Rome.



And in conclusion, with respect to many passages of his book 

in which he has expressed himself in terms neither measured 

nor mealy, he will beg leave to observe, in the words of a 

great poet, who lived a profligate life, it is true, but who 

died a sincere penitent - thanks, after God, to good Bishop 

Burnet -





"All this with indignation I have hurl'd

At the pretending part of this proud world,

Who, swollen with selfish vanity, devise

False freedoms, formal cheats, and holy lies,

Over their fellow fools to tyrannize."

ROCHESTER.







Footnotes



(1) Tipperary.



(2) An obscene oath.



(3) See "Muses' Library," pp. 86, 87.  London, 1738.



(4) Genteel with them seems to be synonymous with Gentile and 

Gentoo; if so, the manner in which it has been applied for 

ages ceases to surprise, for genteel is heathenish.  Ideas of 

barbaric pearl and gold, glittering armour, plumes, tortures, 

blood-shedding, and lust, should always be connected with it.  

Wace, in his grand Norman poem, calls the Baron genteel:-





"La furent li gentil Baron," etc.





And he certainly could not have applied the word better than 

to the strong Norman thief, armed cap-a-pie, without one 

particle of truth or generosity; for a person to be a pink of 

gentility, that is heathenism, should have no such feelings; 

and, indeed, the admirers of gentility seldom or never 

associate any such feelings with it.  It was from the Norman, 

the worst of all robbers and miscreants, who built strong 

castles, garrisoned them with devils, and tore out poor 

wretches' eyes, as the Saxon Chronicle says, that the English 

got their detestable word genteel.  What could ever have made 

the English such admirers of gentility, it would be difficult 

to say; for, during three hundred years, they suffered enough 

by it.  Their genteel Norman landlords were their scourgers, 

their torturers, the plunderers of their homes, the 

dishonourers of their wives, and the deflourers of their 

daughters.  Perhaps, after all, fear is at the root of the 

English veneration for gentility.



(5) Gentle and gentlemanly may be derived from the same root 

as genteel; but nothing can be more distinct from the mere 

genteel, than the ideas which enlightened minds associate 

with these words.  Gentle and gentlemanly mean something kind 

and genial; genteel, that which is glittering or gaudy.  A 

person can be a gentleman in rags, but nobody can be genteel.



(6) The writer has been checked in print by the Scotch with 

being a Norfolk man.  Surely, surely, these latter times have 

not been exactly the ones in which it was expedient for 

Scotchmen to check the children of any county in England with 

the place of their birth, more especially those who have had 

the honour of being born in Norfolk - times in which British 

fleets, commanded by Scotchmen, have returned laden with 

anything but laurels from foreign shores.  It would have been 

well for Britain had she had the old Norfolk man to dispatch 

to the Baltic or the Black sea, lately, instead of Scotch 

admirals.



(7) As the present work will come out in the midst of a 

vehement political contest, people may be led to suppose that 

the above was written expressly for the time.  The writer 

therefore begs to state that it was written in the year 1854.  

He cannot help adding that he is neither Whig, Tory, nor 

Radical, and cares not a straw what party governs England, 

provided it is governed well.  But he has no hopes of good 

government from the Whigs.  It is true that amongst them 

there is one very great man, Lord Palmerston, who is indeed 

the sword and buckler, the chariots and the horses of the 

party; but it is impossible for his lordship to govern well 

with such colleagues as he has - colleagues which have been 

forced upon him by family influence, and who are continually 

pestering him into measures anything but conducive to the 

country's honour and interest.  If Palmerston would govern 

well, he must get rid of them; but from that step, with all 

his courage and all his greatness, he will shrink.  Yet how 

proper and easy a step it would be!  He could easily get 

better, but scarcely worse, associates.  They appear to have 

one object in view, and only one - jobbery.  It was chiefly 

owing to a most flagitious piece of jobbery, which one of his 

lordship's principal colleagues sanctioned and promoted, that 

his lordship experienced his late parliamentary disasters.



(8) A fact.











End 