





CHAPTER XLVII







Departure from Horncastle - Recruiting Sergeant - Kauloes and 

Lolloes.





LEAVING Horncastle I bent my steps in the direction of the 

east.  I walked at a brisk rate, and late in the evening 

reached a large town, situate at the entrance of an extensive 

firth, or arm of the sea, which prevented my farther progress 

eastward.  Sleeping that night in the suburbs of the town, I 

departed early next morning in the direction of the south.  A 

walk of about twenty miles brought me to another large town, 

situated on a river, where I again turned towards the east.  

At the end of the town I was accosted by a fiery-faced 

individual, somewhat under the middle size, dressed as a 

recruiting sergeant.



"Young man," said the recruiting sergeant, "you are just the 

kind of person to serve the Honourable East India Company."



"I had rather the Honourable Company should serve me," said 

I.



"Of course, young man.  Well, the Honourable East India 

Company shall serve you - that's reasonable.  Here, take this 

shilling; 'tis service-money.  The Honourable Company engages 

to serve you, and you the Honourable Company; both parties 

shall be thus served; that's just and reasonable."



"And what must I do for the Company?"



"Only go to India; that's all."



"And what should I do in India?"



"Fight, my brave boy! fight, my youthful hero!"



"What kind of country is India?"



"The finest country in the world!  Rivers, bigger than the 

Ouse.  Hills, higher than anything near Spalding!  Trees - 

you never saw such trees!  Fruits - you never saw such 

fruits!"



"And the people - what kind of folk are they?"



"Pah!  Kauloes - blacks - a set of rascals not worth 

regarding."



"Kauloes!" said I; "blacks!"



"Yes," said the recruiting sergeant; "and they call us 

lolloes, which, in their beastly gibberish, means red."



"Lolloes!" said I; "reds!"



"Yes," said the recruiting sergeant, "kauloes and lolloes; 

and all the lolloes have to do is to kick and cut down the 

kauloes, and take from them their rupees, which mean silver 

money.  Why do you stare so?"



"Why," said I, "this is the very language of Mr. Petulengro."



"Mr. Pet-?"



"Yes," said I, "and Tawno Chikno."



"Tawno Chik-?  I say, young fellow, I don't like your way of 

speaking; no, nor your way of looking.  You are mad, sir; you 

are mad; and what's this?  Why, your hair is grey!  You won't 

do for the Honourable Company - they like red.  I'm glad I 

didn't give you the shilling.  Good day to you."



"I shouldn't wonder," said I, as I proceeded rapidly along a 

broad causeway, in the direction of the east, "if Mr. 

Petulengro and Tawno Chikno came originally from India.  I 

think I'll go there."
