





CHAPTER XL







The Horncastle Welcome - Tzernebock and Bielebock.





THE pipe of the Hungarian had, for some time past, exhibited 

considerable symptoms of exhaustion, little or no ruttling 

having been heard in the tube, and scarcely a particle of 

smoke, drawn through the syphon, having been emitted from the 

lips of the possessor.  He now rose from his seat, and going 

to a corner of the room, placed his pipe against the wall, 

then striding up and down the room, he cracked his fingers 

several times, exclaiming, in a half-musing manner, "Oh, the 

deep nation, which, in order to display its sympathy for 

Hungary, sends its fool to Vienna, to drink the sweet wine of 

Tokay!"



The jockey, having looked for some time at the tall figure 

with evident approbation, winked at me with that brilliant 

eye of his on which there was no speck, saying, "'Did you 

ever see a taller fellow?"



"Never," said I.



"Or a finer?"



"That's another question," said I, "which I am not so willing 

to answer; however, as I am fond of truth, and scorn to 

flatter, I will take the liberty of saying that I have seen a 

finer."



"A finer! where?" said the jockey; whilst the Hungarian, who 

appeared to understand what we said, stood still, and looked 

full at me.



"Amongst a strange set of people," said I, "whom, if I were 

to name, you would, I dare say, only laugh at me."



"Who be they?" said the jockey.  "Come, don't be ashamed; I 

have occasionally kept queerish company myself."



"The people whom we call gypsies," said I; "whom the Germans 

call Zigeuner, and who call themselves Romany chals."



"Zigeuner!" said the Hungarian; "by Isten!  I do know those 

people."



"Romany chals!" said the jockey; "whew!  I begin to smell a 

rat."



"What do you mean by smelling a rat?" said I.



"I'll bet a crown," said the jockey, "that you be the young 

chap what certain folks call 'the Romany Rye.'"



"Ah!" said I, "how came you to know that name?"



"Be not you he?" said the jockey.



"Why, I certainly have been called by that name."



"I could have sworn it," said the jockey; then rising from 

his chair, he laid his pipe on the table, took a large hand-

bell which stood on the side-board, and going to the door, 

opened it, and commenced ringing in a most tremendous manner 

on the staircase.  The noise presently brought up a waiter, 

to whom the jockey vociferated, "Go to your master, and tell 

him to send immediately three bottles of champagne, of the 

pink kind, mind you, which is twelve guineas a dozen;" the 

waiter hurried away, and the jockey resumed his seat and his 

pipe.  I sat in silent astonishment until the waiter returned 

with a basket containing the wine, which, with three long 

glasses, he placed on the table.  The jockey then got up, and 

going to a large bow-window at the end of the room, which 

looked into a court-yard, peeped out; then saying, "the coast 

is clear," he shut down the principal sash which was open for 

the sake of the air, and taking up a bottle of champagne, he 

placed another in the hands of the Hungarian, to whom he said 

something in private.  The latter, who seemed to understand 

him, answered by a nod.  The two then going to the end of the 

table fronting the window, and about eight paces from it, 

stood before it, holding the bottles by their necks; suddenly 

the jockey lifted up his arm.  "Surely," said I, "you are not 

mad enough to fling that bottle through the window?"  "Here's 

to the Romany Rye; here's to the sweet master," said the 

jockey, dashing the bottle through the pane in so neat a 

manner that scarcely a particle of glass fell into the room.



"Eljen edes csigany ur - eljen gul eray!" said the Hungarian, 

swinging round his bottle, and discharging it at the window; 

but, either not possessing the jockey's accuracy of aim, or 

reckless of the consequences, he flung his bottle so, that it 

struck against part of the wooden setting of the panes, 

breaking along with the wood and itself three or four panes 

to pieces.  The crash was horrid, and wine and particles of 

glass flew back into the room, to the no small danger of its 

inmates.  "What do you think of that?" said the jockey; "were 

you ever so honoured before?"  "Honoured!" said I.  "God 

preserve me in future from such honour;" and I put my finger 

to my cheek, which was slightly hurt by a particle of the 

glass.  "That's the way we of the cofrady honour great men at 

Horncastle," said the jockey.  "What, you are hurt! never 

mind; all the better; your scratch shows that you are the 

body the compliment was paid to."  "And what are you going to 

do with the other bottle?" said I.  "Do with it!" said the 

jockey, "why, drink it, cosily and comfortably, whilst 

holding a little quiet talk.  The Romany Rye at Horncastle, 

what an idea!"



"And what will the master of the house say to all this damage 

which you have caused him!"



"What will your master say, William?" said the jockey to the 

waiter, who had witnessed the singular scene just described 

without exhibiting the slightest mark of surprise.  William 

smiled, and slightly shrugging his shoulders, replied, "Very 

little, I dare say, sir; this a'n't the first time your 

honour has done a thing of this kind."  "Nor will it be the 

first time that I shall have paid for it," said the jockey; 

"well, I shall never have paid for a certain item in the bill 

with more pleasure than I shall pay for it now.  Come, 

William, draw the cork, and let us taste the pink champagne."



The waiter drew the cork, and filled the glasses with a pinky 

liquor, which bubbled, hissed, and foamed.  "How do you like 

it?" said the jockey, after I had imitated the example of my 

companions, by despatching my portion at a draught.



"It is wonderful wine," said I; "I have never tasted 

champagne before, though I have frequently heard it praised; 

it more than answers my expectations; but, I confess, I 

should not wish to be obliged to drink it every day."



"Nor I," said the jockey, "for every-day drinking give me a 

glass of old port, or - "



"Of hard old ale," I interposed, "which, according to my 

mind, is better than all the wine in the world."



"Well said, Romany Rye," said the jockey, "just my own 

opinion; now, William, make yourself scarce."



The waiter withdrew, and I said to the jockey, " How did you 

become acquainted with the Romany chals?"



"I first became acquainted with them," said the jockey, "when 

I lived with old Fulcher the basketmaker, who took me up when 

I was adrift upon the world; I do not mean the present 

Fulcher, who is likewise called old Fulcher, but his father, 

who has been dead this many a year; while living with him in 

the caravan, I frequently met them in the green lanes, and of 

latter years I have had occasional dealings with them in the 

horse line."



"And the gypsies have mentioned me to you?" said I.



"Frequently," said the jockey, "and not only those of these 

parts; why, there's scarcely a part of England in which I 

have not heard the name of the Romany Rye mentioned by these 

people.  The power you have over them is wonderful; that is, 

I should have thought it wonderful, had they not more than 

once told me the cause."



"And what is the cause?" said I, "for I am sure I do not 

know."



"The cause is this," said the jockey, "they never heard a bad 

word proceed from your mouth, and never knew you do a bad 

thing."



"They are a singular people," said I.



"And what a singular language they have got," said the 

jockey.



"Do you know it?" said I.



"Only a few words," said the jockey, "they were always chary 

in teaching me any."



"They were vary sherry to me too," said the Hungarian, 

speaking in broken English; "I only could learn from them 

half-a-dozen words, for example, gul eray, which, in the 

czigany of my country, means sweet gentleman; or edes ur in 

my own Magyar."



"Gudlo Rye, in the Romany of mine, means a sugar'd 

gentleman," said I; "then there are gypsies in your country?"



"Plenty," said the Hungarian, speaking German, "and in Russia 

and Turkey too; and wherever they are found, they are alike 

in their ways and language.  Oh, they are a strange race, and 

how little known!  I know little of them, but enough to say, 

that one horse-load of nonsense has been written about them; 

there is one Valter Scott - "



"Mind what you say about him," said I; "he is our grand 

authority in matters of philology and history."



"A pretty philologist," said the Hungarian, "who makes the 

gypsies speak Roth-Welsch, the dialect of thieves; a pretty 

historian, who couples together Thor and Tzernebock."



"Where does he do that?" said I.



"In his conceited romance of 'Ivanhoe,' he couples Thor and 

Tzernebock together, and calls them gods of the heathen 

Saxons."



"Well," said I, "Thur or Thor was certainly a god of the 

heathen Saxons."



"True," said the Hungarian; "but why couple him with 

Tzernebock?  Tzernebock was a word which your Valter had 

picked up somewhere without knowing the meaning.  Tzernebock 

was no god of the Saxons, but one of the gods of the Sclaves, 

on the southern side of the Baltic.  The Sclaves had two 

grand gods to whom they sacrificed, Tzernebock and Bielebock; 

that is, the black and white gods, who represented the powers 

of dark and light.  They were overturned by Waldemar, the 

Dane, the great enemy of the Sclaves; the account of whose 

wars you will find in one fine old book, written by Saxo 

Gramaticus, which I read in the library of the college of 

Debreczen.  The Sclaves, at one time, were masters of all the 

southern shore of the Baltic, where their descendants are 

still to be found, though they have lost their language, and 

call themselves Germans; but the word Zernevitz near Dantzic, 

still attests that the Sclavic language was once common in 

those parts.  Zernevitz means the thing of blackness, as 

Tzernebock means the god of blackness.  Prussia itself merely 

means, in Sclavish, Lower Russia.  There is scarcely a race 

or language in the world more extended than the Sclavic.  On 

the other side of the Dunau you will find the Sclaves and 

their language.  Czernavoda is Sclavic, and means black 

water; in Turkish, kara su; even as Tzernebock means black 

god; and Belgrade, or Belograd, means the white town; even as 

Bielebock, or Bielebog, means the white god.  Oh! he is one 

great ignorant, that Valter.  He is going, they say, to write 

one history about Napoleon.  I do hope that in his history he 

will couple his Thor and Tzernebock together.  By my God! it 

would be good diversion that."



"Walter Scott appears to be no particular favourite of 

yours," said I.



"He is not," said the Hungarian; "I hate him for his slavish 

principles.  He wishes to see absolute power restored in this 

country, and Popery also - and I hate him because - what do 

you think?  In one of his novels, published a few months ago, 

he has the insolence to insult Hungary in the presence of one 

of her sons.  He makes his great braggart, Coeur de Lion, 

fling a Magyar over his head.  Ha! it was well for Richard 

that he never felt the gripe of a Hungarian.  I wish the 

braggart could have felt the gripe of me, who am 'a' magyarok 

kozt legkissebb,' the least among the Magyars.  I do hate 

that Scott, and all his vile gang of Lowlanders and 

Highlanders.  The black corps, the fekete regiment of Matyjas 

Hunyadi, was worth all the Scots, high or low, that ever 

pretended to be soldiers; and would have sent them all 

headlong into the Black Sea, had they dared to confront it on 

its shores; but why be angry with an ignorant, who couples 

together Thor and Tzernebock?  Ha! Ha!"



"You have read his novels?" said I.



"Yes, I read them now and then.  I do not speak much English, 

but I can read it well, and I have read some of his romances, 

and mean to read his 'Napoleon,' in the hope of finding Thor 

and Tzernebock coupled together in it, as in his high-flying 

'Ivanhoe.'"



"Come," said the jockey, "no more Dutch, whether high or low.  

I am tired of it; unless we can have some English, I am off 

to bed."



"I should be very glad to hear some English," said I; 

"especially from your mouth.  Several things which you have 

mentioned, have awakened my curiosity.  Suppose you give us 

your history?"



"My history?" said the jockey.  "A rum idea! however, lest 

conversation should lag, I'll give it you.  First of all, 

however, a glass of champagne to each."



After we had each taken a glass of champagne, the jockey 

commenced his history.

