





CHAPTER IX







Return from Church - The Cuckoo and Gypsy - Spiritual 

Discourse.





THE service over, my companions and myself returned towards 

the encampment, by the way we came.  Some of the humble part 

of the congregation laughed and joked at us as we passed.  

Mr. Petulengro and his wife, however, returned their laughs 

and jokes with interest.  As for Tawno and myself, we said 

nothing: Tawno, like most handsome fellows, having very 

little to say for himself at any time; and myself, though not 

handsome, not being particularly skilful at repartee.  Some 

boys followed us for a considerable time, making all kinds of 

observations about gypsies; but as we walked at a great pace, 

we gradually left them behind, and at last lost sight of 

them.  Mrs. Petulengro and Tawno Chikno walked together, even 

as they had come; whilst Mr. Petulengro and myself followed 

at a little distance.



"That was a very fine preacher we heard," said I to Mr. 

Petulengro, after we had crossed the stile into the fields.



"Very fine indeed, brother," said Mr. Petulengro; "he is 

talked of, far and wide, for his sermons; folks say that 

there is scarcely another like him in the whole of England."



"He looks rather melancholy, Jasper."



"He lost his wife several years ago, who, they say, was one 

of the most beautiful women ever seen.  They say that it was 

grief for her loss that made him come out mighty strong as a 

preacher; for, though he was a clergyman, he was never heard 

of in the pulpit before he lost his wife; since then, the 

whole country has rung with the preaching of the clergyman of 

M- as they call him.  Those two nice young gentlewomen, whom 

you saw with the female childer, are his daughters."



"You seem to know all about him, Jasper.  Did you ever hear 

him preach before?"



"Never, brother; but he has frequently been to our tent, and 

his daughters too, and given us tracts; for he is one of the 

people they call Evangelicals, who give folks tracts which 

they cannot read."



"You should learn to read, Jasper."



"We have no time, brother."



"Are you not frequently idle?"



"Never, brother; when we are not engaged in our traffic, we 

are engaged in taking our relaxation: so we have no time to 

learn."



"You really should make an effort.  If you were disposed to 

learn to read, I would endeavour to assist you.  You would be 

all the better for knowing how to read."



"In what way, brother?"



"Why, you could read the Scriptures, and, by so doing, learn 

your duty towards your fellow-creatures."



"We know that already, brother; the constables and justices 

have contrived to knock that tolerably into our heads."



"Yet you frequently break the laws."



"So, I believe, do now and then those who know how to read, 

brother."



"Very true, Jasper; but you really ought to learn to read, 

as, by so doing, you might learn your duty towards 

yourselves: and your chief duty is to take care of your own 

souls; did not the preacher say, 'In what is a man profited, 

provided he gain the whole world?'"



"We have not much of the world, brother."



"Very little indeed, Jasper.  Did you not observe how the 

eyes of the whole congregation were turned towards our pew, 

when the preacher said, 'There are some people who lose their 

souls, and get nothing in exchange; who are outcast, 

despised, and miserable?'  Now was not what he said quite 

applicable to the gypsies?"



"We are not miserable, brother."



"Well, then, you ought to be, Jasper.  Have you an inch of 

ground of your own?  Are you of the least use?  Are you not 

spoken ill of by everybody?  What's a gypsy?"



"What's the bird noising yonder, brother?"



"The bird! oh, that's the cuckoo tolling; but what has the 

cuckoo to do with the matter?"



"We'll see, brother; what's the cuckoo?"



"What is it? you know as much about it as myself, Jasper."



"Isn't it a kind of roguish, chaffing bird, brother?"



"I believe it is, Jasper."



"Nobody knows whence it comes, brother?"



"I believe not, Jasper."



"Very poor, brother, not a nest of its own?"



"So they say, Jasper."



"With every person's bad word, brother?"



"Yes, Jasper, every person is mocking it."



"Tolerably merry, brother?"



"Yes, tolerably merry, Jasper."



"Of no use at all, brother?"



"None whatever, Jasper."



"You would be glad to get rid of the cuckoos, brother?"



"Why, not exactly, Jasper; the cuckoo is a pleasant, funny 

bird, and its presence and voice give a great charm to the 

green trees and fields; no, I can't say I wish exactly to get 

rid of the cuckoo."



"Well, brother, what's a Romany chal?"



"You must answer that question yourself, Jasper."



"A roguish, chaffing fellow, a'n't he, brother?"



"Ay, ay, Jasper."



"Of no use at all, brother?"



"Just so, Jasper; I see - "



"Something very much like a cuckoo, brother?"



"I see what you are after, Jasper."



"You would like to get rid of us, wouldn't you?"



"Why no, not exactly."



"We are no ornament to the green lanes in spring and summer 

time, are we, brother? and the voices of our chies, with 

their cukkerin and dukkerin, don't help to make them 

pleasant?"



"I see what you are at, Jasper."



"You would wish to turn the cuckoos into barn-door fowls, 

wouldn't you?"



"Can't say I should, Jasper, whatever some people might 

wish."



"And the chals and chies into radical weavers and factory 

wenches, hey, brother?"



"Can't say that I should, Jasper.  You are certainly a 

picturesque people, and in many respects an ornament both to 

town and country; painting and lil writing too are under 

great obligations to you.  What pretty pictures are made out 

of your campings and groupings, and what pretty books have 

been written in which gypsies, or at least creatures intended 

to represent gypsies, have been the principal figures.  I 

think if we were without you, we should begin to miss you."



"Just as you would the cuckoos, if they were all converted 

into barn-door fowls.  I tell you what, brother; frequently, 

as I have sat under a hedge in spring or summer time, and 

heard the cuckoo, I have thought that we chals and cuckoos 

are alike in many respects, but especially in character.  

Everybody speaks ill of us both, and everybody is glad to see 

both of us again."



"Yes, Jasper, but there is some difference between men and 

cuckoos; men have souls, Jasper!"



"And why not cuckoos, brother?"



"You should not talk so, Jasper; what you say is little short 

of blasphemy.  How should a bird have a soul?"



"And how should a man?"



"Oh, we know very well that a man has a soul."



"How do you know it?"



"We know very well."



"Would you take your oath of it, brother - your bodily oath?"



"Why, I think I might, Jasper!"



"Did you ever see the soul, brother?"



"No, I never saw it."



"Then how could you swear to it?  A pretty figure you would 

make in a court of justice, to swear to a thing which you 

never saw.  Hold up your head, fellow.  When and where did 

you see it?  Now upon your oath, fellow, do you mean to say 

that this Roman stole the donkey's foal?  Oh, there's no one 

for cross-questioning like Counsellor P-.  Our people when 

they are in a hobble always like to employ him, though he is 

somewhat dear.  Now, brother, how can you get over the 'upon 

your oath, fellow, will you say that you have a soul?'"



"Well, we will take no oaths on the subject; but you yourself 

believe in the soul.  I have heard you say that you believe 

in dukkerin; now what is dukkerin but the soul science?"



"When did I say that I believed in it?"



"Why, after that fight, when you pointed to the bloody mark 

in the cloud, whilst he you wot of was galloping in the 

barouche to the old town, amidst the rain-cataracts, the 

thunder, and flame of heaven."



"I have some kind of remembrance of it, brother."



"Then, again, I heard you say that the dook of Abershaw rode 

every night on horseback down the wooded hill."



"I say, brother, what a wonderful memory you have!"



"I wish I had not, Jasper; but I can't help it, it is my 

misfortune."



"Misfortune! well, perhaps it is; at any rate it is very 

ungenteel to have such a memory.  I have heard my wife say 

that to show you have a long memory looks very vulgar; and 

that you can't give a greater proof of gentility than by 

forgetting a thing as soon as possible - more especially a 

promise, or an acquaintance when he happens to be shabby.  

Well, brother, I don't deny that I may have said that I 

believe in dukkerin, and in Abershaw's dook, which you say is 

his soul; but what I believe one moment, or say I believe, 

don't be certain that I shall believe the next, or say I do."



"Indeed, Jasper, I heard you say on a previous occasion, on 

quoting a piece of a song, that when a man dies he is cast 

into the earth, and there's an end of him."



"I did, did I?  Lor' what a memory you have, brother.  But 

you are not sure that I hold that opinion now."



"Certainly not, Jasper.  Indeed, after such a sermon as we 

have been hearing, I should be very shocked if you held such 

an opinion."



"However, brother, don't be sure I do not, however shocking 

such an opinion may be to you."



"What an incomprehensible people you are, Jasper."



"We are rather so, brother; indeed, we have posed wiser heads 

than yours before now."



"You seem to care for so little, and yet you rove about a 

distinct race."



"I say, brother!"



"Yes, Jasper."



"What do you think of our women?"



"They have certainly very singular names, Jasper."



"Names!  Lavengro!  However, brother, if you had been as fond 

of things as of names, you would never have been a pal of 

ours."



"What do you mean, Jasper?"



"A'n't they rum animals?"



"They have tongues of their own, Jasper."



"Did you ever feel their teeth and nails, brother?"



"Never, Jasper, save Mrs. Herne's.  I have always been very 

civil to them, so - "



"They let you alone.  I say, brother, some part of the secret 

is in them."



"They seem rather flighty, Jasper."



"Ay, ay, brother!"



"Rather fond of loose discourse!"



"Rather so, brother."



"Can you always trust them, Jasper?"



"We never watch them, brother."



"Can they always trust you?"



"Not quite so well as we can them.  However, we get on very 

well together, except Mikailia and her husband; but Mikailia 

is a cripple, and is married to the beauty of the world, so 

she may be expected to be jealous - though he would not part 

with her for a duchess, no more than I would part with my 

rawnie, nor any other chal with his."



"Ay, but would not the chi part with the chal for a duke, 

Jasper?"



"My Pakomovna gave up the duke for me, brother."



"But she occasionally talks of him, Jasper."



"Yes, brother, but Pakomovna was born on a common not far 

from the sign of the gammon."



"Gammon of bacon, I suppose."



"Yes, brother; but gammon likewise means - "



"I know it does, Jasper; it means fun, ridicule, jest; it is 

an ancient Norse word, and is found in the Edda."



"Lor', brother! how learned in lils you are!"



"Many words of Norse are to be found in our vulgar sayings, 

Jasper; for example - in that particularly vulgar saying of 

ours, 'Your mother is up,' there's a noble Norse word; 

mother, there, meaning not the female who bore us, but rage 

and choler, as I discovered by reading the Sagas, Jasper."



"Lor', brother! how book-learned you be."



"Indifferently so, Jasper.  Then you think you might trust 

your wife with the duke?"



"I think I could, brother, or even with yourself."



"Myself, Jasper!  Oh, I never troubled my head about your 

wife; but I suppose there have been love affairs between 

gorgios and Romany chies.  Why, novels are stuffed with such 

matters; and then even one of your own songs says so - the 

song which Ursula was singing the other afternoon."



"That is somewhat of an old song, brother, and is sung by the 

chies as a warning at our solemn festivals."



"Well! but there's your sister-in-law, Ursula, herself, 

Jasper."



"Ursula, herself, brother?"



"You were talking of my having her, Jasper."



"Well, brother, why didn't you have her?"



"Would she have had me?"



"Of course, brother.  You are so much of a Roman, and speak 

Romany so remarkably well."



"Poor thing! she looks very innocent!"



"Remarkably so, brother! however, though not born on the same 

common with my wife, she knows a thing or two of Roman 

matters."



"I should like to ask her a question or two, Jasper, in 

connection with that song."



"You can do no better, brother.  Here we are at the camp.  

After tea, take Ursula under a hedge, and ask her a question 

or two in connection with that song."


