





CHAPTER VII







The Festival - The Gypsy Song - Piramus of Rome - The 

Scotchman - Gypsy Names.





ON the following day there was much feasting amongst the 

Romany chals of Mr. Petulengro's party.  Throughout the 

forenoon the Romany chies did scarcely anything but cook 

flesh, and the flesh which they cooked was swine's flesh.  

About two o'clock, the chals dividing themselves into various 

parties, sat down and partook of the fare, which was partly 

roasted, partly sodden.  I dined that day with Mr. Petulengro 

and his wife and family, Ursula, Mr. and Mrs. Chikno, and 

Sylvester and his two children.  Sylvester, it will be as 

well to say, was a widower, and had consequently no one to 

cook his victuals for him, supposing he had any, which was 

not always the case, Sylvester's affairs being seldom in a 

prosperous state.  He was noted for his bad success in 

trafficking, notwithstanding the many hints which he received 

from Jasper, under whose protection he had placed himself, 

even as Tawno Chikno had done, who himself, as the reader has 

heard on a former occasion, was anything but a wealthy 

subject, though he was at all times better off than 

Sylvester, the Lazarus of the Romany tribe.



All our party ate with a good appetite, except myself, who, 

feeling rather melancholy that day, had little desire to eat.  

I did not, like the others, partake of the pork, but got my 

dinner entirely off the body of a squirrel which had been 

shot the day before by a chal of the name of Piramus, who, 

besides being a good shot, was celebrated for his skill in 

playing on the fiddle.  During the dinner a horn filled with 

ale passed frequently around; I drank of it more than once, 

and felt inspirited by the draughts.  The repast concluded, 

Sylvester and his children departed to their tent, and Mr. 

Petulengro, Tawno, and myself, getting up, went and lay down 

under a shady hedge, where Mr. Petulengro, lighting his pipe, 

began to smoke, and where Tawno presently fell asleep.  I was 

about to fall asleep also, when I heard the sound of music 

and song.  Piramus was playing on the fiddle, whilst Mrs. 

Chikno, who had a voice of her own, was singing in tones 

sharp enough, but of great power, a gypsy song:-





POISONING THE PORKER

BY MRS. CHIKNO





To mande shoon ye Romany chals

Who besh in the pus about the yag,

I'll pen how we drab the baulo,

I'll pen how we drab the baulo.



We jaws to the drab-engro ker,

Trin horsworth there of drab we lels,

And when to the swety back we wels

We pens we'll drab the baulo,

We'll have a drab at a baulo.



And then we kairs the drab opre,

And then we jaws to the farming ker,

To mang a beti habben,

A beti poggado habben.



A rinkeno baulo there we dick,

And then we pens in Romano jib;

Wust lis odoi opre ye chick,

And the baulo he will lel lis,

The baulo he will lel lis.



Coliko, coliko saulo we

Apopli to the farming ker

Will wel and mang him mullo,

Will wel and mang his truppo.



And so we kairs, and so we kairs;

The baulo in the rarde mers;

We mang him on the saulo,

And rig to the tan the baulo.



And then we toves the wendror well

Till sore the wendror iuziou se,

Till kekkeno drab's adrey lis,

Till drab there's kek adrey lis.



And then his truppo well we hatch,

Kin levinor at the kitchema,

And have a kosko habben,

A kosko Romano habben.



The boshom engro kils, he kils,

The tawnie juva gils, she gils

A puro Romano gillie,

Now shoon the Romano gillie.





Which song I had translated in the following manner, in my 

younger days, for a lady's album:





Listen to me ye Romanlads, who are seated in the straw about 

the fire, and I will tell how we poison the porker, I will 

tell how we poison the porker.



We go to the house of the poison-monger, where we buy three 

pennies' worth of bane, and when we return to our people we 

say, we will poison the porker; we will try and poison the 

porker.



We then make up the poison, and then we take our way to the 

house of the farmer, as if to beg a bit of victuals, a little 

broken victuals.



We see a jolly porker, and then we say in Roman language, 

"Fling the bane yonder amongst the dirt, and the porker soon 

will find it, the porker soon will find it."



Early on the morrow, we will return to the farm-house, and 

beg the dead porker, the body of the dead porker.



And so we do, even so we do; the porker dieth during the 

night; on the morrow we beg the porker, and carry to the tent 

the porker.



And then we wash the inside well, till all the inside is 

perfectly clean, till there's no bane within it, not a poison 

grain within it.



And then we roast the body well, send for ale to the 

alehouse, and have a merry banquet, a merry Roman banquet.



The fellow with the fiddle plays, he plays; the little lassie 

sings, she sings an ancient Roman ditty; now hear the Roman 

ditty.





SONG OF THE BROKEN CHASTITY

BY URSULA





Penn'd the Romany chi ke laki dye

"Miry dearie dye mi shom cambri!"

"And coin kerdo tute cambri,

Miry dearie chi, miry Romany chi?"

"O miry dye a boro rye,

A bovalo rye, a gorgiko rye,

Sos kistur pre a pellengo grye,

'Twas yov sos kerdo man cambri."

"Tu tawnie vassavie lubbeny,

Tu chal from miry tan abri;

Had a Romany cwal kair'd tute cambri,

Then I had penn'd ke tute chie,

But tu shan a vassavie lubbeny

With gorgikie rat to be cambri."





"There's some kernel in those songs, brother," said Mr. 

Petulengro, when the songs and music were over.



"Yes," said I; "they are certainly very remarkable songs.  I 

say, Jasper, I hope you have not been drabbing baulor 

lately."



"And suppose we have, brother, what then?"



"Why, it is a very dangerous practice, to say nothing of the 

wickedness of it."



"Necessity has no law, brother."



"That is true," said I; "I have always said so, but you are 

not necessitous, and should not drab baulor."



"And who told you we had been drabbing baulor?"



"Why, you have had a banquet of pork, and after the banquet, 

Mrs. Chikno sang a song about drabbing baulor, so I naturally 

thought you might have lately been engaged in such a thing."



"Brother, you occasionally utter a word or two of common 

sense.  It was natural for you to suppose, after seeing that 

dinner of pork, and hearing that song, that we had been 

drabbing baulor; I will now tell you that we have not been 

doing so.  What have you to say to that?"



"That I am very glad of it."



"Had you tasted that pork, brother, you would have found that 

it was sweet and tasty, which balluva that is drabbed can 

hardly be expected to be.  We have no reason to drab baulor 

at present, we have money and credit; but necessity has no 

law.  Our forefathers occasionally drabbed baulor; some of 

our people may still do such a thing, but only from 

compulsion."



"I see," said I; "and at your merry meetings you sing songs 

upon the compulsatory deeds of your people, alias, their 

villainous actions; and, after all, what would the stirring 

poetry of any nation be, but for its compulsatory deeds?  

Look at the poetry of Scotland, the heroic part, founded 

almost entirely on the villainous deeds of the Scotch nation; 

cow-stealing, for example, which is very little better than 

drabbing baulor; whilst the softer part is mostly about the 

slips of its females among the broom, so that no upholder of 

Scotch poetry could censure Ursula's song as indelicate, even 

if he understood it.  What do you think, Jasper?"



"I think, brother, as I before said, that occasionally you 

utter a word of common sense; you were talking of the Scotch, 

brother; what do you think of a Scotchman finding fault with 

Romany!"



"A Scotchman finding fault with Romany, Jasper!  Oh dear, but 

you joke, the thing could never be."



"Yes, and at Piramus's fiddle; what do you think of a 

Scotchman turning up his nose at Piramus's fiddle?"



"A Scotchman turning up his nose at Piramus's fiddle! 

nonsense, Jasper."



"Do you know what I most dislike, brother?"



"I do not, unless it be the constable, Jasper."



"It is not the constable; it's a beggar on horseback, 

brother."



"What do you mean by a beggar on horseback?"



"Why, a scamp, brother, raised above his proper place, who 

takes every opportunity of giving himself fine airs.  About a 

week ago, my people and myself camped on a green by a 

plantation in the neighbourhood of a great house.  In the 

evening we were making merry, the girls were dancing, while 

Piramus was playing on the fiddle a tune of his own 

composing, to which he has given his own name, Piramus of 

Rome, and which is much celebrated amongst our people, and 

from which I have been told that one of the grand gorgio 

composers, who once heard it, has taken several hints.  So, 

as we were making merry, a great many grand people, lords and 

ladies, I believe, came from the great house, and looked on, 

as the girls danced to the tune of Piramus of Rome, and 

seemed much pleased; and when the girls had left off dancing, 

and Piramus playing, the ladies wanted to have their fortunes 

told; so I bade Mikailia Chikno, who can tell a fortune when 

she pleases better than any one else, tell them a fortune, 

and she, being in a good mind, told them a fortune which 

pleased them very much.  So, after they had heard their 

fortunes, one of them asked if any of our women could sing; 

and I told them several could, more particularly Leviathan - 

you know Leviathan, she is not here now, but some miles 

distant, she is our best singer, Ursula coming next.  So the 

lady said she should like to hear Leviathan sing, whereupon 

Leviathan sang the Gudlo pesham, and Piramus played the tune 

of the same name, which as you know, means the honeycomb, the 

song and the tune being well entitled to the name, being 

wonderfully sweet.  Well, everybody present seemed mighty 

well pleased with the song and music, with the exception of 

one person, a carroty-haired Scotch body; how he came there I 

don't know, but there he was; and, coming forward, he began 

in Scotch as broad as a barn-door to find fault with the 

music and the song, saying, that he had never heard viler 

stuff than either.  Well, brother, out of consideration for 

the civil gentry with whom the fellow had come, I held my 

peace for a long time, and in order to get the subject 

changed, I said to Mikailia in Romany, You have told the 

ladies their fortunes, now tell the gentlemen theirs, quick, 

quick, - pen lende dukkerin.  Well, brother, the Scotchman, I 

suppose, thinking I was speaking ill of him, fell into a 

greater passion than before, and catching hold of the word 

dukkerin - 'Dukkerin,' said he, 'what's dukkerin?'  

'Dukkerin,' said I, 'is fortune, a man or woman's destiny; 

don't you like the word?'  'Word! d'ye ca' that a word? a 

bonnie word,' said he.  'Perhaps, you'll tell us what it is 

in Scotch,' said I, 'in order that we may improve our 

language by a Scotch word; a pal of mine has told me that we 

have taken a great many words from foreign lingos.'  'Why, 

then, if that be the case, fellow, I will tell you; it is 

e'en "spaeing,"' said he, very seriously.  'Well, then,' said 

I, 'I'll keep my own word, which is much the prettiest - 

spaeing! spaeing! why, I should be ashamed to make use of the 

word, it sounds so much like a certain other word;' and then 

I made a face as if I were unwell.  'Perhaps it's Scotch also 

for that?'  'What do ye mean by speaking in that guise to a 

gentleman?' said he; 'you insolent vagabond, without a name 

or a country.'  'There you are mistaken,' said I; 'my country 

is Egypt, but we 'Gyptians, like you Scotch, are rather fond 

of travelling; and as for name - my name is Jasper 

Petulengro, perhaps you have a better; what is it?'  'Sandy 

Macraw.'  At that, brother, the gentlemen burst into a roar 

of laughter, and all the ladies tittered."



"You were rather severe on the Scotchman, Jasper."



"Not at all, brother, and suppose I were, he began first; I 

am the civilest man in the world, and never interfere with 

anybody, who lets me and mine alone.  He finds fault with 

Romany, forsooth! why, L-d A'mighty, what's Scotch?  He 

doesn't like our songs; what are his own?  I understand them 

as little as he mine; I have heard one or two of them, and 

pretty rubbish they seemed.  But the best of the joke is, the 

fellow's finding fault with Piramus's fiddle - a chap from 

the land of bagpipes finding fault with Piramus's fiddle!  

Why, I'll back that fiddle against all the bagpipes in 

Scotland, and Piramus against all the bagpipers; for though 

Piramus weighs but ten stone, he shall flog a Scotchman of 

twenty."



"Scotchmen are never so fat as that," said I, "unless indeed, 

they have been a long time pensioners of England.  I say, 

Jasper, what remarkable names your people have!"



"And what pretty names, brother; there's my own, for example, 

Jasper; then there's Ambrose and Sylvester; then there's 

Culvato, which signifies Claude; then there's Piramus - 

that's a nice name, brother."



"Then there's your wife's name, Pakomovna; then there's 

Ursula and Morella."



"Then, brother, there's Ercilla."



"Ercilla! the name of the great poet of Spain, how wonderful; 

then Leviathan."



"The name of a ship, brother; Leviathan was named after a 

ship, so don't make a wonder out of her.  But there's 

Sanpriel and Synfye."



"Ay, and Clementina and Lavinia, Camillia and Lydia, Curlanda 

and Orlanda; wherever did they get those names?"



"Where did my wife get her necklace, brother?"



"She knows best, Jasper.  I hope - "



"Come, no hoping!  She got it from her grandmother, who died 

at the age of a hundred and three, and sleeps in Coggeshall 

churchyard.  She got it from her mother, who also died very 

old, and who could give no other account of it than that it 

had been in the family time out of mind."



"Whence could they have got it?"



"Why, perhaps where they got their names, brother.  A 

gentleman, who had travelled much, once told me that he had 

seen the sister of it about the neck of an Indian queen."



"Some of your names, Jasper, appear to be church names; your 

own, for example, and Ambrose, and Sylvester; perhaps you got 

them from the Papists, in the times of Popery; but where did 

you get such a name as Piramus, a name of Grecian romance?  

Then some of them appear to be Slavonian; for example, 

Mikailia and Pakomovna.  I don't know much of Slavonian; but 

- "



"What is Slavonian, brother?"



"The family name of certain nations, the principal of which 

is the Russian, and from which the word slave is originally 

derived.  You have heard of the Russians, Jasper?"



"Yes, brother; and seen some.  I saw their crallis at the 

time of the peace; he was not a bad-looking man for a 

Russian."



"By the bye, Jasper, I'm half inclined to think that crallis 

is a Slavish word.  I saw something like it in a lil called 

'Voltaire's Life of Charles.'  How you should have come by 

such names and words is to me incomprehensible."



"You seem posed, brother."



"I really know very little about you, Jasper."



"Very little indeed, brother.  We know very little about 

ourselves; and you know nothing, save what we have told you; 

and we have now and then told you things about us which are 

not exactly true, simply to make a fool of you, brother.  You 

will say that was wrong; perhaps it was.  Well, Sunday will 

be here in a day or two, when we will go to church, where 

possibly we shall hear a sermon on the disastrous 

consequences of lying."


