





CHAPTER XIV







Preparations for the Fair - The Last Lesson - The Verb 

Siriel.





IT might be about five in the evening, when I reached the 

gypsy encampment.  Here I found Mr. Petulengro, Tawno Chikno, 

Sylvester, and others in a great bustle, clipping and 

trimming certain ponies and old horses which they had brought 

with them.  On inquiring of Jasper the reason of their being 

so engaged, he informed me that they were getting the horses 

ready for a fair, which was to he held on the morrow, at a 

place some miles distant, at which they should endeavour to 

dispose of them, adding - "Perhaps, brother, you will go with 

us, provided you have nothing better to do?"  Not having any 

particular engagement, I assured him that I should have great 

pleasure in being of the party.  It was agreed that we should 

start early on the following morning.  Thereupon I descended 

into the dingle.  Belle was sitting before the fire, at which 

the kettle was boiling.  "Were you waiting for me?" I 

inquired.  "Yes," said Belle, "I thought that you would come, 

and I waited for you."  "That was very kind," said I.  "Not 

half so kind," said she, "as it was of you to get everything 

ready for me in the dead of last night, when there was 

scarcely a chance of my coming."  The tea-things were brought 

forward, and we sat down.  "Have you been far?" said Belle.  

"Merely to that public-house," said I, "to which you directed 

me on the second day of our acquaintance."  "Young men should 

not make a habit of visiting public-houses," said Belle, 

"they are bad places."  "They may be so to some people," said 

I, "but I do not think the worst public-house in England 

could do me any harm."  "Perhaps you are so bad already," 

said Belle, with a smile, "that it would be impossible to 

spoil you."  "How dare you catch at my words?" said I; "come, 

I will make you pay for doing so - you shall have this 

evening the longest lesson in Armenian which I have yet 

inflicted upon you."  "You may well say inflicted," said 

Belle, "but pray spare me.  I do not wish to hear anything 

about Armenian, especially this evening."  "Why this 

evening?" said I.  Belle made no answer.  "I will not spare 

you," said I; "this evening I intend to make you conjugate an 

Armenian verb."  "Well, be it so," said Belle; "for this 

evening you shall command."  "To command is hramahyel," said 

I.  "Ram her ill, indeed," said Belle; "I do not wish to 

begin with that."  "No," said I, "as we have come to the 

verbs, we will begin regularly; hramahyel is a verb of the 

second conjugation.  We will begin with the first."  "First 

of all tell me," said Belle, "what a verb is?"  "A part of 

speech," said I, "which, according to the dictionary, 

signifies some action or passion; for example, I command you, 

or I hate you."  "I have given you no cause to hate me," said 

Belle, looking me sorrowfully in the face.



"I was merely giving two examples," said I, "and neither was 

directed at you.  In those examples, to command and hate are 

verbs.  Belle, in Armenian there are four conjugations of 

verbs; the first ends in al, the second in yel, the third in 

oul, and the fourth in il.  Now, have you understood me?"



"I am afraid, indeed, it will all end ill," said Belle.



"Hold your tongue," said I, "or you will make me lose my 

patience."  "You have already made me nearly lose mine," said 

Belle.  "Let us have no unprofitable interruptions," said I; 

"the conjugations of the Armenian verbs are neither so 

numerous nor so difficult as the declensions of the nouns; 

hear that, and rejoice.  Come, we will begin with the verb 

hntal, a verb of the first conjugation, which signifies to 

rejoice.  Come along; hntam, I rejoice; hntas, thou 

rejoicest; why don't you follow, Belle?"



"I am sure I don't rejoice, whatever you may do," said Belle.  

"The chief difficulty, Belle," said I, "that I find in 

teaching you the Armenian grammar, proceeds from your 

applying to yourself and me every example I give.  Rejoice, 

in this instance, is merely an example of an Armenian verb of 

the first conjugation, and has no more to do with your 

rejoicing than lal, which is, also a verb of the first 

conjugation, and which signifies to weep, would have to do 

with your weeping, provided I made you conjugate it.  Come 

along; hntam, I rejoice; hntas, thou rejoicest; hnta, he 

rejoices; hntamk we rejoice: now, repeat those words."



"I can't," said Belle, "they sound more like the language of 

horses than human beings.  Do you take me for - ?"  "For 

what?" said I.  Belle was silent.  "Were you going to say 

mare?" said I.  "Mare! mare! by the bye, do you know, Belle, 

that mare in old English stands for woman; and that when we 

call a female an evil mare, the strict meaning of the term is 

merely a bad woman.  So if I were to call you a mare without 

prefixing bad, you must not be offended."  "But I should 

though," said Belle.  "I was merely attempting to make you 

acquainted with a philological fact," said I.  "If mare, 

which in old English, and likewise in vulgar English, 

signifies a woman, sounds the same as mare, which in modern 

and polite English signifies a female horse, I can't help it.  

There is no such confusion of sounds in Armenian, not, at 

least, in the same instance.  Belle, in Armenian, woman is 

ghin, the same word, by the by, as our queen, whereas mare is 

madagh tzi, which signifies a female horse; and perhaps you 

will permit me to add, that a hard-mouthed jade is, in 

Armenian, madagh tzi hsdierah."



"I can't bear this much longer," said Belle.  "Keep yourself 

quiet," said I; "I wish to be gentle with you; and to 

convince you, we will skip hntal, and also for the present 

verbs of the first conjugation and proceed to the second.  

Belle, I will now select for you to conjugate the prettiest 

verb in Armenian; not only of the second, but also of all the 

four conjugations; that verb is siriel.  Here is the present 

tense:- siriem, siries, sire, siriemk, sirek, sirien.  You 

observe that it runs on just in the same manner as hntal, 

save and except that the e is substituted for a; and it will 

be as well to tell you that almost the only difference 

between the second, third, and fourth conjugation, and the 

first, is the substituting in the present, preterite and 

other tenses e or ou, or i for a; so you see that the 

Armenian verbs are by no means difficult.  Come on, Belle, 

and say siriem."  Belle hesitated.  "Pray oblige me, Belle, 

by saying siriem!"  Belle still appeared to hesitate.  "You 

must admit, Belle, that it is much softer than hntam."  "It 

is so," said Belle; "and to oblige you I will say siriem."  

"Very well indeed, Belle," said I. "No vartabied, or doctor, 

could have pronounced it better; and now, to show you how 

verbs act upon pronouns in Armenian, I will say siriem zkiez.  

Please to repeat siriem zkiez!"  "Siriem zkiez!" said Belle; 

"that last word is very hard to say."  "Sorry that you think 

so, Belle," said I.  "Now please to say siria zis."  Belle 

did so.  "Exceedingly well," said I.  "Now say, yerani the 

sireir zis."  "Yerani the sireir zis," said Belle.  

"Capital!" said I; "you have now said, I love you - love me - 

ah! would that you would love me!"



"And I have said all these things?" said Belle.  "Yes," said 

I; "you have said them in Armenian."  "I would have said them 

in no language that I understood," said Belle; "and it was 

very wrong of you to take advantage of my ignorance, and make 

me say such things."  "Why so?" said I; "if you said them, I 

said them too."  "You did so," said Belle; "but I believe you 

were merely bantering and jeering."  "As I told you before, 

Belle," said I, "the chief difficulty which I find in 

teaching you Armenian proceeds from your persisting in 

applying to yourself and me every example I give."  "Then you 

meant nothing after all," said Belle, raising her voice.  

"Let us proceed," said I; "sirietsi, I loved."  "You never 

loved any one but yourself," said Belle; "and what's more - "  

"Sirietsits, I will love," said I; "sirietsies, thou wilt 

love."  "Never one so thoroughly heartless," said Belle.  "I 

tell you what, Belle, you are becoming intolerable, but we 

will change the verb; or rather I will now proceed to tell 

you here, that some of the Armenian conjugations have their 

anomalies; one species of these I wish to bring before your 

notice.  As old Villotte says - from whose work I first 

contrived to pick up the rudiments of Armenian - 'Est 

verborum transitivorum, quorum infinitivus - ' but I forgot, 

you don't understand Latin.  He says there are certain 

transitive verbs, whose infinitive is in outsaniel; the 

preterite in outsi; the imperative in one; for example - 

parghatsout-saniem, I irritate - "



"You do, you do," said Belle; "and it will be better for both 

of us, if you leave off doing so."



"You would hardly believe, Belle," said I, "that the Armenian 

is in some respects closely connected with the Irish, but so 

it is; for example, that word parghatsout-saniem is evidently 

derived from the same root as feargaim, which, in Irish, is 

as much as to say I vex."



"You do, indeed," said Belle, sobbing.



"But how do you account for it?"



"O man, man!" said Belle, bursting into tears, "for what 

purpose do you ask a poor ignorant girl such a question, 

unless it be to vex and irritate her?  If you wish to display 

your learning, do so to the wise and instructed, and not to 

me, who can scarcely read or write.  Oh, leave off your 

nonsense; yet I know you will not do so, for it is the breath 

of your nostrils!  I could have wished we should have parted 

in kindness, but you will not permit it.  I have deserved 

better at your hands than such treatment.  The whole time we 

have kept company together in this place, I have scarcely had 

one kind word from you, but the strangest - " and here the 

voice of Belle was drowned in her sobs.



"I am sorry to see you take on so, dear Belle," said I.  "I 

really have given you no cause to be so unhappy; surely 

teaching you a little Armenian was a very innocent kind of 

diversion."



"Yes, but you went on so long, and in such a strange way, and 

made me repeat such strange examples, as you call them, that 

I could not bear it."



"Why, to tell you the truth, Belle, it's just my way; and I 

have dealt with you just as I would with - "



"A hard-mouthed jade," said Belle, "and you practising your 

horse-witchery upon her.  I have been of an unsubdued spirit, 

I acknowledge, but I was always kind to you; and if you have 

made me cry, it's a poor thing to boast of."



"Boast of!" said I; "a pretty thing indeed to boast of; I had 

no idea of making you cry.  Come, I beg your pardon; what 

more can I do?  Come, cheer up, Belle.  You were talking of 

parting; don't let us part, but depart, and that together."



"Our ways lie different," said Belle.



"I don't see why they should," said I.  "Come, let us he off 

to America together."



"To America together?" said Belle, looking full at me.



"Yes," said I; "where we will settle down in some forest, and 

conjugate the verb siriel conjugally."



"Conjugally?" said Belle.



"Yes," said I; "as man and wife in America, air yew ghin."



"You are jesting, as usual," said Belle.



"Not I, indeed.  Come, Belle, make up your mind, and let us 

be off to America; and leave priests, humbug, learning, and 

languages behind us."



"I don't think you are jesting," said Belle; "but I can 

hardly entertain your offers; however, young man, I thank 

you."



"You had better make up your mind at once," said I, "and let 

us be off.  I shan't make a bad husband, I assure you.  

Perhaps you think I am not worthy of you?  To convince you, 

Belle, that I am, I am ready to try a fall with you this 

moment upon the grass.  Brynhilda, the valkyrie, swore that 

no one should ever marry her who could not fling her down.  

Perhaps you have done the same.  The man who eventually 

married her, got a friend of his, who was called Sygurd, the 

serpent-killer, to wrestle with her, disguising him in his 

own armour.  Sygurd flung her down, and won her for his 

friend, though he loved her himself.  I shall not use a 

similar deceit, nor employ Jasper Petulengro to personate me 

- so get up, Belle, and I will do my best to fling you down."



"I require no such thing of you, or anybody," said Belle; 

"you are beginning to look rather wild."



"I every now and then do," said I; "come, Belle, what do you 

say?"



"I will say nothing at present on the subject," said Belle, 

"I must have time to consider."



"Just as you please," said I, "to-morrow I go to a fair with 

Mr. Petulengro, perhaps you will consider whilst I am away.  

Come, Belle, let us have some more tea.  I wonder whether we 

shall be able to procure tea as good as this in the American 

forest."

