




                        CHAPTER 18.



  CATHERINE SAT ALONE by the parlor fire- sat there for more than an

hour, lost in her meditations. Her aunt seemed to her aggressive and

foolish; and to see it so clearly- to judge Mrs. Penniman so

positively- made her feel old and grave. She did not resent the

imputation of weakness; it made no impression on her, for she had

not the sense of weakness, and she was not hurt at not being

appreciated. She had an immense respect for her father, and she felt

that to displease him would be a misdemeanor analogous to an act of

profanity in a great temple; but her purpose had slowly ripened, and

she believed that her prayers had purified it of its violence. The

evening advanced, and the lamp burnt dim without her noticing it;

her eyes were fixed upon her terrible plan. She knew her father was in

his study- that he had been there all the evening; from time to time

she expected to hear him move. She thought he would perhaps come, as

he sometimes came, into the parlor. At last the clock struck eleven,

and the house was wrapped in silence; the servants had gone to bed.

Catherine got up and went slowly to the door of the library, where she

waited a moment, motionless. Then she knocked, and then she waited

again. Her father had answered her, but she had not the courage to

turn the latch. What she had said to her aunt was true enough- she was

afraid of him; and in saying that she had no sense of weakness, she

meant that she was not afraid of herself. She heard him move within,

and he came and opened the door for her.

  "What is the matter?" asked the doctor. "You are standing there like

a ghost!"

  She went into the room, but it was some time before she contrived to

say what she had come to say. Her father, who was in his dressing gown

and slippers, had been busy at his writing table, and after looking at

her for some moments, and waiting for her to speak, he went and seated

himself at his papers again. His back was turned to her- she began

to hear the scratching of his pen. She remained near the door, with

her heart thumping beneath her bodice; and she was very glad that

his back was turned, for it seemed to her that she could more easily

address herself to this portion of his person than to his face. At

last she began, watching it while she spoke.

  "You told me that if I should have anything more to say about Mr.

Townsend you would be glad to listen to it."

  "Exactly, my dear," said the doctor, not turning round, but stopping

his pen.

  Catherine wished it would go on, but she herself continued: "I

thought I would tell you that I have not seen him again, but that I

should like to do so."

  "To bid him good-bye?" asked the doctor.

  The girl hesitated a moment. "He is not going away."

  The doctor wheeled slowly round in his chair, with a smile that

seemed to accuse her of an epigram; but extremes meet, and Catherine

had not intended one. "It is not to bid him good-bye, then?" her

father said.

  "No, Father, not that; at least not forever. I have not seen him

again, but I should like to see him," Catherine repeated.

  The doctor slowly rubbed his underlip with the feather of his quill.

  "Have you written to him?"

  "Yes, four times."

  "You have not dismissed him, then. Once would have done that."

  "No," said Catherine, "I have asked him- asked him to wait."

  Her father sat looking at her, and she was afraid he was going to

break out into wrath, his eyes were so fine and cold.

  "You are a dear, faithful child," he said, at last. "Come here to

your father." And he got up, holding out his hands toward her.

  The words were a surprise, and they gave her an exquisite joy. She

went to him, and he put his arm round her tenderly, soothingly; and

then he kissed her. After this he said, "Do you wish to make me very

happy?"

  "I should like to- but I am afraid I can't," Catherine answered.

  "You can if you will. It all depends on your will."

  "Is it to give him up?" said Catherine.

  "Yes, it is to give him up."

  And he held her still, with the same tenderness, looking into her

face and resting his eyes on her averted eyes. There was a long

silence; she wished he would release her.

  "You are happier than I, Father," she said, at last.

  "I have no doubt you are unhappy just now. But it is better to be

unhappy for three months and get over it, than for many years and

never get over it."

  "Yes, if that were so," said Catherine.

  "It would be so; I am sure of that." She answered nothing, and he

went on: "Have you no faith in my wisdom, in my tenderness, in my

solicitude for your future?"

  "Oh, Father!" murmured the girl.

  "Don't you suppose that I know something of men- their vices,

their follies, their falsities?"

  She detached herself, and turned upon him. "He is not vicious- he is

not false!"

  Her father kept looking at her with his sharp, pure eye. "You make

nothing of my judgment, then?"

  "I can't believe that!"

  "I don't ask you to believe it, but to take it on trust."

  Catherine was far from saying to herself that this was an

ingenious sophism; but she met the appeal none the less squarely.

"What has he done- what do you know?"

  "He has never done anything- he is a selfish idler."

  "Oh, Father, don't abuse him!" she exclaimed, pleadingly.

  "I don't mean to abuse him; it would be a great mistake. You may

do as you choose," he added, turning away.

  "I may see him again?"

  "Just as you choose."

  "Will you forgive me?"

  "By no means."

  "It will only be for once."

  "I don't know what you mean by once. You must either give him up

or continue the acquaintance."

  "I wish to explain- to tell him to wait."

  "To wait for what?"

  "Till you know him better- till you consent."

  "Don't tell him any such nonsense as that. I know him well enough,

and I shall never consent."

  "But we can wait a long time," said poor Catherine, in a tone

which was meant to express the humblest conciliation, but which had

upon her father's nerves the effect of an iteration not

characterized by tact.

  The doctor answered, however, quietly enough: "Of course; you can

wait till I die, if you like."

  Catherine gave a cry of natural horror.

  "Your engagement will have one delightful effect upon you; it will

make you extremely impatient for that event."

  Catherine stood staring, and the doctor enjoyed the point he had

made. It came to Catherine with the force- rather with the vague

impressiveness- of a logical axiom which it was not in her province to

controvert; and yet, though it was a scientific truth, she felt wholly

unable to accept it.

  "I would rather not marry, if that were true," she said.

  "Give me a proof of it, then; for it is beyond a question that by

engaging yourself to Morris Townsend you simply wait for my death."

  She turned away, feeling sick and faint; and the doctor went on:

"And if you wait for it with impatience, judge, if you please, what

his eagerness will be."

  Catherine turned it over- her father's words had such an authority

for her that her very thoughts were capable of obeying him. There

was a dreadful ugliness in it, which seemed to glare at her through

the interposing medium of her own feebler reason. Suddenly, however,

she had an inspiration- she almost knew it to be an inspiration.

  "If I don't marry before your death, I will not after," she said.

  To her father, it must be admitted, this seemed only another

epigram; and as obstinacy, in unaccomplished minds, does not usually

select such a mode of expression, he was the more surprised at this

wanton play of a fixed idea.

  "Do you mean that for an impertinence?" he inquired; an inquiry of

which, as he made it, he quite perceived the grossness.

  "An impertinence? Oh, Father, what terrible things you say!"

  "If you don't wait for my death, you might as well marry

immediately; there is nothing else to wait for."

  For some time Catherine made no answer; but finally she said, "I

think Morris- little by little- might persuade you."

  "I shall never let him speak to me again. I dislike him too much."

  Catherine gave a long, low sigh; she tried to stifle it, for she had

made up her mind that it was wrong to make a parade of her trouble,

and to endeavor to act upon her father by the meretricious aid of

emotion. Indeed, she even thought it wrong- in the sense of being

inconsiderate- to attempt to act upon his feelings at all; her part

was to effect some gentle, gradual change in his intellectual

perception of poor Morris's character. But the means of effecting such

a change were at present shrouded in mystery, and she felt miserably

helpless and hopeless. She had exhausted all arguments, all replies.

Her father might have pitied her, and in fact he did so; but he was

sure he was right.

  "There is one thing you can tell Mr. Townsend when you see him

again," he said, "that if you marry without my consent, I don't

leave you a farthing of money. That will interest him more than

anything else you can tell him."

  "That would be very right," Catherine answered. "I ought not in that

case to have a farthing of your money."

  "My dear child," the doctor observed, laughing, "your simplicity

is touching. Make that remark, in that tone, and with that

expression of countenance, to Mr. Townsend, and take a note of his

answer. It won't be polite- it will express irritation; and I shall be

glad of that, as it will put me in the right; unless, indeed- which is

perfectly possible- you should like him the better for being rude to

you."

  "He will never be rude to me," said Catherine, gently.

  "Tell him what I say, all the same."

  She looked at her father, and her quiet eyes filled with tears.

  "I think I will see him, then," she murmured, in her timid voice.

  "Exactly as you choose." And he went to the door and opened it for

her to go out. The movement gave her a terrible sense of his turning

her off.

  "It will be only once, for the present," she added, lingering a

moment.

  "Exactly as you choose," he repeated, standing there with his hand

on the door. "I have told you what I think. If you see him, you will

be an ungrateful, cruel child; you will have given your old father the

greatest pain of his life."

  This was more than the poor girl could bear; her tears overflowed,

and she moved toward her grimly consistent parent with a pitiful

cry. Her hands were raised in supplication, but he sternly evaded this

appeal. Instead of letting her sob out her misery on his shoulder,

he simply took her by the arm and directed her course across the

threshold, closing the door gently but firmly behind her. After he had

done so, he remained listening. For a long time there was no sound; he

knew that she was standing outside. He was sorry for her, as I have

said; but he was so sure he was right. At last he heard her move away,

and then her footstep creaked faintly upon the stairs.

  The doctor took several turns round his study, with his hands in his

pockets, and a thin sparkle, possibly of irritation, but partly also

of something like humor, in his eye. "By Jove," he said to himself, "I

believe she will stick- I believe she will stick!" And this idea of

Catherine "sticking" appeared to have a comical side, and to offer a

prospect of entertainment. He determined, as he said to himself, to

see it out.
