




                        CHAPTER 19.



  IT WAS for reasons connected with this determination that on the

morrow he sought a few words of private conversation with Mrs.

Penniman. He sent for her to the library, and he there informed her

that he hoped very much that, as regarded this affair of

Catherine's, she would mind her p's and q's.

  "I don't know what you mean by such an expression," said his sister.

"You speak as if I were learning the alphabet."

  "The alphabet of common sense is something you will never learn,"

the doctor permitted himself to respond.

  "Have you called me here to insult me?" Mrs. Penniman inquired.

  "Not at all. Simply to advise you. You have taken up young Townsend;

that's your own affair. I have nothing to do with your sentiments,

your fancies, your affections, your delusions; but what I request of

you is that you will keep these things to yourself. I have explained

my views to Catherine; she understands them perfectly, and anything

that she does further in the way of encouraging Mr. Townsend's

attentions will be in deliberate opposition to my wishes. Anything

that you should do in the way of giving her aid and comfort will be-

permit me the expression- distinctly treasonable. You know high

treason is a capital offense: Take care how you incur the penalty."

  Mrs. Penniman threw back her head, with a certain expansion of the

eye which she occasionally practiced. "It seems to me that you talk

like a great autocrat."

  "I talk like my daughter's father."

  "Not like your sister's brother," cried Lavinia.

  "My dear Lavinia," said the doctor, "I sometimes wonder whether I am

your brother, we are so extremely different. In spite of

differences, however, we can, at a pinch, understand each other; and

that is the essential thing just now. Walk straight with regard to Mr.

Townsend; that's all I ask. It is highly probable you have been

corresponding with him for the last three weeks- perhaps even seeing

him. I don't ask you- you needn't tell me." He had a moral

conviction that she would contrive to tell a fib about the matter,

which it would disgust him to listen to. "Whatever you have done, stop

doing it; that's all I wish."

  "Don't you wish also by chance to murder your child?" Mrs.

Penniman inquired.

  "On the contrary, I wish to make her live and be happy."

  "You will kill her: She passed a dreadful night."

  "She won't die of one dreadful night, nor of a dozen. Remember

that I am a distinguished physician."

  Mrs. Penniman hesitated a moment; then she risked her retort.

"Your being a distinguished physician has not prevented you from

already losing two members of your family."

  She had risked it, but her brother gave her such a terribly incisive

look- a look so like a surgeon's lancet- that she was frightened at

her courage. And he answered her, in words that corresponded to the

look, "It may not prevent me, either, from losing the society of still

another."

  Mrs. Penniman took herself off with whatever air of depreciated

merit was at her command, and repaired to Catherine's room, where

the poor girl was closeted. She knew all about her dreadful night, for

the two had met again, the evening before, after Catherine left her

father. Mrs. Penniman was on the landing of the second floor when

her niece came upstairs; it was not remarkable that a person of so

much subtlety should have discovered that Catherine had been shut up

with the doctor. It was still less remarkable that she should have

felt an extreme curiosity to learn the result of this interview, and

that this sentiment, combined with her great amiability and

generosity, should have prompted her to regret the sharp words

lately exchanged between her niece and herself. As the unhappy girl

came into sight in the dusky corridor, she made a lively demonstration

of sympathy. Catherine's bursting heart was equally oblivious; she

only knew that her aunt was taking her into her arms. Mrs. Penniman

drew her into Catherine's own room, and the two women sat there

together far into the small hours, the younger one with her head on

the other's lap, sobbing, and sobbing at first in a soundless, stifled

manner, and then at last perfectly still. It gratified Mrs. Penniman

to be able to feel conscientiously that this scene virtually removed

the interdict which Catherine had placed upon her indulging in further

communion with Morris Townsend. She was not gratified, however,

when, in coming back to her niece's room before breakfast, she found

that Catherine had risen and was preparing herself for this meal.

  "You should not go to breakfast," she said. "You are not well

enough, after your fearful night."

  "Yes, I am very well, and I am only afraid of being late."

  "I can't understand you," Mrs. Penniman cried. "You should stay in

bed for three days."

  "Oh, I could never do that," said Catherine, to whom this idea

presented no attractions.

  Mrs. Penniman was in despair; and she noted, with extreme annoyance,

that the trace of the night's tears had completely vanished from

Catherine's eyes. She had a most impracticable physique. "What

effect do you expect to have upon your father," her aunt demanded, "if

you come plumping down, without a vestige of any sort of feeling, as

if nothing in the world had happened?"

  "He would not like me to lie in bed," said Catherine, simply.

  "All the more reason for your doing it. How else do you expect to

move him?"

  Catherine thought a little. "I don't know how; but not in that

way. I wish to be just as usual." And she finished dressing- and,

according to her aunt's expression, went plumping down into the

paternal presence. She was really too modest for consistent pathos.

  And yet it was perfectly true that she had had a dreadful night.

Even after Mrs. Penniman left her she had had no sleep; she lay

staring at the uncomforting gloom, with her eyes and ears filled

with the movement with which her father had turned her out of his

room, and of the words in which he had told her that she was a

heartless daughter. Her heart was breaking; she had heart enough for

that. At moments it seemed to her that she believed him, and that to

do what she was doing a girl must indeed be bad. She was bad; but

she couldn't help it. She would try to appear good, even if her

heart were perverted; and from time to time she had a fancy that she

might accomplish something by ingenious concessions to form, though

she should persist in caring for Morris. Catherine's ingenuities

were indefinite, and we are not called upon to expose their

hollowness. The best of them, perhaps, showed itself in that freshness

of aspect which was so discouraging to Mrs. Penniman, who was amazed

at the absence of haggardness in a young woman who for a whole night

had lain quivering beneath a father's curse. Poor Catherine was

conscious of her freshness; it gave her a feeling about the future

which rather added to the weight upon her mind. It seemed a proof that

she was strong and solid and dense, and would live to a great age-

longer than might be generally convenient; and this idea was pressing,

for it appeared to saddle her with a pretension the more, just when

the cultivation of any pretension was inconsistent with her doing

right. She wrote that day to Morris Townsend, requesting him to come

and see her on the morrow, using very few words, and explaining

nothing. She would explain everything face to face.
