




                        CHAPTER 17.



  MRS. PENNIMAN told Catherine that evening- the two ladies were

sitting in the back parlor- that she had had an interview with

Morris Townsend; and on receiving this news the girl started with a

sense of pain. She felt angry for the moment; it was almost the

first time she had ever felt angry. It seemed to her that her aunt was

meddlesome; and from this came a vague apprehension that she would

spoil something.

  "I don't see why you should have seen him. I don't think it was

right," Catherine said.

  "I was so sorry for him- it seemed to me someone ought to see him."

  "No one but I," said Catherine, who felt as if she were making the

most presumptuous speech of her life, and yet at the same time had

an instinct that she was right in doing so.

  "But you wouldn't, my dear," Aunt Lavinia rejoined, "and I didn't

know what might have become of him."

  "I have not seen him because my father has forbidden it,"

Catherine said, very simply.

  There was a simplicity in this, indeed, which fairly vexed Mrs.

Penniman. "If your father forbade you to go to sleep, I suppose you

would keep awake!" she commented.

  Catherine looked at her. "I don't understand you. You seem to me

very strange."

  "Well, my dear, you will understand me someday!" And Mrs.

Penniman, who was reading the evening paper, which she perused daily

from the first line to the last, resumed her occupation. She wrapped

herself in silence; she was determined Catherine should ask her for an

account of her interview with Morris. But Catherine was silent for

so long that she almost lost patience; and she was on the point of

remarking to her that she was very heartless, when the girl at last

spoke.

  "What did he say?" she asked.

  "He said he is ready to marry you any day, in spite of everything."

  Catherine made no answer to this, and Mrs. Penniman almost lost

patience again; owing to which she at last volunteered the information

that Morris looked very handsome, but terribly haggard.

  "Did he seem sad?" asked her niece.

  "He was dark under the eyes," said Mrs. Penniman. "So different from

when I first saw him; though I am not sure that if I had seen him in

this condition the first time, I should not have been even more struck

with him. There is something brilliant in his very misery."

  This was, to Catherine's sense, a vivid picture, and though she

disapproved, she felt herself gazing at it. "Where did you see him?"

she asked, presently.

  "In- in the Bowery; at a confectioner's," said Mrs. Penniman, who

had a general idea that she ought to dissemble a little.

  "Whereabouts is the place?" Catherine inquired, after another pause.

  "Do you wish to go there, my dear?" said her aunt.

  "Oh no." And Catherine got up from her seat and went to the fire,

where she stood looking awhile at the glowing coals.

  "Why are you so dry, Catherine?" Mrs. Penniman said at last.

  "So dry?"

  "So cold- so irresponsive."

  The girl turned very quickly. "Did he say that?"

  Mrs. Penniman hesitated a moment. "I will tell you what he said.

He said he feared only one thing- that you would be afraid."

  "Afraid of what?"

  "Afraid of your father."

  Catherine turned back to the fire again, and then, after a pause,

she said, "I am afraid of my father."

  Mrs. Penniman got quickly up from her chair and approached her

niece. "Do you mean to give him up, then?"

  Catherine for some time never moved; she kept her eyes on the coals.

At last she raised her head and looked at her aunt. "Why do you push

me so?" she asked.

  "I don't push you. When have I spoken to you before?"

  "It seems to me that you have spoken to me several times."

  "I am afraid it is necessary, then, Catherine," said Mrs.

Penniman, with a good deal of solemnity. "I am afraid you don't feel

the importance"- she paused a little; Catherine was looking at her-

"the importance of not disappointing that gallant young heart!" And

Mrs. Penniman went back to her chair by the lamp, and, with a little

jerk, picked up the evening paper again.

  Catherine stood there before the fire, with her hands behind her,

looking at her aunt, to whom it seemed that the girl had never had

just this dark fixedness in her gaze. "I don't think you understand or

that you know me," she said.

  "If I don't, it is not wonderful; you trust me so little."

  Catherine made no attempt to deny this charge, and for some time

more nothing was said. But Mrs. Penniman's imagination was restless,

and the evening paper failed on this occasion to enchain it.

  "If you succumb to the dread of your father's wrath," she said, "I

don't know what will become of us."

  "Did he tell you to say these things to me?"

  "He told me to use my influence."

  "You must be mistaken," said Catherine. "He trusts me."

  "I hope he may never repent of it!" And Mrs. Penniman gave a

little sharp slap to her newspaper. She knew not what to make of her

niece, who had suddenly become stern and contradictious.

  This tendency on Catherine's part was presently even more

apparent. "You had much better not make any more appointments with Mr.

Townsend," she said. "I don't think it is right."

  Mrs. Penniman rose with considerable majesty. "My poor child, are

you jealous of me?" she inquired.

  "Oh, Aunt Lavinia!" murmured Catherine, blushing.

  "I don't think it is your place to teach me what is right."

  On this point Catherine made no concession. "It can't be right to

deceive."

  "I certainly have not deceived you!"

  "Yes; but I promised my father-"

  "I have no doubt you promised your father. But I have promised him

nothing."

  Catherine had to admit this, and she did so in silence. "I don't

believe Mr. Townsend himself likes it," she said, at last.

  "Doesn't like meeting me?"

  "Not in secret."

  "It was not in secret; the place was full of people."

  "But it was a secret place- away off in the Bowery."

  Mrs. Penniman flinched a little. "Gentlemen enjoy such things,"

she remarked, presently. "I know what gentlemen like."

  "My father wouldn't like it, if he knew."

  "Pray, do you propose to inform him?" Mrs. Penniman inquired.

  "No, Aunt Lavinia. But please don't do it again."

  "If I do it again you will inform him- is that what you mean? I

do not share your dread of my brother; I have always known how to

defend my own position. But I shall certainly never again take any

step on your behalf; you are much too thankless. I knew you were not a

spontaneous nature, but I believed you were firm, and I told your

father that he would find you so. I am disappointed, but your father

will not be." And with this Mrs. Penniman offered her niece a brief

good-night, and withdrew to her own apartment.

