




                         CHAPTER 7.



  HE WAS, however, by no means so much in earnest as this might seem

to indicate; and, indeed, he was more than anything else amused with

the whole situation. He was not in the least in a state of tension

or of vigilance with regard to Catherine's prospects; he was even on

his guard against the ridicule that might attach itself to the

spectacle of a house thrown into agitation by its daughter and heiress

receiving attentions unprecedented in its annals. More than this, he

went so far as to promise himself some entertainment from the little

drama- if drama it was- of which Mrs. Penniman desired to represent

the ingenious Mr. Townsend as the hero. He had no intention, as yet,

of regulating the denouement. He was perfectly willing, as Elizabeth

had suggested, to give the young man the benefit of every doubt. There

was no great danger in it; for Catherine, at the age of twenty-two,

was, after all, a rather mature blossom, such as could be plucked from

the stem only by a vigorous jerk. The fact that Morris Townsend was

poor, was not of necessity against him; the doctor had never made up

his mind that his daughter should marry a rich man. The fortune she

would inherit struck him as a very sufficient provision for two

reasonable persons, and if a penniless swain who could give a good

account of himself should enter the lists, he should be judged quite

upon his personal merits. There were other things besides. The

doctor thought it very vulgar to be precipitate in accusing people

of mercenary motives, inasmuch as his door had as yet not been in

the least besieged by fortune hunters; and, lastly, he was very

curious to see whether Catherine might really be loved for her moral

worth. He smiled as he reflected that poor Mr. Townsend had been

only twice to the house, and he said to Mrs. Penniman that the next

time he should come she must ask him to dinner.

  He came very soon again, and Mrs. Penniman had of course great

pleasure in executing this mission. Morris Townsend accepted her

invitation with equal good grace, and the dinner took place a few days

later. The doctor had said to himself, justly enough, that they must

not have the young man alone; this would partake too much of the

nature of encouragement. So two or three other persons were invited;

but Morris Townsend, though he was by no means the ostensible, was the

real occasion of the feast. There is every reason to suppose that he

desired to make a good impression; and if he fell short of this

result, it was not for want of a good deal of intelligent effort.

The doctor talked to him very little during dinner; but he observed

him attentively, and after the ladies had gone out he pushed him the

wine and asked him several questions. Morris was not a young man who

needed to be pressed, and he found quite enough encouragement in the

superior quality of the claret. The doctor's wine was admirable, and

it may be communicated to the reader that while he sipped it Morris

reflected that a cellarful of good liquor- there was evidently a

cellarful here- would be a most attractive idiosyncrasy in a

father-in-law. The doctor was struck with his appreciative guest; he

saw that he was not a commonplace young man. "He has ability," said

Catherine's father, "decided ability; he has a very good head if he

chooses to use it. And he is uncommonly well turned out; quite the

sort of figure that pleases the ladies; but I don't think I like him."

The doctor, however, kept his reflections to himself, and talked to

his visitor about foreign lands, concerning which Morris offered him

more information than he was ready, as he mentally phrased it, to

swallow. Doctor Sloper had traveled but little, and he took the

liberty of not believing everything that his talkative guest narrated.

He prided himself on being something of a physiognomist; and while the

young man, chatting with easy assurance, puffed his cigar and filled

his glass again, the doctor sat with his eyes quietly fixed on his

bright, expressive face. "He has the assurance of the devil

himself!" said Morris's host. "I don't think I ever saw such

assurance. And his powers of invention are most remarkable. He is very

knowing; they were not so knowing as that in my time. And a good head,

did I say? I should think so- after a bottle of Madeira, and a

bottle and a half of claret!"

  After dinner Morris Townsend went and stood before Catherine, who

was standing before the fire in her red satin gown.

  "He doesn't like me- he doesn't like me at all," said the young man.

  "Who doesn't like you?" asked Catherine.

  "Your father; extraordinary man!"

  "I don't see how you know," said Catherine, blushing.

  "I feel; I am very quick to feel."

  "Perhaps you are mistaken."

  "Ah, well, you ask him, and you will see."

  "I would rather not ask him, if there is any danger of his saying

what you think."

  Morris looked at her with an air of mock melancholy.

  "It wouldn't give you any pleasure to contradict him?"

  "I never contradict him," said Catherine.

  "Will you hear me abused without opening your lips in my defense?"

  "My father won't abuse you. He doesn't know you enough."

  Morris Townsend gave a loud laugh, and Catherine began to blush

again.

  "I shall never mention you," she said, to take refuge from her

confusion.

  "That is very well, but it is not quite what I should have liked you

to say. I should have liked you to say, 'If my father doesn't think

well of you, what does it matter?'"

  "Ah, but it would matter; I couldn't say that!" the girl exclaimed.

  He looked at her for a moment, smiling a little; and the doctor,

if he had been watching him just then, would have seen a gleam of fine

impatience in the sociable softness of his eye. But there was no

impatience in his rejoinder- none, at least, save what was expressed

in a little appealing sigh. "Ah, well, then I must not give up the

hope of bringing him round."

  He expressed it more frankly to Mrs. Penniman later in the

evening. But before that he sang two or three songs at Catherine's

timid request; not that he flattered himself that this would help to

bring her father round. He had a sweet light tenor voice, and, when he

had finished, everyone made some exclamation- everyone, that is,

save Catherine, who remained intensely silent. Mrs. Penniman

declared that his manner of singing was "most artistic," and Doctor

Sloper said it was "very taking- very taking, indeed," speaking loudly

and distinctly, but with a certain dryness.

  "He doesn't like me- he doesn't like me at all," said Morris

Townsend, addressing the aunt in the same manner as he had done the

niece. "He thinks I am all wrong."

  Unlike her niece, Mrs. Penniman asked for no explanation. She only

smiled very sweetly, as if she understood everything; and, unlike

Catherine too, she made no attempt to contradict him. "Pray, what does

it matter?" she murmured, softly.

  "Ah, you say the right thing!" said Morris, greatly to the

gratification of Mrs. Penniman, who prided herself on always saying

the right thing.

  The doctor, the next time he saw his sister Elizabeth, let her

know that he had made the acquaintance of Lavinia's protege.

  "Physically," he said, "he's uncommonly well set up. As an

anatomist, it is really a pleasure to me to see such a beautiful

structure; although, if people were all like him, I suppose there

would be very little need for doctors."

  "Don't you see anything in people but their bones?" Mrs. Almond

rejoined. "What do you think of him as a father?"

  "As a father? Thank heaven, I am not his father!"

  "No; but you are Catherine's. Lavinia tells me she is in love."

  "She must get over it. He is not a gentleman."

  "Ah, take care! Remember that he is a branch of the Townsends."

  "He is not what I call a gentleman; he has not the soul of one. He

is extremely insinuating; but it's a vulgar nature. I saw through it

in a minute. He is altogether too familiar- I hate familiarity. He

is a plausible coxcomb."

  "Ah, well," said Mrs. Almond, "if you make up your mind so easily,

it's a great advantage."

  "I don't make up my mind easily. What I tell you is the result of

thirty years of observation; and in order to be able to form that

judgment in a single evening, I have had to spend a lifetime in

study."

  "Very possibly you are right. But the thing is for Catherine to

see it."

  "I will present her with a pair of spectacles!" said the doctor.
