




                        CHAPTER 30.



  IT WAS ALMOST the last outbreak of passion of her life; at least,

she never indulged in another that the world knew anything about.

But this one was long and terrible; she flung herself on the sofa

and gave herself up to her grief She hardly knew what had happened;

ostensibly she had only had a difference with her lover, as other

girls had had before, and the thing was not only not a rupture, but

she was under no obligation to regard it even as a menace.

Nevertheless, she felt a wound, even if he had not dealt it; it seemed

to her that a mask had suddenly fallen from his face. He had wished to

get away from her; he had been angry and cruel, and said strange

things, with strange looks. She was smothered and stunned; she

buried her head in the cushions, sobbing and talking to herself. But

at last she raised herself, with the fear that either her father or

Mrs. Penniman would come in; and then she sat there, staring before

her, while the room grew darker. She said to herself that perhaps he

would come back to tell her he had not meant what he said; and she

listened for his ring at the door, trying to believe that this was

probable. A long time passed, but Morris remained absent; the

shadows gathered; the evening settled down on the meager elegance of

the light, clear-colored room; the fire went out. When it had grown

dark, Catherine went to the window and looked out; she stood there for

half an hour, on the mere chance that he would come up the steps. At

last she turned away, for she saw her father come in. He had seen

her at the window looking out, and he stopped a moment at the bottom

of the white steps, and gravely, with an air of exaggerated

courtesy, lifted his hat to her. The gesture was so incongruous to the

condition she was in, this stately tribute of respect to a poor girl

despised and forsaken was so out of place, that the thing gave her a

kind of horror, and she hurried away to her room. It seemed to her

that she had given Morris up.

  She had to show herself half an hour later, and she was sustained at

table by the immensity of her desire that her father should not

perceive that anything had happened. This was a great help to her

afterward, and it served her (though never as much as she supposed)

from the first. On this occasion Doctor Sloper was rather talkative.

He told a great many stories about a wonderful poodle that he had seen

at the house of an old lady whom he visited professionally.

Catherine not only tried to appear to listen to the anecdotes of the

poodle, but she endeavored to interest herself in them, so as not to

think of her scene with Morris. That perhaps was an hallucination;

he was mistaken, she was jealous; people didn't change like that

from one day to another. Then she knew that she had had doubts before-

strange suspicions, that were at once vague and acute- and that he had

been different ever since her return from Europe: whereupon she

tried again to listen to her father, who told a story so remarkably

well. Afterward she went straight to her own room; it was beyond her

strength to undertake to spend the evening with her aunt. All the

evening, alone, she questioned herself. Her trouble was terrible;

but was it a thing of her imagination, engendered by an extravagant

sensibility, or did it represent a clear-cut reality, and had the

worst that was possible actually come to pass? Mrs. Penniman, with a

degree of tact that was as unusual as it was commendable, took the

line of leaving her alone. The truth is, that her suspicions having

been aroused, she indulged a desire, natural to a timid person, that

the explosion should be localized. So long as the air still vibrated

she kept out of the way.

  She passed and repassed Catherine's door several times in the course

of the evening, as if she expected to hear a plaintive moan behind it.

But the room remained perfectly still; and accordingly the last

thing before retiring to her own couch, she applied for admittance.

Catherine was sitting up, and had a book that she pretended to be

reading. She had no wish to go to bed, for she had no expectation of

sleeping. After Mrs. Penniman had left her she sat up half the

night, and she offered her visitor no inducement to remain. Her aunt

came stealing in very gently, and approached her with great solemnity.

  "I am afraid you are in trouble, my dear. Can I do anything to

help you?"

  "I am not in any trouble whatever, and do not need any help," said

Catherine, fibbing roundly, and proving thereby that not only our

faults, but our most involuntary misfortunes, tend to corrupt our

morals.

  "Has nothing happened to you?"

  "Nothing whatever."

  "Are you very sure, dear?"

  "Perfectly sure."

  "And can I really do nothing for you?"

  "Nothing, Aunt, but kindly leave me alone," said Catherine.

  Mrs. Penniman, though she had been afraid of too warm a welcome

before, was now disappointed at so cold a one; and in relating

afterward, as she did to many persons, and with considerable

variations of detail, the history of the termination of her niece's

engagement, she was usually careful to mention that the young lady, on

a certain occasion, had "hustled" her out of the room. It was

characteristic of Mrs. Penniman that she related this fact, not in the

least out of malignity to Catherine, whom she very sufficiently

pitied, but simply from a natural disposition to embellish any subject

that she touched.

  Catherine, as I have said, sat up half the night, as if she still

expected to hear Morris Townsend ring at the door. On the morrow

this expectation was less unreasonable; but it was not gratified by

the reappearance of the young man. Neither had he written; there was

not a word of explanation or reassurance. Fortunately for Catherine,

she could take refuge from her excitement, which had now become

intense, in her determination that her father should see nothing of

it. How well she deceived her father we shall have occasion to

learn; but her innocent arts were of little avail before a person of

the rare perspicacity of Mrs. Penniman. This lady easily saw that

she was agitated, and if there was any agitation going forward, Mrs.

Penniman was not a person to forfeit her natural share in it. She

returned to the charge the next evening, and requested her niece to

confide in her- to unburden her heart. Perhaps she should be able to

explain certain things that now seemed dark, and that she knew more

about than Catherine supposed. If Catherine had been frigid the

night before, today she was haughty.

  "You are completely mistaken, and I have not the least idea what you

mean. I don't know what you are trying to fasten on me, and I have

never had less need of anyone's explanations in my life."

  In this way the girl delivered herself, and from hour to hour kept

her aunt at bay. From hour to hour Mrs. Penniman's curiosity grew. She

would have given her little finger to know what Morris had said and

done, what tone he had taken, what pretext he had found. She wrote

to him, naturally, to request an interview; but she received, as

naturally, no answer to her petition. Morris was not in a writing

mood; for Catherine had addressed him two short notes which met with

no acknowledgment. These notes were so brief that I may give them

entire. "Won't you give me some sign that you didn't mean to be so

cruel as you seemed on Tuesday?"- that was the first; the other was

a little longer. "If I was unreasonable or suspicious on Tuesday- if I

annoyed you or troubled you in any way- I beg your forgiveness, and

I promise never again to be so foolish. I am punished enough, and I

don't understand. Dear Morris, you are killing me!" These notes were

dispatched on the Friday and Saturday; but Saturday and Sunday

passed without bringing the poor girl the satisfaction she desired.

Her punishment accumulated; she continued to bear it, however, with

a good deal of superficial fortitude. On Saturday morning, the doctor,

who had been watching in silence, spoke to his sister Lavinia.

  "The thing has happened- the scoundrel has backed out!"

  "Never!" cried Mrs. Penniman, who had bethought herself what she

should say to Catherine, but was not provided with a line of defense

against her brother, so that indignant negation was the only weapon in

her hands.

  "He has begged for a reprieve, then, if you like that better!"

  "It seems to make you very happy that your daughter's affections

have been trifled with."

  "It does," said the doctor, "for I had foretold it! It's a great

pleasure to be in the right."

  "Your pleasures make one shudder!" his sister exclaimed.

  Catherine went rigidly through her usual occupations; that is, to

the point of going with her aunt to church on Sunday morning. She

generally went to afternoon service as well; but on this occasion

her courage faltered, and she begged of Mrs. Penniman to go without

her.

  "I am sure you have a secret," said Mrs. Penniman, with great

significance, looking at her rather grimly.

  "If I have, I shall keep it," Catherine answered, turning away.

  Mrs. Penniman started for church; but before she had arrived, she

stopped and turned back, and before twenty minutes had elapsed she

reentered the house, looked into the empty parlors, and then went

upstairs and knocked at Catherine's door. She got no answer; Catherine

was not in her room, and Mrs. Penniman presently ascertained that

she was not in the house. "She has gone to him! She has fled!" Lavinia

cried, clasping her hands with admiration and envy. But she soon

perceived that Catherine had taken nothing with her- all her

personal property in her room was intact- and then she jumped at the

hypothesis that the girl had gone forth, not in tenderness, but in

resentment. "She has followed him to his own door! She has burst

upon him in his own apartment!" It was in these terms that Mrs.

Penniman depicted to herself her niece's errand, which, viewed in this

light, gratified her sense of the picturesque only a shade less

strongly than the idea of a clandestine marriage. To visit one's

lover, with tears and reproaches, at his own residence, was an image

so agreeable to Mrs. Penniman's mind that she felt a sort of aesthetic

disappointment at its lacking, in this case, the harmonious

accompaniments of darkness and storm. A quiet Sunday afternoon

appeared an inadequate setting for it; and, indeed, Mrs. Penniman

was quite out of humor with the conditions of the time, which passed

very slowly as she sat in the front parlor, in her bonnet and her

cashmere shawl, awaiting Catherine's return.

  This event at last took place. She saw her- at the window- mount the

steps, and she went to await her in the hall, where she pounced upon

her as soon as she had entered the house, and drew her into the

parlor, closing the door with solemnity. Catherine was flushed, and

her eye was bright. Mrs. Penniman hardly knew what to think.

  "May I venture to ask where you have been?" she demanded.

  "I have been to take a walk," said Catherine. "I thought you had

gone to church."

  "I did go to church; but the service was shorter than usual. And

pray where did you walk?"

  "I don't know!" said Catherine.

  "Your ignorance is most extraordinary! Dear Catherine, you can trust

me."

  "What am I to trust you with?"

  "With your secret- your sorrow."

  "I have no sorrow!" said Catherine, fiercely.

  "My poor child," Mrs. Penniman insisted, "you can't deceive me. I

know everything. I have been requested to- a- to converse with you."

  "I don't want to converse!"

  "It will relieve you. Don't you know Shakespeare's lines- 'The grief

that does not speak'! My dear girl, it is better as it is!"

  "What is better?" Catherine asked.

  She was really too perverse. A certain amount of perversity was to

be allowed for in a young lady whose lover had thrown her over; but

not such an amount as would prove inconvenient to his apologists.

"That you should be reasonable," said Mrs. Penniman, with some

sternness, "that you should take counsel of worldly prudence, and

submit to practical considerations; that you should agree to- a-

separate."

  Catherine had been ice up to this moment, but at this word she

flamed up. "Separate? What do you know about our separating?"

  Mrs. Penniman shook her head with a sadness in which there was

almost a sense of injury. "Your pride is my pride, and your

susceptibilities are mine. I see your side perfectly, but I also"- and

she smiled with melancholy suggestiveness- "I also see the situation

as a whole!"

  This suggestiveness was lost upon Catherine, who repeated her

violent inquiry. "Why do you talk about separation; what do you know

about it?"

  "We must study resignation," said Mrs. Penniman, hesitating, but

sententious at a venture.

  "Resignation to what?"

  "To a change of- of our plans."

  "My plans have not changed!" said Catherine, with a little laugh.

  "Ah, but Mr. Townsend's have," her aunt answered, very gently.

  "What do you mean?"

  There was an imperious brevity in the tone of this inquiry,

against which Mrs. Penniman felt bound to protest; the information

with which she had undertaken to supply her niece was after all a

favor. She had tried sharpness, and she had tried sternness; but

neither would do; she was shocked at the girl's obstinacy. "Ah

well," she said, "if he hasn't told you!" and she turned away.

  Catherine watched her a moment in silence; then she hurried after

her, stopping her before she reached the door. "Told me what? What

do you mean? What are you hinting at and threatening me with?"

  "Isn't it broken off?" asked Mrs. Penniman.

  "My engagement? Not in the least!"

  "I beg your pardon in that case. I have spoken too soon!"

  "Too soon? Soon or late," Catherine broke out, "you speak

foolishly and cruelly!"

  "What has happened between you then?" asked her aunt, struck by

the sincerity of this cry, "for something certainly has happened."

  "Nothing has happened but that I love him more and more!"

  Mrs. Penniman was silent an instant. "I suppose that's the reason

you went to see him this afternoon."

  Catherine flushed as if she had been struck. "Yes, I did go to see

him! But that's my own business."

  "Very well, then; we won't talk about it." And Mrs. Penniman moved

toward the door again; but she was stopped by a sudden imploring cry

from the girl.

  "Aunt Lavinia, where has he gone?"

  "Ah, you admit then that he has gone away! Didn't they know at his

house?"

  "They said he had left town. I asked no more questions; I was

ashamed," said Catherine, simply enough.

  "You needn't have taken so compromising a step if you had had a

little more confidence in me," Mrs. Penniman observed, with a good

deal of grandeur.

  "Is it to New Orleans?" Catherine went on, irrelevantly.

  It was the first time Mrs. Penniman had heard of New Orleans in this

connection; but she was averse to letting Catherine know that she

was in the dark. She attempted to strike an illumination from the

instructions she had received from Morris. "My dear Catherine," she

said, "when a separation has been agreed upon, the farther he goes

away the better."

  "Agreed upon? Has he agreed upon it with you?" A consummate sense of

her aunt's meddlesome folly had come over her during the last five

minutes, and she was sickened at the thought that Mrs. Penniman had

been let loose, as it were, upon her happiness.

  "He certainly has sometimes advised with me," said Mrs. Penniman.

  "Is it you, then, that has changed him and made him so unnatural?"

Catherine cried. "Is it you that have worked on him and taken him from

me? He doesn't belong to you, and I don't see how you have anything to

do with what is between us! Is it you that have made this plot, and

told him to leave me? How could you be so wicked, so cruel? What

have I ever done to you? Why can't you leave me alone? I was afraid

you would spoil everything; for you do spoil everything you touch! I

was afraid of you all the time we were abroad; I had no rest when I

thought that you were always talking to him." Catherine went on with

growing vehemence, pouring out, in her bitterness and in the

clairvoyance of her passion (which suddenly, jumping all processes,

made her judge her aunt finally and without appeal), the uneasiness

which had lain for so many months upon her heart.

  Mrs. Penniman was scared and bewildered; she saw no prospect of

introducing her little account of the purity of Morris's motives. "You

are a most ungrateful girl!" she cried. "Do you scold me for talking

with him? I'm sure we never talked of anything but you!"

  "Yes; and that was the way you worried him; you made him tired of my

very name! I wish you had never spoken of me to him; I never asked

your help!"

  "I am sure if it hadn't been for me he would never have come to

the house, and you would never have known that he thought of you,"

Mrs. Penniman rejoined, with a good deal of justice.

  "I wish he never had come to the house, and that I never had known

it! That's better than this," said poor Catherine.

  "You are a very ungrateful girl," Aunt Lavinia repeated.

  Catherine's outbreak of anger and the sense of wrong gave her, while

they lasted, the satisfaction that comes from all assertion of

force; they hurried her along, and there is always a sort of

pleasure in cleaving the air. But at bottom she hated to be violent,

and she was conscious of no aptitude for organized resentment. She

calmed herself with a great effort, but with great rapidity, and

walked about the room a few moments, trying to say to herself that her

aunt had meant everything for the best. She did not succeed in

saying it with much conviction, but after a little she was able to

speak quietly enough.

  "I am not ungrateful, but I am very unhappy. It's hard to be

grateful for that," she said. "Will you please tell me where he is?"

  "I haven't the least idea; I am not in secret correspondence with

him!" And Mrs. Penniman wished, indeed, that she were, so that she

might let him know how Catherine abused her, after all she had done.

  "Was it a plan of his, then, to break off-?" By this time

Catherine had become completely quiet.

  Mrs. Penniman began again to have a glimpse of her chance for

explaining. "He shrunk- he shrunk," she said. "He lacked courage,

but it was the courage to injure you! He couldn't bear to bring down

on you your father's curse."

  Catherine listened to this with her eyes fixed upon her aunt, and

continued to gaze at her for some time afterward. "Did he tell you

to say that?"

  "He told me to say many things- all so delicate, so

discriminating; and he told me to tell you he hoped you wouldn't

despise him."

  "I don't," said Catherine; and then she added, "And will he stay

away forever?"

  "Oh, forever is a long time. Your father, perhaps, won't live

forever."

  "Perhaps not."

  "I am sure you appreciate- you understand- even though your heart

bleeds," said Mrs. Penniman. "You doubtless think him too

scrupulous. So do I, but I respect his scruples. What he asks of you

is that you should do the same."

  Catherine was still gazing at her aunt, but she spoke at last as

if she had not heard or not understood her. "It has been a regular

plan, then. He has broken it off deliberately; he has given me up."

  "For the present, dear Catherine; he has put it off, only."

  "He has left me alone," Catherine went on.

  "Haven't you me?" asked Mrs. Penniman, with some solemnity.

  Catherine shook her head slowly. "I don't believe it!" and she

left the room.

