




                        CHAPTER 33.



  LITTLE BY LITTLE Doctor Sloper had retired from his profession; he

visited only those patients in whose symptoms he recognized a

certain originality. He went again to Europe, and remained two

years; Catherine went with him, and on this occasion Mrs. Penniman was

of the party. Europe apparently had few surprises for Mrs. Penniman,

who frequently remarked, in the most romantic sites, "You know I am

very familiar with all this." It should be added that such remarks

were usually not addressed to her brother, or yet to her niece, but to

fellow tourists who happened to be at hand, or even to the cicerone or

the goatherd in the foreground.

  One day, after his return from Europe, the doctor said something

to his daughter that made her start- it seemed to come from so far out

of the past.

  "I should like you to promise me something before I die."

  "Why do you talk about your dying?" she asked.

  "Because I am sixty-eight years old."

  "I hope you will live a long time," said Catherine.

  "I hope I shall! But someday I shall take a bad cold, and then it

will not matter much what anyone hopes. That will be the manner of

my exit, and when it takes place, remember I told you so. Promise me

not to marry Morris Townsend after I am gone."

  This was what made Catherine start, as I have said; but her start

was a silent one, and for some moments she said nothing. "Why do you

speak of him?" she asked at last.

  "You challenge everything I say. I speak of him because he's a

topic, like any other. He's to be seen, like anyone else, and he is

still looking for a wife- having had one and got rid of her, I don't

know by what means. He has lately been in New York, and at your cousin

Marian's house; your aunt Elizabeth saw him there."

  "They neither of them told me," said Catherine.

  "That's their merit; it's not yours. He has grown fat and bald,

and he has not made his fortune. But I can't trust those facts alone

to steel your heart against him, and that's why I ask you to promise."

  "Fat and bald." These words presented a strange image to Catherine's

mind, out of which the memory of the most beautiful young man in the

world had never faded. "I don't think you understand," she said. "I

very seldom think of Mr. Townsend."

  "It will be very easy for you to go on, then. Promise me, after my

death, to do the same."

  Again, for some moments, Catherine was silent; her father's

request deeply amazed her; it opened an old wound, and made it ache

afresh. "I don't think I can promise that," she answered.

  "It would be a great satisfaction," said her father.

  "You don't understand. I can't promise that."

  The doctor was silent a minute. "I ask you for a particular

reason. I am altering my will."

  This reason failed to strike Catherine; and indeed she scarcely

understood it. All her feelings were merged in the sense that he was

trying to treat her as he had treated her years before. She had

suffered from it then; and now all her experience, all her acquired

tranquillity and rigidity protested. She had been so humble in her

youth that she could now afford to have a little pride, and there

was something in his request, and in her father's thinking himself

so free to make it, that seemed an injury to her dignity. Poor

Catherine's dignity was not aggressive; it never sat in state; but

if you pushed far enough you could find it. Her father had pushed very

far.

  "I can't promise," she simply repeated.

  "You are very obstinate," said the doctor.

  "I don't think you understand."

  "Please explain, then."

  "I can't explain," said Catherine, "and I can't promise."

  "Upon my word," her father exclaimed, "I had no idea how obstinate

you are!"

  She knew herself that she was obstinate, and it gave her a certain

joy. She was now a middle-aged woman.

  About a year after this, the accident that the doctor had spoken

of occurred: He took a violent cold. Driving out to Bloomingdale one

April day to see a patient of unsound mind, who was confined in a

private asylum for the insane, and whose family greatly desired a

medical opinion from an eminent source, he was caught in a spring

shower, and being in a buggy, without a hood, he found himself

soaked to the skin. He came home with an ominous chill, and on the

morrow he was seriously ill. "It is congestion of the lungs," he

said to Catherine. "I shall need very good nursing. It will make no

difference, for I shall not recover; but I wish everything to be done,

to the smallest detail, as if I should. I hate an ill-conducted

sick-room, and you will be so good as to nurse me, on the hypothesis

that I shall get well." He told her which of his fellow physicians

to send for, and gave her a multitude of minute directions; it was

quite on the optimistic hypothesis that she nursed him. But he had

never been wrong in his life, and he was not wrong now. He was

touching his seventieth year, and though he had a very well-tempered

constitution, his hold upon life had lost its firmness. He died

after three weeks' illness, during which Mrs. Penniman, as well as his

daughter, had been assiduous at his bedside.

  On his will being opened, after a decent interval, it was found to

consist of two portions. The first of these dated from ten years back,

and consisted of a series of dispositions by which he left the great

mass of his property to his daughter, with becoming legacies to his

two sisters. The second was a codicil, of recent origin, maintaining

the annuities to Mrs. Penniman and Mrs. Almond, but reducing

Catherine's share to a fifth of what he had first bequeathed her. "She

is amply provided for from her mother's side," the document ran,

"never having spent more than a fraction of her income from this

source; so that her fortune is already more than sufficient to attract

those unscrupulous adventurers whom she has given me reason to believe

that she persists in regarding as an interesting class." The large

remainder of his property, therefore, Doctor Sloper had divided into

seven unequal parts, which he left, as endowments, to as many

different hospitals and schools of medicine in various cities of the

union.

  To Mrs. Penniman it seemed monstrous that a man should play such

tricks with other people's money; for after his death, of course, as

she said, it was other people's. "Of course, you will immediately

break the will," she remarked to Catherine.

  "Oh no," Catherine answered, "I like it very much. Only I wish it

had been expressed a little differently!"

