




                        CHAPTER 31.



  THOUGH she had forced herself to be calm, she preferred practicing

this virtue in private, and she forebore to show herself at tea- a

repast which, on Sundays, at six o'clock, took the place of dinner.

Doctor Sloper and his sister sat face to face, but Mrs. Penniman never

met her brother's eye. Late in the evening she went with him, but

without Catherine, to their sister Almond's, where, between the two

ladies, Catherine's unhappy situation was discussed with a frankness

that was conditioned by a good deal of mysterious reticence on Mrs.

Penniman's part.

  "I am delighted he is not to marry her," said Mrs. Almond, "but he

ought to be horsewhipped all the same."

  Mrs. Penniman, who was shocked at her sister's coarseness, replied

that he had been actuated by the noblest of motives- the desire not to

impoverish Catherine.

  "I am very happy that Catherine is not to be impoverished- but I

hope he may never have a penny too much! And what does the poor girl

say to you?" Mrs. Almond asked.

  "She says I have a genius for consolation," said Mrs. Penniman.

  This was the account of the matter that she gave to her sister,

and it was perhaps with the consciousness of genius that, on her

return that evening to Washington Square, she again presented

herself for admittance at Catherine's door. Catherine came and

opened it; she was apparently very quiet.

  "I only want to give you a little word of advice," she said. "If

your father asks you, say that everything is going on."

  Catherine stood there, with her hand on the knob, looking at her

aunt, but not asking her to come in. "Do you think he will ask me?"

  "I am sure he will. He asked me just now, on our way home from

your aunt Elizabeth's. I explained the whole thing to your aunt

Elizabeth. I said to your father I knew nothing about it."

  "Do you think he will ask me, when he sees- when he sees-?" But here

Catherine stopped.

  "The more he sees, the more disagreeable he will be," said her aunt.

  "He shall see as little as possible!" Catherine declared.

  "Tell him you are to be married."

  "So I am," said Catherine, softly; and she closed the door upon

her aunt.

  She could not have said this two days later- for instance, on

Tuesday, when she at last received a letter from Morris Townsend. It

was an epistle of considerable length, measuring five large square

pages, and written at Philadelphia. It was an explanatory document,

and it explained a great many things, chief among which were the

considerations that had led the writer to take advantage of an

urgent "professional" absence to try and banish from his mind the

image of one whose path he had crossed only to scatter it with

ruins. He ventured to expect but partial success in this attempt,

but he could promise her that, whatever his failure, he would never

again interpose between her generous heart and her brilliant prospects

and filial duties. He closed with an intimation that his

professional pursuits might compel him to travel for some months,

and with the hope that when they should each have accommodated

themselves to what was sternly involved in their respective positions-

even should this result not be reached for years- they should meet

as friends, as fellow sufferers, as innocent but philosophic victims

of a great social law. That her life should be peaceful and happy

was the dearest wish of him who ventured still to subscribe himself

her most obedient servant. The letter was beautifully written, and

Catherine, who kept it for many years after this, was able, when her

sense of the bitterness of its meaning and the hollowness of its

tone had grown less acute, to admire its grace of expression. At

present, for a long time after she received it, all she had to help

her was the determination, daily more rigid, to make no appeal to

the compassion of her father.

  He suffered a week to elapse, and then one day, in the morning, at

an hour at which she rarely saw him, he strolled into the back parlor.

He had watched his time, and he found her alone. She was sitting

with some work, and he came and stood in front of her. He was going

out; he had on his hat, and was drawing on his gloves.

  "It doesn't seem to me that you are treating me just now with all

the consideration I deserve," he said in a moment.

  "I don't know what I have done," Catherine answered, with her eyes

on her work.

  "You have apparently quite banished from your mind the request I

made you at Liverpool before we sailed- the request that you would

notify me in advance before leaving my house."

  "I have not left your house," said Catherine.

  "But you intend to leave it, and, by what you gave me to understand,

your departure must be impending. In fact, though you are still here

in body, you are already absent in spirit. Your mind has taken up

its residence with your prospective husband, and you might quite as

well be lodged under the conjugal roof for all the benefit we get from

your society."

  "I will try and be more cheerful," said Catherine.

  "You certainly ought to be cheerful; you ask a great deal if you are

not. To the pleasure of marrying a charming young man you add that

of having your own way; you strike me as a very lucky young lady!"

  Catherine got up; she was suffocating. But she folded her work

deliberately and correctly, bending her burning face upon it. Her

father stood where he had planted himself; she hoped he would go,

but he smoothed and buttoned his gloves, and then he rested his

hands upon his hips.

  "It would be a convenience to me to know when I may expect to have

an empty house," he went on. "When you go, your aunt marches."

  She looked at him at last, with a long, silent gaze, which, in spite

of her pride and her resolution, uttered part of the appeal she had

tried not to make. Her father's cold gray eye sounded her own, and

he insisted on his point.

  "Is it tomorrow? Is it next week, or the week after?"

  "I shall not go away!" said Catherine.

  The doctor raised his eyebrows. "Has he backed out?"

  "I have broken off my engagement."

  "Broken it off?"

  "I have asked him to leave New York, and he has gone away for a long

time."

  The doctor was both puzzled and disappointed, but he solved his

perplexity by saying to himself that his daughter simply

misrepresented- justifiably, if one would, but nevertheless,

misrepresented- the facts; and he eased off his disappointment,

which was that of a man losing a chance for a little triumph that he

had rather counted on, by a few words that he uttered aloud.

  "How does he take his dismissal?"

  "I don't know!" said Catherine, less ingeniously than she had

hitherto spoken.

  "You mean you don't care? You are rather cruel, after encouraging

him and playing with him for so long!"

  The doctor had his revenge, after all.
