




BOOK II



It came vividly to Selden on the Casino steps that Monte Carlo

had, more than any other place he knew, the gift of accommodating

itself to each man's humour. His own, at the moment, lent it a

festive readiness of welcome that might well, in a disenchanted

eye, have turned to paint and facility. So frank an appeal for

participation-so outspoken a recognition of the holiday vein in

human nature--struck refreshingly on a mind jaded by prolonged

hard work in surroundings made for the discipline of the senses.

As he surveyed the white square set in an exotic coquetry of

architecture, the studied tropicality of the gardens, the groups

loitering in the foreground against mauve mountains which

suggested a sublime stage-setting forgotten in a hurried shifting

of scenes--as he took in the whole outspread effect of light and

leisure, he felt a movement of revulsion from the last few months

of his life. 



The New York winter had presented an interminable perspective of

snow-burdened days, reaching toward a spring of raw sunshine and

furious air, when the ugliness of things rasped the eye as the

gritty wind ground into the skin. Selden, immersed in his work,

had told himself that external conditions did not matter to a man

in his state, and that cold and ugliness were a good tonic for

relaxed sensibilities. When an urgent case summoned him abroad to

confer with a client in Paris, he broke reluctantly with the

routine of the office; and it was only now that, having

despatched his business, and slipped away for a week in the

south, he began to feel the renewed zest of spectatorship that is

the solace of those who take an objective interest in life. 



The multiplicity of its appeals--the perpetual surprise of its

contrasts and resemblances! All these tricks and turns of the

show were upon him with a spring as he descended the Casino steps

and paused on the pavement at its doors. He had not been abroad

for seven years--and what changes the renewed contact produced!

If the central depths were untouched, hardly a pin-point of

surface remained the same. And this was the very place to

bring out the completeness of the renewal. The sublimities, the

perpetuities, might have left him as he was: but this tent

pitched for a day's revelry spread a roof of oblivion between

himself and his fixed sky. 



It was mid-April, and one felt that the revelry had reached its

climax and that the desultory groups in the square and gardens

would soon dissolve and re-form in other scenes. Meanwhile the

last moments of the performance seemed to gain an added

brightness from the hovering threat of the curtain. The quality

of the air, the exuberance of the flowers, the blue intensity of

sea and sky, produced the effect of a closing TABLEAU, when all

the lights are turned on at once. This impression was presently

heightened by the way in which a consciously conspicuous group of

people advanced to the middle front, and stood before Selden with

the air of the chief performers gathered together by the

exigencies of the final effect. Their appearance confirmed the

impression that the show had been staged regardless of expense,

and emphasized its resemblance to one of those "costume-plays" in

which the protagonists walk through the passions without

displacing a drapery. The ladies stood in unrelated attitudes

calculated to isolate their effects, and the men hung about them

as irrelevantly as stage heroes whose tailors are named in the

programme. It was Selden himself who unwittingly fused the group

by arresting the attention of one of its members. 



"Why, Mr. Selden!" Mrs. Fisher exclaimed in surprise; and with a

gesture toward Mrs. Jack Stepney and Mrs. Wellington Bry, she

added plaintively: "We're starving to death because we can't

decide where to lunch." 



Welcomed into their group, and made the confidant of their

difficulty, Selden learned with amusement that there were several

places where one might miss something by not lunching, or forfeit

something by lunching; so that eating actually became a minor

consideration on the very spot consecrated to its rites. 



"Of course one gets the best things at the TERRASSE--but that

looks as if one hadn't any other reason for being there: the

Americans who don't know any one always rush for the best food.

And the Duchess of Beltshire has taken up Becassin's lately,"

Mrs. Bry earnestly summed up. 



Mrs. Bry, to Mrs. Fisher's despair, had not progressed beyond the

point of weighing her social alternatives in public. She could

not acquire the air of doing things because she wanted to, and

making her choice the final seal of their fitness. 



Mr. Bry, a short pale man, with a business face and leisure

clothes, met the dilemma hilariously. 



"I guess the Duchess goes where it's cheapest, unless she can get

her meal paid for. If you offered to blow her off at the TERRASSE

she'd turn up fast enough." 



But Mrs. Jack Stepney interposed. "The Grand Dukes go to that

little place at the Condamine. Lord Hubert says it's the only

restaurant in Europe where they can cook peas." 



Lord Hubert Dacey, a slender shabby-looking man, with a charming

worn smile, and the air of having spent his best years in

piloting the wealthy to the right restaurant, assented with

gentle emphasis: "It's quite that." 



"PEAS?" said Mr. Bry contemptuously. "Can they cook terrapin? It

just shows," he continued, "what these European markets are, when

a fellow can make a reputation cooking peas!" 



Jack Stepney intervened with authority. "I don't know that I

quite agree with Dacey: there's a little hole in Paris, off the

Quai Voltaire--but in any case, I can't advise the Condamine

GARGOTE; at least not with ladies."

 

Stepney, since his marriage, had thickened and grown prudish, as

the Van Osburgh husbands were apt to do; but his wife, to his

surprise and discomfiture, had developed an earth-shaking

fastness of gait which left him trailing breathlessly in her

wake. 



"That's where we'll go then!" she declared, with a heavy toss of

her plumage. "I'm so tired of the TERRASSE: it's as dull as one

of mother's dinners. And Lord Hubert has promised to tell us who

all the awful people are at the other place--hasn't he, Carry?

Now, Jack, don't look so solemn!" 



"Well," said Mrs. Bry, "all I want to know is who their

dress-makers are." 



"No doubt Dacey can tell you that too," remarked Stepney, with an

ironic intention which the other received with the light murmur,

"I can at least FIND OUT, my dear fellow"; and Mrs. Bry

having declared that she couldn't walk another step, the party

hailed two or three of the light phaetons which hover attentively

on the confines of the gardens, and rattled off in procession

toward the Condamine. 



Their destination was one of the little restaurants overhanging

the boulevard which dips steeply down from Monte Carlo to the low

intermediate quarter along the quay. From the window in which

they presently found themselves installed, they overlooked the

intense blue curve of the harbour, set between the verdure of

twin promontories: to the right, the cliff of Monaco, topped by

the mediaeval silhouette of its church and castle, to the left

the terraces and pinnacles of the gambling-house. Between the

two, the waters of the bay were furrowed by a light coming and

going of pleasure-craft, through which, just at the culminating

moment of luncheon, the majestic advance of a great steam-yacht

drew the company's attention from the peas. 



"By Jove, I believe that's the Dorsets back!" Stepney exclaimed;

and Lord Hubert, dropping his single eye-glass, corroborated:

"It's the Sabrina--yes." 



"So soon? They were to spend a month in Sicily," Mrs. Fisher

observed. 



"I guess they feel as if they had: there's only one up-to-date

hotel in the whole place," said Mr. Bry disparagingly. 



"It was Ned Silverton's idea--but poor Dorset and Lily Bart must

have been horribly bored." Mrs. Fisher added in an undertone to

Selden: "I do hope there hasn't been a row." 



"It's most awfully jolly having Miss Bart back," said Lord

Hubert, in his mild deliberate voice; and Mrs. Bry added

ingenuously: "I daresay the Duchess will dine with us, now that

Lily's here." 



"The Duchess admires her immensely: I'm sure she'd be charmed to

have it arranged," Lord Hubert agreed, with the professional

promptness of the man accustomed to draw his profit from

facilitating social contacts: Selden was struck by the

businesslike change in his manner. 



"Lily has been a tremendous success here," Mrs. Fisher continued,

still addressing herself confidentially to Selden. "She looks ten

years younger--I never saw her so handsome. Lady Skiddaw took her

everywhere in Cannes, and the Crown Princess of Macedonia

had her to stop for a week at Cimiez. People say that was one

reason why Bertha whisked the yacht off to Sicily: the Crown

Princess didn't take much notice of her, and she couldn't bear to

look on at Lily's triumph." 



Selden made no reply. He was vaguely aware that Miss Bart was

cruising in the Mediterranean with the Dorsets, but it had not

occurred to him that there was any chance of running across her

on the Riviera, where the season was virtually at an end. As he

leaned back, silently contemplating his filigree cup of Turkish

coffee, he was trying to put some order in his thoughts, to tell

himself how the news of her nearness was really affecting him. He

had a personal detachment enabling him, even in moments of

emotional high-pressure, to get a fairly clear view of his

feelings, and he was sincerely surprised by the disturbance which

the sight of the Sabrina had produced in him. He had reason to

think that his three months of engrossing professional work,

following on the sharp shock of his disillusionment, had cleared

his mind of its sentimental vapours. The feeling he had nourished

and given prominence to was one of thankfulness for his escape:

he was like a traveller so grateful for rescue from a dangerous

accident that at first he is hardly conscious of his bruises. Now

he suddenly felt the latent ache, and realized that after all he

had not come off unhurt. 



An hour later, at Mrs. Fisher's side in the Casino gardens, he

was trying to find fresh reasons for forgetting the injury

received in the contemplation of the peril avoided. The party had

dispersed with the loitering indecision characteristic of social

movements at Monte Carlo, where the whole place, and the long

gilded hours of the day, seem to offer an infinity of ways of

being idle. Lord Hubert Dacey had finally gone off in quest of

the Duchess of Beltshire, charged by Mrs. Bry with the delicate

negotiation of securing that lady's presence at dinner, the

Stepneys had left for Nice in their motor-car, and Mr. Bry had

departed to take his place in the pigeon shooting match which was

at the moment engaging his high est faculties. 



Mrs. Bry, who had a tendency to grow red and stertorous after

luncheon, had been judiciously prevailed upon by Carry

Fisher to withdraw to her hotel for an hour's repose; and Selden

and his companion were thus left to a stroll propitious to

confidences. The stroll soon resolved itself into a tranquil

session on a bench overhung with laurel and Banksian roses, from

which they caught a dazzle of blue sea between marble balusters,

and the fiery shafts of cactus-blossoms shooting meteor-like from

the rock. The soft shade of their niche, and the adjacent glitter

of the air, were conducive to an easy lounging mood, and to the

smoking of many cigarettes; and Selden, yielding to these

influences, suffered Mrs. Fisher to unfold to him the history of

her recent experiences. She had come abroad with the Welly Brys

at the moment when fashion flees the inclemency of the New York

spring. The Brys, intoxicated by their first success, already

thirsted for new kingdoms, and Mrs. Fisher, viewing the Riviera

as an easy introduction to London society, had guided their

course thither. She had affiliations of her own in every capital,

and a facility for picking them up again after long absences; and

the carefully disseminated rumour of the Brys' wealth had at once

gathered about them a group of cosmopolitan pleasure-seekers.  



"But things are not going as well as I expected," Mrs. Fisher

frankly admitted. "It's all very well to say that every body with

money can get into society; but it would be truer to say that

NEARLY everybody can. And the London market is so glutted with

new Americans that, to succeed there now, they must be either

very clever or awfully queer. The Brys are neither. HE would get

on well enough if she'd let him alone; they like his slang and

his brag and his blunders. But Louisa spoils it all by trying to

repress him and put herself forward. If she'd be natural

herself--fat and vulgar and bouncing--it would be all right; but

as soon as she meets anybody smart she tries to be slender and

queenly. She tried it with the Duchess of Beltshire and Lady

Skiddaw, and they fled. I've done my best to make her see her

mistake--I've said to her again and again:'Just let yourself go,

Louisa'; but she keeps up the humbug even with me--I believe she

keeps on being queenly in her own room, with the door shut. 



"The worst of it is," Mrs. Fisher went on, "that she thinks it's

all MY fault. When the Dorsets turned up here six weeks ago, and

everybody began to make a fuss about Lily Bart, I could

see Louisa thought that if she'd had Lily in tow instead of me

she would have been hob-nobbing with all the royalties by this

time. She doesn't realize that it's Lily's beauty that does it:

Lord Hubert tells me Lily is thought even handsomer than when he

knew her at Aix ten years ago. It seems she was tremendously

admired there. An Italian Prince, rich and the real thing, wanted

to marry her; but just at the critical moment a good-looking

step-son turned up, and Lily was silly enough to flirt with him

while her marriage-settlements with the step-father were being

drawn up. Some people said the young man did it on purpose. You

can fancy the scandal: there was an awful row between the men,

and people began to look at Lily so queerly that Mrs. Peniston

had to pack up and finish her cure elsewhere. Not that SHE ever

understood: to this day she thinks that Aix didn't suit her, and

mentions her having been sent there as proof of the incompetence

of French doctors. That's Lily all over, you know: she works like

a slave preparing the ground and sowing her seed; but the day she

ought to be reaping the harvest she over-sleeps herself or goes

off on a picnic." 



Mrs. Fisher paused and looked reflectively at the deep shimmer of

sea between the cactus-flowers. "Sometimes," she added, "I think

it's just flightiness--and sometimes I think it's because, at

heart, she despises the things she's trying for. And it's the

difficulty of deciding that makes her such an interesting study."

She glanced tentatively at Selden's motion less profile, and

resumed with a slight sigh: "Well, all I can say is, I wish she'd

give ME some of her discarded opportunities. I wish we could

change places now, for instance. She could make a very good thing

out of the Brys if she managed them properly, and I should know

just how to look after George Dorset while Bertha is reading

Verlaine with Neddy Silverton." 



She met Selden's sound of protest with a sharp derisive glance.

"Well, what's the use of mincing matters? We all know that's what

Bertha brought her abroad for. When Bertha wants to have a good

time she has to provide occupation for George. At first I thought

Lily was going to play her cards well THIS time, but there are

rumours that Bertha is jealous of her success here and at Cannes,

and I shouldn't be surprised if there were a break any

day. Lily's only safeguard is that Bertha needs her badly--oh,

very badly. The Silverton affair is in the acute stage: it's

necessary that George's attention should be pretty continuously

distracted. And I'm bound to say Lily DOES distract it: I believe

he'd marry her tomorrow if he found out there was anything wrong

with Bertha. But you know him--he's as blind as he's jealous; and

of course Lily's present business is to keep him blind. A clever

woman might know just the right moment to tear off the bandage:

but Lily isn't clever in that way, and when George does open his

eyes she'll probably contrive not to be in his line of vision." 



Selden tossed away his cigarette. "By Jove--it's time for my

train," he exclaimed, with a glance at his watch; adding, in

reply to Mrs. Fisher's surprised comment--"Why, I thought of

course you were at Monte!"--a murmured word to the effect that he

was making Nice his head-quarters. 



"The worst of it is, she snubs the Brys now," he heard

irrelevantly flung after him. 



Ten minutes later, in the high-perched bedroom of an hotel

overlooking the Casino, he was tossing his effects into a couple

of gaping portmanteaux, while the porter waited outside to

transport them to the cab at the door. It took but a brief plunge

down the steep white road to the station to land him safely in

the afternoon express for Nice; and not till he was installed in

the corner of an empty carriage, did he exclaim to himself, with

a reaction of self-contempt: "What the deuce am I running away

from?" 



The pertinence of the question checked Selden's fugitive impulse

before the train had started. It was ridiculous to be flying like

an emotional coward from an infatuation his reason had conquered.

He had instructed his bankers to forward some important business

letters to Nice, and at Nice he would quietly await them. He was

already annoyed with him self for having left Monte Carlo, where

he had intended to pass the week which remained to him before

sailing; but it would now be difficult to return on his steps

without an appearance of inconsistency from which his pride

recoiled. In his inmost heart he was not sorry to put himself

beyond the probability of meeting Miss Bart. Completely as he had

<p 198> detached himself from her, he could not yet regard her

merely as a social instance; and viewed in a more personal way

she was not likely to be a reassuring object of study. Chance

encounters, or even the repeated mention of her name, would send

his thoughts back into grooves from which he had resolutely

detached them; whereas, if she could be entirely excluded from

his life, the pressure of new and varied impressions, with which

no thought of her was connected, would soon complete the work of

separation. Mrs. Fisher's conversation had, indeed, operated to

that end; but the treatment was too painful to be voluntarily

chosen while milder remedies were untried; and Selden thought he

could trust himself to return gradually to a reasonable view of

Miss Bart, if only he did not see her. 



Having reached the station early, he had arrived at this point in

his reflections before the increasing throng on the platform

warned him that he could not hope to preserve his privacy; the

next moment there was a hand on the door, and he turned to

confront the very face he was fleeing. 



Miss Bart, glowing with the haste of a precipitate descent upon

the train, headed a group composed of the Dorsets, young

Silverton and Lord Hubert Dacey, who had barely time to spring

into the carriage, and envelop Selden in ejaculations of surprise

and welcome, before the whistle of departure sounded. The party,

it appeared, were hastening to Nice in response to a sudden

summons to dine with the Duchess of Beltshire and to see the

water-fete in the bay; a plan evidently improvised--in spite of

Lord Hubert's protesting "Oh, I say, you know,"--for the express

purpose of defeating Mrs. Bry's endeavour to capture the Duchess.





During the laughing relation of this manoeuvre, Selden had time

for a rapid impression of Miss Bart, who had seated her self

opposite to him in the golden afternoon light. Scarcely three

months had elapsed since he had parted from her on the threshold

of the Brys' conservatory; but a subtle change had passed over

the quality of her beauty. Then it had had a transparency through

which the fluctuations of the spirit were sometimes tragically

visible; now its impenetrable surface suggested a process of

crystallization which had fused her whole being into one hard

brilliant substance. The change had struck Mrs. Fisher as

a rejuvenation: to Selden it seemed like that moment of pause and

arrest when the warm fluidity of youth is chilled into its final

shape. 



He felt it in the way she smiled on him, and in the readiness and

competence with which, flung unexpectedly into his presence, she

took up the thread of their intercourse as though that thread had

not been snapped with a violence from which he still reeled. Such

facility sickened him--but he told himself that it was with the

pang which precedes recovery. Now he would really get well--would

eject the last drop of poison from his blood. Already he felt

himself calmer in her presence than he had learned to be in the

thought of her. Her assumptions and elisions, her short-cuts and

long DETOURS, the skill with which she contrived to meet him at a

point from which no inconvenient glimpses of the past were

visible, suggested what opportunities she had had for practising

such arts since their last meeting. He felt that she had at last

arrived at an understanding with herself: had made a pact with

her rebellious impulses, and achieved a uniform system of

self-government, under which all vagrant tendencies were either

held captive or forced into the service of the state. 



And he saw other things too in her manner: saw how it had

adjusted itself to the hidden intricacies of a situation in

which, even after Mrs. Fisher's elucidating flashes, he still

felt himself agrope. Surely Mrs. Fisher could no longer charge

Miss Bart with neglecting her opportunities! To Selden's

exasperated observation she was only too completely alive to

them. She was "perfect" to every one: subservient to Bertha's

anxious predominance, good-naturedly watchful of Dorset's moods,

brightly companionable to Silverton and Dacey, the latter of whom

met her on an evident footing of old admiration, while young

Silverton, portentously self-absorbed, seemed conscious of her

only as of something vaguely obstructive. And suddenly, as Selden

noted the fine shades of manner by which she harmonized herself

with her surroundings, it flashed on him that, to need such

adroit handling, the situation must indeed be desperate. She was

on the edge of something--that was the impression left with him.

He seemed to see her poised on the brink of a chasm, with one

graceful foot advanced to assert her unconsciousness that

the ground was failing her. 



On the Promenade des Anglais, where Ned Silverton hung on him for

the half hour before dinner, he received a deeper impression of

the general insecurity. Silverton was in a mood of Titanic

pessimism. How any one could come to such a damned hole as the

Riviera--any one with a grain of imagination--with the whole

Mediterranean to choose from: but then, if one's estimate of a

place depended on the way they broiled a spring chicken! Gad!

what a study might be made of the tyranny of the stomach--the way

a sluggish liver or insufficient gastric juices might affect the

whole course of the universe, overshadow everything in

reach--chronic dyspepsia ought to be among the "statutory

causes"; a woman's life might be ruined by a man's inability to

digest fresh bread. Grotesque? Yes--and tragic--like most

absurdities. There's nothing grimmer than the tragedy that wears

a comic mask.... Where was he? Oh--the reason they chucked Sicily

and rushed back? Well--partly, no doubt, Miss Bart's desire to

get back to bridge and smartness. Dead as a stone to art and

poetry--the light never WAS on sea or land for her! And of course

she persuaded Dorset that the Italian food was bad for him. Oh,

she could make him believe anything--ANYTHING! Mrs. Dorset was

aware of it--oh, perfectly: nothing SHE didn't see! But she could

hold her tongue--she'd had to, often enough. Miss Bart was an

intimate friend--she wouldn't hear a word against her. Only it

hurts a woman's pride--there are some things one doesn't get used

to . . . All this in confidence, of course? Ah--and there were

the ladies signalling from the balcony of the hotel.... He

plunged across the Promenade, leaving Selden to a meditative

cigar. 



The conclusions it led him to were fortified, later in the

evening, by some of those faint corroborative hints that generate

a light of their own in the dusk of a doubting mind. Selden,

stumbling on a chance acquaintance, had dined with him, and

adjourned, still in his company, to the brightly lit Promenade,

where a line of crowded stands commanded the glittering darkness

of the waters. The night was soft and per suasive. Overhead hung

a summer sky furrowed with the rush of rockets; and from

the east a late moon, pushing up beyond the lofty bend of the

coast, sent across the bay a shaft of brightness which paled to

ashes in the red glitter of the illuminated boats. Down the

lantern-hung Promenade, snatches of band-music floated above the

hum of the crowd and the soft tossing of boughs in dusky gardens;

and between these gardens and the backs of the stands there

flowed a stream of people in whom the vociferous carnival mood

seemed tempered by the growing languor of the season. 



Selden and his companion, unable to get seats on one of the

stands facing the bay, had wandered for a while with the throng,

and then found a point of vantage on a high garden-parapet above

the Promenade. Thence they caught but a triangular glimpse of

the water, and of the flashing play of boats across its surface;

but the crowd in the street was under their immediate view, and

seemed to Selden, on the whole, of more interest than the show

itself. After a while, however, he wearied of his perch and,

dropping alone to the pavement, pushed his way to the first

corner and turned into the moonlit silence of a side street. Long

garden-walls overhung by trees made a dark boundary to the

pavement; an empty cab trailed along the deserted thoroughfare,

and presently Selden saw two persons emerge from the opposite

shadows, signal to the cab, and drive off in it toward the centre

of the town. The moonlight touched them as they paused to enter

the carriage, and he recognized Mrs. Dorset and young Silverton. 



Beneath the nearest lamp-post he glanced at his watch and saw

that the time was close on eleven. He took another cross street,

and without breasting the throng on the Promenade, made his way

to the fashionable club which overlooks that thoroughfare. Here,

amid the blaze of crowded baccarat tables, he caught sight of

Lord Hubert Dacey, seated with his habitual worn smile behind a

rapidly dwindling heap of gold. The heap being in due course

wiped out, Lord Hubert rose with a shrug, and joining Selden,

adjourned with him to the deserted terrace of the club. It was

now past midnight, and the throng on the stands was dispersing,

while the long trails of red-lit boats scattered and faded

beneath a sky repossessed by the tranquil splendour of the moon. 



Lord Hubert looked at his watch. "By Jove, I promised to

join the Duchess for supper at the LONDON HOUSE; but it's past

twelve, and I suppose they've all scattered. The fact is, I lost

them in the crowd soon after dinner, and took refuge here, for my

sins. They had seats on one of the stands, but of course they

couldn't stop quiet: the Duchess never can. She and Miss Bart

went off in quest of what they call adventures--gad, it ain't

their fault if they don't have some queer ones!" He added

tentatively, after pausing to grope for a cigarette: "Miss Bart's

an old friend of yours, I believe? So she told me.--Ah, thanks--I

don't seem to have one left." He lit Selden's proffered

cigarette, and continued, in his high-pitched drawling tone:

"None of my business, of course, but I didn't introduce her to

the Duchess. Charming woman, the Duchess, you understand; and a

very good friend of mine; but RATHER a liberal education." 



Selden received this in silence, and after a few puffs Lord

Hubert broke out again: "Sort of thing one can't communicate to

the young lady--though young ladies nowadays are so competent to

judge for themselves; but in this case--I'm an old friend too,

you know . . . and there seemed no one else to speak to. The

whole situation's a little mixed, as I see it--but there used to

be an aunt somewhere, a diffuse and innocent person, who was

great at bridging over chasms she didn't see . . . Ah, in New

York, is she? Pity New York's such a long way off!" 



Miss Bart, emerging late the next morning from her cabin, found

herself alone on the deck of the Sabrina. The cushioned chairs,

disposed expectantly under the wide awning, showed no signs of

recent occupancy, and she presently learned from a steward that

Mrs. Dorset had not yet appeared, and that the

gentlemen--separately--had gone ashore as soon as they had

breakfasted. Supplied with these facts, Lily leaned awhile over

the side, giving herself up to a leisurely enjoyment of the

spectacle before her. Unclouded sunlight enveloped sea and shore

in a bath of purest radiancy. The purpling waters drew a sharp

white line of foam at the base of the shore; against its

irregular eminences, hotels and villas flashed from the greyish

verdure of olive and eucalyptus; and the background of bare and

finely-pencilled mountains quivered in a pale intensity of light.



 

How beautiful it was--and how she loved beauty! She had always

felt that her sensibility in this direction made up for certain

obtusenesses of feeling of which she was less proud; and during

the last three months she had indulged it passionately. The

Dorsets' invitation to go abroad with them had come as an almost

miraculous release from crushing difficulties; and her faculty

for renewing herself in new scenes, and casting off problems of

conduct as easily as the surroundings in which they had arisen,

made the mere change from one place to another seem, not merely a

postponement, but a solution of her troubles. Moral complications

existed for her only in the environment that had produced them;

she did not mean to slight or ignore them, but they lost their

reality when they changed their background. She could not have

remained in New York without repaying the money she owed to

Trenor; to acquit herself of that odious debt she might even have

faced a marriage with Rosedale; but the accident of placing the

Atlantic between herself and her obligations made them dwindle

out of sight as if they had been milestones and she had travelled

past them.  



Her two months on the Sabrina had been especially calculated to

aid this illusion of distance. She had been plunged into

new scenes, and had found in them a renewal of old hopes and

ambitions. The cruise itself charmed her as a romantic adventure.

She was vaguely touched by the names and scenes amid which she

moved, and had listened to Ned Silverton reading Theocritus by

moonlight, as the yacht rounded the Sicilian promontories, with a

thrill of the nerves that confirmed her belief in her

intellectual superiority. But the weeks at Cannes and Nice had

really given her more pleasure. The gratification of being

welcomed in high company, and of making her own ascendency felt

there, so that she found herself figuring once more as the

"beautiful Miss Bart"in the interesting journal devoted to

recording the least movements of her cosmopolitan companions--all

these experiences tended to throw into the extreme background of

memory the prosaic and sordid difficulties from which she had

escaped. 



If she was faintly aware of fresh difficulties ahead, she was

sure of her ability to meet them: it was characteristic of her to

feel that the only problems she could not solve were those with

which she was familiar. Meanwhile she could honestly be proud of

the skill with which she had adapted herself to somewhat delicate



conditions. She had reason to think that she had made herself

equally necessary to her host and hostess; and if only she had

seen any perfectly irreproachable means of drawing a financial

profit from the situation, there would have been no cloud on her

horizon. The truth was that her funds, as usual, were

inconveniently low; and to neither Dorset nor his wife could this

vulgar embarrassment be safely hinted. Still, the need was not a

pressing one; she could worry along, as she had so often done

before, with the hope of some happy change of fortune to sustain

her; and meanwhile life was gay and beautiful and easy, and she

was conscious of figuring not unworthily in such a setting. 



She was engaged to breakfast that morning with the Duchess of

Beltshire, and at twelve o'clock she asked to be set ashore in

the gig. Before this she had sent her maid to enquire if she

might see Mrs. Dorset; but the reply came back that the latter

was tired, and trying to sleep. Lily thought she understood the

reason of the rebuff. Her hostess had not been included in the

Duchess's invitation, though she herself had made the

most loyal efforts in that direction. But her grace was

impervious to hints, and invited or omitted as she chose. It was

not Lily's fault if Mrs. Dorset's complicated attitudes did not

fall in with the Duchess's easy gait. The Duchess, who seldom

explained herself, had not formulated her objection beyond

saying: "She's rather a bore, you know. The only one of your

friends I like is that little Mr. Bry--HE'S funny--" but Lily

knew enough not to press the point, and was not altogether sorry

to be thus distinguished at her friend's expense. Bertha

certainly HAD grown tiresome since she had taken to poetry and

Ned Silverton. 



On the whole, it was a relief to break away now and then from the

Sabrina; and the Duchess's little breakfast, organized by Lord

Hubert with all his usual virtuosity, was the pleasanter to Lily

for not including her travelling-companions. Dorset, of late, had

grown more than usually morose and incalculable, and Ned

Silverton went about with an air that seemed to challenge the

universe. The freedom and lightness of the ducal intercourse made

an agreeable change from these complications, and Lily was

tempted, after luncheon, to adjourn in the wake of her companions

to the hectic atmosphere of the Casino. She did not mean to play;

her diminished pocket-money offered small scope for the

adventure; but it amused her to sit on a divan, under the

doubtful protection of the Duchess's back, while the latter hung

above her stakes at a neighbouring table. 



The rooms were packed with the gazing throng which, in the

afternoon hours, trickles heavily between the tables, like the

Sunday crowd in a lion-house. In the stagnant flow of the mass,

identities were hardly distinguishable; but Lily presently saw

Mrs. Bry cleaving her determined way through the doors, and, in

the broad wake she left, the light figure of Mrs. Fisher bobbing

after her like a row-boat at the stern of a tug. Mrs. Bry pressed

on, evidently animated by the resolve to reach a certain point in

the rooms; but Mrs. Fisher, as she passed Lily, broke from her

towing-line, and let herself float to the girl's side.



"Lose her?" she echoed the latter's query, with an indifferent

glance at Mrs. Bry's retreating back. "I daresay--it doesn't

matter: I HAVE lost her already." And, as Lily ex<p 206>claimed,

she added: "We had an awful row this morning. You know, of

course, that the Duchess chucked her at dinner last night, and

she thinks it was my fault--my want of management. The worst of

it is, the message--just a mere word by telephone--came so late

that the dinner HAD to be paid for; and Becassin HAD run it

up--it had been so drummed into him that the Duchess was coming!"

Mrs. Fisher indulged in a faint laugh at the remembrance. "Paying

for what she doesn't get rankles so dreadfully with Louisa: I

can't make her see that it's one of the preliminary steps to

getting what you haven't paid for--and as I was the nearest thing

to smash, she smashed me to atoms, poor dear!" 



Lily murmured her commiseration. Impulses of sympathy came

naturally to her, and it was instinctive to proffer her help to

Mrs. Fisher. 



"If there's anything I can do--if it's only a question of meeting

the Duchess! I heard her say she thought Mr. Bry amusing---" 



But Mrs. Fisher interposed with a decisive gesture. "My dear, I

have my pride: the pride of my trade. I couldn't manage the

Duchess, and I can't palm off your arts on Louisa Bry as mine.

I've taken the final step: I go to Paris tonight with the Sam

Gormers. THEY'RE still in the elementary stage; an Italian Prince

is a great deal more than a Prince to them, and they're always on

the brink of taking a courier for one. To save them from that is

my present mission." She laughed again at the picture. "But

before I go I want to make my last will and testament--I want to

leave you the Brys." 



"Me?" Miss Bart joined in her amusement. "It's charming of you to

remember me, dear; but really---" 



"You're already so well provided for?" Mrs. Fisher flashed a

sharp glance at her. "ARE you, though, Lily--to the point of

rejecting my offer?" 



Miss Bart coloured slowly. "What I really meant was, that the

Brys wouldn't in the least care to be so disposed of." 



Mrs. Fisher continued to probe her embarrassment with an

unflinching eye. "What you really meant was that you've snubbed

the Brys horribly; and you know that they know---" 

"Carry!" 



"Oh, on certain sides Louisa bristles with perceptions. If you'd

even managed to have them asked once on the Sabrina--especially

when royalties were coming! But it's not too late," she ended

earnestly, "it's not too late for either of you." 



Lily smiled. "Stay over, and I'll get the Duchess to dine with

them." 



"I shan't stay over--the Gormers have paid for my SALON-LIT,"

said Mrs. Fisher with simplicity. "But get the Duchess to dine

with them all the same." 



Lily's smile again flowed into a slight laugh: her friend's

importunity was beginning to strike her as irrelevant. "I'm sorry

I have been negligent about the Brys---" she began. 



"Oh, as to the Brys--it's you I'm thinking of," said Mrs. Fisher

abruptly. She paused, and then, bending forward, with a lowered

voice: "You know we all went on to Nice last night when the

Duchess chucked us. It was Louisa's idea--I told her what I

thought of it."



Miss Bart assented. "Yes--I caught sight of you on the way back,

at the station." 



"Well, the man who was in the carriage with you and George

Dorset--that horrid little Dabham who does 'Society Notes from

the Riviera'--had been dining with us at Nice. And he's telling

everybody that you and Dorset came back alone after midnight." 



"Alone--? When he was with us?" Lily laughed, but her laugh faded

into gravity under the prolonged implication of Mrs. Fisher's

look. "We DID come back alone--if that's so very dreadful! But

whose fault was it? The Duchess was spending the night at Cimiez

with the Crown Princess; Bertha got bored with the show, and went

off early, promising to meet us at the station. We turned up on

time, but she didn't--she didn't turn up at all!" 



Miss Bart made this announcement in the tone of one who presents,

with careless assurance, a complete vindication; but Mrs. Fisher

received it in a manner almost inconsequent. She seemed to have

lost sight of her friend's part in the incident: her inward

vision had taken another slant. 



"Bertha never turned up at all? Then how on earth did she get

back?" 



"Oh, by the next train, I suppose; there were two extra ones for

the FETE. At any rate, I know she's safe on the yacht, though I

haven't yet seen her; but you see it was not my fault," Lily

summed up. 



"Not your fault that Bertha didn't turn up? My poor child, if

only you don't have to pay for it!" Mrs. Fisher rose--she had

seen Mrs. Bry surging back in her direction. "There's Louisa, and

I must be off--oh, we're on the best of terms externally; we're

lunching together; but at heart it's ME she's lunching on," she

explained; and with a last hand-clasp and a last look, she added:

"Remember, I leave her to you; she's hovering now, ready to take

you in. 







"Lily carried the impression of Mrs. Fisher's leave-taking away

with her from the Casino doors. She had accomplished, before

leaving, the first step toward her reinstatement in Mrs. Bry's

good graces. An affable advance--a vague murmur that they must

see more of each other--an allusive glance to a near future that

was felt to include the Duchess as well as the Sabrina--how

easily it was all done, if one possessed the knack of doing it!

She wondered at herself, as she had so often wondered, that,

possessing the knack, she did not more consistently exercise it.

But sometimes she was forgetful--and sometimes, could it be that

she was proud? Today, at any rate, she had been vaguely conscious

of a reason for sinking her pride, had in fact even sunk it to

the point of suggesting to Lord Hubert Dacey, whom she ran across

on the Casino steps, that he might really get the Duchess to dine

with the Brys, if SHE undertook to have them asked on the

Sabrina. Lord Hubert had promised his help, with the readiness on

which she could always count: it was his only way of ever

reminding her that he had once been ready to do so much more for

her. Her path, in short, seemed to smooth itself before her as

she advanced; yet the faint stir of uneasiness persisted. Had it

been produced, she wondered, by her chance meeting with Selden?

She thought not--time and change seemed so completely to have

relegated him to his proper distance. The sudden and exquisite

reaction from her anxieties had had the effect of throwing the

recent past so far back that even Selden, as part of it, retained

a certain air of unreality. And he had made it so clear

that they were not to meet again; that he had merely dropped down

to Nice for a day or two, and had almost his foot on the next

steamer. No--that part of the past had merely surged up for a

moment on the fleeing surface of events; and now that it was

submerged again, the uncertainty, the apprehension persisted.



They grew to sudden acuteness as she caught sight of George

Dorset descending the steps of the Hotel de Paris and making for

her across the square. She had meant to drive down to the quay

and regain the yacht; but she now had the immediate impression

that something more was to happen first. 



"Which way are you going? Shall we walk a bit?" he began, putting

the second question before the first was answered, and not

waiting for a reply to either before he directed her silently

toward the comparative seclusion of the lower gardens. 



She detected in him at once all the signs of extreme nervous

tension. The skin was puffed out under his sunken eyes, and its

sallowness had paled to a leaden white against which his

irregular eyebrows and long reddish moustache were relieved with

a saturnine effect. His appearance, in short, presented an odd

mixture of the bedraggled and the ferocious. 



He walked beside her in silence, with quick precipitate steps,

till they reached the embowered slopes to the east of the Casino;

then, pulling up abruptly, he said: "Have you seen Bertha?" 



"No--when I left the yacht she was not yet up." 



He received this with a laugh like the whirring sound in a

disabled clock. "Not yet up? Had she gone to bed? Do you know at

what time she came on board? This morning at seven!" he

exclaimed. 



"At seven?" Lily started. "What happened--an accident to the

train?" 



He laughed again. "They missed the train--all the trains--they

had to drive back." 



"Well---?" She hesitated, feeling at once how little even this

necessity accounted for the fatal lapse of hours. 



"Well, they couldn't get a carriage at once--at that time of

night, you know--" the explanatory note made it almost

seem as though he were putting the case for his wife--"and when

they finally did, it was only a one-horse cab, and the horse was

lame!" 



"How tiresome! I see," she affirmed, with the more earnestness

because she was so nervously conscious that she did not; and

after a pause she added: "I'm so sorry--but ought we to have

waited?" 



"Waited for the one-horse cab? It would scarcely have carried the

four of us, do you think?" 



She took this in what seemed the only possible way, with a laugh

intended to sink the question itself in his humorous treatment of

it. "Well, it would have been difficult; we should have had to

walk by turns. But it would have been jolly to see the sunrise." 



"Yes: the sunrise WAS jolly," he agreed. 



"Was it? You saw it, then?" 



"I saw it, yes; from the deck. I waited up for them." 



"Naturally--I suppose you were worried. Why didn't you call on me

to share your vigil?" 



He stood still, dragging at his moustache with a lean weak hand.

"I don't think you would have cared for its DENOUEMENT," he said

with sudden grimness. 



Again she was disconcerted by the abrupt change in his tone, and

as in one flash she saw the peril of the moment, and the need of

keeping her sense of it out of her eyes. 



"DENOUEMENT--isn't that too big a word for such a small incident?

The worst of it, after all, is the fatigue which Bertha has

probably slept off by this time." 



She clung to the note bravely, though its futility was now plain

to her in the glare of his miserable eyes. 



"Don't--don't---!" he broke out, with the hurt cry of a child;

and while she tried to merge her sympathy, and her resolve to

ignore any cause for it, in one ambiguous murmur of deprecation,

he dropped down on the bench near which they had paused, and

poured out the wretchedness of his soul. 



It was a dreadful hour--an hour from which she emerged shrinking

and seared, as though her lids had been scorched by its actual

glare. It was not that she had never had premonitory glimpses of

such an outbreak; but rather because, here and there

throughout the three months, the surface of life had shown such

ominous cracks and vapours that her fears had always been on the

alert for an upheaval. There had been moments when the situation

had presented itself under a homelier yet more vivid image--that

of a shaky vehicle, dashed by unbroken steeds over a bumping

road, while she cowered within, aware that the harness wanted

mending, and wondering what would give way first.

Well--everything had given way now; and the wonder was that the

crazy outfit had held together so long. Her sense of being

involved in the crash, instead of merely witnessing it from the

road, was intensified by the way in which Dorset, through his

furies of denunciation and wild reactions of self-contempt, made

her feel the need he had of her, the place she had taken in his

life. But for her, what ear would have been open to his cries?

And what hand but hers could drag him up again to a footing of

sanity and self-respect? All through the stress of the struggle

with him, she had been conscious of something faintly maternal in

her efforts to guide and uplift him. But for the present, if he

clung to her, it was not in order to be dragged up, but to feel

some one floundering in the depths with him: he wanted her to

suffer with him, not to help him to suffer less. 



Happily for both, there was little physical strength to sustain

his frenzy. It left him, collapsed and breathing heavily, to an

apathy so deep and prolonged that Lily almost feared the

passers-by would think it the result of a seizure, and stop to

offer their aid. But Monte Carlo is, of all places, the one where

the human bond is least close, and odd sights are the least

arresting. If a glance or two lingered on the couple, no

intrusive sympathy disturbed them; and it was Lily herself who

broke the silence by rising from her seat. With the clearing of

her vision the sweep of peril had extended, and she saw that the

post of danger was no longer at Dorset's side. 



"If you won't go back, I must--don't make me leave you!" she

urged. 



But he remained mutely resistant, and she added: "What are you

going to do? You really can't sit here all night." 

 

"I can go to an hotel. I can telegraph my lawyers." He sat up,

roused by a new thought. "By Jove, Selden's at Nice--I'll send

for Selden!" 



Lily, at this, reseated herself with a cry of alarm. "No, no, NO"

she protested. 



He swung round on her distrustfully. "Why not Selden? He's a

lawyer isn't he? One will do as well as another in a case like

this." 



"As badly as another, you mean. I thought you relied on ME to

help you." 



"You do--by being so sweet and patient with me. If it hadn't been

for you I'd have ended the thing long ago. But now it's got to

end." He rose suddenly, straightening himself with an effort.

"You can't want to see me ridiculous." 



She looked at him kindly. "That's just it." Then, after a

moment's pondering, almost to her own surprise she broke out with

a flash of inspiration: "Well, go over and see Mr. Selden. You'll

have time to do it before dinner." 



"Oh, DINNER---" he mocked her; but she left him with the smiling

rejoinder: "Dinner on board, remember; we'll put it off till nine

if you like." 



It was past four already; and when a cab had dropped her at the

quay, and she stood waiting for the gig to put off for her, she

began to wonder what had been happening on the yacht. Of

Silverton's whereabouts there had been no mention. Had he

returned to the Sabrina? Or could Bertha--the dread alternative

sprang on her suddenly--could Bertha, left to herself, have gone

ashore to rejoin him? Lily's heart stood still at the thought.

All her concern had hitherto been for young Silverton, not only

because, in such affairs, the woman's instinct is to side with

the man, but because his case made a peculiar appeal to her

sympathies. He was so desperately in earnest, poor youth, and his

earnestness was of so different a quality from Bertha's, though

hers too was desperate enough. The difference was that Bertha was

in earnest only about herself, while he was in earnest about her.

But now, at the actual crisis, this difference seemed to throw

the weight of destitution on Bertha's side, since at least he had

her to suffer for, and she had only herself. At any rate, viewed

less ideally, all the disadvantages of such a situation were for

the woman; and it was to Bertha that Lily's sympathies now went

out. She was not fond of Bertha Dorset, but neither was she

without a sense of obligation, the heavier for having so little

per<p 213>sonal liking to sustain it. Bertha had been kind to

her, they had lived together, during the last months, on terms of

easy friendship, and the sense of friction of which Lily had

recently become aware seemed to make it the more urgent that she

should work undividedly in her friend's interest. 



It was in Bertha's interest, certainly, that she had despatched

Dorset to consult with Lawrence Selden. Once the grotesqueness of

the situation accepted, she had seen at a glance that it was the

safest in which Dorset could find himself. Who but Selden could

thus miraculously combine the skill to save Bertha with the

obligation of doing so? The consciousness that much skill would

be required made Lily rest thankfully in the greatness of the

obligation. Since he would HAVE to pull Bertha through she could

trust him to find a way; and she put the fulness of her trust in

the telegram she managed to send him on her way to the quay. 



Thus far, then, Lily felt that she had done well; and the

conviction strengthened her for the task that remained. She and

Bertha had never been on confidential terms, but at such a crisis

the barriers of reserve must surely fall: Dorset's wild allusions

to the scene of the morning made Lily feel that they were down

already, and that any attempt to rebuild them would be beyond

Bertha's strength. She pictured the poor creature shivering

behind her fallen defences and awaiting with suspense the moment

when she could take refuge in the first shelter that offered. If

only that shelter had not already offered itself elsewhere! As

the gig traversed the short distance between the quay and the

yacht, Lily grew more than ever alarmed at the possible

consequences of her long absence. What if the wretched Bertha,

finding in all the long hours no soul to turn to--but by this

time Lily's eager foot was on the side-ladder, and her first step

on the Sabrina showed the worst of her apprehensions to be

unfounded; for there, in the luxurious shade of the after-deck,

the wretched Bertha, in full command of her usual attenuated

elegance, sat dispensing tea to the Duchess of Beltshire and Lord

Hubert.



The sight filled Lily with such surprise that she felt that

Bertha, at least, must read its meaning in her look, and she was

proportionately disconcerted by the blankness of the look

returned. But in an instant she saw that Mrs. Dorset had, of

necessity, to look blank before the others, and that, to mitigate

the effect of her own surprise, she must at once produce some

simple reason for it. The long habit of rapid transitions made it

easy for her to exclaim to the Duchess: "Why, I thought you'd

gone back to the Princess!" and this sufficed for the lady she

addressed, if it was hardly enough for Lord Hubert. 



At least it opened the way to a lively explanation of how the

Duchess was, in fact, going back the next moment, but had first

rushed out to the yacht for a word with Mrs. Dorset on the

subject of tomorrow's dinner--the dinner with the Brys, to which

Lord Hubert had finally insisted on dragging them.



"To save my neck, you know!" he explained, with a glance that

appealed to Lily for some recognition of his promptness; and the

Duchess added, with her noble candour: "Mr. Bry has promised him

a tip, and he says if we go he'll pass it onto us."



This led to some final pleasantries, in which, as it seemed to

Lily, Mrs. Dorset bore her part with astounding bravery, and at

the close of which Lord Hubert, from half way down the

side-ladder, called back, with an air of numbering heads: "And of

course we may count on Dorset too?" 



"Oh, count on him," his wife assented gaily. She was keeping up

well to the last--but as she turned back from waving her adieux

over the side, Lily said to herself that the mask must drop and


the soul of fear look out. 



Mrs. Dorset turned back slowly; perhaps she wanted time to steady

her muscles; at any rate, they were still under perfect control

when, dropping once more into her seat behind the tea-table, she

remarked to Miss Bart with a faint touch of irony: "I suppose I

ought to say good morning."



If it was a cue, Lily was ready to take it, though with only the

vaguest sense of what was expected of her in return. There was

something unnerving in the contemplation of Mrs. Dorset's

composure, and she had to force the light tone in which she

answered: "I tried to see you this morning, but you were not yet

up.



"No--I got to bed late. After we missed you at the station

I thought we ought to wait for you till the last train."

She spoke very gently, but with just the least tinge of reproach. 



"You missed us? You waited for us at the station?" Now indeed

Lily was too far adrift in bewilderment to measure the other's

words or keep watch on her own. "But I thought you didn't get to

the station till after the last train had left!"



Mrs. Dorset, examining her between lowered lids, met this with

the immediate query: "Who told you that?"



"George--I saw him just now in the gardens."



"Ah, is that George's version? Poor George--he was in no state to

remember what I told him. He had one of his worst attacks this

morning, and I packed him off to see the doctor. Do you know if

he found him?"



Lily, still lost in conjecture, made no reply, and Mrs. Dorset

settled herself indolently in her seat. "He'll wait to see him;

he was horribly frightened about himself. It's very bad for him

to be worried, and whenever anything upsetting happens, it always

brings on an attack."



This time Lily felt sure that a cue was being pressed on her; but

it was put forth with such startling suddenness, and with so

incredible an air of ignoring what it led up to, that she could

only falter out doubtfully: "Anything upsetting?" 



"Yes--such as having you so conspicuously on his hands in the

small hours. You know, my dear, you're rather a big

responsibility in such a scandalous place after midnight." 



At that--at the complete unexpectedness and the inconceivable

audacity of it--Lily could not restrain the tribute of an

astonished laugh. 



"Well, really--considering it was you who burdened him with the

responsibility!" 



Mrs. Dorset took this with an exquisite mildness. "By not having

the superhuman cleverness to discover you in that frightful rush

for the train? Or the imagination to believe that you'd take it

without us--you and he all alone--instead of waiting quietly in

the station till we DID manage to meet you?" 



Lily's colour rose: it was growing clear to her that Bertha was

pursuing an object, following a line she had marked out for

herself. Only, with such a doom impending, why waste time in

these childish efforts to avert it? The puerility of the

attempt disarmed Lily's indignation: did it not prove how

horribly the poor creature was frightened?" 



No; by our simply all keeping together at Nice," she returned. 



"Keeping together? When it was you who seized the first

opportunity to rush off with the Duchess and her friends? My dear

Lily, you are not a child to be led by the hand!"



"No--nor to be lectured, Bertha, really; if that's what you are

doing to me now."



Mrs. Dorset smiled on her reproachfully. "Lecture you--I? Heaven

forbid! I was merely trying to give you a friendly hint. But it's

usually the other way round, isn't it? I'm expected to take

hints, not to give them: I've positively lived on them all these

last months."



"Hints--from me to you?" Lily repeated.



"Oh, negative ones merely--what not to be and to do and to see.

And I think I've taken them to admiration. Only, my dear, if

you'll let me say so, I didn't understand that one of my negative

duties was NOT to warn you when you carried your imprudence too

far."



A chill of fear passed over Miss Bart: a sense of remembered

treachery that was like the gleam of a knife in the dusk. But

compassion, in a moment, got the better of her instinctive

recoil. What was this outpouring of senseless bitterness but the

tracked creature's attempt to cloud the medium through which it

was fleeing? It was on Lily's lips to exclaim: "You poor soul,

don't double and turn--come straight back to me, and we'll find a

way out!" But the words died under the impenetrable insolence of

Bertha's smile. Lily sat silent, taking the brunt of it quietly,

letting it spend itself on her to the last drop of its

accumulated falseness; then, without a word, she rose and went

down to her cabin. 



Miss Bart's telegram caught Lawrence Selden at the door of his

hotel; and having read it, he turned back to wait for Dorset. The

message necessarily left large gaps for conjecture; but all that

he had recently heard and seen made these but too easy to fill

in. On the whole he was surprised; for though he had perceived

that the situation contained all the elements of an explosion, he

had often enough, in the range of his personal experience, seen

just such combinations subside into harmlessness. Still, Dorset's

spasmodic temper, and his wife's reckless disregard of

appearances, gave the situation a peculiar insecurity; and it was

less from the sense of any special relation to the case than from

a purely professional zeal, that Selden resolved to guide the

pair to safety. Whether, in the present instance, safety for

either lay in repairing so damaged a tie, it was no business of

his to consider: he had only, on general principles, to think of

averting a scandal, and his desire to avert it was increased by

his fear of its involving Miss Bart. There was nothing specific

in this apprehension; he merely wished to spare her the

embarrassment of being ever so remotely connected with the public

washing of the Dorset linen. 
