





It was a good deal better than a broiling Sunday in town--of

that no doubt remained to Lily as, reclining in the shade of a

leafy verandah, she looked seaward across a stretch of greensward

picturesquely dotted with groups of ladies in lace raiment and

men in tennis flannels. The huge Van Alstyne house and its

rambling dependencies were packed to their fullest capacity with

the Gormers' week-end guests, who now, in the radiance of the

Sunday forenoon, were dispersing themselves over the grounds in

quest of the various distractions the place afforded:

distractions ranging from tennis-courts to shooting-galleries,

from bridge and whiskey within doors to motors and steam-launches

without. Lily had the odd sense of having been caught up into the

crowd as carelessly as a passenger is gathered in by an express

train. The blonde and genial Mrs. Gormer might, indeed, have

figured the conductor, calmly assigning seats to the rush of

travellers, while Carry Fisher represented the porter pushing

their bags into place, giving them their numbers for the

dining-car, and warning them when their station was at hand. The

train, meanwhile, had scarcely slackened speed--life whizzed on

with a deafening' rattle and roar, in which one traveller at

least found a welcome refuge from the sound of her own thoughts. 

The Gormer MILIEU represented a social out-skirt which Lily had

always fastidiously avoided; but it struck her, now that she was

in it, as only a flamboyant copy of her own world, a caricature

approximating the real thing as the "society play" approaches the

manners of the drawing-room. The people about her were doing the

same things as the Trenors, the Van Osburghs and the Dorsets: the

difference lay in a hundred shades of aspect and manner, from the

pattern of the men's waistcoats to the inflexion of the women's

voices. Everything was pitched in a higher key, and there was

more of each thing: more noise, more colour, more champagne, more

familiarity--but also greater good-nature, less rivalry, and a

fresher capacity for enjoyment.



Miss Bart's arrival had been welcomed with an uncritical

friendliness that first irritated her pride and then brought her

to a sharp sense of her own situation--of the place in life

which, for the moment, she must accept and make the best of.

These people knew her story--of that her first long talk with

Carry Fisher had left no doubt: she was publicly branded as the

heroine of a "queer" episode--but instead of shrinking from her

as her own friends had done, they received her without question

into the easy promiscuity of their lives. They swallowed her past

as easily as they did Miss Anstell's, and with no apparent sense

of any difference in the size of the mouthful: all they asked was

that she should--in her own way, for they recognized a diversity

of gifts--contribute as much to the general amusement as that

graceful actress, whose talents, when off the stage, were of the

most varied order. Lily felt at once that any tendency to be

"stuck-up," to mark a sense of differences and distinctions,

would be fatal to her continuance in the Gormer set. To be taken

in on such terms--and into such a world!--was hard enough to the

lingering pride in her; but she realized, with a pang of

self-contempt, that to be excluded from it would, after all, be

harder still. For, almost at once, she had felt the insidious

charm of slipping back into a life where every material

difficulty was smoothed away. The sudden escape from a stifling

hotel in a dusty deserted city to the space and luxury of a great

country-house fanned by sea breezes, had produced a state of

moral lassitude agreeable enough after the nervous tension and

physical discomfort of the past weeks. For the moment she must

yield to the refreshment her senses craved--after that she would

reconsider her situation, and take counsel with her dignity. Her

enjoyment of her surroundings was, indeed, tinged by the

unpleasant consideration that she was accepting the hospitality

and courting the approval of people she had disdained under other

conditions. But she was growing less sensitive on such points: a

hard glaze of indifference was fast forming over her delicacies

and susceptibilities, and each concession to expediency hardened

the surface a little more. 



On the Monday, when the party disbanded with uproarious adieux,

the return to town threw into stronger relief the charms of the

life she was leaving. The other guests were dis<p 245>persing to

take up the same existence in a different setting: some at

Newport, some at Bar Harbour, some in the elaborate rusticity of

an Adirondack camp. Even Gerty Farish, who welcomed Lily's return

with tender solicitude, would soon be preparing to join the aunt

with whom she spent her summers on Lake George: only Lily herself

remained without plan or purpose, stranded in a backwater of the

great current of pleasure. But Carry Fisher, who had insisted on

transporting her to her own house, where she herself was to perch

for a day or two on the way to the Brys' camp, came to the rescue

with a new suggestion. 



"Look here, Lily--I'll tell you what it is: I want you to take my

place with Mattie Gormer this summer. They're taking a party out

to Alaska next month in their private car, and Mattie, who is the

laziest woman alive, wants me to go with them, and relieve her of

the bother of arranging things; but the Brys want me too--oh,

yes, we've made it up: didn't I tell you?--and, to put it

frankly, though I like the Gormers best, there's more profit for

me in the Brys. The fact is, they want to try Newport this

summer, and if I can make it a success for them they--well,

they'll make it a success for me." Mrs. Fisher clasped her hands

enthusiastically. "Do you know, Lily, the more I think of my idea

the better I like it--quite as much for you as for myself. The

Gormers have both taken a tremendous fancy to you, and the trip

to Alaska is--well--the very thing I should want for you just at

present." 



Miss Bart lifted her eyes with a keen glance. "To take me out of

my friends' way, you mean?" she said quietly; and Mrs. Fisher

responded with a deprecating kiss: "To keep you out of their

sight till they realize how much they miss you." 







Miss Bart went with the Gormers to Alaska; and the expedition, if

it did not produce the effect anticipated by her friend, had at

least the negative advantage of removing her from the fiery

centre of criticism and discussion. Gerty Farish had opposed the

plan with all the energy of her somewhat inarticulate nature. She

had even offered to give up her visit to Lake George, and remain

in town with Miss Bart, if the latter would renounce her journey;

but Lily could disguise her real distaste for this plan under a

sufficiently valid reason.



"You dear innocent, don't you see," she protested, "that Carry is

quite right, and that I must take Up my usual life, and go about

among people as much as possible? If my old friends choose to

believe lies about me I shall have to make new ones, that's all;

and you know beggars mustn't be choosers. Not that I don't like

Mattie Gormer--I DO like her: she's kind and honest and

unaffected; and don't you suppose I feel grateful to her for

making me welcome at a time when, as you've yourself seen, my own

family have unanimously washed their hands of me?" 



Gerty shook her head, mutely unconvinced. She felt not only that

Lily was cheapening herself by making use of an intimacy she

would never have cultivated from choice, but that, in drifting

back now to her former manner of life, she was forfeiting her

last chance of ever escaping from it. Gerty had but an obscure

conception of what Lily's actual experience had been: but its

consequences had established a lasting hold on her pity since the

memorable night when she had offered up her own secret hope to

her friend's extremity. To characters like Gerty's such a

sacrifice constitutes a moral claim on the part of the person in

whose behalf it has been made. Having once helped Lily, she must

continue to help her; and helping her, must believe in her,

because faith is the main-spring of such natures. But even if

Miss Bart, after her renewed taste of the amenities of life,

could have returned to the barrenness of a New York August,

mitigated only by poor Gerty's presence, her worldly wisdom would

have counselled her against such an act of abnegation. She knew

that Carry Fisher was right: that an opportune absence might be

the first step toward rehabilitation, and that, at any rate, to

linger on in town out of season was a fatal admission of defeat. 

From the Gormers' tumultuous progress across their native

continent, she returned with an altered view of her situation.

The renewed habit of luxury--the daily waking to an assured

absence of care and presence of material ease--gradually blunted

her appreciation of these values, and left her more conscious of

the void they could not fill. Mattie Gormer's undiscriminating

good-nature, and the slap-dash sociability of her friends, who

treated Lily precisely as they treated each other--all these

characteristic notes of difference began to wear upon her

endurance; and the more she saw to criticize in her companions,

the less justification she found for making use of them. The

longing to get back to her former surroundings hardened to a

fixed idea; but with the strengthening of her purpose came the

inevitable perception that, to attain it, she must exact fresh

concessions from her pride. These, for the moment, took the

unpleasant form of continuing to cling to her hosts after their

return from Alaska. Little as she was in the key of their MILIEU,

her immense social facility, her long habit of adapting herself

to others without suffering her own outline to be blurred, the

skilled manipulation of all the polished implements of her craft,

had won for her an important place in the Gormer group. If their

resonant hilarity could never be hers, she contributed a note of

easy elegance more valuable to Mattie Gormer than the louder

passages of the band. Sam Gormer and his special cronies stood

indeed a little in awe of her; but Mattie's following, headed by

Paul Morpeth, made her feel that they prized her for the very

qualities they most conspicuously lacked. If Morpeth, whose

social indolence was as great as his artistic activity, had

abandoned himself to the easy current of the Gormer existence,

where the minor exactions of politeness were unknown or ignored,

and a man could either break his engagements, or keep them in a

painting-jacket and slippers, he still preserved his sense of

differences, and his appreciation of graces he had no time to

cultivate. During the preparations for the Brys' TABLEAUX he had

been immensely struck by Lily's plastic possibilities--"not the

face: too self-controlled for expression; but the rest of

her--gad, what a model she'd make!"--and though his abhorrence of

the world in which he had seen her was too great for him to think

of seeking her there, he was fully alive to the privilege of

having her to look at and listen to while he lounged in Mattie

Gormer's dishevelled drawing-room. 



Lily had thus formed, in the tumult of her surroundings, a little

nucleus of friendly relations which mitigated the crudeness of


her course in lingering with the Gormers after their return. Nor

was she without pale glimpses of her own world, especially since

the breaking-up of the Newport season had set the social current

once more toward Long Island. Kate Corby, whose tastes

made her as promiscuous as Carry Fisher was rendered by her

necessities, occasionally descended on the Gormers, where, after

a first stare of surprise, she took Lily's presence almost too

much as a matter of course. Mrs. Fisher, too, appearing

frequently in the neighbourhood, drove over to impart her

experiences and give Lily what she called the latest report from

the weather-bureau; and the latter, who had never directly

invited her confidence, could yet talk with her more freely than

with Gerty Farish, in whose presence it was impossible even to

admit the existence of much that Mrs. Fisher conveniently took

for granted. 



Mrs. Fisher, moreover, had no embarrassing curiosity. She did not

wish to probe the inwardness of Lily's situation, but simply to

view it from the outside, and draw her conclusions accordingly;

and these conclusions, at the end of a confidential talk, she

summed up to her friend in the succinct remark: "You must marry

as soon as you can." 



Lily uttered a faint laugh--for once Mrs. Fisher lacked

originality. "Do you mean, like Gerty Farish, to recommend the

unfailing panacea of 'a good man's love'?" 



"No--I don't think either of my candidates would answer to that

description," said Mrs. Fisher after a pause of reflection. 



"Either? Are there actually two?" 



"Well, perhaps I ought to say one and a half--for the moment." 



Miss Bart received this with increasing amusement. "Other things

being equal, I think I should prefer a half-husband: who is he?" 

"Don't fly out at me till you hear my reasons--George Dorset." 



"Oh---" Lily murmured reproachfully; but Mrs. Fisher pressed on

unrebuffed. "Well, why not? They had a few weeks' honeymoon when

they first got back from Europe, but now things are going badly

with them again. Bertha has been behaving more than ever like a

madwoman, and George's powers of credulity are very nearly

exhausted. They're at their place here, you know, and I spent

last Sunday with them. It was a ghastly party--no one else but

poor Neddy Silverton, who looks like a galley-slave (they used to

talk of my making that poor boy unhappy!)--and after

luncheon George carried me off on a long walk, and told me the

end would have to come soon." 



Miss Bart made an incredulous gesture. "As far as that goes, the

end will never come--Bertha will always know how to get him back

when she wants him." 



Mrs. Fisher continued to observe her tentatively. "Not if he has

any one else to turn to! Yes--that's just what it comes to: the

poor creature can't stand alone. And I remember him such a good

fellow, full of life and enthusiasm." She paused, and went on,

dropping her glance from Lily's: "He wouldn't stay with her ten

minutes if he KNEW---" 



"Knew---?" Miss Bart repeated. 



"What YOU must, for instance--with the opportunities you've had!

If he had positive proof, I mean---" 



Lily interrupted her with a deep blush of displeasure. "Please

let us drop the subject, Carry: it's too odious to me." And to

divert her companion's attention she added, with an attempt at

lightness: "And your second candidate? We must not forget him." 



Mrs. Fisher echoed her laugh. "I wonder if you'll cry out just as

loud if I say--Sim Rosedale?" 



Miss Bart did not cry out: she sat silent, gazing thoughtfully at

her friend. The suggestion, in truth, gave expression to a

possibility which, in the last weeks, had more than once recurred

to her; but after a moment she said carelessly: "Mr. Rosedale

wants a wife who can establish him in the bosom of the Van

Osburghs and Trenors." 



Mrs. Fisher caught her up eagerly. "And so YOU could--with his

money! Don't you see how beautifully it would work out for you

both?" 



"I don't see any way of making him see it," Lily returned, with a

laugh intended to dismiss the subject. 



But in reality it lingered with her long after Mrs. Fisher had

taken leave. She had seen very little of Rosedale since her

annexation by the Gormers, for he was still steadily bent on

penetrating to the inner Paradise from which she was now

excluded; but once or twice, when nothing better offered, he had

turned up for a Sunday, and on these occasions he had left her in

no doubt as to his view of her situation. That he still

admired her was, more than ever, offensively evident; for in the

Gormer circle, where he expanded as in his native element, there

were no puzzling conventions to check the full expression of his

approval. But it was in the quality of his admiration that she

read his shrewd estimate of her case. He enjoyed letting the

Gormers see that he had known "Miss Lily"--she was "Miss Lily" to

him now--before they had had the faintest social existence:

enjoyed more especially impressing Paul Morpeth with the distance

to which their intimacy dated back. But he let it be felt that

that intimacy was a mere ripple on the surface of a rushing

social current, the kind of relaxation which a man of large

interests and manifold preoccupations permits himself in his

hours of ease. 



The necessity of accepting this view of their past relation, and

of meeting it in the key of pleasantry prevalent among her new

friends, was deeply humiliating to Lily. But she dared less than

ever to quarrel with Rosedale. She suspected that her rejection

rankled among the most unforgettable of his rebuffs, and the fact

that he knew something of her wretched transaction with Trenor,

and was sure to put the basest construction on it, seemed to

place her hopelessly in his power. Yet at Carry Fisher's

suggestion a new hope had stirred in her. Much as she disliked

Rosedale, she no longer absolutely despised him. For he was

gradually attaining his object in life, and that, to Lily, was

always less despicable than to miss it. With the slow unalterable

persistency which she had always felt in him, he was making his

way through the dense mass of social antagonisms. Already his

wealth, and the masterly use he had made of it, were giving him

an enviable prominence in the world of affairs, and placing Wall

Street under obligations which only Fifth Avenue could repay. In

response to these claims, his name began to figure on municipal

committees and charitable boards; he appeared at banquets to

distinguished strangers, and his candidacy at one of the

fashionable clubs was discussed with diminishing opposition. He

had figured once or twice at the Trenor dinners, and had learned

to speak with just the right note of disdain of the big Van

Osburgh crushes; and all he now needed was a wife whose

affiliations would shorten the last tedious steps of his ascent.

It was with that object that, a year earlier, he had fixed

his affections on Miss Bart; but in the interval he had

mounted nearer to the goal, while she had lost the power to

abbreviate the remaining steps of the way. All this she saw with

the clearness of vision that came to her in moments of

despondency. It was success that dazzled her--she could

distinguish facts plainly enough in the twilight of failure. And

the twilight, as she now sought to pierce it, was gradually

lighted by a faint spark of reassurance. Under the utilitarian

motive of Rosedale's wooing she had felt, clearly enough, the

heat of personal inclination. She would not have detested him so

heartily had she not known that he dared to admire her. What,

then, if the passion persisted, though the other motive had

ceased to sustain it? She had never even tried to please him--he

had been drawn to her in spite of her manifest disdain. What if

she now chose to exert the power which, even in its passive

state, he had felt so strongly? What if she made him marry her

for love, now that he had no other reason for marrying her?



As became persons of their rising consequence, the Gormers were

engaged in building a country-house on Long Island; and it was a

part of Miss Bart's duty to attend her hostess on frequent visits

of inspection to the new estate. There, while Mrs. Gormer plunged

into problems of lighting and sanitation, Lily had leisure to

wander, in the bright autumn air, along the tree-fringed bay to

which the land declined. Little as she was addicted to solitude,

there had come to be moments when it seemed a welcome escape from

the empty noises of her life. She was weary of being swept

passively along a current of pleasure and business in which she

had no share; weary of seeing other people pursue amusement and

squander money, while she felt herself of no more account among

them than an expensive toy in the hands of a spoiled child. 



It was in this frame of mind that, striking back from the shore

one morning into the windings of an unfamiliar lane, she came

suddenly upon the figure of George Dorset. The Dorset place was

in the immediate neighbourhood of the Gormers' newly-acquired

estate, and in her motor-flights thither with Mrs. Gormer, Lily

had caught one or two passing glimpses of the couple; but they

moved in so different an orbit that she had not considered the

possibility of a direct encounter. 



Dorset, swinging along with bent head, in moody abstraction, did

not see Miss Bart till he was close upon her; but the sight,

instead of bringing him to a halt, as she had half-expected, sent

him toward her with an eagerness which found expression in his

opening words. 



"Miss Bart!--You'll shake hands, won't you? I've been hoping to

meet you--I should have written to you if I'd dared." His face,

with its tossed red hair and straggling moustache, had a driven

uneasy look, as though life had become an unceasing race between

himself and the thoughts at his heels. 



The look drew a word of compassionate greeting from Lily, and he

pressed on, as if encouraged by her tone: "I wanted to

apologize--to ask you to forgive me for the miserable part I

played---" 



She checked him with a quick gesture. "Don't let us speak of it:

I was very sorry for you," she said, with a tinge of disdain

which, as she instantly perceived, was not lost on him. 



He flushed to his haggard eyes, flushed so cruelly that she

repented the thrust. "You might well be; you don't know--you must

let me explain. I was deceived: abominably deceived---" 



"I am still more sorry for you, then," she interposed, without

irony; "but you must see that I am not exactly the person with

whom the subject can be discussed." 



He met this with a look of genuine wonder. "Why not? Isn't it to

you, of all people, that I owe an explanation---" 



"No explanation is necessary: the situation was perfectly clear

to me." 



"Ah---" he murmured, his head drooping again, and his irresolute

hand switching at the underbrush along the lane. But as Lily made

a movement to pass on, he broke out with fresh vehemence: "Miss

Bart, for God's sake don't turn from me! We used to be good

friends--you were always kind to me--and you don't know how I

need a friend now." 



The lamentable weakness of the words roused a motion of pity in

Lily's breast. She too needed friends--she had tasted the pang of

loneliness; and her resentment of Bertha Dorset's cruelty

softened her heart to the poor wretch who was after all the chief

of Bertha's victims. 



"I still wish to be kind; I feel no ill-will toward you," she

said. "But you must understand that after what has happened we

can't be friends again--we can't see each other." 



"Ah, you ARE kind--you're merciful--you always were!" He fixed

his miserable gaze on her. "But why can't we be friends--why not,

when I've repented in dust and ashes? Isn't it hard that you

should condemn me to suffer for the falseness, the treachery of

others? I was punished enough at the time--is there to be no

respite for me?" 



"I should have thought you had found complete respite in the

reconciliation which was effected at my expense," Lily began,

with renewed impatience; but he broke in imploringly: "Don't put

it in that way--when that's been the worst of my

punishment. My God! what could I do--wasn't I powerless? You were

singled out as a sacrifice: any word I might have said would have

been turned against you---" 



"I have told you I don't blame you; all I ask you to understand

is that, after the use Bertha chose to make of me--after all that

her behaviour has since implied--it's impossible that you and I

should meet." 



He continued to stand before her, in his dogged weakness. "Is

it--need it be? Mightn't there be circumstances---?" he checked

himself, slashing at the wayside weeds in a wider radius. Then he

began again: "Miss Bart, listen--give me a minute. If we're not

to meet again, at least let me have a hearing now. You say we

can't be friends after--after what has happened. But can't I at

least appeal to your pity? Can't I move you if I ask you to think

of me as a prisoner--a prisoner you alone can set free?" 



Lily's inward start betrayed itself in a quick blush: was it

possible that this was really the sense of Carry Fisher's

adumbrations? 



"I can't see how I can possibly be of any help to you," she

murmured, drawing back a little from the mounting excitement of

his look. 



Her tone seemed to sober him, as it had so often done in his

stormiest moments. The stubborn lines of his face relaxed, and he

said, with an abrupt drop to docility: "You WOULD see, if you'd

be as merciful as you used to be: and heaven knows I've never

needed it more!" 



She paused a moment, moved in spite of herself by this reminder

of her influence over him. Her fibres had been softened by

suffering, and the sudden glimpse into his mocked and broken life

disarmed her contempt for his weakness. 



"I am very sorry for you--I would help you willingly; but you

must have other friends, other advisers." 



"I never had a friend like you," he answered simply. "And

besides--can't you see?--you're the only person"--his voice

dropped to a whisper--"the only person who knows." 



Again she felt her colour change; again her heart rose in

precipitate throbs to meet what she felt was coming. He lifted

his eyes to her entreatingly. "You do see, don't you? You

understand? I'm desperate--I'm at the end of my tether. I

want to be free, and you can free me. I know you can. You don't

want to keep me bound fast in hell, do you? You can't want to

take such a vengeance as that. You were always kind--your eyes

are kind now. You say you're sorry for me. Well, it rests with

you to show it; and heaven knows there's nothing to keep you

back. You understand, of course--there wouldn't be a hint of

publicity--not a sound or a syllable to connect you with the

thing. It would never come to that, you know: all I need is to be

able to say definitely:'I know this--and this--and this'--and the

fight would drop, and the way be cleared, and the whole

abominable business swept out of sight in a second." 



He spoke pantingly, like a tired runner, with breaks of

exhaustion between his words; and through the breaks she caught,

as through the shifting rents of a fog, great golden vistas of

peace and safety. For there was no mistaking the definite

intention behind his vague appeal; she could have filled up the

blanks without the help of Mrs. Fisher's insinuations. Here was a

man who turned to her in the extremity of his loneliness and his

humiliation: if she came to him at such a moment he would be hers

with all the force of his deluded faith. And the power to make

him so lay in her hand--lay there in a completeness he could not

even remotely conjecture. Revenge and rehabilitation might be

hers at a stroke--there was something dazzling in the

completeness of the opportunity. 



She stood silent, gazing away from him down the autumnal stretch

of the deserted lane. And suddenly fear possessed her--fear of

herself, and of the terrible force of the temptation. All her

past weaknesses were like so many eager accomplices drawing her

toward the path their feet had already smoothed. She turned

quickly, and held out her hand to Dorset. 



"Goodbye--I'm sorry; there's nothing in the world that I can do."



"Nothing? Ah, don't say that," he cried; "say what's true: that

you abandon me like the others. You, the only creature who could

have saved me!" 



"Goodbye--goodbye," she repeated hurriedly; and as she

moved away she heard him cry out on a last note of entreaty: "At

least you'll let me see you once more?" 







Lily, on regaining the Gormer grounds, struck rapidly across the

lawn toward the unfinished house, where she fancied that her

hostess might be speculating, not too resignedly, on the cause of

her delay; for, like many unpunctual persons, Mrs. Gormer

disliked to be kept waiting. 



As Miss Bart reached the avenue, however, she saw a smart phaeton

with a high-stepping pair disappear behind the shrubbery in the

direction of the gate; and on the doorstep stood Mrs. Gormer,

with a glow of retrospective pleasure on her open countenance. At

sight of Lily the glow deepened to an embarrassed red, and she

said with a slight laugh: "Did you see my visitor? Oh, I thought

you came back by the avenue. It was Mrs. George Dorset--she said

she'd dropped in to make a neighbourly call." 



Lily met the announcement with her usual composure, though her

experience of Bertha's idiosyncrasies would not have led her to

include the neighbourly instinct among them; and Mrs. Gormer,

relieved to see that she gave no sign of surprise, went on with a

deprecating laugh: "Of course what really brought her was

curiosity--she made me take her all over the house. But no one

could have been nicer--no airs, you know, and so good-natured: I

can quite see why people think her so fascinating." 



This surprising event, coinciding too completely with her meeting

with Dorset to be regarded as contingent upon it, had yet

immediately struck Lily with a vague sense of foreboding. It was

not in Bertha's habits to be neighbourly, much less to make

advances to any one outside the immediate circle of her

affinities. She had always consistently ignored the world of

outer aspirants, or had recognized its individual members only

when prompted by motives of self-interest; and the very

capriciousness of her condescensions had, as Lily was aware,

given them special value in the eyes of the persons she

distinguished. Lily saw this now in Mrs. Gormer's unconcealable

complacency, and in the happy irrelevance with which, for the

next day or two, she quoted Bertha's opinions and

speculated on the origin of her gown. All the secret ambitions

which Mrs. Gormer's native indolence, and the attitude of her

companions, kept in habitual abeyance, were now germinating

afresh in the glow of Bertha's advances; and whatever the cause

of the latter, Lily saw that, if they were followed up, they were

likely to have a disturbing effect upon her own future. 



She had arranged to break the length of her stay with her new

friends by one or two visits to other acquaintances as recent;

and on her return from this somewhat depressing excursion she was

immediately conscious that Mrs. Dorset's influence was still in

the air. There had been another exchange of visits, a tea at a

country-club, an encounter at a hunt ball; there was even a

rumour of an approaching dinner, which Mattie Gormer, with an

unnatural effort at discretion, tried to smuggle out of the

conversation whenever Miss Bart took part in it. 



The latter had already planned to return to town after a farewell

Sunday with her friends; and, with Gerty Farish's aid, had

discovered a small private hotel where she might establish

herself for the winter. The hotel being on the edge of a

fashionable neighbourhood, the price of the few square feet she

was to occupy was considerably in excess of her means; but she

found a justification for her dislike of poorer quarters in the

argument that, at this particular juncture, it was of the utmost

importance to keep up a show of prosperity. In reality, it was

impossible for her, while she had the means to pay her way for a

week ahead, to lapse into a form of existence like Gerty

Farish's. She had never been so near the brink of insolvency; but

she could at least manage to meet her weekly hotel bill, and

having settled the heaviest of her previous debts out of the

money she had received from Trenor, she had a still fair margin

of credit to go upon. The situation, however, was not agreeable

enough to lull her to complete unconsciousness of its insecurity.

Her rooms, with their cramped outlook down a sallow vista of

brick walls and fire-escapes, her lonely meals in the dark

restaurant with its surcharged ceiling and haunting smell of

coffee--all these material discomforts, which were yet to be

accounted as so many privileges soon to be withdrawn, kept

constantly before her the disadvantages of her state; and

her mind reverted the more insistently to Mrs. Fisher's counsels.

Beat about the question as she would, she knew the outcome of it

was that she must try to marry Rosedale; and in this conviction

she was fortified by an unexpected visit from George Dorset. 



She found him, on the first Sunday after her return to town,

pacing her narrow sitting-room to the imminent peril of the few

knick-knacks with which she had tried to disguise its plush

exuberances; but the sight of her seemed to quiet him, and he

said meekly that he hadn't come to bother her--that he asked

only to be allowed to sit for half an hour and talk of anything

she liked. In reality, as she knew, he had but one subject:

himself and his wretchedness; and it was the need of her sympathy

that had drawn him back. But he began with a pretence of

questioning her about herself, and as she replied, she saw that,

for the first time, a faint realization of her plight penetrated

the dense surface of his self-absorption. Was it possible that

her old beast of an aunt had actually cut her off? That she was

living alone like this because there was no one else for her to

go to, and that she really hadn't more than enough to keep alive

on till the wretched little legacy was paid? The fibres of

sympathy were nearly atrophied in him, but he was suffering so

intensely that he had a faint glimpse of what other sufferings

might mean--and, as she perceived, an almost simultaneous

perception of the way in which her particular misfortunes might

serve him. 



When at length she dismissed him, on the pretext that she must

dress for dinner, he lingered entreatingly on the threshold to

blurt out: "It's been such a comfort--do say you'll let me see

you again--" But to this direct appeal it was impossible to give

an assent; and she said with friendly decisiveness: "I'm

sorry--but you know why I can't." 



He coloured to the eyes, pushed the door shut, and stood before

her embarrassed but insistent. "I know how you might, if you

would--if things were different--and it lies with you to make

them so. It's just a word to say, and you put me out of my

misery!" 



Their eyes met, and for a second she trembled again with the

nearness of the temptation. "You're mistaken; I know nothing; I

saw nothing," she exclaimed, striving, by sheer force of

reiteration, to build a barrier between herself and her peril;

and as he turned away, groaning out "You sacrifice us both," she

continued to repeat, as if it were a charm: "I know

nothing--absolutely nothing."







Lily had seen little of Rosedale since her illuminating talk with

Mrs. Fisher, but on the two or three occasions when they had met

she was conscious of having distinctly advanced in his favour.

There could be no doubt that he admired her as much as ever, and

she believed it rested with herself to raise his admiration to

the point where it should bear down the lingering counsels of

expediency. The task was not an easy one; but neither was it

easy, in her long sleepless nights, to face the thought of what

George Dorset was so clearly ready to offer. Baseness for

baseness, she hated the other least: there were even moments when

a marriage with Rosedale seemed the only honourable solution of

her difficulties. She did not indeed let her imagination range

beyond the day of plighting: after that everything faded into a

haze of material well-being, in which the personality of her

benefactor remained mercifully vague. She had learned, in her

long vigils, that there were certain things not good to think of,

certain midnight images that must at any cost be exorcised--and

one of these was the image of herself as Rosedale's wife. 



Carry Fisher, on the strength, as she frankly owned, of the Brys'

Newport success, had taken for the autumn months a small house at

Tuxedo; and thither Lily was bound on the Sunday after Dorset's

visit. Though it was nearly dinner-time when she arrived, her

hostess was still out, and the firelit quiet of the small silent

house descended on her spirit with a sense of peace and

familiarity. It may be doubted if such an emotion had ever before

been evoked by Carry Fisher's surroundings; but, contrasted to

the world in which Lily had lately lived, there was an air of

repose and stability in the very placing of the furniture, and in

the quiet competence of the parlour-maid who led her up to her

room. Mrs. Fisher's unconventionality was, after all, a merely

superficial divergence from an inherited social creed, while the

manners of the Gormer circle represented their first attempt to

formulate such a creed for themselves.



It was the first time since her return from Europe that Lily had

found herself in a congenial atmosphere, and the stirring of

familiar associations had almost prepared her, as she descended

the stairs before dinner, to enter upon a group of her old

acquaintances. But this expectation was instantly checked by the

reflection that the friends who remained loyal were precisely

those who would be least willing to expose her to such

encounters; and it was hardly with surprise that she found,

instead, Mr. Rosedale kneeling domestically on the drawing-room

hearth before his hostess's little girl. 



Rosedale in the paternal role was hardly a figure to soften Lily;

yet she could not but notice a quality of homely goodness in his

advances to the child. They were not, at any rate, the

premeditated and perfunctory endearments of the guest under his

hostess's eye, for he and the little girl had the room to

themselves; and something in his attitude made him seem a simple

and kindly being compared to the small critical creature who

endured his homage. Yes, he would be kind--Lily, from the

threshold, had time to feel--kind in his gross, unscrupulous,

rapacious way, the way of the predatory creature with his mate.

She had but a moment in which to consider whether this glimpse of

the fireside man mitigated her repugnance, or gave it, rather, a

more concrete and intimate form; for at sight of her he was

immediately on his feet again, the florid and dominant Rosedale

of Mattie Gormer's drawing-room. 



It was no surprise to Lily to find that he had been selected as

her only fellow-guest. Though she and her hostess had not met

since the latter's tentative discussion of her future, Lily knew

that the acuteness which enabled Mrs. Fisher to lay a safe and

pleasant course through a world of antagonistic forces was not

infrequently exercised for the benefit of her friends. It was, in

fact, characteristic of Carry that, while she actively gleaned

her own stores from the fields of affluence, her real sympathies

were on the other side--with the unlucky, the unpopular, the

unsuccessful, with all her hungry fellow-toilers in the shorn

stubble of success. 



Mrs. Fisher's experience guarded her against the mistake of

exposing Lily, for the first evening, to the unmitigated

impression of Rosedale's personality. Kate Corby and two

or three men dropped in to dinner, and Lily, alive to every

detail of her friend's method, saw that such opportunities as had

been contrived for her were to be deferred till she had, as it

were, gained courage to make effectual use of them. She had a

sense of acquiescing in this plan with the passiveness of a

sufferer resigned to the surgeon's touch; and this feeling of

almost lethargic helplessness continued when, after the departure

of the guests, Mrs. Fisher followed her upstairs. 



"May I come in and smoke a cigarette over your fire? If we talk

in my room we shall disturb the child." Mrs. Fisher looked about

her with the eye of the solicitous hostess. "I hope you've

managed to make yourself comfortable, dear? Isn't it a jolly

little house? It's such a blessing to have a few quiet weeks with

the baby." 



Carry, in her rare moments of prosperity, became so expansively

maternal that Miss Bart sometimes wondered whether, if she could

ever get time and money enough, she would not end by devoting

them both to her daughter. 



It's a well-earned rest: I'll say that for myself," she

continued, sinking down with a sigh of content on the pillowed

lounge near the fire. "Louisa Bry is a stern task-master: I often

used to wish myself back with the Gormers. Talk of love making

people jealous and suspicious--it's nothing to social ambition!

Louisa used to lie awake at night wondering whether the women who

called on us called on ME because I was with her, or on HER

because she was with me; and she was always laying traps to find

out what I thought. Of course I had to disown my oldest friends,

rather than let her suspect she owed me the chance of making a

single acquaintance--when, all the while, that was what she had

me there for, and what she wrote me a handsome cheque for when

the season was over!" 



Mrs. Fisher was not a woman who talked of herself without cause,

and the practice of direct speech, far from precluding in her an

occasional resort to circuitous methods, served rather, at

crucial moments, the purpose of the juggler's chatter while he

shifts the contents of his sleeves. Through the haze of her

cigarette smoke she continued to gaze meditatively at Miss Bart,

who, having dismissed her maid, sat before the

toilet-table shaking out over her shoulders the loosened

undulations of her hair. 



"Your hair's wonderful, Lily. Thinner--? What does that matter,

when it's so light and alive? So many women's worries seem to go

straight to their hair--but yours looks as if there had never

been an anxious thought under it. I never saw you look better

than you did this evening. Mattie Gormer told me that Morpeth

wanted to paint you--why don't you let him?" 



Miss Bart's immediate answer was to address a critical glance to

the reflection of the countenance under discussion. Then she

said, with a slight touch of irritation: "I don't care to accept

a portrait from Paul Morpeth." 



Mrs. Fisher mused. "N--no. And just now, especially--well, he

can do you after you're married." She waited a moment, and then

went on: "By the way, I had a visit from Mattie the other day.

She turned up here last Sunday--and with Bertha Dorset, of all

people in the world!" 



She paused again to measure the effect of this announcement on

her hearer, but the brush in Miss Bart's lifted hand maintained

its unwavering stroke from brow to nape. 



"I never was more astonished," Mrs. Fisher pursued. "I don't know

two women less predestined to intimacy--from Bertha's standpoint,

that is; for of course poor Mattie thinks it natural enough that

she should be singled out--I've no doubt the rabbit always thinks

it is fascinating the anaconda. Well, you know I've always told

you that Mattie secretly longed to bore herself with the really

fashionable; and now that the chance has come, I see that she's

capable of sacrificing all her old friends to it." 



Lily laid aside her brush and turned a penetrating glance upon

her friend. "Including ME?" she suggested. 



"Ah, my dear," murmured Mrs. Fisher, rising to push back a log

from the hearth. 



"That's what Bertha means, isn't it?" Miss Bart went on steadily.

"For of course she always means something; and before I left Long

Island I saw that she was beginning to lay her toils for Mattie."



Mrs. Fisher sighed evasively. "She has her fast now, at any rate.

To think of that loud independence of Mattie's being only

a subtler form of snobbishness! Bertha can already make her

believe anything she pleases--and I'm afraid she's begun, my poor

child, by insinuating horrors about you." 



Lily flushed under the shadow of her drooping hair. "The world is

too vile," she murmured, averting herself from Mrs. Fisher's

anxious scrutiny. 



"It's not a pretty place; and the only way to keep a footing in

it is to fight it on its own terms--and above all, my dear, not

alone!" Mrs. Fisher gathered up her floating implications in a

resolute grasp. "You've told me so little that I can only guess

what has been happening; but in the rush we all live in there's

no time to keep on hating any one without a cause, and if Bertha

is still nasty enough to want to injure you with other people it

must be because she's still afraid of you. From her standpoint

there's only one reason for being afraid of you; and my own idea

is that, if you want to punish her, you hold the means in your

hand. I believe you can marry George Dorset tomorrow; but if you

don't care for that particular form of retaliation, the only

thing to save you from Bertha is to marry somebody else."





The light projected on the situation by Mrs. Fisher had the

cheerless distinctness of a winter dawn. It outlined the facts

with a cold precision unmodified by shade or colour, and

refracted, as it were, from the blank walls of the surrounding

limitations: she had opened windows from which no sky was ever

visible. But the idealist subdued to vulgar necessities must

employ vulgar minds to draw the inferences to which he cannot

stoop; and it was easier for Lily to let Mrs. Fisher formulate

her case than to put it plainly to herself. Once confronted with

it, however, she went the full length of its consequences; and

these had never been more clearly present to her than when, the

next afternoon, she set out for a walk with Rosedale. 



It was one of those still November days when the air is haunted

with the light of summer, and something in the lines of the

landscape, and in the golden haze which bathed them, recalled to

Miss Bart the September afternoon when she had climbed the slopes

of Bellomont with Selden. The importunate memory was kept before

her by its ironic contrast to her present situation, since her

walk with Selden had represented an irresistible flight from just

such a climax as the present excursion was designed to bring

about. But other memories importuned her also; the recollection

of similar situations, as skillfully led up to, but through some

malice of fortune, or her own unsteadiness of purpose, always

failing of the intended result. Well, her purpose was steady

enough now. She saw that the whole weary work of rehabilitation

must begin again, and against far greater odds, if Bertha Dorset

should succeed in breaking up her friendship with the Gormers;

and her longing for shelter and security was intensified by the

passionate desire to triumph over Bertha, as only wealth and

predominance could triumph over her. As the wife of Rosedale--the

Rosedale she felt it in her power to create--she would at least

present an invulnerable front to her enemy. 



She had to draw upon this thought, as upon some fiery stimulant,

to keep up her part in the scene toward which Rosedale

was too frankly tending. As she walked beside him, shrinking in

every nerve from the way in which his look and tone made free of

her, yet telling herself that this momentary endurance of his

mood was the price she must pay for her ultimate power over him,

she tried to calculate the exact point at which concession must

turn to resistance, and the price HE would have to pay be made

equally clear to him. But his dapper self-confidence seemed

impenetrable to such hints, and she had a sense of something hard

and self-contained behind the superficial warmth of his manner. 



They had been seated for some time in the seclusion of a rocky

glen above the lake, when she suddenly cut short the culmination

of an impassioned period by turning upon him the grave loveliness

of her gaze. 



"I DO believe what you say, Mr. Rosedale," she said quietly; "and

I am ready to marry you whenever you wish." 



Rosedale, reddening to the roots of his glossy hair, received

this announcement with a recoil which carried him to his feet,

where he halted before her in an attitude of almost comic

discomfiture. 



"For I suppose that is what you do wish," she continued, in the

same quiet tone. "And, though I was unable to consent when you

spoke to me in this way before, I am ready, now that I know you

so much better, to trust my happiness to your hands." 



She spoke with the noble directness which she could command on

such occasions, and which was like a large steady light thrown

across the tortuous darkness of the situation. In its

inconvenient brightness Rosedale seemed to waver a moment, as

though conscious that every avenue of escape was unpleasantly

illuminated. 



Then he gave a short laugh, and drew out a gold cigarette-case,

in which, with plump jewelled fingers, he groped for a

gold-tipped cigarette. Selecting one, he paused to contemplate it

a moment before saying: "My dear Miss Lily, I'm sorry if there's

been any little misapprehension between us-but you made me feel

my suit was so hopeless that I had really no intention of

renewing it." 



Lily's blood tingled with the grossness of the rebuff; but she checked

the first leap of her anger, and said in a tone of gentle dignity:

"I have no one but myself to blame if I gave you the impression

that my decision was final." 



Her word-play was always too quick for him, and this reply held

him in puzzled silence while she extended her hand and added,

with the faintest inflection of sadness in her voice: "Before we

bid each other goodbye, I want at least to thank you for having

once thought of me as you did." 



The touch of her hand, the moving softness of her look, thrilled

a vulnerable fibre in Rosedale. It was her exquisite

inaccessibleness, the sense of distance she could convey without

a hint of disdain, that made it most difficult for him to give

her up. 



"Why do you talk of saying goodbye? Ain't we going to be good

friends all the same?" he urged, without releasing her hand. 



She drew it away quietly. "What is your idea of being good

friends?" she returned with a slight smile. "Making love to me

without asking me to marry you?" Rosedale laughed with a

recovered sense of ease. 



"Well, that's about the size of it, I suppose. I can't help

making love to you--I don't see how any man could; but I don't

mean to ask you to marry me as long as I can keep out of it." 



She continued to smile. "I like your frankness; but I am afraid

our friendship can hardly continue on those terms." She turned

away, as though to mark that its final term had in fact been

reached, and he followed her for a few steps with a baffled sense

of her having after all kept the game in her own hands. 



"Miss Lily---" he began impulsively; but she walked on without

seeming to hear him. 



He overtook her in a few quick strides, and laid an entreating

hand on her arm. "Miss Lily--don't hurry away like that. You're

beastly hard on a fellow; but if you don't mind speaking the

truth I don't see why you shouldn't allow me to do the same." 



She had paused a moment with raised brows, drawing away

instinctively from his touch, though she made no effort to evade

his words. 



"I was under the impression," she rejoined, "that you had done so

without waiting for my permission."



"Well--why shouldn't you hear my reasons for doing it, then?

We're neither of us such new hands that a little plain speaking

is going to hurt us. I'm all broken up on you: there's nothing

new in that. I'm more in love with you than I was this time last

year; but I've got to face the fact that the situation is

changed." 



She continued to confront him with the same air of ironic

composure. "You mean to say that I'm not as desirable a match as

you thought me?" 



"Yes; that's what I do mean," he answered resolutely. "I won't go

into what's happened. I don't believe the stories about you--I

don't WANT to believe them. But they're there, and my not

believing them ain't going to alter the situation." 



She flushed to her temples, but the extremity of her need checked

the retort on her lip and she continued to face him composedly.

"If they are not true," she said, "doesn't THAT alter the

situation?" 



He met this with a steady gaze of his small stock-taking eyes,

which made her feel herself no more than some superfine human

merchandise. "I believe it does in novels; but I'm certain it

don't in real life. You know that as well as I do: if we're

speaking the truth, let's speak the whole truth. Last year I was

wild to marry you, and you wouldn't look at me: this year--well,

you appear to be willing. Now, what has changed in the interval?

Your situation, that's all. Then you thought you could do better;

now---"



"You think you can?" broke from her ironically. 



"Why, yes, I do: in one way, that is." He stood before her, his

hands in his pockets, his chest sturdily expanded under its vivid

waistcoat. "It's this way, you see: I've had a pretty steady

grind of it these last years, working up my social position.

Think it's funny I should say that? Why should I mind saying I

want to get into society? A man ain't ashamed to say he wants to

own a racing stable or a picture gallery. Well, a taste for

society's just another kind of hobby. Perhaps I want to get even

with some of the people who cold-shouldered me last year--put it

that way if it sounds better. Anyhow, I want to have the run of

the best houses; and I'm getting it too, little by little. But I

know the quickest way to queer yourself with the right

people is to be seen with the wrong ones; and that's the reason I

want to avoid mistakes." 



Miss Bart continued to stand before him in a silence that might

have expressed either mockery or a half-reluctant respect for his

candour, and after a moment's pause he went on: "There it is, you

see. I'm more in love with you than ever, but if I married you

now I'd queer myself for good and all, and everything I've worked

for all these years would be wasted." 



She received this with a look from which all tinge of resentment

had faded. After the tissue of social falsehoods in which she had

so long moved it was refreshing to step into the open daylight of

an avowed expediency. 



"I understand you," she said. "A year ago I should have been of

use to you, and now I should be an encumbrance; and I like you

for telling me so quite honestly." She extended her hand with a

smile. 



Again the gesture had a disturbing effect upon Mr. Rosedale's

self-command. "By George, you're a dead game sport, you are!" he

exclaimed; and as she began once more to move away, he broke out

suddenly--"Miss Lily--stop. You know I don't believe those

stories--I believe they were all got up by a woman who didn't

hesitate to sacrifice you to her own convenience---" 



Lily drew away with a movement of quick disdain: it was easier to

endure his insolence than his commiseration. 



"You are very kind; but I don't think we need discuss the matter

farther." 



But Rosedale's natural imperviousness to hints made it easy for

him to brush such resistance aside. "I don't want to discuss

anything; I just want to put a plain case before you," he

persisted. 



She paused in spite of herself, held by the note of a new purpose

in his look and tone; and he went on, keeping his eyes firmly

upon her: "The wonder to me is that you've waited so long to get

square with that woman, when you've had the power in your hands."

She continued silent under the rush of astonishment that his

words produced, and he moved a step closer to ask with low-toned

directness: "Why don't you use those letters of hers you bought

last year?"



Lily stood speechless under the shock of the interrogation. In

the words preceding it she had conjectured, at most, an allusion

to her supposed influence over George Dorset; nor did the

astonishing indelicacy of the reference diminish the likelihood

of Rosedale's resorting to it. But now she saw how far short of

the mark she had fallen; and the surprise of learning that he had

discovered the secret of the letters left her, for the moment,

unconscious of the special use to which he was in the act of

putting his knowledge. 



Her temporary loss of self-possession gave him time to press his

point; and he went on quickly, as though to secure completer

control of the situation: "You see I know where you stand--I know

how completely she's in your power. That sounds like stage-talk,

don't it?--but there's a lot of truth in some of those old gags;

and I don't suppose you bought those letters simply because

you're collecting autographs." 



She continued to look at him with a deepening bewilderment: her

only clear impression resolved itself into a scared sense of his

power. 



"You're wondering how I found out about 'em?" he went on,

answering her look with a note of conscious pride. "Perhaps

you've forgotten that I'm the owner of the Benedick-but never

mind about that now. Getting on to things is a mighty useful

accomplishment in business, and I've simply extended it to my

private affairs. For this IS partly my affair, you see--at least,

it depends on you to make it so. Let's look the situation

straight in the eye. Mrs. Dorset, for reasons we needn't go into,

did you a beastly bad turn last spring. Everybody knows what Mrs.

Dorset is, and her best friends wouldn't believe her on oath

where their own interests were concerned; but as long as they're

out of the row it's much easier to follow her lead than to set

themselves against it, and you've simply been sacrificed to their

laziness and selfishness. Isn't that a pretty fair statement of

the case?--Well, some people say you've got the neatest kind of

an answer in your hands: that George Dorset would marry you

tomorrow, if you'd tell him all you know, and give him the chance

to show the lady the door. I daresay he would; but you don't seem

to care for that particular form of getting even, and,

taking a purely business view of the question, I think you're

right. In a deal like that, nobody comes out with perfectly clean

hands, and the only way for you to start fresh is to get Bertha

Dorset to back you up, instead of trying to fight her." 



He paused long enough to draw breath, but not to give her time

for the expression of her gathering resistance; and as he pressed

on, expounding and elucidating his idea with the directness of

the man who has no doubts of his cause, she found the indignation

gradually freezing on her lip, found herself held fast in the

grasp of his argument by the mere cold strength of its

presentation. There was no time now to wonder how he had heard of

her obtaining the letters: all her world was dark outside the

monstrous glare of his scheme for using them. And it was not,

after the first moment, the horror of the idea that held her

spell-bound, subdued to his will; it was rather its subtle

affinity to her own inmost cravings. He would marry her tomorrow

if she could regain Bertha Dorset's friendship; and to induce the

open resumption of that friendship, and the tacit retractation of

all that had caused its withdrawal, she had only to put to the

lady the latent menace contained in the packet so miraculously

delivered into her hands. Lily saw in a flash the advantage of

this course over that which poor Dorset had pressed upon her. The

other plan depended for its success on the infliction of an open

injury, while this reduced the transaction to a private

understanding, of which no third person need have the remotest

hint. Put by Rosedale in terms of business-like give-and-take,

this understanding took on the harmless air of a mutual

accommodation, like a transfer of property or a revision of

boundary lines. It certainly simplified life to view it as a

perpetual adjustment, a play of party politics, in which every

concession had its recognized equivalent: Lily's tired mind was

fascinated by this escape from fluctuating ethical estimates into

a region of concrete weights and measures. 



Rosedale, as she listened, seemed to read in her silence not only

a gradual acquiescence in his plan, but a dangerously far-

reaching perception of the chances it offered; for as she

continued to stand before him without speaking, he broke out,

with a quick return upon himself: "You see how simple it is,

don't you? Well, don't be carried away by the idea that it's TOO simple.

It isn't exactly as if you'd started in with a clean

bill of health. Now we're talking let's call things by

their right names, and clear the whole business up. You know well

enough that Bertha Dorset couldn't have touched you if there

hadn't been--well--questions asked before--little points of

interrogation, eh? Bound to happen to a good-looking girl with

stingy relatives, I suppose; anyhow, they DID happen, and she

found the ground prepared for her. Do you see where I'm coming

out? You don't want these little questions cropping up again.

It's one thing to get Bertha Dorset into line--but what you want

is to keep her there. You can frighten her fast enough--but how

are you going to keep her frightened? By showing her that you're

as powerful as she is. All the letters in the world won't do that

for you as you are now; but with a big backing behind you, you'll

keep her just where you want her to be. That's MY share in the

business--that's what I'm offering you. You can't put the thing

through without me--don't run away with any idea that you can. In

six months you'd be back again among your old worries, or worse

ones; and here I am, ready to lift you out of 'em tomorrow if you

say so. DO you say so, Miss Lily?" he added, moving suddenly

nearer.



The words, and the movement which accompanied them, combined to

startle Lily out of the state of tranced subservience into which

she had insensibly slipped. Light comes in devious ways to the

groping consciousness, and it came to her now through the

disgusted perception that her would-be accomplice assumed, as a

matter of course, the likelihood of her distrusting him and

perhaps trying to cheat him of his share of the spoils. This

glimpse of his inner mind seemed to present the whole transaction

in a new aspect, and she saw that the essential baseness of the

act lay in its freedom from risk. 



She drew back with a quick gesture of rejection, saying, in a

voice that was a surprise to her own ears: "You are

mistaken--quite mistaken--both in the facts and in what you infer

from them." 



Rosedale stared a moment, puzzled by her sudden dash in a

direction so different from that toward which she had appeared to

be letting him guide her.



"Now what on earth does that mean? I thought we understood each

other!" he exclaimed; and to her murmur of "Ah, we do NOW," he

retorted with a sudden burst of violence: "I suppose it's because

the letters are to HIM, then? Well, I'll be damned if I see what

thanks you've got from him!"



The autumn days declined to winter. Once more the leisure world

was in transition between country and town, and Fifth Avenue,

still deserted at the week-end, showed from Monday to Friday a

broadening stream of carriages between house-fronts gradually

restored to consciousness. 



The Horse Show, some two weeks earlier, had produced a passing

semblance of reanimation, filling the theatres and restaurants

with a human display of the same costly and high-stepping kind as

circled daily about its ring. In Miss Bart's world the Horse

Show, and the public it attracted, had ostensibly come to be

classed among the spectacles disdained of the elect; but, as the

feudal lord might sally forth to join in the dance on his village

green, so society, unofficially and incidentally, still

condescended to look in upon the scene. Mrs. Gormer, among the

rest, was not above seizing such an occasion for the display of

herself and her horses; and Lily was given one or two

opportunities of appearing at her friend's side in the most

conspicuous box the house afforded. But this lingering semblance

of intimacy made her only the more conscious of a change in the

relation between Mattie and herself, of a dawning discrimination,

a gradually formed social standard, emerging from Mrs. Gormer's

chaotic view of life. It was inevitable that Lily herself should

constitute the first sacrifice to this new ideal, and she knew

that, once the Gormers were established in town, the whole drift

of fashionable life would facilitate Mattie's detachment from

her. She had, in short, failed to make herself indispensable; or

rather, her at tempt to do so had been thwarted by an influence

stronger than any she could exert. That influence, in its last

analysis, was simply the power of money: Bertha Dorset's social

credit was based on an impregnable bank-account. 



Lily knew that Rosedale had overstated neither the difficulty of

her own position nor the completeness of the vindication he

offered. once Bertha's match in material resources, her superior

gifts would make it easy for her to dominate her adversary. An

understanding of what such domination would mean, and of the

disadvantages accruing from her rejection of it, was

brought home to Lily with increasing clearness during the early

weeks of the winter. Hitherto, she had kept up a semblance of

movement outside the main flow of the social current; but with

the return to town, and the concentrating of scattered

activities, the mere fact of not slipping back naturally into her

old habits of life marked her as being unmistakably excluded from

them. If one were not a part of the season's fixed routine, one

swung unsphered in a void of social non-existence. Lily, for all

her dissatisfied dreaming, had never really conceived the

possibility of revolving about a different centre: it was easy

enough to despise the world, but decidedly difficult to find any

other habitable region. Her sense of irony never quite deserted

her, and she could still note, with self-directed derision, the

abnormal value suddenly acquired by the most tiresome and

insignificant details of her former life. Its very drudgeries had

a charm now that she was involuntarily released from them:

card-leaving, note-writing, enforced civilities to the dull and

elderly, and the smiling endurance of tedious dinners--how

pleasantly such obligations would have filled the emptiness of

her days! She did indeed leave cards in plenty; she kept herself,

with a smiling and valiant persistence, well in the eye of her

world; nor did she suffer any of those gross rebuffs which

sometimes produce a wholesome reaction of contempt in their

victim. Society did not turn away from her, it simply drifted by,

preoccupied and inattentive, letting her feel, to the full

measure of her humbled pride, how completely she had been the

creature of its favour. 



She had rejected Rosedale's suggestion with a promptness of scorn

almost surprising to herself: she had not lost her capacity for

high flashes of indignation. But she could not breathe long on

the heights; there had been nothing in her training to develop

any continuity of moral strength: what she craved, and really

felt herself entitled to, was a situation in which the noblest

attitude should also be the easiest. Hitherto her intermittent

impulses of resistance had sufficed to maintain her self-respect.

If she slipped she recovered her footing, and it was only

afterward that she was aware of having recovered it each time on

a slightly lower level. She had rejected Rosedale's offer without

conscious effort; her whole being had risen against it;

and she did not yet perceive that, by the mere act of listening

to him, she had learned to live with ideas which would once have

been intolerable to her. 









To Gerty Farish, keeping watch over her with a tenderer if less

discerning eye than Mrs. Fisher's, the results of the struggle

were already distinctly visible. She did not, indeed, know what

hostages Lily had already given to expediency; but she saw her

passionately and irretrievably pledged to the ruinous policy of

"keeping up." Gerty could smile now at her own early dream of her

friend's renovation through adversity: she understood clearly

enough that Lily was not of those to whom privation teaches the

unimportance of what they have lost. But this very fact, to

Gerty, made her friend the more piteously in want of aid, the

more exposed to the claims of a tenderness she was so little

conscious of needing. 



Lily, since her return to town, had not often climbed Miss

Farish's stairs. There was something irritating to her in the

mute interrogation of Gerty's sympathy: she felt the real

difficulties of her situation to be incommunicable to any one

whose theory of values was so different from her own, and the

restrictions of Gerty's life, which had once had the charm of

contrast, now reminded her too painfully of the limits to which

her own existence was shrinking. When at length, one afternoon,

she put into execution the belated resolve to visit her friend,

this sense of shrunken opportunities possessed her with unusual

intensity. The walk up Fifth Avenue, unfolding before her, in the

brilliance of the hard winter sunlight, an interminable

procession of fastidiously-equipped carriages--giving her,

through the little squares of brougham-windows, peeps of familiar

profiles bent above visiting-lists, of hurried hands dispensing

notes and cards to attendant footmen--this glimpse of the

ever-revolving wheels of the great social machine made Lily more

than ever conscious of the steepness and narrowness of Gerty's

stairs, and of the cramped blind alley of life to which they led.

Dull stairs destined to be mounted by dull people: how many

thousands of insignificant figures were going up and down such

stairs all over the world at that very moment--figures as shabby

and uninteresting as that of the middle-aged lady in limp

black who descended Gerty's flight as Lily climbed to it! 



"That was poor Miss Jane Silverton--she came to talk things over

with me: she and her sister want to do something to support

themselves," Gerty explained, as Lily followed her into the

sitting-room. 



"To support themselves? Are they so hard up?" Miss Bart asked

with a touch of irritation: she had not come to listen to the

woes of other people. 



"I'm afraid they have nothing left: Ned's debts have swallowed up

everything. They had such hopes, you know, when he broke away

from Carry Fisher; they thought Bertha Dorset would be such a

good influence, because she doesn't care for cards, and--well,

she talked quite beautifully to poor Miss Jane about feeling as

if Ned were her younger brother, and wanting to carry him off on

the yacht, so that he might have a chance to drop cards and

racing, and take up his literary work again." 
