







How exhaustive and unpleasant such a process would be, he saw

even more vividly after his two hours' talk with poor Dorset. If

anything came out at all, it would be such a vast unpacking of

accumulated moral rags as left him, after his visitor had gone,

with the feeling that he must fling open the windows and have his

room swept out. But nothing should come out; and happily for his

side of the case, the dirty rags, however pieced together, could

not, without considerable difficulty, be turned into a

homogeneous grievance. The torn edges did not always fit--there

were missing bits, there were disparities of size and colour, all

of which it was naturally Selden's business to make the most of

in putting them under his client's eye. But to a man in Dorset's

mood the completest demonstration could not carry conviction, and

Selden saw that for the moment all he could do was to soothe and

temporize, to offer sympathy and to counsel prudence. He let

Dorset depart charged to the brim with the sense that, till

their next meeting, he must maintain a strictly noncommittal

attitude; that, in short, his share in the game consisted for the

present in looking on. Selden knew, however, that he could not

long keep such violences in equilibrium; and he promised to meet

Dorset, the next morning, at an hotel in Monte Carlo. Meanwhile

he counted not a little on the reaction of weakness and

self-distrust that, in such natures, follows on every unwonted

expenditure of moral force; and his telegraphic reply to Miss

Bart consisted simply in the injunction: "Assume that everything

is as usual." 



On this assumption, in fact, the early part of the following day

was lived through. Dorset, as if in obedience to Lily's

imperative bidding, had actually returned in time for a late

dinner on the yacht. The repast had been the most difficult

moment of the day. Dorset was sunk in one of the abysmal silences

which so commonly followed on what his wife called his "attacks"

that it was easy, before the servants, to refer it to this cause;

but Bertha herself seemed, perversely enough, little disposed to

make use of this obvious means of protection. She simply left the

brunt of the situation on her husband's hands, as if too absorbed

in a grievance of her own to suspect that she might be the object

of one herself. To Lily this attitude was the most ominous,

because the most perplexing, element in the situation. As she

tried to fan the weak flicker of talk, to build up, again and

again, the crumbling structure of "appearances," her own

attention was perpetually distracted by the question: "What on

earth can she be driving at?" There was something positively

exasperating in Bertha's attitude of isolated defiance. If only

she would have given her friend a hint they might still have

worked together successfully; but how could Lily be of use, while

she was thus obstinately shut out from participation? To be of

use was what she honestly wanted; and not for her own sake but

for the Dorsets'. She had not thought of her own situation at

all: she was simply engrossed in trying to put a little order in

theirs. But the close of the short dreary evening left her with a

sense of effort hopelessly wasted. She had not tried to see

Dorset alone: she had positively shrunk from a renewal of his

confidences. It was Bertha whose confidence she sought, and who

<p 219> should as eagerly have invited her own; and Bertha, as if

in the infatuation of self-destruction, was actually pushing away

her rescuing hand. 



Lily, going to bed early, had left the couple to themselves; and

it seemed part of the general mystery in which she moved that

more than an hour should elapse before she heard Bertha walk down

the silent passage and regain her room. The morrow, rising on an

apparent continuance of the same conditions, revealed nothing of

what had occurred between the confronted pair. One fact alone


outwardly proclaimed the change they were all conspiring to

ignore; and that was the non-appearance of Ned Silverton. No one

referred to it, and this tacit avoidance of the subject kept it

in the immediate foreground of consciousness. But there was

another change, perceptible only to Lily; and that was that

Dorset now avoided her almost as pointedly as his wife. Perhaps

he was repenting his rash outpourings of the previous day;

perhaps only trying, in his clumsy way, to conform to Selden's

counsel to behave "as usual." Such instructions no more make for

easiness of attitude than the photographer's behest to "look

natural"; and in a creature as unconscious as poor Dorset of the

appearance he habitually presented, the struggle to maintain a

pose was sure to result in queer contortions.



It resulted, at any rate, in throwing Lily strangely on her own

resources. She had learned, on leaving her room, that Mrs. Dorset

was still invisible, and that Dorset had left the yacht early;

and feeling too restless to remain alone, she too had herself

ferried ashore. Straying toward the Casino, she attached herself

to a group of acquaintances from Nice, with whom she lunched, and

in whose company she was returning to the rooms when she

encountered Selden crossing the square. She could not, at the

moment, separate herself definitely from her party, who had

hospitably assumed that she would remain with them till they took

their departure; but she found time for a momentary pause of

enquiry, to which he promptly returned: "I've seen him

again--he's just left me." 



She waited before him anxiously. "Well? what has happened? What

WILL happen?" 



"Nothing as yet--and nothing in the future, I think."



"It's over, then? It's settled? You're sure?" 



He smiled. "Give me time. I'm not sure--but I'm a good deal

surer." And with that she had to content herself, and hasten on

to the expectant group on the steps. 



Selden had in fact given her the utmost measure of his sureness,

had even stretched it a shade to meet the anxiety in her eyes.

And now, as he turned away, strolling down the hill toward the

station, that anxiety remained with him as the visible

justification of his own. It was not, indeed, anything specific

that he feared: there had been a literal truth in his declaration

that he did not think anything would happen. What troubled him

was that, though Dorset's attitude had perceptibly changed, the

change was not clearly to be accounted for. It had certainly not

been produced by Selden's arguments, or by the action of his own

soberer reason. Five minutes' talk sufficed to show that some

alien influence had been at work, and that it had not so much

subdued his resentment as weakened his will, so that he moved

under it in a state of apathy, like a dangerous lunatic who has

been drugged. Temporarily, no doubt, however exerted, it worked

for the general safety: the question was how long it would last,

and by what kind of reaction it was likely to be followed. On

these points Selden could gain no light; for he saw that one

effect of the transformation had been to shut him off from free

communion with Dorset. The latter, indeed, was still moved by the

irresistible desire to discuss his wrong; but, though he revolved

about it with the same forlorn tenacity, Selden was aware that

something always restrained him from full expression. His state

was one to produce first weariness and then impatience in his

hearer; and when their talk was over, Selden began to feel that

he had done his utmost, and might justifiably wash his hands of

the sequel. 



It was in this mind that he had been making his way back to the

station when Miss Bart crossed his path; but though, after his

brief word with her, he kept mechanically on his course, he was

conscious of a gradual change in his purpose. The change had been

produced by the look in her eyes; and in his eagerness to define

the nature of that look, he dropped into a seat in the gardens,

and sat brooding upon the question. It was natural enough, in all

conscience, that she should appear anxious: a young woman

placed, in the close intimacy of a yachting-cruise, between a

couple on the verge of disaster, could hardly, aside from her

concern for her friends, be insensible to the awkwardness of her

own position. The worst of it was that, in interpreting Miss

Bart's state of mind, so many alternative readings were possible;

and one of these, in Selden's troubled mind, took the ugly form

suggested by Mrs. Fisher. If the girl was afraid, was she afraid

for herself or for her friends? And to what degree was her dread

of a catastrophe intensified by the sense of being fatally

involved in it? The burden of offence lying manifestly with Mrs.

Dorset, this conjecture seemed on the face of it gratuitously

unkind; but Selden knew that in the most one-sided matrimonial

quarrel there are generally counter-charges to be brought, and

that they are brought with the greater audacity where the

original grievance is so emphatic. Mrs. Fisher had not hesitated

to suggest the likelihood of Dorset's marrying Miss Bart if

"anything happened"; and though Mrs. Fisher's conclusions were

notoriously rash, she was shrewd enough in reading the signs from

which they were drawn. Dorset had apparently shown marked

interest in the girl, and this interest might be used to cruel

advantage in his wife's struggle for rehabilitation. Selden knew

that Bertha would fight to the last round of powder: the rashness

of her conduct was illogically combined with a cold determination

to escape its consequences. She could be as unscrupulous in

fighting for herself as she was reckless in courting danger, and

whatever came to her hand at such moments was likely to be used

as a defensive missile. He did not, as yet, see clearly just what

course she was likely to take, but his perplexity increased his

apprehension, and with it the sense that, before leaving, he must

speak again with Miss Bart. Whatever her share in the

situation--and he had always honestly tried to resist judging her

by her surroundings--however free she might be from any personal

connection with it, she would be better out of the way of a

possible crash; and since she had appealed to him for help, it

was clearly his business to tell her so. 



This decision at last brought him to his feet, and carried him

back to the gambling rooms, within whose doors he had seen her

disappearing; but a prolonged exploration of the crowd

failed to put him on her traces. He saw instead, to his surprise,

Ned Silverton loitering somewhat ostentatiously about the tables;

and the discovery that this actor in the drama was not only

hovering in the wings, but actually inviting the exposure of the

footlights, though it might have seemed to imply that all peril

was over, served rather to deepen Selden's sense of foreboding.

Charged with this impression he returned to the square, hoping to

see Miss Bart move across it, as every one in Monte Carlo seemed

inevitably to do at least a dozen times a day; but here again he

waited vainly for a glimpse of her, and the conclusion was slowly

forced on him that she had gone back to the Sabrina. It would be

difficult to follow her there, and still more difficult, should

he do so, to contrive the opportunity for a private word; and he

had almost decided on the unsatisfactory alternative of writing,

when the ceaseless diorama of the square suddenly unrolled before

him the figures of Lord Hubert and Mrs. Bry. 



Hailing them at once with his question, he learned from Lord

Hubert that Miss Bart had just returned to the Sabrina in

Dorset's company; an announcement so evidently disconcerting to

him that Mrs. Bry, after a glance from her companion, which

seemed to act like the pressure on a spring, brought forth the


prompt proposal that he should come and meet his friends at

dinner that evening--"At Becassin's--a little dinner to the

Duchess," she flashed out before Lord Hubert had time to remove

the pressure. 



Selden's sense of the privilege of being included in such company

brought him early in the evening to the door of the restaurant,

where he paused to scan the ranks of diners approaching down the

brightly lit terrace. There, while the Brys hovered within over

the last agitating alternatives of the MENU, he kept watch for

the guests from the Sabrina, who at length rose on the horizon in

company with the Duchess, Lord and Lady Skiddaw and the Stepneys.

From this group it was easy for him to detach Miss Bart on the

pretext of a moment's glance into one of the brilliant shops

along the terrace, and to say to her, while they lingered

together in the white dazzle of a jeweller's window: "I stopped

over to see you--to beg of you to leave the yacht."



The eyes she turned on him showed a quick gleam of her former

fear. "To leave--? What do you mean? What has happened?" 



"Nothing. But if anything should, why be in the way of it?" 



The glare from the jeweller's window, deepening the pallour of

her face, gave to its delicate lines the sharpness of a tragic

mask. "Nothing will, I am sure; but while there's even a doubt

left, how can you think I would leave Bertha?" 



The words rang out on a note of contempt--was it possibly of

contempt for himself? Well, he was willing to risk its renewal to

the extent of insisting, with an undeniable throb of added

interest: "You have yourself to think of, you know--" to which,

with a strange fall of sadness in her voice, she answered,

meeting his eyes: "If you knew how little difference that makes!"



"Oh, well, nothing WILL happen," he said, more for his own

reassurance than for hers; and "Nothing, nothing, of course!" she

valiantly assented, as they turned to overtake their companions. 



In the thronged restaurant, taking their places about Mrs. Bry's

illuminated board, their confidence seemed to gain support from

the familiarity of their surroundings. Here were Dorset and his

wife once more presenting their customary faces to the world, she

engrossed in establishing her relation with an intensely new

gown, he shrinking with dyspeptic dread from the multiplied

solicitations of the MENU. The mere fact that they thus showed

themselves together, with the utmost openness the place afforded,

seemed to declare beyond a doubt that their differences were

composed. How this end had been attained was still matter for

wonder, but it was clear that for the moment Miss Bart rested

confidently in the result; and Selden tried to achieve the same

view by telling himself that her opportunities for observation

had been ampler than his own. 



Meanwhile, as the dinner advanced through a labyrinth of courses,

in which it became clear that Mrs. Bry had occasionally broken

away from Lord Hubert's restraining hand, Selden's general

watchfulness began to lose itself in a particular study of Miss

Bart. It was one of the days when she was so handsome

that to be handsome was enough, and all the rest--her grace, her

quickness, her social felicities--seemed the overflow of a

bounteous nature. But what especially struck him was the way in

which she detached herself, by a hundred undefinable shades, from

the persons who most abounded in her own style. It was in just

such company, the fine flower and complete expression of the

state she aspired to, that the differences came out with special

poignancy, her grace cheapening the other women's smartness as

her finely-discriminated silences made their chatter dull. The

strain of the last hours had restored to her face the deeper

eloquence which Selden had lately missed in it, and the bravery

of her words to him still fluttered in her voice and eyes. Yes,

she was matchless--it was the one word for her; and he could give

his admiration the freer play because so little personal feeling

remained in it. His real detachment from her had taken place, not

at the lurid moment of disenchantment, but now, in the sober

after-light of discrimination, where he saw her definitely

divided from him by the crudeness of a choice which seemed to

deny the very differences he felt in her. It was before him again

in its completeness--the choice in which she was content to rest:

in the stupid costliness of the food and the showy dulness of the

talk, in the freedom of speech which never arrived at wit and the

freedom of act which never made for romance. The strident setting

of the restaurant, in which their table seemed set apart in a

special glare of publicity, and the presence at it of little

Dabham of the "Riviera Notes," emphasized the ideals of a world

where conspicuousness passed for distinction, and the society

column had become the roll of fame. 



It was as the immortalizer of such occasions that little Dabham,

wedged in modest watchfulness between two brilliant neighbours,

suddenly became the centre of Selden's scrutiny. How much did he

know of what was going on, and how much, for his purpose, was

still worth finding out? His little eyes were like tentacles

thrown out to catch the floating intimations with which, to

Selden, the air at moments seemed thick; then again it cleared to

its normal emptiness, and he could see nothing in it for the

journalist but leisure to note the elegance of the ladies' gowns.

Mrs. Dorset's, in particular, challenged all the wealth

of Mr. Dabham's vocabulary: it had surprises and subtleties

worthy of what he would have called "the literary style." At

first, as Selden had noticed, it had been almost too preoccupying

to its wearer; but now she was in full command of it, and was

even producing her effects with unwonted freedom. Was she not,

indeed, too free, too fluent, for perfect naturalness? And was

not Dorset, to whom his glance had passed by a natural

transition, too jerkily wavering between the same extremes?

Dorset indeed was always jerky; but it seemed to Selden that

tonight each vibration swung him farther from his centre. 



The dinner, meanwhile, was moving to its triumphant close, to the

evident satisfaction of Mrs. Bry, who, throned in apoplectic

majesty between Lord Skiddaw and Lord Hubert, seemed in spirit to

be calling on Mrs. Fisher to witness her achievement. Short of

Mrs. Fisher her audience might have been called complete; for the

restaurant was crowded with persons mainly gathered there for the

purpose of spectatorship, and accurately posted as to the names

and faces of the celebrities they had come to see. Mrs. Bry,

conscious that all her feminine guests came under that heading,

and that each one looked her part to admiration, shone on Lily

with all the pent-up gratitude that Mrs. Fisher had failed to

deserve. Selden, catching the glance, wondered what part Miss

Bart had played in organizing the entertainment. She did, at

least, a great deal to adorn it; and as he watched the bright

security with which she bore herself, he smiled to think that he

should have fancied her in need of help. Never had she appeared

more serenely mistress of the situation than when, at the moment

of dispersal, detaching herself a little from the group about the

table, she turned with a smile and a graceful slant of the

shoulders to receive her cloak from Dorset. 



The dinner had been protracted over Mr. Bry's exceptional cigars

and a bewildering array of liqueurs, and many of the other tables

were empty; but a sufficient number of diners still lingered to

give relief to the leave-taking of Mrs. Bry's distinguished

guests. This ceremony was drawn out and complicated by the fact

that it involved, on the part of the Duchess and Lady Skiddaw,

definite farewells, and pledges of speedy reunion in Paris, where

they were to pause and re<p 226>plenish their wardrobes on the

way to England. The quality of Mrs. Bry's hospitality, and of the

tips her husband had presumably imparted, lent to the manner of

the English ladies a general effusiveness which shed the rosiest

light over their hostess's future. In its glow Mrs. Dorset and

the Stepneys were also visibly included, and the whole scene had

touches of intimacy worth their weight in gold to the watchful

pen of Mr. Dabham. 



A glance at her watch caused the Duchess to exclaim to her sister

that they had just time to dash for their train, and the flurry

of this departure over, the Stepneys, who had their motor at the

door, offered to convey the Dorsets and Miss Bart to the quay.

The offer was accepted, and Mrs. Dorset moved away with her

husband in attendance. Miss Bart had lingered for a last word

with Lord Hubert, and Stepney, on whom Mr. Bry was pressing a

final, and still more expensive, cigar, called out: "Come on,

Lily, if you're going back to the yacht." 



Lily turned to obey; but as she did so, Mrs. Dorset, who had

paused on her way out, moved a few steps back toward the table. 



"Miss Bart is not going back to the yacht," she said in a voice

of singular distinctness. 



A startled look ran from eye to eye; Mrs. Bry crimsoned to the

verge of congestion, Mrs. Stepney slipped nervously behind her

husband, and Selden, in the general turmoil of his sensations,

was mainly conscious of a longing to grip Dabham by the collar

and fling him out into the street. 



Dorset, meanwhile, had stepped back to his wife's side. His face

was white, and he looked about him with cowed angry eyes.

"Bertha!--Miss Bart . . . this is some misunderstanding . . .

some mistake . . ." 



"Miss Bart remains here," his wife rejoined incisively. "And, I

think, George, we had better not detain Mrs. Stepney any longer."



Miss Bart, during this brief exchange of words, remained in

admirable erectness, slightly isolated from the embarrassed group

about her. She had paled a little under the shock of the insult,

but the discomposure of the surrounding faces was not reflected

in her own. The faint disdain of her smile seemed to lift

her high above her antagonist's reach, and it was not till she

had given Mrs. Dorset the full measure of the distance between

them that she turned and extended her hand to her hostess. 



"I am joining the Duchess tomorrow," she explained, "and it

seemed easier for me to remain on shore for the night." 



She held firmly to Mrs. Bry's wavering eye while she gave this

explanation, but when it was over Selden saw her send a tentative

glance from one to another of the women's faces. She read their

incredulity in their averted looks, and in the mute wretchedness

of the men behind them, and for a miserable half-second he

thought she quivered on the brink of failure. Then, turning to

him with an easy gesture, and the pale bravery of her recovered

smile--"Dear Mr. Selden," she said, "you promised to see me to my

cab." 







Outside, the sky was gusty and overcast, and as Lily and Selden

moved toward the deserted gardens below the restaurant, spurts of

warm rain blew fitfully against their faces. The fiction of the

cab had been tacitly abandoned; they walked on in silence, her

hand on his arm, till the deeper shade of the gardens received

them, and pausing beside a bench, he said: "Sit down a moment." 



She dropped to the seat without answering, but the electric lamp

at the bend of the path shed a gleam on the struggling misery of

her face. Selden sat down beside her, waiting for her to speak,

fearful lest any word he chose should touch too roughly on her

wound, and kept also from free utterance by the wretched doubt

which had slowly renewed itself within him. What had brought her

to this pass? What weakness had placed her so abominably at her

enemy's mercy? And why should Bertha Dorset have turned into an

enemy at the very moment when she so obviously needed the support

of her sex? Even while his nerves raged at the subjection of husbands

to their wives, and at the cruelty of women to their kind,

reason obstinately harped on the proverbial relation between

smoke and fire. The memory of Mrs. Fisher's hints, and the

corroboration of his own impressions, while they deepened his pity

also increased his constraint, since, whichever way he sought a free

outlet for sympathy, it was blocked by the fear of committing a blunder. 



Suddenly it struck him that his silence must seem almost as

accusatory as that of the men he had despised for turning from

her; but before he could find the fitting word she had cut him

short with a question. 



"Do you know of a quiet hotel? I can send for my maid in the

morning." 



"An hotel--HERE--that you can go to alone? It's not possible." 



She met this with a pale gleam of her old playfulness. "What IS,

then? It's too wet to sleep in the gardens." 



"But there must be some one---" 



"Some one to whom I can go? Of course--any number--but at THIS

hour? You see my change of plan was rather sudden---" 



"Good God--if you'd listened to me!" he cried, venting his

helplessness in a burst of anger. 



She still held him off with the gentle mockery of her smile. "But

haven't I?" she rejoined. "You advised me to leave the yacht, and

I'm leaving it." 



He saw then, with a pang of self-reproach, that she meant neither

to explain nor to defend herself; that by his miserable silence

he had forfeited all chance of helping her, and that the decisive

hour was past. 



She had risen, and stood before him in a kind of clouded majesty,

like some deposed princess moving tranquilly to exile. 



"Lily!" he exclaimed, with a note of despairing appeal; but--"Oh,

not now," she gently admonished him; and then, in all the

sweetness of her recovered composure: "Since I must find shelter

somewhere, and since you're so kindly here to help me---" 



He gathered himself up at the challenge. "You will do as I tell

you? There's but one thing, then; you must go straight to your

cousins, the Stepneys." 



"Oh--" broke from her with a movement of instinctive resistance;

but he insisted: "Come--it's late, and you must appear to have

gone there directly."



He had drawn her hand into his arm, but she held him back with a

last gesture of protest. "I can't--I can't--not that--you don't

know Gwen: you mustn't ask me!" 



"I MUST ask you--you must obey me," he persisted, though infected

at heart by her own fear. 



Her voice sank to a whisper: "And if she refuses?"--but, "Oh,

trust me--trust me!" he could only insist in return; and yielding

to his touch, she let him lead her back in silence to the edge of

the square. 



In the cab they continued to remain silent through the brief

drive which carried them to the illuminated portals of the

Stepneys' hotel. Here he left her outside, in the darkness of the

raised hood, while his name was sent up to Stepney, and he paced

the showy hall, awaiting the latter's descent. Ten minutes later

the two men passed out together between the gold-laced custodians

of the threshold; but in the vestibule Stepney drew up with a

last flare of reluctance. 



"It's understood, then?" he stipulated nervously, with his hand

on Selden's arm. "She leaves tomorrow by the early train--and my

wife's asleep, and can't be disturbed." 



The blinds of Mrs. Peniston's drawing-room were drawn down

against the oppressive June sun, and in the sultry twilight the

faces of her assembled relatives took on a fitting shadow of

bereavement. They were all there: Van Alstynes, Stepneys and

Melsons--even a stray Peniston or two, indicating, by a greater

latitude in dress and manner, the fact of remoter relationship

and more settled hopes. The Peniston side was, in fact, secure in

the knowledge that the bulk of Mr. Peniston's property "went

back"; while the direct connection hung suspended on the disposal

of his widow's private fortune and on the uncertainty of its

extent. Jack Stepney, in his new character as the richest nephew,

tacitly took the lead, emphasizing his importance by the deeper

gloss of his mourning and the subdued authority of his manner;

while his wife's bored attitude and frivolous gown proclaimed the

heiress's disregard of the insignificant interests at stake. Old

Ned Van Alstyne, seated next to her in a coat that made

affliction dapper, twirled his white moustache to conceal the

eager twitch of his lips; and Grace Stepney, red-nosed and

smelling of crape, whispered emotionally to Mrs. Herbert Melson:

"I couldn't BEAR to see the Niagara anywhere else!" 



A rustle of weeds and quick turning of heads hailed the opening

of the door, and Lily Bart appeared, tall and noble in her black

dress, with Gerty Farish at her side. The women's faces, as she

paused interrogatively on the threshold, were a study in

hesitation. One or two made faint motions of recognition, which

might have been subdued either by the solemnity of the scene, or

by the doubt as to how far the others meant to go; Mrs. Jack

Stepney gave a careless nod, and Grace Stepney, with a sepulchral

gesture, indicated a seat at her side. But Lily, ignoring the

invitation, as well as Jack Stepney's official attempt to direct

her, moved across the room with her smooth free gait, and seated

herself in a chair which seemed to have been purposely placed

apart from the others. 



It was the first time that she had faced her family since her

return from Europe, two weeks earlier; but if she perceived

any uncertainty in their welcome, it served only to add a tinge

of irony to the usual composure of her bearing. The shock of

dismay with which, on the dock, she had heard from Gerty Farish

of Mrs. Peniston's sudden death, had been mitigated, almost at

once, by the irrepressible thought that now, at last, she would

be able to pay her debts. She had looked forward with

considerable uneasiness to her first encounter with her aunt.

Mrs. Peniston had vehemently opposed her niece's departure with

the Dorsets, and had marked her continued disapproval by not

writing during Lily's absence. The certainty that she had heard

of the rupture with the Dorsets made the prospect of the meeting

more formidable; and how should Lily have repressed a quick sense

of relief at the thought that, instead of undergoing the

anticipated ordeal, she had only to enter gracefully on a

long-assured inheritance? It had been, in the consecrated phrase,

"always understood" that Mrs. Peniston was to provide handsomely

for her niece; and in the latter's mind the understanding had

long since crystallized into fact. 



"She gets everything, of course--I don't see what we're here

for," Mrs. Jack Stepney remarked with careless loudness to Ned

Van Alstyne; and the latter's deprecating murmur--"Julia was

always a just woman"--might have been interpreted as signifying

either acquiescence or doubt. 



"Well, it's only about four hundred thousand," Mrs. Stepney

rejoined with a yawn; and Grace Stepney, in the silence produced

by the lawyer's preliminary cough, was heard to sob out: "They

won't find a towel missing--I went over them with her the very

day---" 



Lily, oppressed by the close atmosphere, and the stifling odour

of fresh mourning, felt her attention straying as Mrs. Peniston's


lawyer, solemnly erect behind the Buhl table at the end of the

room, began to rattle through the preamble of the will. 



"It's like being in church," she reflected, wondering vaguely

where Gwen Stepney had got such an awful hat. Then she noticed

how stout Jack had grown--he would soon be almost as plethoric as

Herbert Melson, who sat a few feet off, breathing puffily as he

leaned his black-gloved hands on his stick.



"I wonder why rich people always grow fat--I suppose it's because

there's nothing to worry them. If I inherit, I shall have to be

careful of my figure," she mused, while the lawyer droned on

through a labyrinth of legacies. The servants came first, then a

few charitable institutions, then several remoter Melsons and

Stepneys, who stirred consciously as their names rang out, and

then subsided into a state of impassiveness befitting the

solemnity of the occasion. Ned Van Alstyne, Jack Stepney, and a

cousin or two followed, each coupled with the mention of a few

thousands: Lily wondered that Grace Stepney was not among them.

Then she heard her own name--"to my niece Lily Bart ten thousand

dollars--" and after that the lawyer again lost himself in a coil

of unintelligible periods, from which the concluding phrase

flashed out with startling distinctness: "and the residue of my

estate to my dear cousin and name-sake, Grace Julia Stepney." 



There was a subdued gasp of surprise, a rapid turning of heads,

and a surging of sable figures toward the corner in which Miss

Stepney wailed out her sense of unworthiness through the crumpled

ball of a black-edged handkerchief. 



Lily stood apart from the general movement, feeling herself for

the first time utterly alone. No one looked at her, no one seemed

aware of her presence; she was probing the very depths of

insignificance. And under her sense of the collective

indifference came the acuter pang of hopes deceived.

Disinherited--she had been disinherited--and for Grace Stepney!

She met Gerty's lamentable eyes, fixed on her in a despairing

effort at consolation, and the look brought her to herself. There

was something to be done before she left the house: to be done

with all the nobility she knew how to put into such gestures. She

advanced to the group about Miss Stepney, and holding out her

hand said simply: "Dear Grace, I am so glad." 



The other ladies had fallen back at her approach, and a space

created itself about her. It widened as she turned to go, and no

one advanced to fill it up. She paused a moment, glancing about

her, calmly taking the measure of her situation. She heard some

one ask a question about the date of the will; she caught a

fragment of the lawyer's answer--something about a sudden

summons, and an "earlier instru<p 233>ment." Then the tide of

dispersal began to drift past her; Mrs. Jack Stepney and Mrs.

Herbert Melson stood on the doorstep awaiting their motor; a

sympathizing group escorted Grace Stepney to the cab it was felt

to be fitting she should take, though she lived but a street or

two away; and Miss Bart and Gerty found themselves almost alone

in the purple drawing-room, which more than ever, in its stuffy

dimness, resembled a well-kept family vault, in which the last

corpse had just been decently deposited. 







In Gerty Farish's sitting-room, whither a hansom had carried the

two friends, Lily dropped into a chair with a faint sound of

laughter: it struck her as a humorous coincidence that her aunt's

legacy should so nearly represent the amount of her debt to

Trenor. The need of discharging that debt had reasserted itself

with increased urgency since her return to America, and she spoke

her first thought in saying to the anxiously hovering Gerty: "I

wonder when the legacies will be paid." 



But Miss Farish could not pause over the legacies; she broke into

a larger indignation. "Oh, Lily, it's unjust; it's cruel--Grace

Stepney must FEEL she has no right to all that money!" 



"Any one who knew how to please Aunt Julia has a right to her

money," Miss Bart rejoined philosophically. 



"But she was devoted to you--she led every one to think--" Gerty

checked herself in evident embarrassment, and Miss Bart turned to

her with a direct look. "Gerty, be honest: this will was made

only six weeks ago. She had heard of my break with the Dorsets?"



"Every one heard, of course, that there had been some

disagreement--some misunderstanding---" 



"Did she hear that Bertha turned me off the yacht?" 



"Lily!" 



"That was what happened, you know. She said I was trying to marry

George Dorset. She did it to make him think she was jealous.

Isn't that what she told Gwen Stepney?" 



"I don't know--I don't listen to such horrors." 



"I MUST listen to them--I must know where I stand." She paused,

and again sounded a faint note of derision. "Did you

notice the women? They were afraid to snub me while they thought

I was going to get the money--afterward they scuttled off as if I

had the plague." Gerty remained silent, and she continued: "I

stayed on to see what would happen. They took their cue from Gwen

Stepney and Lulu Melson--I saw them watching to see what Gwen

would do.--Gerty, I must know just what is being said of me." 



"I tell you I don't listen---" 



"One hears such things without listening." She rose and laid her

resolute hands on Miss Farish's shoulders. "Gerty, are people

going to cut me?" 



"Your FRIENDS, Lily--how can you think it?" 



"Who are one's friends at such a time? Who, but you, you poor

trustful darling? And heaven knows what YOU suspect me of!" She

kissed Gerty with a whimsical murmur. "You'd never let it make

any difference--but then you're fond of criminals, Gerty! How

about the irreclaimable ones, though? For I'm absolutely

impenitent, you know." 



She drew herself up to the full height of her slender majesty,

towering like some dark angel of defiance above the troubled

Gerty, who could only falter out: "Lily, Lily--how can you laugh

about such things?" 



"So as not to weep, perhaps. But no--I'm not of the tearful

order. I discovered early that crying makes my nose red, and the

knowledge has helped me through several painful episodes." She

took a restless turn about the room, and then, reseating herself,

lifted the bright mockery of her eyes to Gerty's anxious

countenance. 



"I shouldn't have minded, you know, if I'd got the money--" and

at Miss Farish's protesting "Oh!" she repeated calmly: "Not a

straw, my dear; for, in the first place, they wouldn't have quite

dared to ignore me; and if they had, it wouldn't have mattered,

because I should have been independent of them. But now--!" The

irony faded from her eyes, and she bent a clouded face upon her

friend. 



"How can you talk so, Lily? Of course the money ought to have

been yours, but after all that makes no difference. The important

thing---" Gerty paused, and then continued firmly: "The important

thing is that you should clear yourself--should tell your friends

the whole truth." 



"The whole truth?" Miss Bart laughed. "What is truth? Where a

woman is concerned, it's the story that's easiest to believe. In

this case it's a great deal easier to believe Bertha Dorset's

story than mine, because she has a big house and an opera box,

and it's convenient to be on good terms with her." 



Miss Farish still fixed her with an anxious gaze. "But what IS

your story, Lily? I don't believe any one knows it yet." 



"My story?--I don't believe I know it myself. You see I never

thought of preparing a version in advance as Bertha did--and if I

had, I don't think I should take the trouble to use it now." 



But Gerty continued with her quiet reasonableness: "I don't want

a version prepared in advance--but I want you to tell me exactly

what happened from the beginning." 



"From the beginning?" Miss Bart gently mimicked her. "Dear Gerty,

how little imagination you good people have! Why, the beginning

was in my cradle, I suppose--in the way I was brought up, and the

things I was taught to care for. Or no--I won't blame anybody for

my faults: I'll say it was in my blood, that I got it from some

wicked pleasure-loving ancestress, who reacted against the homely

virtues of New Amsterdam, and wanted to be back at the court of

the Charleses!" And as Miss Farish continued to press her with

troubled eyes, she went on impatiently: "You asked me just now

for the truth--well, the truth about any girl is that once she's

talked about she's done for; and the more she explains her case

the worse it looks.--My good Gerty, you don't happen to have a

cigarette about you?" 







In her stuffy room at the hotel to which she had gone on landing,

Lily Bart that evening reviewed her situation. It was the last

week in June, and none of her friends were in town. The few

relatives who had stayed on, or returned, for the reading of Mrs.

Peniston's will, had taken flight again that afternoon to Newport

or Long Island; and not one of them had made any proffer of

hospitality to Lily. For the first time in her life she found

herself utterly alone except for Gerty Farish. Even at the actual

moment of her break with the Dorsets she had not had so keen a

sense of its consequences, for the Duchess of Beltshire,

hearing of the catastrophe from Lord Hubert, had instantly

offered her protection, and under her sheltering wing Lily had

made an almost triumphant progress to London. There she had been

sorely tempted to linger on in a society which asked of her only

to amuse and charm it, without enquiring too curiously how she

had acquired her gift for doing so; but Selden, before they

parted, had pressed on her the urgent need of returning at once

to her aunt, and Lord Hubert, when he presently reappeared in

London, abounded in the same counsel. Lily did not need to be

told that the Duchess's championship was not the best road to

social rehabilitation, and as she was besides aware that her

noble defender might at any moment drop her in favour of a new

PROTEGEE, she reluctantly decided to return to America. But she

had not been ten minutes on her native shore before she realized

that she had delayed too long to regain it. The Dorsets, the

Stepneys, the Brys--all the actors and witnesses in the miserable

drama--had preceded her with their version of the case; and, even

had she seen the least chance of gaining a hearing for her own,

some obscure disdain and reluctance would have restrained her.

She knew it was not by explanations and counter-charges that she

could ever hope to recover her lost standing; but even had she

felt the least trust in their efficacy, she would still have been

held back by the feeling which had kept her from defending

herself to Gerty Farish--a feeling that was half pride and half

humiliation. For though she knew she had been ruthlessly

sacrificed to Bertha Dorset's determination to win back her

husband, and though her own relation to Dorset had been that of

the merest good-fellowship, yet she had been perfectly aware from

the outset that her part in the affair was, as Carry Fisher

brutally put it, to distract Dorset's attention from his wife.

That was what she was "there for": it was the price she had

chosen to pay for three months of luxury and freedom from care.

Her habit of resolutely facing the facts, in her rare moments of

introspection, did not now allow her to put any false gloss on

the situation. She had suffered for the very faithfulness with

which she had carried out her part of the tacit compact, but the

part was not a handsome one at best, and she saw it now in all

the ugliness of failure. 



She saw, too, in the same uncompromising light, the train of

consequences resulting from that failure; and these became

clearer to her with every day of her weary lingering in town. She

stayed on partly for the comfort of Gerty Farish's nearness, and

partly for lack of knowing where to go. She understood well

enough the nature of the task before her. She must set out to

regain, little by little, the position she had lost; and the

first step in the tedious task was to find out, as soon as

possible, on how many of her friends she could count. Her hopes

were mainly centred on Mrs. Trenor, who had treasures of

easy-going tolerance for those who were amusing or useful to her,

and in the noisy rush of whose existence the still small voice of

detraction was slow to make itself heard. But Judy, though she

must have been apprised of Miss Bart's return, had not even

recognized it by the formal note of condolence which her friend's

bereavement demanded. Any advance on Lily's side might have been

perilous: there was nothing to do but to trust to the happy

chance of an accidental meeting, and Lily knew that, even so late

in the season, there was always a hope of running across her

friends in their frequent passages through town. 



To this end she assiduously showed herself at the restaurants

they frequented, where, attended by the troubled Gerty, she

lunched luxuriously, as she said, on her expectations. 



"My dear Gerty, you wouldn't have me let the head-waiter see that

I've nothing to live on but Aunt Julia's legacy? Think of Grace

Stepney's satisfaction if she came in and found us lunching on

cold mutton and tea! What sweet shall we have today, dear--COUPE

JACQUES or PECHES A LA MELBA?" 



She dropped the MENU abruptly, with a quick heightening of

colour, and Gerty, following her glance, was aware of the

advance, from an inner room, of a party headed by Mrs. Trenor and

Carry Fisher. It was impossible for these ladies and their

companions--among whom Lily had at once distinguished both Trenor

and Rosedale--not to pass, in going out, the table at which the

two girls were seated; and Gerty's sense of the fact betrayed

itself in the helpless trepidation of her manner. Miss Bart, on

the contrary, borne forward on the wave of her buoyant grace, and

neither shrinking from her friends nor appearing to lie in wait

for them, gave to the encounter the touch of naturalness

which she could impart to the most strained situations. Such

embarrassment as was shown was on Mrs. Trenor's side, and

manifested itself in the mingling of exaggerated warmth with

imperceptible reservations. Her loudly affirmed pleasure at

seeing Miss Bart took the form of a nebulous generalization,

which included neither enquiries as to her future nor the

expression of a definite wish to see her again. Lily, well-versed

in the language of these omissions, knew that they were equally

intelligible to the other members of the party: even Rosedale,

flushed as he was with the importance of keeping such company, at

once took the temperature of Mrs. Trenor's cordiality, and

reflected it in his off-hand greeting of Miss Bart. Trenor, red

and uncomfortable, had cut short his salutations on the pretext

of a word to say to the head-waiter; and the rest of the group

soon melted away in Mrs. Trenor's wake. 



It was over in a moment--the waiter, MENU in hand, still hung on

the result of the choice between COUPE JACQUES and PECHES A LA

MELBA--but Miss Bart, in the interval, had taken the measure of

her fate. Where Judy Trenor led, all the world would follow; and

Lily had the doomed sense of the castaway who has signalled in

vain to fleeing sails. 



In a flash she remembered Mrs. Trenor's complaints of Carry

Fisher's rapacity, and saw that they denoted an unexpected

acquaintance with her husband's private affairs. In the large

tumultuous disorder of the life at Bellomont, where no one seemed

to have time to observe any one else, and private aims and

personal interests were swept along unheeded in the rush of

collective activities, Lily had fancied herself sheltered from

inconvenient scrutiny; but if Judy knew when Mrs. Fisher borrowed

money of her husband, was she likely to ignore the same

transaction on Lily's part? If she was careless of his affections

she was plainly jealous of his pocket; and in that fact Lily read

the explanation of her rebuff. The immediate result of these

conclusions was the passionate resolve to pay back her debt to

Trenor. That obligation discharged, she would have but a thousand

dollars of Mrs. Peniston's legacy left, and nothing to live on

but her own small income, which was considerably less than Gerty

Farish's wretched pittance; but this consideration gave way to

the imperative claim of her wounded pride. She must be

quits with the Trenors first; after that she would take thought

for the future. 



In her ignorance of legal procrastinations she had supposed that

her legacy would be paid over within a few days of the reading of

her aunt's will; and after an interval of anxious suspense, she

wrote to enquire the cause of the delay. There was another

interval before Mrs. Peniston's lawyer, who was also one of the

executors, replied to the effect that, some questions having

arisen relative to the interpretation of the will, he and his

associates might not be in a position to pay the legacies till

the close of the twelvemonth legally allotted for their

settlement. Bewildered and indignant, Lily resolved to try the

effect of a personal appeal; but she returned from her expedition

with a sense of the powerlessness of beauty and charm against the

unfeeling processes of the law. It seemed intolerable to live on

for another year under the weight of her debt; and in her

extremity she decided to turn to Miss Stepney, who still lingered

in town, immersed in the delectable duty of "going over" her

benefactress's effects. It was bitter enough for Lily to ask a

favour of Grace Stepney, but the alternative was bitterer still;

and one morning she presented herself at Mrs. Peniston's, where

Grace, for the facilitation of her pious task, had taken up a

provisional abode. 



The strangeness of entering as a suppliant the house where she

had so long commanded, increased Lily's desire to shorten the

ordeal; and when Miss Stepney entered the darkened drawing-room,

rustling with the best quality of crape, her visitor went

straight to the point: would she be willing to advance the amount

of the expected legacy? 



Grace, in reply, wept and wondered at the request, bemoaned the

inexorableness of the law, and was astonished that Lily had not

realized the exact similarity of their positions. Did she think

that only the payment of the legacies had been delayed? Why, Miss

Stepney herself had not received a penny of her inheritance, and

was paying rent--yes, actually!--for the privilege of living in a

house that belonged to her. She was sure it was not what poor

dear cousin Julia would have wished--she had told the executors

so to their faces; but they were inaccessible to reason, and

there was nothing to do but to wait. Let Lily take example by

her, and be patient--let them both remember how

beautifully patient cousin Julia had always been. 



Lily made a movement which showed her imperfect assimilation of

this example. "But you will have everything, Grace--it would be

easy for you to borrow ten times the amount I am asking for." 



"Borrow--easy for me to borrow?" Grace Stepney rose up before her

in sable wrath. "Do you imagine for a moment that I would raise

money on my expectations from cousin Julia, when I know so well

her unspeakable horror of every transaction of the sort? Why,

Lily, if you must know the truth, it was the idea of your being

in debt that brought on her illness--you remember she had a

slight attack before you sailed. Oh, I don't know the

particulars, of course--I don't WANT to know them--but there were

rumours about your affairs that made her most unhappy--no one

could be with her without seeing that. I can't help it if you are

offended by my telling you this now--if I can do anything to make

you realize the folly of your course, and how deeply SHE

disapproved of it, I shall feel it is the truest way of making up

to you for her loss.



It seemed to Lily, as Mrs. Peniston's door closed on her, that

she was taking a final leave of her old life. The future

stretched before her dull and bare as the deserted length of

Fifth Avenue, and opportunities showed as meagrely as the few

cabs trailing in quest of fares that did not come. The

completeness of the analogy was, however, disturbed as she

reached the sidewalk by the rapid approach of a hansom which

pulled up at sight of her. 



From beneath its luggage-laden top, she caught the wave of a

signalling hand; and the next moment Mrs. Fisher, springing to

the street, had folded her in a demonstrative embrace. 



"My dear, you don't mean to say you're still in town? When I saw

you the other day at Sherry's I didn't have time to ask---" She

broke off, and added with a burst of frankness: "The truth is I

was HORRID, Lily, and I've wanted to tell you so ever since."



"Oh---" Miss Bart protested, drawing back from her penitent

clasp; but Mrs. Fisher went on with her usual directness: "Look

here, Lily, don't let's beat about the bush: half the trouble in

life is caused by pretending there isn't any. That's not my way,

and I can only say I'm thoroughly ashamed of myself for following

the other women's lead. But we'll talk of that by and bye--tell

me now where you're staying and what your plans are. I don't

suppose you're keeping house in there with Grace Stepney,

eh?--and it struck me you might be rather at loose ends." 



In Lily's present mood there was no resisting the honest

friendliness of this appeal, and she said with a smile: "I am at

loose ends for the moment, but Gerty Farish is still in town, and

she's good enough to let me be with her whenever she can spare

the time." 



Mrs. Fisher made a slight grimace. "H'm--that's a temperate joy.

Oh, I know--Gerty's a trump, and worth all the rest of us put

together; but A LA LONGUE you're used to a little higher

seasoning, aren't you, dear? And besides, I suppose she'll be off

herself before long--the first of August, you say? Well,

look here, you can't spend your summer in town; we'll talk of

that later too. But meanwhile, what do you say to putting a few

things in a trunk and coming down with me to the Sam Gormers'

tonight?" 



And as Lily stared at the breathless suddenness of the

suggestion, she continued with her easy laugh: "You don't know

them and they don't know you; but that don't make a rap of

difference. They've taken the Van Alstyne place at Roslyn, and

I've got CARTE BLANCHE to bring my friends down there--the more

the merrier. They do things awfully well, and there's to be

rather a jolly party there this week---" she broke off, checked

by an undefinable change in Miss Bart's expression. "Oh, I don't

mean YOUR particular set, you know: rather a different crowd, but

very good fun. The fact is, the Gormers have struck out on a line

of their own: what they want is to have a good time, and to have

it in their own way. They gave the other thing a few months'

trial, under my distinguished auspices, and they were really

doing extremely well--getting on a good deal faster than the

Brys, just because they didn't care as much--but suddenly they

decided that the whole business bored them, and that what they

wanted was a crowd they could really feel at home with. Rather

original of them, don't you think so? Mattie Gormer HAS got

aspirations still; women always have; but she's awfully

easy-going, and Sam won't be bothered, and they both like to be

the most important people in sight, so they've started a sort of

continuous performance of their own, a kind of social Coney

Island, where everybody is welcome who can make noise enough and

doesn't put on airs. I think it's awfully good fun myself--some

of the artistic set, you know, any pretty actress that's going,

and so on. This week, for instance, they have Audrey Anstell, who

made such a hit last spring in 'The Winning of Winny'; and Paul

Morpeth--he's painting Mattie Gormer--and the Dick Bellingers,

and Kate Corby--well, every one you can think of who's jolly and

makes a row. Now don't stand there with your nose in the air, my

dear--it will be a good deal better than a broiling Sunday in

town, and you'll find clever people as well as noisy

ones--Morpeth, who admires Mattie enormously, always brings one

or two of his set." 



Mrs. Fisher drew Lily toward the hansom with friendly authority.

"Jump in now, there's a dear, and we'll drive round to your hotel

and have your things packed, and then we'll have tea, and the two

maids can meet us at the train." 
