






Miss Farish paused with a sigh which reflected the perplexity of

her departing visitor. "But that isn't all; it isn't even the

worst. It seems that Ned has quarrelled with the Dorsets; or at

least Bertha won't allow him to see her, and he is so unhappy

about it that he has taken to gambling again, and going about

with all sorts of queer people. And cousin Grace Van Osburgh

accuses him of having had a very bad influence on Freddy, who

left Harvard last spring, and has been a great deal with Ned ever

since. She sent for Miss Jane, and made a dreadful scene; and

Jack Stepney and Herbert Melson, who were there too, told Miss

Jane that Freddy was threatening to marry some dreadful woman to

whom Ned had introduced him, and that they could do nothing with

him because now he's of age he has his own money. You can fancy

how poor Miss Jane felt--she came to me at once, and seemed to

think that if I could get her something to do she could earn

enough to pay Ned's debts and send him away--I'm afraid she has

no idea how long it would take her to pay for one of his evenings

at bridge. And he was horribly in debt when he came back from the

cruise--I can't see why he should have spent so much more money

under Bertha's influence than Carry's: can you?"



Lily met this query with an impatient gesture. "My dear Gerty, I

always understand how people can spend much more money--never how

they can spend any less!" 



She loosened her furs and settled herself in Gerty's easy-chair,

while her friend busied herself with the tea-cups. 



"But what can they do--the Miss Silvertons? How do they mean to

support themselves?" she asked, conscious that the note of

irritation still persisted in her voice. It was the very last

topic she had meant to discuss--it really did not interest her in

the least--but she was seized by a sudden perverse curiosity to

know how the two colourless shrinking victims of young

Silverton's sentimental experiments meant to cope with the grim

necessity which lurked so close to her own threshold. 



"I don't know--I am trying to find something for them. Miss Jane

reads aloud very nicely--but it's so hard to find any one who is

willing to be read to. And Miss Annie paints a little---" 



"Oh, I know--apple-blossoms on blotting-paper; just the kind of

thing I shall be doing myself before long!" exclaimed Lily,

starting up with a vehemence of movement that threatened

destruction to Miss Farish's fragile tea-table. 



Lily bent over to steady the cups; then she sank back into her

seat. "I'd forgotten there was no room to dash about in--how

beautifully one does have to behave in a small flat! Oh, Gerty, I

wasn't meant to be good," she sighed out incoherently. 



Gerty lifted an apprehensive look to her pale face, in which the

eyes shone with a peculiar sleepless lustre. 



"You look horribly tired, Lily; take your tea, and let me give

you this cushion to lean against." 



Miss Bart accepted the cup of tea, but put back the cushion with

an impatient hand. 



"Don't give me that! I don't want to lean back--I shall go to

sleep if I do." 



"Well, why not, dear? I'll be as quiet as a mouse," Gerty urged

affectionately. 



"No--no; don't be quiet; talk to me--keep me awake! I don't sleep

at night, and in the afternoon a dreadful drowsiness creeps over

me."



"You don't sleep at night? Since when?" 



"I don't know--I can't remember." She rose and put the empty cup

on the tea-tray. "Another, and stronger, please; if I don't keep

awake now I shall see horrors tonight--perfect horrors!" 



"But they'll be worse if you drink too much tea." 



"No, no--give it to me; and don't preach, please," Lily returned

imperiously. Her voice had a dangerous edge, and Gerty noticed

that her hand shook as she held it out to receive the second cup.



"But you look so tired: I'm sure you must be ill---" 



Miss Bart set down her cup with a start. "Do I look ill? Does my

face show it?" She rose and walked quickly toward the little

mirror above the writing-table. "What a horrid

looking-glass--it's all blotched and discoloured. Any one would

look ghastly in it!" She turned back, fixing her plaintive eyes

on Gerty. "You stupid dear, why do you say such odious things to

me? It's enough to make one ill to be told one looks so! And

looking ill means looking ugly." She caught Gerty's wrists, and

drew her close to the window. "After all, I'd rather know the

truth. Look me straight in the face, Gerty, and tell me: am I

perfectly frightful?" 



"You're perfectly beautiful now, Lily: your eyes are shining, and

your cheeks have grown so pink all of a sudden---" 



"Ah, they WERE pale, then--ghastly pale, when I came in? Why

don't you tell me frankly that I'm a wreck? My eyes are bright

now because I'm so nervous--but in the mornings they look like

lead. And I can see the lines coming in my face--the lines of

worry and disappointment and failure! Every sleepless night

leaves a new one--and how can I sleep, when I have such dreadful

things to think about?" 



"Dreadful things--what things?" asked Gerty, gently detaching her

wrists from her friend's feverish fingers. 



"What things? Well, poverty, for one--and I don't know any that's

more dreadful." Lily turned away and sank with sudden weariness

into the easy-chair near the tea-table. "You asked me just now if

I could understand why Ned Silverton spent so much money. Of

course I understand--he spends it on living with the rich. You

think we live ON the rich, rather than with them: and so we do,

in a sense--but it's a privi<p 279>lege we have to pay for! We

eat their dinners, and drink their wine, and smoke their

cigarettes, and use their carriages and their opera-boxes and

their private cars--yes, but there's a tax to pay on every one of

those luxuries. The man pays it by big tips to the servants, by

playing cards beyond his means, by flowers and

presents--and--and--lots of other things that cost; the girl pays

it by tips and cards too--oh, yes, I've had to take up bridge

again--and by going to the best dress-makers, and having just the

right dress for every occasion, and always keeping herself fresh

and exquisite and amusing!" 



She leaned back for a moment, closing her eyes, and as she sat

there, her pale lips slightly parted, and the lids dropped above

her fagged brilliant gaze, Gerty had a startled perception of the

change in her face--of the way in which an ashen daylight seemed

suddenly to extinguish its artificial brightness. She looked up,

and the vision vanished.



"It doesn't sound very amusing, does it? And it isn't--I'm sick

to death of it! And yet the thought of giving it all up nearly

kills me--it's what keeps me awake at night, and makes me so

crazy for your strong tea. For I can't go on in this way much

longer, you know--I'm nearly at the end of my tether. And then

what can I do--how on earth am I to keep myself alive? I see

myself reduced to the fate of that poor Silverton woman--slinking

about to employment agencies, and trying to sell painted

blotting-pads to Women's Exchanges! And there are thousands and

thousands of women trying to do the same thing already, and not

one of the number who has less idea how to earn a dollar than I

have!" 



She rose again with a hurried glance at the clock. "It's late,

and I must be off--I have an appointment with Carry Fisher. Don't

look so worried, you dear thing--don't think too much about the

nonsense I've been talking." She was before the mirror again,

adjusting her hair with a light hand, drawing down her veil, and

giving a dexterous touch to her furs. "Of course, you know, it

hasn't come to the employment agencies and the painted

blotting-pads yet; but I'm rather hard-up just for the moment,

and if I could find something to do--notes to write and

visiting-lists to make up, or that kind of thing--it would tide

me over till the legacy is paid.



And Carry has promised to find somebody who wants a kind of

social secretary--you know she makes a specialty of the helpless

rich." 









Miss Bart had not revealed to Gerty the full extent of her

anxiety. She was in fact in urgent and immediate need of money:

money to meet the vulgar weekly claims which could neither be

deferred nor evaded. To give up her apartment, and shrink to the

obscurity of a boarding-house, or the provisional hospitality of

a bed in Gerty Farish's sitting-room, was an expedient which

could only postpone the problem confronting her; and it seemed

wiser as well as more agreeable to remain where she was and find

some means of earning her living. The possibility of having to do

this was one which she had never before seriously considered, and

the discovery that, as a bread-winner, she was likely to prove as

helpless and ineffectual as poor Miss Silverton, was a severe

shock to her self-confidence. 



Having been accustomed to take herself at the popular valuation,

as a person of energy and resource, naturally fitted to dominate

any situation in which she found herself, she vaguely imagined

that such gifts would be of value to seekers after social

guidance; but there was unfortunately no specific head under

which the art of saying and doing the right thing could be

offered in the market, and even Mrs. Fisher's resourcefulness

failed before the difficulty of discovering a workable vein in

the vague wealth of Lily's graces. Mrs. Fisher was full of

indirect expedients for enabling her friends to earn a living,

and could conscientiously assert that she had put several

opportunities of this kind before Lily; but more legitimate

methods of bread-winning were as much out of her line as they

were beyond the capacity of the sufferers she was generally

called upon to assist. Lily's failure to profit by the chances

already afforded her might, moreover, have justified the

abandonment of farther effort on her behalf; but Mrs. Fisher's

inexhaustible good-nature made her an adept at creating

artificial demands in response to an actual supply. In the

pursuance of this end she at once started on a voyage of

discovery in Miss Bart's behalf; and as the result of her

explora<p 281>tions she now summoned the latter with the

announcement that she had "found something." 









Left to herself, Gerty mused distressfully upon her friend's

plight, and her own inability to relieve it. It was clear to her

that Lily, for the present, had no wish for the kind of help she

could give. Miss Farish could see no hope for her friend but in a

life completely reorganized and detached from its old

associations; whereas all Lily's energies were centred in the

determined effort to hold fast to those associations, to keep

herself visibly identified with them, as long as the illusion

could be maintained. Pitiable as such an attitude seemed to

Gerty, she could not judge it as harshly as Selden, for instance,

might have done. She had not forgotten the night of emotion when

she and Lily had lain in each other's arms, and she had seemed to

feel her very heart's blood passing into her friend. The

sacrifice she had made had seemed unavailing enough; no trace

remained in Lily of the subduing influences of that hour; but

Gerty's tenderness, disciplined by long years of contact with

obscure and inarticulate suffering, could wait on its object with

a silent forbearance which took no account of time. She could

not, however, deny herself the solace of taking anxious counsel

with Lawrence Selden, with whom, since his return from Europe,

she had renewed her old relation of cousinly confidence. 



Selden himself had never been aware of any change in their

relation. He found Gerty as he had left her, simple, undemanding

and devoted, but with a quickened intelligence of the heart which

he recognized without seeking to explain it. To Gerty herself it

would once have seemed impossible that she should ever again talk

freely with him of Lily Bart; but what had passed in the secrecy

of her own breast seemed to resolve itself, when the mist of the

struggle cleared, into a breaking down of the bounds of self, a

deflecting of the wasted personal emotion into the general

current of human understanding. 



It was not till some two weeks after her visit from Lily that

Gerty had the opportunity of communicating her fears to Selden.

The latter, having presented himself on a Sunday afternoon, had

lingered on through the dowdy animation of his cousin's

tea-hour, conscious of something in her voice and eye which

solicited a word apart; and as soon as the last visitor was gone

Gerty opened her case by asking how lately he had seen Miss Bart.



Selden's perceptible pause gave her time for a slight stir of

surprise. 



"I haven't seen her at all--I've perpetually missed seeing her

since she came back." 



This unexpected admission made Gerty pause too; and she was still

hesitating on the brink of her subject when he relieved her by

adding: "I've wanted to see her--but she seems to have been

absorbed by the Gormer set since her return from Europe." 



"That's all the more reason: she's been very unhappy." 



"Unhappy at being with the Gormers?" 



"Oh, I don't defend her intimacy with the Gormers; but that too

is at an end now, I think. You know people have been very unkind

since Bertha Dorset quarrelled with her." 



"Ah---" Selden exclaimed, rising abruptly to walk to the window,

where he remained with his eyes on the darkening street while his

cousin continued to explain: "Judy Trenor and her own family have

deserted her too--and all because Bertha Dorset has said such

horrible things. And she is very poor--you know Mrs. Peniston cut

her off with a small legacy, after giving her to understand that

she was to have everything." 



"Yes--I know," Selden assented curtly, turning back into the

room, but only to stir about with restless steps in the

circumscribed space between door and window. "Yes--she's been

abominably treated; but it's unfortunately the precise thing that

a man who wants to show his sympathy can't say to her." 



His words caused Gerty a slight chill of disappointment. "There

would be other ways of showing your sympathy," she suggested. 



Selden, with a slight laugh, sat down beside her on the little

sofa which projected from the hearth. "What are you thinking of,

you incorrigible missionary?" he asked. 



Gerty's colour rose, and her blush was for a moment her only

answer. Then she made it more explicit by saying: "I am

thinking of the fact that you and she used to be great

friends--that she used to care immensely for what you thought of

her--and that, if she takes your staying away as a sign of what

you think now, I can imagine its adding a great deal to her

unhappiness." 



"My dear child, don't add to it still more--at least to your

conception of it--by attributing to her all sorts of

susceptibilities of your own." Selden, for his life, could not

keep a note of dryness out of his voice; but he met Gerty's look

of perplexity by saying more mildly: "But, though you immensely

exaggerate the importance of anything I could do for Miss Bart,

you can't exaggerate my readiness to do it--if you ask me to." He

laid his hand for a moment on hers, and there passed between

them, on the current of the rare contact, one of those exchanges

of meaning which fill the hidden reservoirs of affection. Gerty

had the feeling that he measured the cost of her request as

plainly as she read the significance of his reply; and the sense

of all that was suddenly clear between them made her next words

easier to find. 



"I do ask you, then; I ask you because she once told me that you

had been a help to her, and because she needs help now as she has

never needed it before. You know how dependent she has always

been on ease and luxury--how she has hated what was shabby and

ugly and uncomfortable. She can't help it--she was brought up

with those ideas, and has never been able to find her way out of

them. But now all the things she cared for have been taken from

her, and the people who taught her to care for them have

abandoned her too; and it seems to me that if some one could

reach out a hand and show her the other side--show her how much

is left in life and in herself---" Gerty broke off, abashed at

the sound of her own eloquence, and impeded by the difficulty of

giving precise expression to her vague yearning for her friend's

retrieval. "I can't help her myself: she's passed out of my

reach," she continued. "I think she's afraid of being a burden to

me. When she was last here, two weeks ago, she seemed dreadfully

worried about her future: she said Carry Fisher was trying to

find something for her to do. A few days later she wrote me that

she had taken a position as private secretary, and that I was not

to be anxious, for everything was all right, and she

would come in and tell me about it when she had time; but she has

never come, and I don't like to go to her, because I am afraid of

forcing myself on her when I'm not wanted. Once, when we were

children, and I had rushed up after a long separation, and thrown

my arms about her, she said:'Please don't kiss me unless I ask

you to, Gerty'--and she DID ask me, a minute later; but since

then I've always waited to be asked." 



Selden had listened in silence, with the concentrated look which

his thin dark face could assume when he wished to guard it

against any involuntary change of expression. When his cousin

ended, he said with a slight smile: "Since you've learned the

wisdom of waiting, I don't see why you urge me to rush in_ n but

the troubled appeal of her eyes made him add, as he rose to take

leave: "Still, I'll do what you wish, and not hold you

responsible for my failure." Selden's avoidance of Miss Bart had

not been as unintentional as he had allowed his cousin to think.

At first, indeed, while the memory of their last hour at Monte

Carlo still held the full heat of his indignation, he had

anxiously watched for her return; but she had disappointed him by

lingering in England, and when she finally reappeared it happened

that business had called him to the West, whence he came back

only to learn that she was starting for Alaska with the Gormers.

The revelation of this suddenly-established intimacy effectually

chilled his desire to see her. If, at a moment when her whole

life seemed to be breaking up, she could cheerfully commit its

reconstruction to the Gormers, there was no reason why such

accidents should ever strike her as irreparable. Every step she

took seemed in fact to carry her farther from the region where,

once or twice, he and she had met for an illumined moment; and

the recognition of this fact, when its first pang had been

surmounted, produced in him a sense of negative relief. It was

much simpler for him to judge Miss Bart by her habitual conduct

than by the rare deviations from it which had thrown her so

disturbingly in his way; and every act of hers which made the

recurrence of such deviations more unlikely, confirmed the sense

of relief with which he returned to the conventional view of her.



But Gerty Farish's words had sufficed to make him see how

little this view was really his, and how impossible it was for

him to live quietly with the thought of Lily Bart. To hear that

she was in need of help--even such vague help as he could

offer--was to be at once repossessed by that thought; and by the

time he reached the street he had sufficiently convinced himself

of the urgency of his cousin's appeal to turn his steps directly

toward Lily's hotel. 



There his zeal met a check in the unforeseen news that Miss Bart

had moved away; but, on his pressing his enquiries, the clerk

remembered that she had left an address, for which he presently

began to search through his books. 



It was certainly strange that she should have taken this step

without letting Gerty Farish know of her decision; and Selden

waited with a vague sense of uneasiness while the address was

sought for. The process lasted long enough for uneasiness to turn

to apprehension; but when at length a slip of paper was handed

him, and he read on it: "Care of Mrs. Norma Hatch, Emporium

Hotel," his apprehension passed into an incredulous stare, and

this into the gesture of disgust with which he tore the paper in

two, and turned to walk quickly homeward.



When Lily woke on the morning after her translation to the

Emporium Hotel, her first feeling was one of purely physical

satisfaction. The force of contrast gave an added keenness to the

luxury of lying once more in a soft-pillowed bed, and looking

across a spacious sunlit room at a breakfast-table set invitingly

near the fire. Analysis and introspection might come later; but

for the moment she was not even troubled by the excesses of the

upholstery or the restless convolutions of the furniture. The

sense of being once more lapped and folded in ease, as in some

dense mild medium impenetrable to discomfort, effectually stilled

the faintest note of criticism. 



When, the afternoon before, she had presented herself to the lady

to whom Carry Fisher had directed her, she had been conscious of

entering a new world. Carry's vague presentment of Mrs. Norma

Hatch (whose reversion to her Christian name was explained as the

result of her latest divorce), left her under the implication of

coming "from the West," with the not unusual extenuation of

having brought a great deal of money with her. She was, in short,

rich, helpless, unplaced: the very subject for Lily's hand. Mrs.

Fisher had not specified the line her friend was to take; she

owned herself unacquainted with Mrs. Hatch, whom she "knew about"

through Melville Stancy, a lawyer in his leisure moments, and the

Falstaff of a certain section of festive dub life. Socially, Mr.

Stancy might have been said to form a connecting link between the

Gormer world and the more dimly-lit region on which Miss Bart now

found herself entering. It was, however, only figuratively that

the illumination of Mrs. Hatch's world could be described as dim:

in actual fact, Lily found her seated in a blaze of electric

light, impartially projected from various ornamental excrescences

on a vast concavity of pink damask and gilding, from which she

rose like Venus from her shell. The analogy was justified by the

appearance of the lady, whose large-eyed prettiness had the

fixity of something impaled and shown under glass. This did not

preclude the immediate discovery that she was some years younger

than her visitor, and that under her showiness, her ease,

the aggression of her dress and voice, there persisted that

ineradicable innocence which, in ladies of her nationality, so

curiously coexists with startling extremes of experience. 



The environment in which Lily found herself was as strange to her

as its inhabitants. She was unacquainted with the world of the

fashionable New York hotel--a world over-heated,

over-upholstered, and over-fitted with mechanical appliances for

the gratification of fantastic requirements, while the comforts

of a civilized life were as unattainable as in a desert. Through

this atmosphere of torrid splendour moved wan beings as richly

upholstered as the furniture, beings without definite pursuits or

permanent relations, who drifted on a languid tide of curiosity

from restaurant to concert-hall, from palm-garden to music-room,

from "art exhibit" to dress-maker's opening. High-stepping horses

or elaborately equipped motors waited to carry these ladies into

vague metropolitan distances, whence they returned, still more

wan from the weight of their sables, to be sucked back into the

stifling inertia of the hotel routine. Somewhere behind them, in

the background of their lives, there was doubtless a real past,

peopled by real human activities: they themselves were probably

the product of strong ambitions, persistent energies, diversified

contacts with the wholesome roughness of life; yet they had no

more real existence than the poet's shades in limbo. 



Lily had not been long in this pallid world without discovering

that Mrs. Hatch was its most substantial figure. That lady,

though still floating in the void, showed faint symptoms of

developing an outline; and in this endeavour she was actively

seconded by Mr. Melville Stancy. It was Mr. Stancy, a man of

large resounding presence, suggestive of convivial occasions and

of a chivalry finding expression in "first-night" boxes and

thousand dollar bonbonnieres, who had transplanted Mrs. Hatch

from the scene of her first development to the higher stage of

hotel life in the metropolis. It was he who had selected the

horses with which she had taken the blue ribbon at the Show, had

introduced her to the photographer whose portraits of her formed

the recurring ornament of "Sunday Supplements," and had got

together the group which constituted her social world. It was a

small group still, with heterogeneous figures suspended

in large unpeopled spaces; but Lily did not take long to learn

that its regulation was no longer in Mr. Stancy's hands. As often

happens, the pupil had outstripped the teacher, and Mrs. Hatch

was already aware of heights of elegance as well as depths of

luxury beyond the world of the Emporium. This discovery at once

produced in her a craving for higher guidance, for the adroit

feminine hand which should give the right turn to her

correspondence, the right "look" to her hats, the right

succession to the items of her MENUS. It was, in short, as the

regulator of a germinating social life that Miss Bart's guidance

was required; her ostensible duties as secretary being restricted

by the fact that Mrs. Hatch, as yet, knew hardly any one to write

to. 



The daily details of Mrs. Hatch's existence were as strange to

Lily as its general tenor. The lady's habits were marked by an

Oriental indolence and disorder peculiarly trying to her

companion. Mrs. Hatch and her friends seemed to float together

outside the bounds of time and space. No definite hours were

kept; no fixed obligations existed: night and day flowed into one

another in a blur of confused and retarded engagements, so that

one had the impression of lunching at the tea-hour, while dinner

was often merged in the noisy after-theatre supper which

prolonged Mrs. Hatch's vigil till daylight. 



Through this jumble of futile activities came and went a strange

throng of hangers-on--manicures, beauty-doctors, hair-dressers,

teachers of bridge, of French, of "physical development": figures

sometimes indistinguishable, by their appearance, or by Mrs.

Hatch's relation to them, from the visitors constituting her

recognized society. But strangest of all to Lily was the

encounter, in this latter group, of several of her acquaintances.

She had supposed, and not without relief, that she was passing,

for the moment, completely out of her own circle; but she found

that Mr. Stancy, one side of whose sprawling existence overlapped

the edge of Mrs. Fisher's world, had drawn several of its

brightest ornaments into the circle of the Emporium. To find Ned

Silverton among the habitual frequenters of Mrs. Hatch's

drawing-room was one of Lily's first astonishments; but she soon

discovered that he was not Mr. Stancy's most important

recruit. It was on little Freddy Van Osburgh, the small slim heir

of the Van Osburgh millions, that the attention of Mrs. Hatch's

group was centred. Freddy, barely out of college, had risen above

the horizon since Lily's eclipse, and she now saw with surprise

what an effulgence he shed on the outer twilight of Mrs. Hatch's

existence. This, then, was one of the things that young men "went

in" for when released from the official social routine; this

was the kind of "previous engagement" that so frequently caused

them to disappoint the hopes of anxious hostesses. Lily had an

odd sense of being behind the social tapestry, on the side where

the threads were knotted and the loose ends hung. For a moment

she found a certain amusement in the show, and in her own share

of it: the situation had an ease and unconventionality distinctly

refreshing after her experience of the irony of conventions. But

these flashes of amusement were but brief reactions from the long

disgust of her days. Compared with the vast gilded void of Mrs.

Hatch's existence, the life of Lily's former friends seemed

packed with ordered activities. Even the most irresponsible

pretty woman of her acquaintance had her inherited obligations,

her conventional benevolences, her share in the working of the

great civic machine; and all hung together in the solidarity of

these traditional functions. The performance of specific duties

would have simplified Miss Bart's position; but the vague

attendance on Mrs. Hatch was not without its perplexities. 



It was not her employer who created these perplexities. Mrs.

Hatch showed from the first an almost touching desire for Lily's

approval. Far from asserting the superiority of wealth, her

beautiful eyes seemed to urge the plea of inexperience: she

wanted to do what was "nice," to be taught how to be "lovely."

The difficulty was to find any point of contact between her

ideals and Lily's. 



Mrs. Hatch swam in a haze of indeterminate enthusiasms, of

aspirations culled from the stage, the newspapers, the fashion

journals, and a gaudy world of sport still more completely beyond

her companion's ken. To separate from these confused conceptions

those most likely to advance the lady on her way, was Lily's

obvious duty; but its performance was hampered by

rapidly-growing doubts. Lily was in fact becoming more and more

aware of a certain ambiguity in her situation. It was not that

she had, in the conventional sense, any doubt of Mrs. Hatch's

irreproachableness. The lady's offences were always against taste

rather than conduct; her divorce record seemed due to

geographical rather than ethical conditions; and her worst

laxities were likely to proceed from a wandering and extravagant

good-nature. But if Lily did not mind her detaining her manicure

for luncheon, or offering the "Beauty-Doctor" a seat in Freddy

Van Osburgh's box at the play, she was not equally at ease in

regard to some less apparent lapses from convention. Ned

Silverton's relation to Stancy seemed, for instance, closer and

less clear than any natural affinities would warrant; and both

appeared united in the effort to cultivate Freddy Van Osburgh's

growing taste for Mrs. Hatch. There was as yet nothing definable

in the situation, which might well resolve itself into a huge

joke on the part of the other two; but Lily had a vague sense

that the subject of their experiment was too young, too rich and

too credulous. Her embarrassment was increased by the fact that

Freddy seemed to regard her as cooperating with himself in the

social development of Mrs. Hatch: a view that suggested, on his

part, a permanent interest in the lady's future. There were

moments when Lily found an ironic amusement in this aspect of the

case. The thought of launching such a missile as Mrs. Hatch at

the perfidious bosom of society was not without its charm: Miss

Bart had even beguiled her leisure with visions of the fair Norma

introduced for the first time to a family banquet at the Van

Osburghs'. But the thought of being personally connected with the

transaction was less agreeable; and her momentary flashes of

amusement were followed by increasing periods of doubt. 



The sense of these doubts was uppermost when, late one afternoon,

she was surprised by a visit from Lawrence Selden. He found her

alone in the wilderness of pink damask, for in Mrs. Hatch's world

the tea-hour was not dedicated to social rites, and the lady was

in the hands of her masseuse.



Selden's entrance had caused Lily an inward start of

embarrassment; but his air of constraint had the effect of

restoring her self-possession, and she took at once the tone of

surprise and pleasure, wondering frankly that he should

have traced her to so unlikely a place, and asking what had

inspired him to make the search. 



Selden met this with an unusual seriousness: she had never seen

him so little master of the situation, so plainly at the mercy of

any obstructions she might put in his way. "I wanted to see you,"

he said; and she could not resist observing in reply that he had

kept his wishes under remarkable control. She had in truth felt

his long absence as one of the chief bitternesses of the last

months: his desertion had wounded sensibilities far below the

surface of her pride.



Selden met the challenge with directness. "Why should I have

come, unless I thought I could be of use to you? It is my only

excuse for imagining you could want me."



This struck her as a clumsy evasion, and the thought gave a flash

of keenness to her answer. "Then you have come now because you

think you can be of use to me?"



He hesitated again. "Yes: in the modest capacity of a person to

talk things over with."



For a clever man it was certainly a stupid beginning; and the

idea that his awkwardness was due to the fear of her attaching a

personal significance to his visit, chilled her pleasure in

seeing him. Even under the most adverse conditions, that pleasure

always made itself felt: she might hate him, but she had never

been able to wish him out of the room. She was very near hating

him now; yet the sound of his voice, the way the light fell on

his thin dark hair, the way he sat and moved and wore his

clothes--she was conscious that even these trivial things were

inwoven with her deepest life. In his presence a sudden stillness

came upon her, and the turmoil of her spirit ceased; but an

impulse of resistance to this stealing influence now prompted her

to say: "It's very good of you to present yourself in that

capacity; but what makes you think I have anything particular to

talk about?"



Though she kept the even tone of light intercourse, the question

was framed in a way to remind him that his good offices were

unsought; and for a moment Selden was checked by it. The

situation between them was one which could have been cleared up

only by a sudden explosion of feeling; and their whole training

and habit of mind were against the chances of such an

explosion. Selden's calmness seemed rather to harden into

resistance, and Miss Bart's into a surface of glittering irony,

as they faced each other from the opposite comers of one of Mrs.

Hatch's elephantine sofas. The sofa in question, and the

apartment peopled by its monstrous mates, served at length to

suggest the turn of Selden's reply.



"Gerty told me that you were acting as Mrs. Hatch's secretary;

and I knew she was anxious to hear how you were getting on." 



Miss Bart received this explanation without perceptible

softening. "Why didn't she look me up herself, then?" she asked.



"Because, as you didn't send her your address, she was afraid of

being importunate." Selden continued with a smile: "You see no

such scruples restrained me; but then I haven't as much to risk

if I incur your displeasure."



Lily answered his smile. "You haven't incurred it as yet; but I

have an idea that you are going to."



"That rests with you, doesn't it? You see my initiative doesn't

go beyond putting myself at your disposal."



"But in what capacity? What am I to do with you?" she asked in

the same light tone.



Selden again glanced about Mrs. Hatch's drawing-room; then he

said, with a decision which he seemed to have gathered from this

final inspection: "You are to let me take you away from here."



Lily flushed at the suddenness of the attack; then she stiffened

under it and said coldly: "And may I ask where you mean me to

go?"



"Back to Gerty in the first place, if you will; the essential

thing is that it should be away from here."



The unusual harshness of his tone might have shown her how much

the words cost him; but she was in no state to measure his

feelings while her own were in a flame of revolt. To neglect her,

perhaps even to avoid her, at a time when she had most need of

her friends, and then suddenly and unwarrantably to break into

her life with this strange assumption of authority, was to rouse

in her every instinct of pride and self-defence.



"I am very much obliged to you," she said, "for taking such

an interest in my plans; but I am quite contented where I am,

and have no intention of leaving.



"Selden had risen, and was standing before her in an attitude of

uncontrollable expectancy.



"That simply means that you don't know where you are!" he

exclaimed.



Lily rose also, with a quick flash of anger. "If you have come

here to say disagreeable things about Mrs. Hatch---"



"It is only with your relation to Mrs. Hatch that I am

concerned."



"My relation to Mrs. Hatch is one I have no reason to be ashamed

of. She has helped me to earn a living when my old friends were

quite resigned to seeing me starve."



"Nonsense! Starvation is not the only alternative. You know you

can always find a home with Gerty till you are independent

again."



"You show such an intimate acquaintance with my affairs that I

suppose you mean--till my aunt's legacy is paid?"



"I do mean that; Gerty told me of it," Selden acknowledged

without embarrassment. He was too much in earnest now to feel any

false constraint in speaking his mind.



"But Gerty does not happen to know," Miss Bart rejoined, "that I

owe every penny of that legacy."



"Good God!" Selden exclaimed, startled out of his composure by

the abruptness of the statement.



"Every penny of it, and more too," Lily repeated; "and you now

perhaps see why I prefer to remain with Mrs. Hatch rather than

take advantage of Gerty's kindness. I have no money left, except

my small income, and I must earn something more to keep myself

alive."



Selden hesitated a moment; then he rejoined in a quieter tone:

"But with your income and Gerty's--since you allow me to go so

far into the details of the situation--you and she could surely

contrive a life together which would put you beyond the need of

having to support yourself. Gerty, I know, is eager to make such

an arrangement, and would be quite happy in it---"



"But I should not," Miss Bart interposed. "There are many reasons

why it would be neither kind to Gerty nor wise for myself." She

paused a moment, and as he seemed to await a farther

explanation, added with a quick lift of her head: "You will

perhaps excuse me from giving you these reasons."



"I have no claim to know them," Selden answered, ignoring her

tone; "no claim to offer any comment or suggestion beyond the one

I have already made. And my right to make that is simply the

universal right of a man to enlighten a woman when he sees her

unconsciously placed in a false position."



Lily smiled. "I suppose," she rejoined, "that by a false position

you mean one outside of what we call society; but you must

remember that I had been excluded from those sacred precincts

long before I met Mrs. Hatch. As far as I can see, there is very

little real difference in being inside or out, and I remember

your once telling me that it was only those inside who took the

difference seriously.



"She had not been without intention in making this allusion to

their memorable talk at Bellomont, and she waited with an odd

tremor of the nerves to see what response it would bring; but the

result of the experiment was disappointing. Selden did not allow

the allusion to deflect him from his point; he merely said with

completer fulness of emphasis: "The question of being inside or

out is, as you say, a small one, and it happens to have nothing

to do with the case, except in so far as Mrs. Hatch's desire to

be inside may put you in the position I call false."



In spite of the moderation of his tone, each word he spoke had

the effect of confirming Lily's resistance. The very

apprehensions he aroused hardened her against him: she had been

on the alert for the note of personal sympathy, for any sign of

recovered power over him; and his attitude of sober impartiality,

the absence of all response to her appeal, turned her hurt pride

to blind resentment of his interference. The conviction that he

had been sent by Gerty, and that, whatever straits he conceived

her to be in, he would never voluntarily have come to her aid,

strengthened her resolve not to admit him a hair's breadth

farther into her confidence. However doubtful she might feel her

situation to be, she would rather persist in darkness than owe

her enlightenment to Selden.



"I don't know," she said, when he had ceased to speak, "why you

imagine me to be situated as you describe; but as you

have always told me that the sole object of a bringing-up like

mine was to teach a girl to get what she wants, why not assume

that that is precisely what I am doing?"



The smile with which she summed up her case was like a clear

barrier raised against farther confidences: its brightness held

him at such a distance that he had a sense of being almost out of

hearing as he rejoined: "I am not sure that I have ever called

you a successful example of that kind of bringing-up."



Her colour rose a little at the implication, but she steeled

herself with a light laugh."Ah, wait a little longer--give me a

little more time before you decide!" And as he wavered before

her, still watching for a break in the impenetrable front she

presented: "Don't give me up; I may still do credit to my

training!" she affirmed.



Look at those spangles, Miss Bart--every one of 'em sewed on

crooked."



The tall forewoman, a pinched perpendicular figure, dropped the

condemned structure of wire and net on the table at Lily's side,

and passed on to the next figure in the line.



There were twenty of them in the work-room, their fagged

profiles, under exaggerated hair, bowed in the harsh north light

above the utensils of their art; for it was something more than

an industry, surely, this creation of ever-varied settings for

the face of fortunate womanhood. Their own faces were sallow with

the unwholesomeness of hot air and sedentary toil, rather than

with any actual signs of want: they were employed in a

fashionable millinery establishment, and were fairly well clothed

and well paid; but the youngest among them was as dull and

colourless as the middle-aged. In the whole work-room there was

only one skin beneath which the blood still visibly played; and

that now burned with vexation as Miss Bart, under the lash of the

forewoman's comment, began to strip the hat-frame of its

over-lapping spangles.



To Gerty Farish's hopeful spirit a solution appeared to have been

reached when she remembered how beautifully Lily could trim hats.

Instances of young lady-milliners establishing themselves under

fashionable patronage, and imparting to their "creations" that

indefinable touch which the professional hand can never give, had

flattered Gerty's visions of the future, and convinced even Lily

that her separation from Mrs. Norma Hatch need not reduce her to

dependence on her friends.



The parting had occurred a few weeks after Selden's visit, and

would have taken place sooner had it not been for the resistance

set up in Lily by his ill-starred offer of advice. The sense of

being involved in a transaction she would not have cared to

examine too closely had soon afterward defined itself in the

light of a hint from Mr. Stancy that, if she "saw them through,"

she would have no reason to be sorry. The implication that such

loyalty would meet with a direct reward had hastened her flight,

and flung her back, ashamed and peni<p 297>tent, on the broad

bosom of Gerty's sympathy. She did not, however, propose to lie

there prone, and Gerty's inspiration about the hats at once

revived her hopes of profitable activity. Here was, after all,

something that her charming listless hands could really do; she

had no doubt of their capacity for knotting a ribbon or placing a

flower to advantage. And of course only these finishing touches

would be expected of her: subordinate fingers, blunt, grey,

needle-pricked fingers, would prepare the shapes and stitch the

linings, while she presided over the charming little front

shop--a shop all white panels, mirrors, and moss-green

hangings--where her finished creations, hats, wreaths, aigrettes

and the rest, perched on their stands like birds just poising for

flight.



But at the very outset of Gerty's campaign this vision of the

green-and-white shop had been dispelled. Other young ladies of

fashion had been thus "set-up," selling their hats by the mere

attraction of a name and the reputed knack of tying a bow; but

these privileged beings could command a faith in their powers

materially expressed by the readiness to pay their shop-rent and

advance a handsome sum for current expenses. Where was Lily to

find such support? And even could it have been found, how were

the ladies on whose approval she depended to be induced to give

her their patronage? Gerty learned that whatever sympathy her

friend's case might have excited a few months since had been

imperilled, if not lost, by her association with Mrs. Hatch. Once

again, Lily had withdrawn from an ambiguous situation in time to

save her self-respect, but too late for public vindication.

Freddy Van Osburgh was not to marry Mrs. Hatch; he had been

rescued at the eleventh hour--some said by the efforts of Gus

Trenor and Rosedale--and despatched to Europe with old Ned Van

Alstyne; but the risk he had run would always be ascribed to Miss

Bart's connivance, and would somehow serve as a summing-up and

corroboration of the vague general distrust of her. It was a

relief to those who had hung back from her to find themselves

thus justified, and they were inclined to insist a little on her

connection with the Hatch case in order to show that they had

been right.



Gerty's quest, at any rate, brought up against a solid wall of

resistance; and even when Carry Fisher, momentarily pen<p

298>itent for her share in the Hatch affair, joined her efforts

to Miss Farish's, they met with no better success. Gerty had

tried to veil her failure in tender ambiguities; but Carry,

always the soul of candour, put the case squarely to her friend.



"I went straight to Judy Trenor; she has fewer prejudices than

the others, and besides she's always hated Bertha Dorset. But

what HAVE you done to her, Lily? At the very first word about

giving you a start she flamed out about some money you'd got from

Gus; I never knew her so hot before. You know she'll let him do

anything but spend money on his friends: the only reason she's

decent to me now is that she knows I'm not hard up.--He

speculated for you, you say? Well, what's the harm? He had no

business to lose. He DIDN'T lose? Then what on earth--but I never

COULD understand you, Lily!"



The end of it was that, after anxious enquiry and much

deliberation, Mrs. Fisher and Gerty, for once oddly united in

their effort to help their friend, decided on placing her in the

work-room of Mme. Regina's renowned millinery establishment. Even

this arrangement was not effected without considerable

negotiation, for Mme. Regina had a strong prejudice against

untrained assistance, and was induced to yield only by the fact

that she owed the patronage of Mrs. Bry and Mrs. Gormer to Carry

Fisher's influence. She had been willing from the first to employ

Lily in the show-room: as a displayer of hats, a fashionable

beauty might be a valuable asset. But to this suggestion Miss

Bart opposed a negative which Gerty emphatically supported, while

Mrs. Fisher, inwardly unconvinced, but resigned to this latest

proof of Lily's unreason, agreed that perhaps in the end it would

be more useful that she should learn the trade. To Regina's

work-room Lily was therefore committed by her friends, and there

Mrs. Fisher left her with a sigh of relief, while Gerty's

watchfulness continued to hover over her at a distance.



Lily had taken up her work early in January: it was now two

months later, and she was still being rebuked for her inability

to sew spangles on a hat-frame. As she returned to her work she

heard a titter pass down the tables. She knew she was an object

of criticism and amusement to the other work-women. They were,

of course, aware of her history--the exact situation of

every girl in the room was known and freely discussed by all the

others--but the knowledge did not produce in them any awkward

sense of class distinction: it merely explained why her untutored

fingers were still blundering over the rudiments of the trade.

Lily had no desire that they should recognize any social

difference in her; but she had hoped to be received as their

equal, and perhaps before long to show herself their superior by

a special deftness of touch, and it was humiliating to find that,

after two months of drudgery, she still betrayed her lack of

early training. Remote was the day when she might aspire to

exercise the talents she felt confident of possessing; only

experienced workers were entrusted with the delicate art of

shaping and trimming the hat, and the forewoman still held her

inexorably to the routine of preparatory work.



She began to rip the spangles from the frame, listening absently

to the buzz of talk which rose and fell with the coming and going

of Miss Haines's active figure. The air was closer than usual,

because Miss Haines, who had a cold, had not allowed a window to

be opened even during the noon recess; and Lily's head was so

heavy with the weight of a sleepless night that the chatter of

her companions had the incoherence of a dream. 



"I TOLD her he'd never look at her again; and he didn't. I

wouldn't have, either--I think she acted real mean to him. He

took her to the Arion Ball, and had a hack for her both ways....

She's taken ten bottles, and her headaches don't seem no

better--but she's written a testimonial to say the first bottle

cured her, and she got five dollars and her picture in the

paper.... Mrs. Trenor's hat? The one with the green Paradise?

Here, Miss Haines--it'll be ready right off.... That was one of

the Trenor girls here yesterday with Mrs. George Dorset. How'd I

know? Why, Madam sent for me to alter the flower in that Virot

hat--the blue tulle: she's tall and slight, with her hair fuzzed

out--a good deal like Mamie Leach, on'y thinner...."



On and on it flowed, a current of meaningless sound, on which,

startlingly enough, a familiar name now and then floated to the

surface. It was the strangest part of Lily's strange experience,

the hearing of these names, the seeing the fragmentary

and distorted image of the world she had lived in reflected in

the mirror of the working-girls' minds. She had never before

suspected the mixture of insatiable curiosity and contemptuous

freedom with which she and her kind were discussed in this

underworld of toilers who lived on their vanity and

self-indulgence. Every girl in Mme. Regina's work-room knew to

whom the headgear in her hands was destined, and had her opinion

of its future wearer, and a definite knowledge of the latter's

place in the social system. That Lily was a star fallen from that

sky did not, after the first stir of curiosity had subsided,

materially add to their interest in her. She had fallen, she had

"gone under," and true to the ideal of their race, they were awed

only by success--by the gross tangible image of material

achievement. The consciousness of her different point of view

merely kept them at a little distance from her, as though she

were a foreigner with whom it was an effort to talk.



"Miss Bart, if you can't sew those spangles on more regular I

guess you'd better give the hat to Miss Kilroy."



Lily looked down ruefully at her handiwork. The forewoman was

right: the sewing on of the spangles was inexcusably bad. What

made her so much more clumsy than usual? Was it a growing

distaste for her task, or actual physical disability? She felt

tired and confused: it was an effort to put her thoughts

together. She rose and handed the hat to Miss Kilroy, who took it

with a suppressed smile.



"I'm sorry; I'm afraid I am not well," she said to the forewoman.



Miss Haines offered no comment. From the first she had augured

ill of Mme. Regina's consenting to include a fashionable

apprentice among her workers. In that temple of art no raw

beginners were wanted, and Miss Haines would have been more than

human had she not taken a certain pleasure in seeing her

forebodings confirmed.



"You'd better go back to binding edges," she said drily. Lily

slipped out last among the band of liberated work-women. She did

not care to be mingled in their noisy dispersal: once in the

street, she always felt an irresistible return to her old

standpoint, an instinctive shrinking from all that was unpolished

and promiscuous. In the days--how distant they now

seemed!--when she had visited the Girls' Club with Gerty Farish,

she had felt an enlightened interest in the working-classes; but

that was because she looked down on them from above, from the

happy altitude of her grace and her beneficence. Now that she was

on a level with them, the point of view was less interesting.



She felt a touch on her arm, and met the penitent eye of Miss

Kilroy. "Miss Bart, I guess you can sew those spangles on as well

as I can when you're feeling right. Miss Haines didn't act fair

to you." 



Lily's colour rose at the unexpected advance: it was a long time

since real kindness had looked at her from any eyes but Gerty's.



"Oh, thank you: I'm not particularly well, but Miss Haines was

right. I AM clumsy."



"Well, it's mean work for anybody with a headache." Miss Kilroy

paused irresolutely. "You ought to go right home and lay down.

Ever try orangeine?"



"Thank you." Lily held out her hand. "It's very kind of you--I

mean to go home."



She looked gratefully at Miss Kilroy, but neither knew what more

to say. Lily was aware that the other was on the point of

offering to go home with her, but she wanted to be alone and

silent--even kindness, the sort of kindness that Miss Kilroy

could give, would have jarred on her just then.



"Thank you," she repeated as she turned away.



She struck westward through the dreary March twilight, toward the

street where her boarding-house stood. She had resolutely refused

Gerty's offer of hospitality. Something of her mother's fierce

shrinking from observation and sympathy was beginning to develop

in her, and the promiscuity of small quarters and close intimacy

seemed, on the whole, less endurable than the solitude of a hall

bedroom in a house where she could come and go unremarked among

other workers. For a while she had been sustained by this desire

for privacy and independence; but now, perhaps from increasing

physical weariness, the lassitude brought about by hours of

unwonted confinement, she was beginning to feel acutely the

ugliness and discomfort of her surroundings. The day's task done,

she dreaded to return to her narrow room, with its

blotched wallpaper and shabby paint; and she hated every step of

the walk thither, through the degradation of a New York street in

the last stages of decline from fashion to commerce.



But what she dreaded most of all was having to pass the chemist's

at the corner of Sixth Avenue. She had meant to take another

street: she had usually done so of late. But today her steps were

irresistibly drawn toward the flaring plate-glass comer; she

tried to take the lower crossing, but a laden dray crowded her

back, and she struck across the street obliquely, reaching the

sidewalk just opposite the chemist's door.



Over the counter she caught the eye of the clerk who had waited

on her before, and slipped the prescription into his hand. There

could be no question about the prescription: it was a copy of one

of Mrs. Hatch's, obligingly furnished by that lady's chemist.

Lily was confident that the clerk would fill it without

hesitation; yet the nervous dread of a refusal, or even of an

expression of doubt, communicated itself to her restless hands as

she affected to examine the bottles of perfume stacked on the

glass case before her.



The clerk had read the prescription without comment; but in the

act of handing out the bottle he paused.



"You don't want to increase the dose, you know," he remarked.

Lily's heart contracted.



What did he mean by looking at her in that way?



"Of course not," she murmured, holding out her hand.



"That's all right: it's a queer-acting drug. A drop or two more,

and off you go--the doctors don't know why."



The dread lest he should question her, or keep the bottle back,

choked the murmur of acquiescence in her throat; and when at

length she emerged safely from the shop she was almost dizzy with

the intensity of her relief. The mere touch of the packet

thrilled her tired nerves with the delicious promise of a night

of sleep, and in the reaction from her momentary fear she felt as

if the first fumes of drowsiness were already stealing over her.



In her confusion she stumbled against a man who was hurrying down

the last steps of the elevated station. He drew back, and she

heard her name uttered with surprise. It was Rosedale,

fur-coated, glossy and prosperous--but why did she seem to see

him so far off, and as if through a mist of splintered crystals?

Before she could account for the phenomenon she found herself

shaking hands with him. They had parted with scorn on her side

and anger upon his; but all trace of these emotions seemed to

vanish as their hands met, and she was only aware of a confused

wish that she might continue to hold fast to him.



"Why, what's the matter, Miss Lily? You're not well!" he

exclaimed; and she forced her lips into a pallid smile of

reassurance.



"I'm a little tired--it's nothing. Stay with me a moment,

please," she faltered. That she should be asking this service of

Rosedale!



He glanced at the dirty and unpropitious comer on which they

stood, with the shriek of the "elevated" and the tumult of trams

and waggons contending hideously in their ears.



"We can't stay here; but let me take you somewhere for a cup of

tea. The LONGWORTH is only a few yards off, and there'll be no

one there at this hour."



A cup of tea in quiet, somewhere out of the noise and ugliness,

seemed for the moment the one solace she could bear. A few steps

brought them to the ladies' door of the hotel he had named, and a

moment later he was seated opposite to her, and the waiter had

placed the tea-tray between them.



"Not a drop of brandy or whiskey first? You look regularly done

up, Miss Lily. Well, take your tea strong, then; and, waiter, get

a cushion for the lady's back."



Lily smiled faintly at the injunction to take her tea strong. It

was the temptation she was always struggling to resist. Her

craving for the keen stimulant was forever conflicting with that

other craving for sleep--the midnight craving which only the

little phial in her hand could still. But today, at any rate, the

tea could hardly be too strong: she counted on it to pour warmth

and resolution into her empty veins.



As she leaned back before him, her lids drooping in utter

lassitude, though the first warm draught already tinged her face

with returning life, Rosedale was seized afresh by the poignant

surprise of her beauty. The dark pencilling of fatigue under her

eyes, the morbid blue-veined pallour of the temples,

brought out the brightness of her hair and lips, as though all

her ebbing vitality were centred there. Against the dull

chocolate-coloured background of the restaurant, the purity of

her head stood out as it had never done in the most brightly-lit

ball-room. He looked at her with a startled uncomfortable

feeling, as though her beauty were a forgotten enemy that had

lain in ambush and now sprang out on him unawares.



To clear the air he tried to take an easy tone with her. "Why,

Miss Lily, I haven't seen you for an age. I didn't know what had

become of you."



As he spoke, he was checked by an embarrassing sense of the

complications to which this might lead. Though he had not seen

her he had heard of her; he knew of her connection with Mrs.

Hatch, and of the talk resulting from it. Mrs. Hatch's MILIEU was

one which he had once assiduously frequented, and now as devoutly

shunned.



Lily, to whom the tea had restored her usual clearness of mind,

saw what was in his thoughts and said with a slight smile: "You

would not be likely to know about me. I have joined the working

classes."



He stared in genuine wonder. "You don't mean ? Why, what on earth

are you doing?"



"Learning to be a milliner--at least TRYING to learn," she

hastily qualified the statement.



Rosedale suppressed a low whistle of surprise. "Come off--you

ain't serious, are you?"



"Perfectly serious. I'm obliged to work for my living."



"But I understood--I thought you were with Norma Hatch."



"You heard I had gone to her as her secretary?"



"Something of the kind, I believe." He leaned forward to refill

her cup.



Lily guessed the possibilities of embarrassment which the topic

held for him, and raising her eyes to his, she said suddenly: "I

left her two months ago."
