




CHAPTER III - PREDICTIONS FOR THE YEAR 1708.



WHEREIN THE MONTH, AND DAY OF THE MONTH ARE SET DOWN, THE PERSONS 

NAMED, AND THE GREAT ACTIONS AND EVENTS OF NEXT YEAR PARTICULARLY 

RELATED AS WILL COME TO PASS.



WRITTEN TO PREVENT THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND FROM BEING FARTHER IMPOSED 

ON BY VULGAR ALMANACK-MAKERS.



BY ISAAC BICKERSTAFF, ESQ.









I HAVE long considered the gross abuse of astrology in this 

kingdom, and upon debating the matter with myself, I could not 

possibly lay the fault upon the art, but upon those gross impostors 

who set up to be the artists.  I know several learned men have 

contended that the whole is a cheat; that it is absurd and 

ridiculous to imagine the stars can have any influence at all upon 

human actions, thoughts, or inclinations; and whoever has not bent 

his studies that way may be excused for thinking so, when he sees 

in how wretched a manner that noble art is treated by a few mean 

illiterate traders between us and the stars, who import a yearly 

stock of nonsense, lies, folly, and impertinence, which they offer 

to the world as genuine from the planets, though they descend from 

no greater a height than their own brains.



I intend in a short time to publish a large and rational defence of 

this art, and therefore shall say no more in its justification at 

present than that it hath been in all ages defended by many learned 

men, and among the rest by Socrates himself, whom I look upon as 

undoubtedly the wisest of uninspired mortals:  to which if we add 

that those who have condemned this art, though otherwise learned, 

having been such as either did not apply their studies this way, or 

at least did not succeed in their applications, their testimony 

will not be of much weight to its disadvantage, since they are 

liable to the common objection of condemning what they did not 

understand.



Nor am I at all offended, or think it an injury to the art, when I 

see the common dealers in it, the students in astrology, the 

Philomaths, and the rest of that tribe, treated by wise men with 

the utmost scorn and contempt; but rather wonder, when I observe 

gentlemen in the country, rich enough to serve the nation in 

Parliament, poring in Partridge's Almanack to find out the events 

of the year at home and abroad, not daring to propose a hunting-

match till Gadbury or he have fixed the weather.



I will allow either of the two I have mentioned, or any other of 

the fraternity, to he not only astrologers, but conjurers too, if I 

do not produce a hundred instances in all their almanacks to 

convince any reasonable man that they do not so much as understand 

common grammar and syntax; that they are not able to spell any word 

out of the usual road, nor even in their prefaces write common 

sense or intelligible English.  Then for their observations and 

predictions, they are such as will equally suit any age or country 

in the world.  "This month a certain great person. will be 

threatened with death or sickness."  This the newspapers will tell 

them; for there we find at the end of the year that no month passes 

without the death of some person of note; and it would be hard if 

it should be otherwise, when there are at least two thousand 

persons of note in this kingdom, many of them old, and the 

almanack-maker has the liberty of choosing the sickliest season of 

the year where lie may fix his prediction.  Again, "This month an 

eminent clergyman will be preferred;" of which there may be some 

hundreds, half of them with one foot in the grave.  Then "such a 

planet in such a house shows great machinations, plots, and 

conspiracies, that may in time be brought to light:" after which, 

if we hear of any discovery, the astrologer gets the honour; if 

not, his prediction still stands good.  And at last, "God preserve 

King William from all his open and secret enemies, Amen."  When if 

the King should happen to have died, the astrologer plainly 

foretold it; otherwise it passes but for the pious ejaculation of a 

loyal subject; though it unluckily happened in some of their 

almanacks that poor King William was prayed for many months after 

he was dead, because it fell out that he died about the beginning 

of the year.



To mention no more of their impertinent predictions:  what have we 

to do with their advertisements about pills and drink for disease? 

or their mutual quarrels in verse and prose of Whig and Tory, 

wherewith the stars have little to do?



Having long observed and lamented these, and a hundred other abuses 

of this art, too tedious to repeat, I resolved to proceed in a new 

way, which I doubt not will be to the general satisfaction of the 

kingdom.  I can this year produce but a specimen of what I design 

for the future, having employed most part of my time in adjusting 

and correcting the calculations I made some years past, because I 

would offer nothing to the world of which I am not as fully 

satisfied as that I am now alive.  For these two last years I have 

not failed in above one or two particulars, and those of no very 

great moment.  I exactly foretold the miscarriage at Toulon, with 

all its particulars, and the loss of Admiral Shovel, though I was 

mistaken as to the day, placing that accident about thirty-six 

hours sooner than it happened; but upon reviewing my schemes, I 

quickly found the cause of that error.  I likewise foretold the 

Battle of Almanza to the very day and hour, with the lose on both 

sides, and the consequences thereof.  All which I showed to some 

friends many months before they happened - that is, I gave them 

papers sealed up, to open at such a time, after which they were at 

liberty to read them; and there they found my predictions true in 

every article, except one or two very minute.



As for the few following predictions I now offer the world, I 

forbore to publish them till I had perused the several almanacks 

for the year we are now entered on.  I find them all in the usual 

strain, and I beg the reader will compare their manner with mine.  

And here I make bold to tell the world that I lay the whole credit 

of my art upon the truth of these predictions; and I will be 

content that Partridge, and the rest of his clan, may hoot me for a 

cheat and impostor if I fail in any single particular of moment.  I 

believe any man who reads this paper will look upon me to be at 

least a person of as much honesty and understanding as a common 

maker of almanacks.  I do not lurk in the dark; 1 am not wholly 

unknown in the world; I have set my name at length, to be a mark of 

infamy to mankind, if they shall find I deceive them.



In one thing I must desire to be forgiven, that I talk more 

sparingly of home affairs.  As it will be imprudence to discover 

secrets of State, so it would be dangerous to my person; but in 

smaller matters, and that are not of public consequence, I shall be 

very free; and the truth of my conjectures will as much appear from 

those as the others.  As for the most signal events abroad, in 

France, Flanders, Italy, and Spain, I shall make no scruple to 

predict them in plain terms.  Some of them are of importance, and I 

hope I shall seldom mistake the day they will happen; therefore I 

think good to inform the reader that I all along make use of the 

Old Style observed in England, which I desire he will compare with 

that of the newspapers at the time they relate the actions I 

mention.



I must add one word more.  I know it hath been the opinion of 

several of the learned, who think well enough of the true art of 

astrology, that the stars do only incline, and not force the 

actions or wills of men, and therefore, however I may proceed by 

right rules, yet I cannot in prudence so confidently assure the 

events will follow exactly as I predict them.



I hope I have maturely considered this objection, which in some 

cases is of no little weight.  For example:  a man may, by the 

influence of an over-ruling planet, be disposed or inclined to 

lust, rage, or avarice, and yet by the force of reason overcome 

that bad influence; and this was the case of Socrates.  But as the 

great events of the world usually depend upon numbers of men, it 

cannot be expected they should all unite to cross their 

inclinations from pursuing a general design wherein they 

unanimously agree.  Besides, the influence of the stars reaches to 

many actions and events which are not any way in the power of 

reason, as sickness, death, and what we commonly call accidents, 

with many more, needless to repeat.



But now it is time to proceed to my predictions, which I have begun 

to calculate from the time that the sun enters into Aries.  And 

this I take to be properly the beginning of the natural year.  I 

pursue them to the time that he enters Libra, or somewhat more, 

which is the busy period of the year.  The remainder I have not yet 

adjusted, upon account of several impediments needless here to 

mention.  Besides, I must remind the reader again that this is but 

a specimen of what I design in succeeding years to treat more at 

large, if I may have liberty and encouragement.



My first prediction is but a trifle, yet I will mention it, to show 

how ignorant those sottish pretenders to astrology are in their own 

concerns.  It relates to Partridge, the almanack-maker.  I have 

consulted the stars of his nativity by my own rules, and find he 

will infallibly die upon the 29th of March next, about eleven at 

night, of a raging fever; therefore I advise him to consider of it, 

and settle his affairs in time.



The month of APRIL will be observable for the death of many great 

persons.  On the 4th will die the Cardinal de Noailles, Archbishop 

of Paris; on the 11th, the young Prince of Asturias, son to the 

Duke of Anjou; on the 14th, a great peer of this realm will die at 

his country house; on the 19th, an old layman of great fame for 

learning, and on the 23rd, an eminent goldsmith in Lombard Street.  

I could mention others, both at home and abroad, if I did not 

consider it is of very little use or instruction to the reader, or 

to the world.



As to public affairs:  On the 7th of this month there will be an 

insurrection in Dauphiny, occasioned by the oppressions of the 

people, which will not be quieted in some months.



On the 15th will be a violent storm on the south-east coast of 

France, which will destroy many of their ships, and some in the 

very harbour.



The 11th will be famous for the revolt of a whole province or 

kingdom, excepting one city, by which the affairs of a certain 

prince in the Alliance will take a better face.



MAY, against common conjectures, will be no very busy month in 

Europe, but very signal for the death of the Dauphin, which will 

happen on the 7th, after a short fit of sickness, and grievous 

torments with the strangury.  He dies less lamented by the Court 

than the kingdom.



On the 9th a Marshal of France will break his leg by a fall from 

his horse.  I have not been able to discover whether he will then 

die or not.



On the 11th will begin a most important siege, which the eyes of 

all Europe will be upon:  I cannot be more particular, for in 

relating affairs that so nearly concern the Confederates, and 

consequently this kingdom, I am forced to confine myself for 

several reasons very obvious to the reader.



On the 15th news will arrive of a very surprising event, than which 

nothing could be more unexpected.



On the 19th three noble ladies of this kingdom will, against all 

expectation, prove with child, to the great joy of their husbands.



On the 23rd a famous buffoon of the playhouse will die a ridiculous 

death, suitable to his vocation.



JUNE.  This month will be distinguished at home by the utter 

dispersing of those ridiculous deluded enthusiasts commonly called 

the Prophets, occasioned chiefly by seeing the time come that many 

of their prophecies should be fulfilled, and then finding 

themselves deceived by contrary events.  It is indeed to be admired 

how any deceiver can be so weak to foretell things near at hand, 

when a very few months must of necessity discover the impostor to 

all the world; in this point less prudent than common almanack-

makers, who are so wise to wonder in generals, and talk dubiously, 

and leave to the reader the business of interpreting.



On the 1st of this month a French general will be killed by a 

random shot of a cannon-ball.



On the 6th a fire will break out in the suburbs of Paris, which 

will destroy above a thousand houses, and seems to be the 

foreboding of what will happen, to the surprise of all Europe, 

about the end of the following month.



On the 10th a great battle will be fought, which will begin at four 

of the clock in the afternoon, and last till nine at night with 

great obstinacy, but no very decisive event.  I shall not name the 

place, for the reasons aforesaid, but the commanders on each left 

wing will be killed.  I see bonfires and hear the noise of guns for 

a victory.



On the 14th there will be a false report of the French king's 

death.



On the 20th Cardinal Portocarero will die of a dysentery, with 

great suspicion of poison, but the report of his intention to 

revolt to King Charles will prove false.



JULY.  The 6th of this month a certain general will, by a glorious 

action, recover the reputation he lost by former misfortunes.



On the 12th a great commander will die a prisoner in the hands of 

his enemies.



On the 14th a shameful discovery will be made of a French Jesuit 

giving poison to a great foreign general; and when he is put to the 

torture, will make wonderful discoveries.



In short, this will prove a month of great action, if I might have 

liberty to relate the particulars.



At home, the death of an old famous senator will happen on the 15th 

at his country house, worn with age and diseases.



But that which will make this month memorable to all posterity is 

the death of the French king, Louis the Fourteenth, after a week's 

sickness at Marli, which will happen on the 29th, about six o'clock 

in the evening.  It seems to be an effect of the gout in his 

stomach, followed by a flux.  And in three days after Monsieur 

Chamillard will follow his master, dying suddenly of an apoplexy.



In this month likewise an ambassador will die in London, but I 

cannot assign the day.



AUGUST.  The affairs of France will seem to suffer no change for a 

while under the Duke of Burgundy's administration; but the genius 

that animated the whole machine being gone, will be the cause of 

mighty turns and revolutions in the following year.  The new king 

makes yet little change either in the army or the Ministry, but the 

libels against his grandfather, that fly about his very Court, give 

him uneasiness.



I see an express in mighty haste, with joy and wonder in his looks, 

arriving by break of day on the 26th of this month, having 

travelled in three days a prodigious journey by land and sea.  In 

the evening I hear bells and guns, and see the blazing of a 

thousand bonfires.



A young admiral of noble birth does likewise this month gain 

immortal honour by a great achievement.



The affairs of Poland are this month entirely settled; Augustus 

resigns his pretensions which he had again taken up for some time:  

Stanislaus is peaceably possessed of the throne, and the King of 

Sweden declares for the emperor.



I cannot omit one particular accident here at home:  that near the 

end of this month much mischief will be done at Bartholomew Fair by 

the fall of a booth.



SEPTEMBER.  This month begins with a very surprising fit of frosty 

weather, which will last near twelve days.



The Pope, having long languished last month, the swellings in his 

legs breaking, and the flesh mortifying, will die on the 11th 

instant; and in three weeks' time, after a mighty contest, be 

succeeded by a cardinal of the Imperial faction, but native of 

Tuscany, who is now about sixty-one years old.



The French army acts now wholly on the defensive, strongly 

fortified in their trenches, and the young French king sends 

overtures for a treaty of peace by the Duke of Mantua; which, 

because it is a matter of State that concerns us here at home, I 

shall speak no farther of it.



I shall add but one prediction more, and that in mystical terms, 

which shall be included in a verse out of Virgil -





ALTER ERIT JAM TETHYS, ET ALTERA QUAE VEHAT ARGO

DELECTOS HEROAS.





Upon the 25th day of this month, the fulfilling of this prediction 

will be manifest to everybody.



This is the farthest I have proceeded in my calculations for the 

present year.  I do not pretend that these are all the great events 

which will happen in this period, but that those I have set down 

will infallibly come to pass.  It will perhaps still be objected 

why I have not spoken more particularly of affairs at home, or of 

the success of our armies abroad, which I might, and could very 

largely have done; but those in power have wisely discouraged men 

from meddling in public concerns, and I was resolved by no means to 

give the least offence.  This I will venture to say, that it will 

be a glorious campaign for the Allies, wherein the English forces, 

both by sea and land, will have their full share of honour; that 

Her Majesty Queen Anne will continue in health and prosperity; and 

that no ill accident will arrive to any in the chief Ministry.



As to the particular events I have mentioned, the readers may judge 

by the fulfilling of them, whether I am on the level with common 

astrologers, who, with an old paltry cant, and a few pothooks for 

planets, to amuse the vulgar, have, in my opinion, too long been 

suffered to abuse the world.  But an honest physician ought not to 

be despised because there are such things as mountebanks.  I hope I 

have some share of reputation, which I would not willingly forfeit 

for a frolic or humour; and I believe no gentleman who reads this 

paper will look upon it to be of the same cast or mould with the 

common scribblers that are every day hawked about.  My fortune has 

placed me above the little regard of scribbling for a few pence, 

which I neither value nor want; therefore, let no wise man too 

hastily condemn this essay, intended for a good design, to 

cultivate and improve an ancient art long in disgrace, by having 

fallen into mean and unskilful hands.  A little time will determine 

whether I have deceived others or myself; and I think it is no very 

unreasonable request that men would please to suspend their 

judgments till then.  I was once of the opinion with those who 

despise all predictions from the stars, till in the year 1686 a man 

of quality showed me, written in his album, that the most learned 

astronomer, Captain H-, assured him, he would never believe 

anything of the stars' influence if there were not a great 

revolution in England in the year 1688.  Since that time I began to 

have other thoughts, and after eighteen years' diligent study and 

application, I think I have no reason to repent of my pains.  I 

shall detain the reader no longer than to let him know that the 

account I design to give of next year's events shall take in the 

principal affairs that happen in Europe; and if I be denied the 

liberty of offering it to my own country, I shall appeal to the 

learned world, by publishing it in Latin, and giving order to have 

it printed in Holland.

