



CHAPTER XII - THE SECOND PRAYER WAS WRITTEN NOV. 6, 1727.



O MERCIFUL Father, who never afflictest Thy children but for their 

own good, and with justice, over which Thy mercy always prevaileth, 

either to turn them to repentance, or to punish them in the present 

life, in order to reward them in a better; take pity, we beseech 

Thee, upon this Thy poor afflicted servant, languishing so long and 

so grievously under the weight of Thy Hand.  Give her strength, O 

Lord, to support her weakness, and patience to endure her pains, 

without repining at Thy correction.  Forgive every rash and 

inconsiderate expression which her anguish may at any time force 

from her tongue, while her heart continueth in an entire submission 

to Thy Will.  Suppress in her, O Lord, all eager desires of life, 

and lesson her fears of death, by inspiring into her an humble yet 

assured hope of Thy mercy.  Give her a sincere repentance for all 

her transgressions and omissions, and a firm resolution to pass the 

remainder of her life in endeavouring to her utmost to observe all 

thy precepts.  We beseech Thee likewise to compose her thoughts, 

and preserve to her the use of her memory and reason during the 

course of her sickness.  Give her a true conception of the vanity, 

folly, and insignificancy of all human things; and strengthen her 

so as to beget in her a sincere love of Thee in the midst of her 

sufferings.  Accept and impute all her good deeds, and forgive her 

all those offences against Thee, which she hath sincerely repented 

of, or through the frailty of memory hath forgot.  And now, O Lord, 

we turn to Thee in behalf of ourselves, and the rest of her 

sorrowful friends.  Let not our grief afflict her mind, and thereby 

have an ill effect on her present distemper.  Forgive the sorrow 

and weakness of those among us who sink under the grief and terror 

of losing so dear and useful a friend.  Accept and pardon our most 

earnest prayers and wishes for her longer continuance in this evil 

world, to do what Thou art pleased to call Thy service, and is only 

her bounden duty; that she may be still a comfort to us, and to all 

others, who will want the benefit of her conversation, her advice, 

her good offices, or her charity.  And since Thou hast promised 

that where two or three are gathered together in Thy Name, Thou 

wilt be in the midst of them to grant their request, O Gracious 

Lord, grant to us who are here met in Thy Name, that those 

requests, which in the utmost sincerity and earnestness of our 

hearts we have now made in behalf of this Thy distressed servant, 

and of ourselves, may effectually be answered; through the merits 

of Jesus Christ our Lord.  AMEN,

