




CHAPTER XIV - AN ARGUMENT TO PROVE THAT THE

ABOLISHING OF CHRISTIANITY IN ENGLAND

MAY, AS THINGS NOW STAND, BE ATTENDED WITH

SOME INCONVENIENCES, AND PERHAPS NOT PRODUCE

THOSE MANY GOOD EFFECTS PROPOSED THEREBY.



WRITTEN IN THE YEAR 1708.




I AM very sensible what a weakness and presumption it is to reason 

against the general humour and disposition of the world.  I 

remember it was with great justice, and a due regard to the 

freedom, both of the public and the press, forbidden upon several 

penalties to write, or discourse, or lay wagers against the - even 

before it was confirmed by Parliament; because that was looked upon 

as a design to oppose the current of the people, which, besides the 

folly of it, is a manifest breach of the fundamental law, that 

makes this majority of opinions the voice of God.  In like manner, 

and for the very same reasons, it may perhaps be neither safe nor 

prudent to argue against the abolishing of Christianity, at a 

juncture when all parties seem so unanimously determined upon the 

point, as we cannot but allow from their actions, their discourses, 

and their writings.  However, I know not how, whether from the 

affectation of singularity, or the perverseness of human nature, 

but so it unhappily falls out, that I cannot be entirely of this 

opinion.  Nay, though I were sure an order were issued for my 

immediate prosecution by the Attorney-General, I should still 

confess, that in the present posture of our affairs at home or 

abroad, I do not yet see the absolute necessity of extirpating the 

Christian religion from among us.



This perhaps may appear too great a paradox even for our wise and 

paxodoxical age to endure; therefore I shall handle it with all 

tenderness, and with the utmost deference to that great and 

profound majority which is of another sentiment.



And yet the curious may please to observe, how much the genius of a 

nation is liable to alter in half an age.  I have heard it affirmed 

for certain by some very odd people, that the contrary opinion was 

even in their memories as much in vogue as the other is now; and 

that a project for the abolishing of Christianity would then have 

appeared as singular, and been thought as absurd, as it would be at 

this time to write or discourse in its defence.



Therefore I freely own, that all appearances are against me.  The 

system of the Gospel, after the fate of other systems, is generally 

antiquated and exploded, and the mass or body of the common people, 

among whom it seems to have had its latest credit, are now grown as 

much ashamed of it as their betters; opinions, like fashions, 

always descending from those of quality to the middle sort, and 

thence to the vulgar, where at length they are dropped and vanish.



But here I would not be mistaken, and must therefore be so bold as 

to borrow a distinction from the writers on the other side, when 

they make a difference betwixt nominal and real Trinitarians.  I 

hope no reader imagines me so weak to stand up in the defence of 

real Christianity, such as used in primitive times (if we may 

believe the authors of those ages) to have an influence upon men's 

belief and actions.  To offer at the restoring of that, would 

indeed be a wild project:  it would be to dig up foundations; to 

destroy at one blow all the wit, and half the learning of the 

kingdom; to break the entire frame and constitution of things; to 

ruin trade, extinguish arts and sciences, with the professors of 

them; in short, to turn our courts, exchanges, and shops into 

deserts; and would be full as absurd as the proposal of Horace, 

where he advises the Romans, all in a body, to leave their city, 

and seek a new seat in some remote part of the world, by way of a 

cure for the corruption of their manners.



Therefore I think this caution was in itself altogether unnecessary 

(which I have inserted only to prevent all possibility of 

cavilling), since every candid reader will easily understand my 

discourse to be intended only in defence of nominal Christianity, 

the other having been for some time wholly laid aside by general 

consent, as utterly inconsistent with all our present schemes of 

wealth and power.



But why we should therefore cut off the name and title of 

Christians, although the general opinion and resolution be so 

violent for it, I confess I cannot (with submission) apprehend the 

consequence necessary.  However, since the undertakers propose such 

wonderful advantages to the nation by this project, and advance 

many plausible objections against the system of Christianity, I 

shall briefly consider the strength of both, fairly allow them 

their greatest weight, and offer such answers as I think most 

reasonable.  After which I will beg leave to show what 

inconveniences may possibly happen by such an innovation, in the 

present posture of our affairs.



First, one great advantage proposed by the abolishing of 

Christianity is, that it would very much enlarge and establish 

liberty of conscience, that great bulwark of our nation, and of the 

Protestant religion, which is still too much limited by 

priestcraft, notwithstanding all the good intentions of the 

legislature, as we have lately found by a severe instance.  For it 

is confidently reported, that two young gentlemen of real hopes, 

bright wit, and profound judgment, who, upon a thorough examination 

of causes and effects, and by the mere force of natural abilities, 

without the least tincture of learning, having made a discovery 

that there was no God, and generously communicating their thoughts 

for the good of the public, were some time ago, by an unparalleled 

severity, and upon I know not what obsolete law, broke for 

blasphemy.  And as it has been wisely observed, if persecution once 

begins, no man alive knows how far it may reach, or where it will 

end.



In answer to all which, with deference to wiser judgments, I think 

this rather shows the necessity of a nominal religion among us.  

Great wits love to be free with the highest objects; and if they 

cannot be allowed a god to revile or renounce, they will speak evil 

of dignities, abuse the government, and reflect upon the ministry, 

which I am sure few will deny to be of much more pernicious 

consequence, according to the saying of Tiberius, DEORUM OFFENSA 

DIIS CUROE.  As to the particular fact related, I think it is not 

fair to argue from one instance, perhaps another cannot be 

produced:  yet (to the comfort of all those who may be apprehensive 

of persecution) blasphemy we know is freely spoke a million of 

times in every coffee-house and tavern, or wherever else good 

company meet.  It must be allowed, indeed, that to break an English 

free-born officer only for blasphemy was, to speak the gentlest of 

such an action, a very high strain of absolute power.  Little can 

be said in excuse for the general; perhaps he was afraid it might 

give offence to the allies, among whom, for aught we know, it may 

be the custom of the country to believe a God.  But if he argued, 

as some have done, upon a mistaken principle, that an officer who 

is guilty of speaking blasphemy may, some time or other, proceed so 

far as to raise a mutiny, the consequence is by no means to be 

admitted:  for surely the commander of an English army is like to 

be but ill obeyed whose soldiers fear and reverence him as little 

as they do a Deity.



It is further objected against the Gospel system that it obliges 

men to the belief of things too difficult for Freethinkers, and 

such who have shook off the prejudices that usually cling to a 

confined education.  To which I answer, that men should be cautious 

how they raise objections which reflect upon the wisdom of the 

nation.  Is not everybody freely allowed to believe whatever he 

pleases, and to publish his belief to the world whenever he thinks 

fit, especially if it serves to strengthen the party which is in 

the right?  Would any indifferent foreigner, who should read the 

trumpery lately written by Asgil, Tindal, Toland, Coward, and forty 

more, imagine the Gospel to be our rule of faith, and to be 

confirmed by Parliaments?  Does any man either believe, or say he 

believes, or desire to have it thought that he says he believes, 

one syllable of the matter?  And is any man worse received upon 

that score, or does he find his want of nominal faith a 

disadvantage to him in the pursuit of any civil or military 

employment?  What if there be an old dormant statute or two against 

him, are they not now obsolete, to a degree, that Empson and Dudley 

themselves, if they were now alive, would find it impossible to put 

them in execution?



It is likewise urged, that there are, by computation, in this 

kingdom, above ten thousand parsons, whose revenues, added to those 

of my lords the bishops, would suffice to maintain at least two 

hundred young gentlemen of wit and pleasure, and free-thinking, 

enemies to priestcraft, narrow principles, pedantry, and 

prejudices, who might be an ornament to the court and town:  and 

then again, so a great number of able [bodied] divines might be a 

recruit to our fleet and armies.  This indeed appears to be a 

consideration of some weight; but then, on the other side, several 

things deserve to be considered likewise:  as, first, whether it 

may not be thought necessary that in certain tracts of country, 

like what we call parishes, there should be one man at least of 

abilities to read and write.  Then it seems a wrong computation 

that the revenues of the Church throughout this island would be 

large enough to maintain two hundred young gentlemen, or even half 

that number, after the present refined way of living, that is, to 

allow each of them such a rent as, in the modern form of speech, 

would make them easy.  But still there is in this project a greater 

mischief behind; and we ought to beware of the woman's folly, who 

killed the hen that every morning laid her a golden egg.  For, pray 

what would become of the race of men in the next age, if we had 

nothing to trust to beside the scrofulous consumptive production 

furnished by our men of wit and pleasure, when, having squandered 

away their vigour, health, and estates, they are forced, by some 

disagreeable marriage, to piece up their broken fortunes, and 

entail rottenness and politeness on their posterity?  Now, here are 

ten thousand persons reduced, by the wise regulations of Henry 

VIII., to the necessity of a low diet, and moderate exercise, who 

are the only great restorers of our breed, without which the nation 

would in an age or two become one great hospital.



Another advantage proposed by the abolishing of Christianity is the 

clear gain of one day in seven, which is now entirely lost, and 

consequently the kingdom one seventh less considerable in trade, 

business, and pleasure; besides the loss to the public of so many 

stately structures now in the hands of the clergy, which might be 

converted into play-houses, exchanges, market-houses, common 

dormitories, and other public edifices.



I hope I shall be forgiven a hard word if I call this a perfect 

cavil.  I readily own there hath been an old custom, time out of 

mind, for people to assemble in the churches every Sunday, and that 

shops are still frequently shut, in order, as it is conceived, to 

preserve the memory of that ancient practice; but how this can 

prove a hindrance to business or pleasure is hard to imagine.  What 

if the men of pleasure are forced, one day in the week, to game at 

home instead of the chocolate-house?  Are not the taverns and 

coffee-houses open?  Can there be a more convenient season for 

taking a dose of physic?  Is not that the chief day for traders to 

sum up the accounts of the week, and for lawyers to prepare their 

briefs?  But I would fain know how it can be pretended that the 

churches are misapplied?  Where are more appointments and 

rendezvouses of gallantry?  Where more care to appear in the 

foremost box, with greater advantage of dress?  Where more meetings 

for business?  Where more bargains driven of all sorts?  And where 

so many conveniences or incitements to sleep?



There is one advantage greater than any of the foregoing, proposed 

by the abolishing of Christianity, that it will utterly extinguish 

parties among us, by removing those factious distinctions of high 

and low church, of Whig and Tory, Presbyterian and Church of 

England, which are now so many mutual clogs upon public 

proceedings, and are apt to prefer the gratifying themselves or 

depressing their adversaries before the most important interest of 

the State.



I confess, if it were certain that so great an advantage would 

redound to the nation by this expedient, I would submit, and be 

silent; but will any man say, that if the words, whoring, drinking, 

cheating, lying, stealing, were, by Act of Parliament, ejected out 

of the English tongue and dictionaries, we should all awake next 

morning chaste and temperate, honest and just, and lovers of truth?  

Is this a fair consequence?  Or if the physicians would forbid us 

to pronounce the words pox, gout, rheumatism, and stone, would that 

expedient serve like so many talismen to destroy the diseases 

themselves?  Are party and faction rooted in men's hearts no deeper 

than phrases borrowed from religion, or founded upon no firmer 

principles?  And is our language so poor that we cannot find other 

terms to express them?  Are envy, pride, avarice, and ambition such 

ill nomenclators, that they cannot furnish appellations for their 

owners?  Will not heydukes and mamalukes, mandarins and patshaws, 

or any other words formed at pleasure, serve to distinguish those 

who are in the ministry from others who would be in it if they 

could?  What, for instance, is easier than to vary the form of 

speech, and instead of the word church, make it a question in 

politics, whether the monument be in danger?  Because religion was 

nearest at hand to furnish a few convenient phrases, is our 

invention so barren we can find no other?  Suppose, for argument 

sake, that the Tories favoured Margarita, the Whigs, Mrs. Tofts, 

and the Trimmers, Valentini, would not Margaritians, Toftians, and 

Valentinians be very tolerable marks of distinction?  The Prasini 

and Veniti, two most virulent factions in Italy, began, if I 

remember right, by a distinction of colours in ribbons, which we 

might do with as good a grace about the dignity of the blue and the 

green, and serve as properly to divide the Court, the Parliament, 

and the kingdom between them, as any terms of art whatsoever, 

borrowed from religion.  And therefore I think there is little 

force in this objection against Christianity, or prospect of so 

great an advantage as is proposed in the abolishing of it.



It is again objected, as a very absurd, ridiculous custom, that a 

set of men should be suffered, much less employed and hired, to 

bawl one day in seven against the lawfulness of those methods most 

in use towards the pursuit of greatness, riches, and pleasure, 

which are the constant practice of all men alive on the other six.  

But this objection is, I think, a little unworthy so refined an age 

as ours.  Let us argue this matter calmly.  I appeal to the breast 

of any polite Free-thinker, whether, in the pursuit of gratifying a 

pre-dominant passion, he hath not always felt a wonderful 

incitement, by reflecting it was a thing forbidden; and therefore 

we see, in order to cultivate this test, the wisdom of the nation 

hath taken special care that the ladies should be furnished with 

prohibited silks, and the men with prohibited wine.  And indeed it 

were to be wished that some other prohibitions were promoted, in 

order to improve the pleasures of the town, which, for want of such 

expedients, begin already, as I am told, to flag and grow languid, 

giving way daily to cruel inroads from the spleen.



'Tis likewise proposed, as a great advantage to the public, that if 

we once discard the system of the Gospel, all religion will of 

course be banished for ever, and consequently along with it those 

grievous prejudices of education which, under the names of 

conscience, honour, justice, and the like, are so apt to disturb 

the peace of human minds, and the notions whereof are so hard to be 

eradicated by right reason or free-thinking, sometimes during the 

whole course of our lives.



Here first I observe how difficult it is to get rid of a phrase 

which the world has once grown fond of, though the occasion that 

first produced it be entirely taken away.  For some years past, if 

a man had but an ill-favoured nose, the deep thinkers of the age 

would, some way or other contrive to impute the cause to the 

prejudice of his education.  From this fountain were said to be 

derived all our foolish notions of justice, piety, love of our 

country; all our opinions of God or a future state, heaven, hell, 

and the like; and there might formerly perhaps have been some 

pretence for this charge.  But so effectual care hath been since 

taken to remove those prejudices, by an entire change in the 

methods of education, that (with honour I mention it to our polite 

innovators) the young gentlemen, who are now on the scene, seem to 

have not the least tincture left of those infusions, or string of 

those weeds, and by consequence the reason for abolishing nominal 

Christianity upon that pretext is wholly ceased.



For the rest, it may perhaps admit a controversy, whether the 

banishing all notions of religion whatsoever would be inconvenient 

for the vulgar.  Not that I am in the least of opinion with those 

who hold religion to have been the invention of politicians, to 

keep the lower part of the world in awe by the fear of invisible 

powers; unless mankind were then very different from what it is 

now; for I look upon the mass or body of our people here in England 

to be as Freethinkers, that is to say, as staunch unbelievers, as 

any of the highest rank.  But I conceive some scattered notions 

about a superior power to be of singular use for the common people, 

as furnishing excellent materials to keep children quiet when they 

grow peevish, and providing topics of amusement in a tedious winter 

night.



Lastly, it is proposed, as a singular advantage, that the 

abolishing of Christianity will very much contribute to the uniting 

of Protestants, by enlarging the terms of communion, so as to take 

in all sorts of Dissenters, who are now shut out of the pale upon 

account of a few ceremonies, which all sides confess to be things 

indifferent.  That this alone will effectually answer the great 

ends of a scheme for comprehension, by opening a large noble gate, 

at which all bodies may enter; whereas the chaffering with 

Dissenters, and dodging about this or t'other ceremony, is but like 

opening a few wickets, and leaving them at jar, by which no more 

than one can get in at a time, and that not without stooping, and 

sideling, and squeezing his body.



To all this I answer, that there is one darling inclination of 

mankind which usually affects to be a retainer to religion, though 

she be neither its parent, its godmother, nor its friend.  I mean 

the spirit of opposition, that lived long before Christianity, and 

can easily subsist without it.  Let us, for instance, examine 

wherein the opposition of sectaries among us consists.  We shall 

find Christianity to have no share in it at all.  Does the Gospel 

anywhere prescribe a starched, squeezed countenance, a stiff formal 

gait, a singularity of manners and habit, or any affected forms and 

modes of speech different from the reasonable part of mankind?  

Yet, if Christianity did not lend its name to stand in the gap, and 

to employ or divert these humours, they must of necessity be spent 

in contraventions to the laws of the land, and disturbance of the 

public peace.  There is a portion of enthusiasm assigned to every 

nation, which, if it hath not proper objects to work on, will burst 

out, and set all into a flame.  If the quiet of a State can be 

bought by only flinging men a few ceremonies to devour, it is a 

purchase no wise man would refuse.  Let the mastiffs amuse 

themselves about a sheep's skin stuffed with hay, provided it will 

keep them from worrying the flock.  The institution of convents 

abroad seems in one point a strain of great wisdom, there being few 

irregularities in human passions which may not have recourse to 

vent themselves in some of those orders, which are so many retreats 

for the speculative, the melancholy, the proud, the silent, the 

politic, and the morose, to spend themselves, and evaporate the 

noxious particles; for each of whom we in this island are forced to 

provide a several sect of religion to keep them quiet; and whenever 

Christianity shall be abolished, the Legislature must find some 

other expedient to employ and entertain them.  For what imports it 

how large a gate you open, if there will be always left a number 

who place a pride and a merit in not coming in?



Having thus considered the most important objections against 

Christianity, and the chief advantages proposed by the abolishing 

thereof, I shall now, with equal deference and submission to wiser 

judgments, as before, proceed to mention a few inconveniences that 

may happen if the Gospel should be repealed, which, perhaps, the 

projectors may not have sufficiently considered.



And first, I am very sensible how much the gentlemen of wit and 

pleasure are apt to murmur, and be choked at the sight of so many 

daggle-tailed parsons that happen to fall in their way, and offend 

their eyes; but at the same time, these wise reformers do not 

consider what an advantage and felicity it is for great wits to be 

always provided with objects of scorn and contempt, in order to 

exercise and improve their talents, and divert their spleen from 

falling on each other, or on themselves, especially when all this 

may be done without the least imaginable danger to their persons.



And to urge another argument of a parallel nature:  if Christianity 

were once abolished, how could the Freethinkers, the strong 

reasoners, and the men of profound learning be able to find another 

subject so calculated in all points whereon to display their 

abilities?  What wonderful productions of wit should we be deprived 

of from those whose genius, by continual practice, hath been wholly 

turned upon raillery and invectives against religion, and would 

therefore never be able to shine or distinguish themselves upon any 

other subject?  We are daily complaining of the great decline of 

wit among as, and would we take away the greatest, perhaps the only 

topic we have left?  Who would ever have suspected Asgil for a wit, 

or Toland for a philosopher, if the inexhaustible stock of 

Christianity had not been at hand to provide them with materials?  

What other subject through all art or nature could have produced 

Tindal for a profound author, or furnished him with readers?  It is 

the wise choice of the subject that alone adorns and distinguishes 

the writer.  For had a hundred such pens as these been employed on 

the side of religion, they would have immediately sunk into silence 

and oblivion.



Nor do I think it wholly groundless, or my fears altogether 

imaginary, that the abolishing of Christianity may perhaps bring 

the Church in danger, or at least put the Senate to the trouble of 

another securing vote.  I desire I may not be mistaken; I am far 

from presuming to affirm or think that the Church is in danger at 

present, or as things now stand; but we know not how soon it may be 

so when the Christian religion is repealed.  As plausible as this 

project seems, there may be a dangerous design lurk under it.  

Nothing can be more notorious than that the Atheists, Deists, 

Socinians, Anti-Trinitarians, and other subdivisions of 

Freethinkers, are persons of little zeal for the present 

ecclesiastical establishment:  their declared opinion is for 

repealing the sacramental test; they are very indifferent with 

regard to ceremonies; nor do they hold the JUS DIVINUM of 

episcopacy:  therefore they may be intended as one politic step 

towards altering the constitution of the Church established, and 

setting up Presbytery in the stead, which I leave to be further 

considered by those at the helm.



In the last place, I think nothing can be more plain, than that by 

this expedient we shall run into the evil we chiefly pretend to 

avoid; and that the abolishment of the Christian religion will be 

the readiest course we can take to introduce Popery.  And I am the 

more inclined to this opinion because we know it has been the 

constant practice of the Jesuits to send over emissaries, with 

instructions to personate themselves members of the several 

prevailing sects amongst us.  So it is recorded that they have at 

sundry times appeared in the guise of Presbyterians, Anabaptists, 

Independents, and Quakers, according as any of these were most in 

credit; so, since the fashion hath been taken up of exploding 

religion, the Popish missionaries have not been wanting to mix with 

the Freethinkers; among whom Toland, the great oracle of the Anti-

Christians, is an Irish priest, the son of an Irish priest; and the 

most learned and ingenious author of a book called the "Rights of 

the Christian Church," was in a proper juncture reconciled to the 

Romish faith, whose true son, as appears by a hundred passages in 

his treatise, he still continues.  Perhaps I could add some others 

to the number; but the fact is beyond dispute, and the reasoning 

they proceed by is right:  for supposing Christianity to be 

extinguished the people will never he at ease till they find out 

some other method of worship, which will as infallibly produce 

superstition as this will end in Popery.



And therefore, if, notwithstanding all I have said, it still be 

thought necessary to have a Bill brought in for repealing 

Christianity, I would humbly offer an amendment, that instead of 

the word Christianity may be put religion in general, which I 

conceive will much better answer all the good ends proposed by the 

projectors of it.  For as long as we leave in being a God and His 

Providence, with all the necessary consequences which curious and 

inquisitive men will be apt to draw from such promises, we do not 

strike at the root of the evil, though we should ever so 

effectually annihilate the present scheme of the Gospel; for of 

what use is freedom of thought if it will not produce freedom of 

action, which is the sole end, how remote soever in appearance, of 

all objections against Christianity? and therefore, the 

Freethinkers consider it as a sort of edifice, wherein all the 

parts have such a mutual dependence on each other, that if you 

happen to pull out one single nail, the whole fabric must fall to 

the ground.  This was happily expressed by him who had heard of a 

text brought for proof of the Trinity, which in an ancient 

manuscript was differently read; he thereupon immediately took the 

hint, and by a sudden deduction of a long Sorites, most logically 

concluded:  why, if it be as you say, I may safely drink on, and 

defy the parson.  From which, and many the like instances easy to 

be produced, I think nothing can be more manifest than that the 

quarrel is not against any particular points of hard digestion in 

the Christian system, but against religion in general, which, by 

laying restraints on human nature, is supposed the great enemy to 

the freedom of thought and action.



Upon the whole, if it shall still be thought for the benefit of 

Church and State that Christianity be abolished, I conceive, 

however, it may be more convenient to defer the execution to a time 

of peace, and not venture in this conjuncture to disoblige our 

allies, who, as it falls out, are all Christians, and many of them, 

by the prejudices of their education, so bigoted as to place a sort 

of pride in the appellation.  If, upon being rejected by them, we 

are to trust to an alliance with the Turk, we shall find ourselves 

much deceived; for, as he is too remote, and generally engaged in 

war with the Persian emperor, so his people would be more 

scandalised at our infidelity than our Christian neighbours.  For 

they are not only strict observers of religions worship, but what 

is worse, believe a God; which is more than is required of us, even 

while we preserve the name of Christians.



To conclude, whatever some may think of the great advantages to 

trade by this favourite scheme, I do very much apprehend that in 

six months' time after the Act is passed for the extirpation of the 

Gospel, the Bank and East India stock may fall at least one per 

cent.  And since that is fifty times more than ever the wisdom of 

our age thought fit to venture for the preservation of 

Christianity, there is no reason we should be at so great a loss 

merely for the sake of destroying it.

