



CHAPTER XVI - THOUGHTS ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS.



WE have just enough religion to make us hate, but not enough to 

make us love one another.



Reflect on things past as wars, negotiations, factions, etc.  We 

enter so little into those interests, that we wonder how men could 

possibly be so busy and concerned for things so transitory; look on 

the present times, we find the same humour, yet wonder not at all.



A wise man endeavours, by considering all circumstances, to make 

conjectures and form conclusions; but the smallest accident 

intervening (and in the course of affairs it is impossible to 

foresee all) does often produce such turns and changes, that at 

last he is just as much in doubt of events as the most ignorant and 

inexperienced person.



Positiveness is a good quality for preachers and orators, because 

he that would obtrude his thoughts and reasons upon a multitude, 

will convince others the more, as he appears convinced himself.



How is it possible to expect that mankind will take advice, when 

they will not so much as take warning?



I forget whether Advice be among the lost things which Aristo says 

are to be found in the moon; that and Time ought to have been 

there.



No preacher is listened to but Time, which gives us the same train 

and turn of thought that older people have tried in vain to put 

into our heads before.



When we desire or solicit anything, our minds run wholly on the 

good side or circumstances of it; when it is obtained, our minds 

run wholly on the bad ones.



In a glass-house the workmen often fling in a small quantity of 

fresh coals, which seems to disturb the fire, but very much 

enlivens it.  This seems to allude to a gentle stirring of the 

passions, that the mind may not languish.



Religion seems to have grown an infant with age, and requires 

miracles to nurse it, as it had in its infancy.



All fits of pleasure are balanced by an equal degree of pain or 

languor; it is like spending this year part of the next year's 

revenue.



The latter part of a wise man's life is taken up in curing the 

follies, prejudices, and false opinions he had contracted in the 

former.



Would a writer know how to behave himself with relation to 

posterity, let him consider in old books what he finds that he is 

glad to know, and what omissions he most laments.



Whatever the poets pretend, it is plain they give immortality to 

none but themselves; it is Homer and Virgil we reverence and 

admire, not Achilles or AEneas.  With historians it is quite the 

contrary; our thoughts are taken up with the actions, persons, and 

events we read, and we little regard the authors.



When a true genius appears in the world you may know him by this 

sign; that the dunces are all in confederacy against him.



Men who possess all the advantages of life, are in a state where 

there are many accidents to disorder and discompose, but few to 

please them.



It is unwise to punish cowards with ignominy, for if they had 

regarded that they would not have been cowards; death is their 

proper punishment, because they fear it most.



The greatest inventions were produced in the times of ignorance, as 

the use of the compass, gunpowder, and printing, and by the dullest 

nation, as the Germans.



One argument to prove that the common relations of ghosts and 

spectres are generally false, may be drawn from the opinion held 

that spirits are never seen by more than one person at a time; that 

is to say, it seldom happens to above one person in a company to be 

possessed with any high degree of spleen or melancholy.



I am apt to think that, in the day of Judgment, there will be small 

allowance given to the wise for their want of morals, nor to the 

ignorant for their want of faith, because both are without excuse.  

This renders the advantages equal of ignorance and knowledge.  But, 

some scruples in the wise, and some vices in the ignorant, will 

perhaps be forgiven upon the strength of temptation to each.



The value of several circumstances in story lessens very much by 

distance of time, though some minute circumstances are very 

valuable; and it requires great judgment in a writer to 

distinguish.



It is grown a word of course for writers to say, "This critical 

age," as divines say, "This sinful age."



It is pleasant to observe how free the present age is in laying 

taxes on the next.  FUTURE AGES SHALL TALK OF THIS; THIS SHALL BE 

FAMOUS TO ALL POSTERITY.  Whereas their time and thoughts will be 

taken up about present things, as ours are now.



The chameleon, who is said to feed upon nothing but air, hath, of 

all animals, the nimblest tongue.



When a man is made a spiritual peer he loses his surname; when a 

temporal, his Christian name.



It is in disputes as in armies, where the weaker side sets up false 

lights, and makes a great noise, to make the enemy believe them 

more numerous and strong than they really are.



Some men, under the notions of weeding out prejudices, eradicate 

virtue, honesty, and religion.



In all well-instituted commonwealths, care has been taken to limit 

men's possessions; which is done for many reasons, and among the 

rest, for one which perhaps is not often considered:  that when 

bounds are set to men's desires, after they have acquired as much 

as the laws will permit them, their private interest is at an end, 

and they have nothing to do but to take care of the public.



There are but three ways for a man to revenge himself of the 

censure of the world:  to despise it, to return the like, or to 

endeavour to live so as to avoid it.  The first of these is usually 

pretended, the last is almost impossible; the universal practice is 

for the second.



I never heard a finer piece of satire against lawyers than that of 

astrologers, when they pretend by rules of art to tell when a suit 

will end, and whether to the advantage of the plaintiff or 

defendant; thus making the matter depend entirely upon the 

influence of the stars, without the least regard to the merits of 

the cause.



The expression in Apocrypha about Tobit and his dog following him I 

have often heard ridiculed, yet Homer has the same words of 

Telemachus more than once; and Virgil says something like it of 

Evander.  And I take the book of Tobit to be partly poetical.



I have known some men possessed of good qualities, which were very 

serviceable to others, but useless to themselves; like a sun-dial 

on the front of a house, to inform the neighbours and passengers, 

but not the owner within.



If a man would register all his opinions upon love, politics, 

religion, learning, etc., beginning from his youth and so go on to 

old age, what a bundle of inconsistencies and contradictions would 

appear at last!



What they do in heaven we are ignorant of; what they do not we are 

told expressly:  that they neither marry, nor are given in 

marriage.



It is a miserable thing to live in suspense; it is the life of a 

spider.



The Stoical scheme of supplying our wants by lopping off our 

desires, is like cutting off our feet when we want shoes.



Physicians ought not to give their judgment of religion, for the 

same reason that butchers are not admitted to be jurors upon life 

and death.



The reason why so few marriages are happy, is, because young ladies 

spend their time in making nets, not in making cages.



If a man will observe as he walks the streets, I believe he will 

find the merriest countenances in mourning coaches.



Nothing more unqualifies a man to act with prudence than a 

misfortune that is attended with shame and guilt.



The power of fortune is confessed only by the miserable; for the 

happy impute all their success to prudence or merit.



Ambition often puts men upon doing the meanest offices; so climbing 

is performed in the same posture with creeping.



Censure is the tax a man pays to the public for being eminent.



Although men are accused for not knowing their own weakness, yet 

perhaps as few know their own strength.  It is, in men as in soils, 

where sometimes there is a vein of gold which the owner knows not 

of.



Satire is reckoned the easiest of all wit, but I take it to be 

otherwise in very bad times:  for it is as hard to satirise well a 

man of distinguished vices, as to praise well a man of 

distinguished virtues.  It is easy enough to do either to people of 

moderate characters.



Invention is the talent of youth, and judgment of age; so that our 

judgment grows harder to please, when we have fewer things to offer 

it:  this goes through the whole commerce of life.  When we are 

old, our friends find it difficult to please us, and are less 

concerned whether we be pleased or no.



No wise man ever wished to be younger.



An idle reason lessens the weight of the good ones you gave before.



The motives of the best actions will not bear too strict an 

inquiry.  It is allowed that the cause of most actions, good or 

bad, may he resolved into the love of ourselves; but the self-love 

of some men inclines them to please others, and the self-love of 

others is wholly employed in pleasing themselves.  This makes the 

great distinction between virtue and vice.  Religion is the best 

motive of all actions, yet religion is allowed to be the highest 

instance of self-love.



Old men view best at a distance with the eyes of their 

understanding as well as with those of nature.



Some people take more care to hide their wisdom than their folly.



Anthony Henley's farmer, dying of an asthma, said, "Well, if I can 

get this breath once OUT, I'll take care it never got IN again."



The humour of exploding many things under the name of trifles, 

fopperies, and only imaginary goods, is a very false proof either 

of wisdom or magnanimity, and a great check to virtuous actions.  

For instance, with regard to fame, there is in most people a 

reluctance and unwillingness to be forgotten.  We observe, even 

among the vulgar, how fond they are to have an inscription over 

their grave.  It requires but little philosophy to discover and 

observe that there is no intrinsic value in all this; however, if 

it be founded in our nature as an incitement to virtue, it ought 

not to be ridiculed.



Complaint is the largest tribute heaven receives, and the sincerest 

part of our devotion.



The common fluency of speech in many men, and most women, is owing 

to a scarcity of matter, and a scarcity of words; for whoever is a 

master of language, and hath a mind full of ideas, will be apt, in 

speaking, to hesitate upon the choice of both; whereas common 

speakers have only one set of ideas, and one set of words to clothe 

them in, and these are always ready at the mouth.  So people come 

faster out of a church when it is almost empty, than when a crowd 

is at the door.



Few are qualified to shine in company; but it is in most men's 

power to be agreeable.  The reason, therefore, why conversation 

runs so low at present, is not the defect of understanding, but 

pride, vanity, ill-nature, affectation, singularity, positiveness, 

or some other vice, the effect of a wrong education.



To be vain is rather a mark of humility than pride.  Vain men 

delight in telling what honours have been done them, what great 

company they have kept, and the like, by which they plainly confess 

that these honours were more than their due, and such as their 

friends would not believe if they had not been told:  whereas a man 

truly proud thinks the greatest honours below his merit, and 

consequently scorns to boast.  I therefore deliver it as a maxim, 

that whoever desires the character of a proud man, ought to conceal 

his vanity.



Law, in a free country, is, or ought to be, the determination of 

the majority of those who have property in land.



One argument used to the disadvantage of Providence I take to be a 

very strong one in its defence.  It is objected that storms and 

tempests, unfruitful seasons, serpents, spiders, flies, and other 

noxious or troublesome animals, with many more instances of the 

like kind, discover an imperfection in nature, because human life 

would be much easier without them; but the design of Providence may 

clearly be perceived in this proceeding.  The motions of the sun 

and moon - in short, the whole system of the universe, as far as 

philosophers have been able to discover and observe, are in the 

utmost degree of regularity and perfection; but wherever God hath 

left to man the power of interposing a remedy by thought or labour, 

there he hath placed things in a state of imperfection, on purpose 

to stir up human industry, without which life would stagnate, or, 

indeed, rather, could not subsist at all:  CURIS ACCUUNT MORTALIA 

CORDA.



Praise is the daughter of present power.



How inconsistent is man with himself!



I have known several persons of great fame for wisdom in public 

affairs and counsels governed by foolish servants.



I have known great Ministers, distinguished for wit and learning, 

who preferred none but dunces.



I have known men of great valour cowards to their wives.



I have known men of the greatest cunning perpetually cheated.



I knew three great Ministers, who could exactly compute and settle 

the accounts of a kingdom, but were wholly ignorant of their own 

economy.



The preaching of divines helps to preserve well-inclined men in the 

course of virtue, but seldom or never reclaims the vicious.



Princes usually make wiser choices than the servants whom they 

trust for the disposal of places:  I have known a prince, more than 

once, choose an able Minister, but I never observed that Minister 

to use his credit in the disposal of an employment to a person whom 

he thought the fittest for it.  One of the greatest in this age 

owned and excused the matter from the violence of parties and the 

unreasonableness of friends.



Small causes are sufficient to make a man uneasy when great ones 

are not in the way.  For want of a block he will stumble at a 

straw.



Dignity, high station, or great riches, are in some sort necessary 

to old men, in order to keep the younger at a distance, who are 

otherwise too apt to insult them upon the score of their age.



Every man desires to live long; but no man would be old.



Love of flattery in most men proceeds from the mean opinion they 

have of themselves; in women from the contrary.



If books and laws continue to increase as they have done for fifty 

years past, I am in some concern for future ages how any man will 

be learned, or any man a lawyer.



Kings are commonly said to have LONG HANDS; I wish they had as LONG 

EARS.



Princes in their infancy, childhood, and youth are said to discover 

prodigious parts and wit, to speak things that surprise and 

astonish.  Strange, so many hopeful princes, and so many shameful 

kings!  If they happen to die young, they would have been prodigies 

of wisdom and virtue.  If they live, they are often prodigies 

indeed, but of another sort.



Politics, as the word is commonly understood, are nothing but 

corruptions, and consequently of no use to a good king or a good 

ministry; for which reason Courts are so overrun with politics.



A nice man is a man of nasty ideas.



Apollo was held the god of physic and sender of diseases.  Both 

wore originally the same trade, and still continue.



Old men and comets have been reverenced for the same reason:  their 

long beards, and pretences to foretell events.



A person was asked at court, what he thought of an ambassador and 

his train, who were all embroidery and lace, full of bows, cringes, 

and gestures; he said, it was Solomon's importation, gold and apes.



Most sorts of diversion in men, children, and other animals, is an 

imitation of fighting.



Augustus meeting an ass with a lucky name foretold himself good 

fortune.  I meet many asses, but none of them have lucky names.



If a man makes me keep my distance, the comfort is he keeps his at 

the same time.



Who can deny that all men are violent lovers of truth when we see 

them so positive in their errors, which they will maintain out of 

their zeal to truth, although they contradict themselves every day 

of their lives?



That was excellently observed, say I, when I read a passage in an 

author, where his opinion agrees with mine.  When we differ, there 

I pronounce him to be mistaken.



Very few men, properly speaking, live at present, but are providing 

to live another time.



Laws penned with the utmost care and exactness, and in the vulgar 

language, are often perverted to wrong meanings; then why should we 

wonder that the Bible is so?



Although men are accused for not knowing their weakness, yet 

perhaps as few know their own strength.



A man seeing a wasp creeping into a vial filled with honey, that 

was hung on a fruit tree, said thus:  "Why, thou sottish animal, 

art thou mad to go into that vial, where you see many hundred of 

your kind there dying in it before you?"  "The reproach is just," 

answered the wasp, "but not from you men, who are so far from 

taking example by other people's follies, that you will not take 

warning by your own.  If after falling several times into this 

vial, and escaping by chance, I should fall in again, I should then 

but resemble you."



An old miser kept a tame jackdaw, that used to steal pieces of 

money, and hide them in a hole, which the cat observing, asked why 

he would hoard up those round shining things that he could make no 

use of?  "Why," said the jackdaw, "my master has a whole chest 

full, and makes no more use of them than I."



Men are content to be laughed at for their wit, but not for their 

folly.



If the men of wit and genius would resolve never to complain in 

their works of critics and detractors, the next age would not know 

that they ever had any.



After all the maxims and systems of trade and commerce, a stander-

by would think the affairs of the world were most ridiculously 

contrived.



There are few countries which, if well cultivated, would not 

support double the number of their inhabitants, and yet fewer where 

one-third of the people are not extremely stinted even in the 

necessaries of life.  I send out twenty barrels of corn, which 

would maintain a family in bread for a year, and I bring back in 

return a vessel of wine, which half a dozen good follows would 

drink in less than a month, at the expense of their health and 

reason.



A man would have but few spectators, if he offered to show for 

threepence how he could thrust a red-hot iron into a barrel of 

gunpowder, and it should not take fire.





End 