




CHAPTER XI - THE FIRST HE WROTE OCT. 17, 1727.



MOST merciful Father, accept our humblest prayers in behalf of this 

Thy languishing servant; forgive the sins, the frailties, and 

infirmities of her life past.  Accept the good deeds she hath done 

in such a manner that, at whatever time Thou shalt please to call 

her, she may be received into everlasting habitations.  Give her 

grace to continue sincerely thankful to Thee for the many favours 

Thou hast bestowed upon her, the ability and inclination and 

practice to do good, and those virtues which have procured the 

esteem and love of her friends, and a most unspotted name in the 

world.  O God, Thou dispensest Thy blessings and Thy punishments, 

as it becometh infinite justice and mercy; and since it was Thy 

pleasure to afflict her with a long, constant, weakly state of 

health, make her truly sensible that it was for very wise ends, and 

was largely made up to her in other blessings, more valuable and 

less common.  Continue to her, O Lord, that firmness and constancy 

of mind wherewith Thou hast most graciously endowed her, together 

with that contempt of worldly things and vanities that she hath 

shown in the whole conduct of her life.  O All-powerful Being, the 

least motion of whose Will can create or destroy a world, pity us, 

the mournful friends of Thy distressed servant, who sink under the 

weight of her present condition, and the fear of losing the most 

valuable of our friends; restore her to us, O Lord, if it be Thy 

gracious Will, or inspire us with constancy and resignation to 

support ourselves under so heavy an affliction.  Restore her, O 

Lord, for the sake of those poor, who by losing her will be 

desolate, and those sick, who will not only want her bounty, but 

her care and tending; or else, in Thy mercy, raise up some other in 

her place with equal disposition and better abilities.  Lessen, O 

Lord, we beseech thee, her bodily pains, or give her a double 

strength of mind to support them.  And if Thou wilt soon take her 

to Thyself, turn our thoughts rather upon that felicity which we 

hope she shall enjoy, than upon that unspeakable loss we shall 

endure.  Let her memory be ever dear unto us, and the example of 

her many virtues, as far as human infirmity will admit, our 

constant imitation.  Accept, O Lord, these prayers poured from the 

very bottom of our hearts, in Thy mercy, and for the merits of our 

blessed Saviour.  AMEN.

