





CHAPTER II - A MEDITATION UPON A BROOMSTICK.




ACCORDING TO THE STYLE AND MANNER OF THE HON. ROBERT BOYLE'S 

MEDITATIONS.



THIS single stick, which you now behold ingloriously lying in that 

neglected corner, I once knew in a flourishing state in a forest.  

It was full of sap, full of leaves, and full of boughs; but now in 

vain does the busy art of man pretend to vie with nature, by tying 

that withered bundle of twigs to its sapless trunk; it is now at 

best but the reverse of what it was, a tree turned upside-down, the 

branches on the earth, and the root in the air; it is now handled 

by every dirty wench, condemned to do her drudgery, and, by a 

capricious kind of fate, destined to make other things clean, and 

be nasty itself; at length, worn to the stumps in the service of 

the maids, it is either thrown out of doors or condemned to the 

last use - of kindling a fire.  When I behold this I sighed, and 

said within myself, "Surely mortal man is a broomstick!"  Nature 

sent him into the world strong and lusty, in a thriving condition, 

wearing his own hair on his head, the proper branches of this 

reasoning vegetable, till the axe of intemperance has lopped off 

his green boughs, and left him a withered trunk; he then flies to 

art, and puts on a periwig, valuing himself upon an unnatural 

bundle of hairs, all covered with powder, that never grew on his 

head; but now should this our broomstick pretend to enter the 

scene, proud of those birchen spoils it never bore, and all covered 

with dust, through the sweepings of the finest lady's chamber, we 

should be apt to ridicule and despise its vanity.  Partial judges 

that we are of our own excellencies, and other men's defaults!



But a broomstick, perhaps you will say, is an emblem of a tree 

standing on its head; and pray what is a man but a topsy-turvy 

creature, his animal faculties perpetually mounted on his rational, 

his head where his heels should be, grovelling on the earth?  And 

yet, with all his faults, he sets up to be a universal reformer and 

corrector of abuses, a remover of grievances, rakes into every 

slut's corner of nature, bringing hidden corruptions to the light, 

and raises a mighty dust where there was none before, sharing 

deeply all the while in the very same pollutions he pretends to 

sweep away.  His last days are spent in slavery to women, and 

generally the least deserving; till, worn to the stumps, like his 

brother besom, he is either kicked out of doors, or made use of to 

kindle flames for others to warm themselves by.
