






CHAPTER XII - THE PRISONERS' VAN







We were passing the corner of Bow-street, on our return from a

lounging excursion the other afternoon, when a crowd, assembled

round the door of the Police-office, attracted our attention.  We

turned up the street accordingly.  There were thirty or forty

people, standing on the pavement and half across the road; and a

few stragglers were patiently stationed on the opposite side of the

way - all evidently waiting in expectation of some arrival.  We

waited too, a few minutes, but nothing occurred; so, we turned

round to an unshorn, sallow-looking cobbler, who was standing next

us with his hands under the bib of his apron, and put the usual

question of 'What's the matter?'  The cobbler eyed us from head to

foot, with superlative contempt, and laconically replied 'Nuffin.'



Now, we were perfectly aware that if two men stop in the street to

look at any given object, or even to gaze in the air, two hundred

men will be assembled in no time; but, as we knew very well that no

crowd of people could by possibility remain in a street for five

minutes without getting up a little amusement among themselves,

unless they had some absorbing object in view, the natural inquiry

next in order was, 'What are all these people waiting here for?' -

'Her Majesty's carriage,' replied the cobbler.  This was still more

extraordinary.  We could not imagine what earthly business Her

Majesty's carriage could have at the Public Office, Bow-street.  We

were beginning to ruminate on the possible causes of such an

uncommon appearance, when a general exclamation from all the boys

in the crowd of 'Here's the wan!' caused us to raise our heads, and

look up the street.



The covered vehicle, in which prisoners are conveyed from the

police-offices to the different prisons, was coming along at full

speed.  It then occurred to us, for the first time, that Her

Majesty's carriage was merely another name for the prisoners' van,

conferred upon it, not only by reason of the superior gentility of

the term, but because the aforesaid van is maintained at Her

Majesty's expense:  having been originally started for the

exclusive accommodation of ladies and gentlemen under the necessity

of visiting the various houses of call known by the general

denomination of 'Her Majesty's Gaols.'



The van drew up at the office-door, and the people thronged round

the steps, just leaving a little alley for the prisoners to pass

through.  Our friend the cobbler, and the other stragglers, crossed

over, and we followed their example.  The driver, and another man

who had been seated by his side in front of the vehicle,

dismounted, and were admitted into the office.  The office-door was

closed after them, and the crowd were on the tiptoe of expectation.



After a few minutes' delay, the door again opened, and the two

first prisoners appeared.  They were a couple of girls, of whom the

elder - could not be more than sixteen, and the younger of whom had

certainly not attained her fourteenth year.  That they were

sisters, was evident, from the resemblance which still subsisted

between them, though two additional years of depravity had fixed

their brand upon the elder girl's features, as legibly as if a red-

hot iron had seared them.  They were both gaudily dressed, the

younger one especially; and, although there was a strong similarity

between them in both respects, which was rendered the more obvious

by their being handcuffed together, it is impossible to conceive a

greater contrast than the demeanour of the two presented.  The

younger girl was weeping bitterly - not for display, or in the hope

of producing effect, but for very shame:  her face was buried in

her handkerchief:  and her whole manner was but too expressive of

bitter and unavailing sorrow.



'How long are you for, Emily?' screamed a red-faced woman in the

crowd.  'Six weeks and labour,' replied the elder girl with a

flaunting laugh; 'and that's better than the stone jug anyhow; the

mill's a deal better than the Sessions, and here's Bella a-going

too for the first time.  Hold up your head, you chicken,' she

continued, boisterously tearing the other girl's handkerchief away;

'Hold up your head, and show 'em your face.  I an't jealous, but

I'm blessed if I an't game!' - 'That's right, old gal,' exclaimed a

man in a paper cap, who, in common with the greater part of the

crowd, had been inexpressibly delighted with this little incident.

- 'Right!' replied the girl; 'ah, to be sure; what's the odds, eh?'

- 'Come!  In with you,' interrupted the driver.  'Don't you be in a

hurry, coachman,' replied the girl, 'and recollect I want to be set

down in Cold Bath Fields - large house with a high garden-wall in

front; you can't mistake it.  Hallo.  Bella, where are you going to

- you'll pull my precious arm off?'  This was addressed to the

younger girl, who, in her anxiety to hide herself in the caravan,

had ascended the steps first, and forgotten the strain upon the

handcuff.  'Come down, and let's show you the way.'  And after

jerking the miserable girl down with a force which made her stagger

on the pavement, she got into the vehicle, and was followed by her

wretched companion.



These two girls had been thrown upon London streets, their vices

and debauchery, by a sordid and rapacious mother.  What the younger

girl was then, the elder had been once; and what the elder then

was, the younger must soon become.  A melancholy prospect, but how

surely to be realised; a tragic drama, but how often acted!  Turn

to the prisons and police offices of London - nay, look into the

very streets themselves.  These things pass before our eyes, day

after day, and hour after hour - they have become such matters of

course, that they are utterly disregarded.  The progress of these

girls in crime will be as rapid as the flight of a pestilence,

resembling it too in its baneful influence and wide-spreading

infection.  Step by step, how many wretched females, within the

sphere of every man's observation, have become involved in a career

of vice, frightful to contemplate; hopeless at its commencement,

loathsome and repulsive in its course; friendless, forlorn, and

unpitied, at its miserable conclusion!



There were other prisoners - boys of ten, as hardened in vice as

men of fifty - a houseless vagrant, going joyfully to prison as a

place of food and shelter, handcuffed to a man whose prospects were

ruined, character lost, and family rendered destitute, by his first

offence.  Our curiosity, however, was satisfied.  The first group

had left an impression on our mind we would gladly have avoided,

and would willingly have effaced.



The crowd dispersed; the vehicle rolled away with its load of guilt

and misfortune; and we saw no more of the Prisoners' Van.
