





CHAPTER VIII - THE MISTAKEN MILLINER.  A TALE OF AMBITION







Miss Amelia Martin was pale, tallish, thin, and two-and-thirty -

what ill-natured people would call plain, and police reports

interesting.  She was a milliner and dressmaker, living on her

business and not above it.  If you had been a young lady in

service, and had wanted Miss Martin, as a great many young ladies

in service did, you would just have stepped up, in the evening, to

number forty-seven, Drummond-street, George-street, Euston-square,

and after casting your eye on a brass door-plate, one foot ten by

one and a half, ornamented with a great brass knob at each of the

four corners, and bearing the inscription 'Miss Martin; millinery

and dressmaking, in all its branches;' you'd just have knocked two

loud knocks at the street-door; and down would have come Miss

Martin herself, in a merino gown of the newest fashion, black

velvet bracelets on the genteelest principle, and other little

elegancies of the most approved description.



If Miss Martin knew the young lady who called, or if the young lady

who called had been recommended by any other young lady whom Miss

Martin knew, Miss Martin would forthwith show her up-stairs into

the two-pair front, and chat she would - SO kind, and SO

comfortable - it really wasn't like a matter of business, she was

so friendly; and, then Miss Martin, after contemplating the figure

and general appearance of the young lady in service with great

apparent admiration, would say how well she would look, to be sure,

in a low dress with short sleeves; made very full in the skirts,

with four tucks in the bottom; to which the young lady in service

would reply in terms expressive of her entire concurrence in the

notion, and of the virtuous indignation with which she reflected on

the tyranny of 'Missis,' who wouldn't allow a young girl to wear a

short sleeve of an arternoon - no, nor nothing smart, not even a

pair of ear-rings; let alone hiding people's heads of hair under

them frightful caps.  At the termination of this complaint, Miss

Amelia Martin would distantly suggest certain dark suspicions that

some people were jealous on account of their own daughters, and

were obliged to keep their servants' charms under, for fear they

should get married first, which was no uncommon circumstance -

leastways she had known two or three young ladies in service, who

had married a great deal better than their missises, and THEY were

not very good-looking either; and then the young lady would inform

Miss Martin, in confidence, that how one of their young ladies was

engaged to a young man and was a-going to be married, and Missis

was so proud about it there was no bearing of her; but how she

needn't hold her head quite so high neither, for, after all, he was

only a clerk.  And, after expressing due contempt for clerks in

general, and the engaged clerk in particular, and the highest

opinion possible of themselves and each other, Miss Martin and the

young lady in service would bid each other good night, in a

friendly but perfectly genteel manner:  and the one went back to

her 'place,' and the other, to her room on the second-floor front.



There is no saying how long Miss Amelia Martin might have continued

this course of life; how extensive a connection she might have

established among young ladies in service; or what amount her

demands upon their quarterly receipts might have ultimately

attained, had not an unforeseen train of circumstances directed her

thoughts to a sphere of action very different from dressmaking or

millinery.



A friend of Miss Martin's who had long been keeping company with an

ornamental painter and decorator's journeyman, at last consented

(on being at last asked to do so) to name the day which would make

the aforesaid journeyman a happy husband.  It was a Monday that was

appointed for the celebration of the nuptials, and Miss Amelia

Martin was invited, among others, to honour the wedding-dinner with

her presence.  It was a charming party; Somers-town the locality,

and a front parlour the apartment.  The ornamental painter and

decorator's journeyman had taken a house - no lodgings nor

vulgarity of that kind, but a house - four beautiful rooms, and a

delightful little washhouse at the end of the passage - which was

the most convenient thing in the world, for the bridesmaids could

sit in the front parlour and receive the company, and then run into

the little washhouse and see how the pudding and boiled pork were

getting on in the copper, and then pop back into the parlour again,

as snug and comfortable as possible.  And such a parlour as it was!

Beautiful Kidderminster carpet - six bran-new cane-bottomed stained

chairs - three wine-glasses and a tumbler on each sideboard -

farmer's girl and farmer's boy on the mantelpiece:  girl tumbling

over a stile, and boy spitting himself, on the handle of a

pitchfork - long white dimity curtains in the window - and, in

short, everything on the most genteel scale imaginable.



Then, the dinner.  There was baked leg of mutton at the top, boiled

leg of mutton at the bottom, pair of fowls and leg of pork in the

middle; porter-pots at the corners; pepper, mustard, and vinegar in

the centre; vegetables on the floor; and plum-pudding and apple-pie

and tartlets without number:  to say nothing of cheese, and celery,

and water-cresses, and all that sort of thing.  As to the Company!

Miss Amelia Martin herself declared, on a subsequent occasion,

that, much as she had heard of the ornamental painter's

journeyman's connexion, she never could have supposed it was half

so genteel.  There was his father, such a funny old gentleman - and

his mother, such a dear old lady - and his sister, such a charming

girl - and his brother, such a manly-looking young man - with such

a eye!  But even all these were as nothing when compared with his

musical friends, Mr. and Mrs. Jennings Rodolph, from White Conduit,

with whom the ornamental painter's journeyman had been fortunate

enough to contract an intimacy while engaged in decorating the

concert-room of that noble institution.  To hear them sing

separately, was divine, but when they went through the tragic duet

of 'Red Ruffian, retire!' it was, as Miss Martin afterwards

remarked, 'thrilling.'  And why (as Mr. Jennings Rodolph observed)

why were they not engaged at one of the patent theatres?  If he was

to be told that their voices were not powerful enough to fill the

House, his only reply was, that he would back himself for any

amount to fill Russell-square - a statement in which the company,

after hearing the duet, expressed their full belief; so they all

said it was shameful treatment; and both Mr. and Mrs. Jennings

Rodolph said it was shameful too; and Mr. Jennings Rodolph looked

very serious, and said he knew who his malignant opponents were,

but they had better take care how far they went, for if they

irritated him too much he had not quite made up his mind whether he

wouldn't bring the subject before Parliament; and they all agreed

that it ''ud serve 'em quite right, and it was very proper that

such people should be made an example of.'  So Mr. Jennings Rodolph

said he'd think of it.



When the conversation resumed its former tone, Mr. Jennings Rodolph

claimed his right to call upon a lady, and the right being

conceded, trusted Miss Martin would favour the company - a proposal

which met with unanimous approbation, whereupon Miss Martin, after

sundry hesitatings and coughings, with a preparatory choke or two,

and an introductory declaration that she was frightened to death to

attempt it before such great judges of the art, commenced a species

of treble chirruping containing frequent allusions to some young

gentleman of the name of Hen-e-ry, with an occasional reference to

madness and broken hearts.  Mr. Jennings Rodolph frequently

interrupted the progress of the song, by ejaculating 'Beautiful!' -

'Charming!' - 'Brilliant!' - 'Oh! splendid,' &c.; and at its close

the admiration of himself, and his lady, knew no bounds.



'Did you ever hear so sweet a voice, my dear?' inquired Mr.

Jennings Rodolph of Mrs. Jennings Rodolph.



'Never; indeed I never did, love,' replied Mrs. Jennings Rodolph.



'Don't you think Miss Martin, with a little cultivation, would be

very like Signora Marra Boni, my dear?' asked Mr. Jennings Rodolph.



'Just exactly the very thing that struck me, my love,' answered

Mrs. Jennings Rodolph.



And thus the time passed away; Mr. Jennings Rodolph played tunes on

a walking-stick, and then went behind the parlour-door and gave his

celebrated imitations of actors, edge-tools, and animals; Miss

Martin sang several other songs with increased admiration every

time; and even the funny old gentleman began singing.  His song had

properly seven verses, but as he couldn't recollect more than the

first one, he sang that over seven times, apparently very much to

his own personal gratification.  And then all the company sang the

national anthem with national independence - each for himself,

without reference to the other - and finally separated:  all

declaring that they never had spent so pleasant an evening:  and

Miss Martin inwardly resolving to adopt the advice of Mr. Jennings

Rodolph, and to 'come out' without delay.



Now, 'coming out,' either in acting, or singing, or society, or

facetiousness, or anything else, is all very well, and remarkably

pleasant to the individual principally concerned, if he or she can

but manage to come out with a burst, and being out, to keep out,

and not go in again; but, it does unfortunately happen that both

consummations are extremely difficult to accomplish, and that the

difficulties, of getting out at all in the first instance, and if

you surmount them, of keeping out in the second, are pretty much on

a par, and no slight ones either - and so Miss Amelia Martin

shortly discovered.  It is a singular fact (there being ladies in

the case) that Miss Amelia Martin's principal foible was vanity,

and the leading characteristic of Mrs. Jennings Rodolph an

attachment to dress.  Dismal wailings were heard to issue from the

second-floor front of number forty-seven, Drummond-street, George-

street, Euston-square; it was Miss Martin practising.  Half-

suppressed murmurs disturbed the calm dignity of the White Conduit

orchestra at the commencement of the season.  It was the appearance

of Mrs. Jennings Rodolph in full dress, that occasioned them.  Miss

Martin studied incessantly - the practising was the consequence.

Mrs. Jennings Rodolph taught gratuitously now and then - the

dresses were the result.



Weeks passed away; the White Conduit season had begun, and

progressed, and was more than half over.  The dressmaking business

had fallen off, from neglect; and its profits had dwindled away

almost imperceptibly.  A benefit-night approached; Mr. Jennings

Rodolph yielded to the earnest solicitations of Miss Amelia Martin,

and introduced her personally to the 'comic gentleman' whose

benefit it was.  The comic gentleman was all smiles and blandness -

he had composed a duet, expressly for the occasion, and Miss Martin

should sing it with him.  The night arrived; there was an immense

room - ninety-seven sixpenn'orths of gin-and-water, thirty-two

small glasses of brandy-and-water, five-and-twenty bottled ales,

and forty-one neguses; and the ornamental painter's journeyman,

with his wife and a select circle of acquaintance, were seated at

one of the side-tables near the orchestra.  The concert began.

Song - sentimental - by a light-haired young gentleman in a blue

coat, and bright basket buttons - [applause].  Another song,

doubtful, by another gentleman in another blue coat and more bright

basket buttons - [increased applause].  Duet, Mr. Jennings Rodolph,

and Mrs. Jennings Rodolph, 'Red Ruffian, retire!' - [great

applause].  Solo, Miss Julia Montague (positively on this occasion

only) - 'I am a Friar' - [enthusiasm].  Original duet, comic - Mr.

H. Taplin (the comic gentleman) and Miss Martin - 'The Time of

Day.'  'Brayvo! - Brayvo!' cried the ornamental painter's

journeyman's party, as Miss Martin was gracefully led in by the

comic gentleman.  'Go to work, Harry,' cried the comic gentleman's

personal friends.  'Tap-tap-tap,' went the leader's bow on the

music-desk.  The symphony began, and was soon afterwards followed

by a faint kind of ventriloquial chirping, proceeding apparently

from the deepest recesses of the interior of Miss Amelia Martin.

'Sing out' - shouted one gentleman in a white great-coat.  'Don't

be afraid to put the steam on, old gal,' exclaimed another, 'S-s-s-

s-s-s-s'-went the five-and-twenty bottled ales.  'Shame, shame!'

remonstrated the ornamental painter's journeyman's party - 'S-s-s-

s' went the bottled ales again, accompanied by all the gins, and a

majority of the brandies.



'Turn them geese out,' cried the ornamental painter's journeyman's

party, with great indignation.



'Sing out,' whispered Mr. Jennings Rodolph.



'So I do,' responded Miss Amelia Martin.



'Sing louder,' said Mrs. Jennings Rodolph.



'I can't,' replied Miss Amelia Martin.



'Off, off, off,' cried the rest of the audience.



'Bray-vo!' shouted the painter's party.  It wouldn't do - Miss

Amelia Martin left the orchestra, with much less ceremony than she

had entered it; and, as she couldn't sing out, never came out.  The

general good humour was not restored until Mr. Jennings Rodolph had

become purple in the face, by imitating divers quadrupeds for half

an hour, without being able to render himself audible; and, to this

day, neither has Miss Amelia Martin's good humour been restored,

nor the dresses made for and presented to Mrs. Jennings Rodolph,

nor the local abilities which Mr. Jennings Rodolph once staked his

professional reputation that Miss Martin possessed.
