






CHAPTER III - THE NEW YEAR







Next to Christmas-day, the most pleasant annual epoch in existence

is the advent of the New Year.  There are a lachrymose set of

people who usher in the New Year with watching and fasting, as if

they were bound to attend as chief mourners at the obsequies of the

old one.  Now, we cannot but think it a great deal more

complimentary, both to the old year that has rolled away, and to

the New Year that is just beginning to dawn upon us, to see the old

fellow out, and the new one in, with gaiety and glee.



There must have been some few occurrences in the past year to which

we can look back, with a smile of cheerful recollection, if not

with a feeling of heartfelt thankfulness.  And we are bound by

every rule of justice and equity to give the New Year credit for

being a good one, until he proves himself unworthy the confidence

we repose in him.



This is our view of the matter; and entertaining it,

notwithstanding our respect for the old year, one of the few

remaining moments of whose existence passes away with every word we

write, here we are, seated by our fireside on this last night of

the old year, one thousand eight hundred and thirty-six, penning

this article with as jovial a face as if nothing extraordinary had

happened, or was about to happen, to disturb our good humour.



Hackney-coaches and carriages keep rattling up the street and down

the street in rapid succession, conveying, doubtless, smartly-

dressed coachfuls to crowded parties; loud and repeated double

knocks at the house with green blinds, opposite, announce to the

whole neighbourhood that there's one large party in the street at

all events; and we saw through the window, and through the fog too,

till it grew so thick that we rung for candles, and drew our

curtains, pastry-cooks' men with green boxes on their heads, and

rout-furniture-warehouse-carts, with cane seats and French lamps,

hurrying to the numerous houses where an annual festival is held in

honour of the occasion.



We can fancy one of these parties, we think, as well as if we were

duly dress-coated and pumped, and had just been announced at the

drawing-room door.



Take the house with the green blinds for instance.  We know it is a

quadrille party, because we saw some men taking up the front

drawing-room carpet while we sat at breakfast this morning, and if

further evidence be required, and we must tell the truth, we just

now saw one of the young ladies 'doing' another of the young

ladies' hair, near one of the bedroom windows, in an unusual style

of splendour, which nothing else but a quadrille party could

possibly justify.



The master of the house with the green blinds is in a public

office; we know the fact by the cut of his coat, the tie of his

neckcloth, and the self-satisfaction of his gait - the very green

blinds themselves have a Somerset House air about them.



Hark! - a cab!  That's a junior clerk in the same office; a tidy

sort of young man, with a tendency to cold and corns, who comes in

a pair of boots with black cloth fronts, and brings his shoes in

his coat-pocket, which shoes he is at this very moment putting on

in the hall.  Now he is announced by the man in the passage to

another man in a blue coat, who is a disguised messenger from the

office.



The man on the first landing precedes him to the drawing-room door.

'Mr. Tupple!' shouts the messenger.  'How ARE you, Tupple?' says

the master of the house, advancing from the fire, before which he

has been talking politics and airing himself.  'My dear, this is

Mr. Tupple (a courteous salute from the lady of the house); Tupple,

my eldest daughter; Julia, my dear, Mr. Tupple; Tupple, my other

daughters; my son, sir;' Tupple rubs his hands very hard, and

smiles as if it were all capital fun, and keeps constantly bowing

and turning himself round, till the whole family have been

introduced, when he glides into a chair at the corner of the sofa,

and opens a miscellaneous conversation with the young ladies upon

the weather, and the theatres, and the old year, and the last new

murder, and the balloon, and the ladies' sleeves, and the

festivities of the season, and a great many other topics of small

talk.



More double knocks! what an extensive party! what an incessant hum

of conversation and general sipping of coffee!  We see Tupple now,

in our mind's eye, in the height of his glory.  He has just handed

that stout old lady's cup to the servant; and now, he dives among

the crowd of young men by the door, to intercept the other servant,

and secure the muffin-plate for the old lady's daughter, before he

leaves the room; and now, as he passes the sofa on his way back, he

bestows a glance of recognition and patronage upon the young ladies

as condescending and familiar as if he had known them from infancy.



Charming person Mr. Tupple - perfect ladies' man -  such a

delightful companion, too!  Laugh! - nobody ever understood papa's

jokes half so well as Mr. Tupple, who laughs himself into

convulsions at every fresh burst of facetiousness.  Most delightful

partner! talks through the whole set! and although he does seem at

first rather gay and frivolous, so romantic and with so MUCH

feeling!  Quite a love.  No great favourite with the young men,

certainly, who sneer at, and affect to despise him; but everybody

knows that's only envy, and they needn't give themselves the

trouble to depreciate his merits at any rate, for Ma says he shall

be asked to every future dinner-party, if it's only to talk to

people between the courses, and distract their attention when

there's any unexpected delay in the kitchen.



At supper, Mr. Tupple shows to still greater advantage than he has

done throughout the evening, and when Pa requests every one to fill

their glasses for the purpose of drinking happiness throughout the

year, Mr. Tupple is SO droll:  insisting on all the young ladies

having their glasses filled, notwithstanding their repeated

assurances that they never can, by any possibility, think of

emptying them and subsequently begging permission to say a few

words on the sentiment which has just been uttered by Pa - when he

makes one of the most brilliant and poetical speeches that can

possibly be imagined, about the old year and the new one.  After

the toast has been drunk, and when the ladies have retired, Mr.

Tupple requests that every gentleman will do him the favour of

filling his glass, for he has a toast to propose:  on which all the

gentlemen cry 'Hear! hear!' and pass the decanters accordingly:

and Mr. Tupple being informed by the master of the house that they

are all charged, and waiting for his toast, rises, and begs to

remind the gentlemen present, how much they have been delighted by

the dazzling array of elegance and beauty which the drawing-room

has exhibited that night, and how their senses have been charmed,

and their hearts captivated, by the bewitching concentration of

female loveliness which that very room has so recently displayed.

(Loud cries of 'Hear!')  Much as he (Tupple) would be disposed to

deplore the absence of the ladies, on other grounds, he cannot but

derive some consolation from the reflection that the very

circumstance of their not being present, enables him to propose a

toast, which he would have otherwise been prevented from giving -

that toast he begs to say is - 'The Ladies!'  (Great applause.)

The Ladies! among whom the fascinating daughters of their excellent

host, are alike conspicuous for their beauty, their

accomplishments, and their elegance.  He begs them to drain a

bumper to 'The Ladies, and a happy new year to them!'  (Prolonged

approbation; above which the noise of the ladies dancing the

Spanish dance among themselves, overhead, is distinctly audible.)



The applause consequent on this toast, has scarcely subsided, when

a young gentleman in a pink under-waistcoat, sitting towards the

bottom of the table, is observed to grow very restless and fidgety,

and to evince strong indications of some latent desire to give vent

to his feelings in a speech, which the wary Tupple at once

perceiving, determines to forestall by speaking himself.  He,

therefore, rises again, with an air of solemn importance, and

trusts he may be permitted to propose another toast (unqualified

approbation, and Mr. Tupple proceeds).  He is sure they must all be

deeply impressed with the hospitality - he may say the splendour -

with which they have been that night received by their worthy host

and hostess.  (Unbounded applause.)  Although this is the first

occasion on which he has had the pleasure and delight of sitting at

that board, he has known his friend Dobble long and intimately; he

has been connected with him in business - he wishes everybody

present knew Dobble as well as he does.  (A cough from the host.)

He (Tupple) can lay his hand upon his (Tupple's) heart, and declare

his confident belief that a better man, a better husband, a better

father, a better brother, a better son, a better relation in any

relation of life, than Dobble, never existed.  (Loud cries of

'Hear!')  They have seen him to-night in the peaceful bosom of his

family; they should see him in the morning, in the trying duties of

his office.  Calm in the perusal of the morning papers,

uncompromising in the signature of his name, dignified in his

replies to the inquiries of stranger applicants, deferential in his

behaviour to his superiors, majestic in his deportment to the

messengers.  (Cheers.)  When he bears this merited testimony to the

excellent qualities of his friend Dobble, what can he say in

approaching such a subject as Mrs. Dobble?  Is it requisite for him

to expatiate on the qualities of that amiable woman?  No; he will

spare his friend Dobble's feelings; he will spare the feelings of

his friend - if he will allow him to have the honour of calling him

so - Mr. Dobble, junior.  (Here Mr. Dobble, junior, who has been

previously distending his mouth to a considerable width, by

thrusting a particularly fine orange into that feature, suspends

operations, and assumes a proper appearance of intense melancholy).

He will simply say - and he is quite certain it is a sentiment in

which all who hear him will readily concur - that his friend Dobble

is as superior to any man he ever knew, as Mrs. Dobble is far

beyond any woman he ever saw (except her daughters); and he will

conclude by proposing their worthy 'Host and Hostess, and may they

live to enjoy many more new years!'



The toast is drunk with acclamation; Dobble returns thanks, and the

whole party rejoin the ladies in the drawing-room.  Young men who

were too bashful to dance before supper, find tongues and partners;

the musicians exhibit unequivocal symptoms of having drunk the new

year in, while the company were out; and dancing is kept up, until

far in the first morning of the new year.



We have scarcely written the last word of the previous sentence,

when the first stroke of twelve, peals from the neighbouring

churches.  There certainly - we must confess it now - is something

awful in the sound.  Strictly speaking, it may not be more

impressive now, than at any other time; for the hours steal as

swiftly on, at other periods, and their flight is little heeded.

But, we measure man's life by years, and it is a solemn knell that

warns us we have passed another of the landmarks which stands

between us and the grave.  Disguise it as we may, the reflection

will force itself on our minds, that when the next bell announces

the arrival of a new year, we may be insensible alike of the timely

warning we have so often neglected, and of all the warm feelings

that glow within us now.
