






CHAPTER II - A CHRISTMAS DINNER







Christmas time!  That man must be a misanthrope indeed, in whose

breast something like a jovial feeling is not roused - in whose

mind some pleasant associations are not awakened - by the

recurrence of Christmas.  There are people who will tell you that

Christmas is not to them what it used to be; that each succeeding

Christmas has found some cherished hope, or happy prospect, of the

year before, dimmed or passed away; that the present only serves to

remind them of reduced circumstances and straitened incomes - of

the feasts they once bestowed on hollow friends, and of the cold

looks that meet them now, in adversity and misfortune.  Never heed

such dismal reminiscences.  There are few men who have lived long

enough in the world, who cannot call up such thoughts any day in

the year.  Then do not select the merriest of the three hundred and

sixty-five for your doleful recollections, but draw your chair

nearer the blazing fire - fill the glass and send round the song -

and if your room be smaller than it was a dozen years ago, or if

your glass be filled with reeking punch, instead of sparkling wine,

put a good face on the matter, and empty it off-hand, and fill

another, and troll off the old ditty you used to sing, and thank

God it's no worse.  Look on the merry faces of your children (if

you have any) as they sit round the fire.  One little seat may be

empty; one slight form that gladdened the father's heart, and

roused the mother's pride to look upon, may not be there.  Dwell

not upon the past; think not that one short year ago, the fair

child now resolving into dust, sat before you, with the bloom of

health upon its cheek, and the gaiety of infancy in its joyous eye.

Reflect upon your present blessings - of which every man has many -

not on your past misfortunes, of which all men have some.  Fill

your glass again, with a merry face and contented heart.  Our life

on it, but your Christmas shall be merry, and your new year a happy

one!



Who can be insensible to the outpourings of good feeling, and the

honest interchange of affectionate attachment, which abound at this

season of the year?  A Christmas family-party!  We know nothing in

nature more delightful!  There seems a magic in the very name of

Christmas.  Petty jealousies and discords are forgotten; social

feelings are awakened, in bosoms to which they have long been

strangers; father and son, or brother and sister, who have met and

passed with averted gaze, or a look of cold recognition, for months

before, proffer and return the cordial embrace, and bury their past

animosities in their present happiness.  Kindly hearts that have

yearned towards each other, but have been withheld by false notions

of pride and self-dignity, are again reunited, and all is kindness

and benevolence!  Would that Christmas lasted the whole year

through (as it ought), and that the prejudices and passions which

deform our better nature, were never called into action among those

to whom they should ever be strangers!



The Christmas family-party that we mean, is not a mere assemblage

of relations, got up at a week or two's notice, originating this

year, having no family precedent in the last, and not likely to be

repeated in the next.  No.  It is an annual gathering of all the

accessible members of the family, young or old, rich or poor; and

all the children look forward to it, for two months beforehand, in

a fever of anticipation.  Formerly, it was held at grandpapa's; but

grandpapa getting old, and grandmamma getting old too, and rather

infirm, they have given up house-keeping, and domesticated

themselves with uncle George; so, the party always takes place at

uncle George's house, but grandmamma sends in most of the good

things, and grandpapa always WILL toddle down, all the way to

Newgate-market, to buy the turkey, which he engages a porter to

bring home behind him in triumph, always insisting on the man's

being rewarded with a glass of spirits, over and above his hire, to

drink 'a merry Christmas and a happy new year' to aunt George.  As

to grandmamma, she is very secret and mysterious for two or three

days beforehand, but not sufficiently so, to prevent rumours

getting afloat that she has purchased a beautiful new cap with pink

ribbons for each of the servants, together with sundry books, and

pen-knives, and pencil-cases, for the younger branches; to say

nothing of divers secret additions to the order originally given by

aunt George at the pastry-cook's, such as another dozen of mince-

pies for the dinner, and a large plum-cake for the children.



On Christmas-eve, grandmamma is always in excellent spirits, and

after employing all the children, during the day, in stoning the

plums, and all that, insists, regularly every year, on uncle George

coming down into the kitchen, taking off his coat, and stirring the

pudding for half an hour or so, which uncle George good-humouredly

does, to the vociferous delight of the children and servants.  The

evening concludes with a glorious game of blind-man's-buff, in an

early stage of which grandpapa takes great care to be caught, in

order that he may have an opportunity of displaying his dexterity.



On the following morning, the old couple, with as many of the

children as the pew will hold, go to church in great state:

leaving aunt George at home dusting decanters and filling casters,

and uncle George carrying bottles into the dining-parlour, and

calling for corkscrews, and getting into everybody's way.



When the church-party return to lunch, grandpapa produces a small

sprig of mistletoe from his pocket, and tempts the boys to kiss

their little cousins under it - a proceeding which affords both the

boys and the old gentleman unlimited satisfaction, but which rather

outrages grandmamma's ideas of decorum, until grandpapa says, that

when he was just thirteen years and three months old, HE kissed

grandmamma under a mistletoe too, on which the children clap their

hands, and laugh very heartily, as do aunt George and uncle George;

and grandmamma looks pleased, and says, with a benevolent smile,

that grandpapa was an impudent young dog, on which the children

laugh very heartily again, and grandpapa more heartily than any of

them.



But all these diversions are nothing to the subsequent excitement

when grandmamma in a high cap, and slate-coloured silk gown; and

grandpapa with a beautifully plaited shirt-frill, and white

neckerchief; seat themselves on one side of the drawing-room fire,

with uncle George's children and little cousins innumerable, seated

in the front, waiting the arrival of the expected visitors.

Suddenly a hackney-coach is heard to stop, and uncle George, who

has been looking out of the window, exclaims 'Here's Jane!' on

which the children rush to the door, and helter-skelter down-

stairs; and uncle Robert and aunt Jane, and the dear little baby,

and the nurse, and the whole party, are ushered up-stairs amidst

tumultuous shouts of 'Oh, my!' from the children, and frequently

repeated warnings not to hurt baby from the nurse.  And grandpapa

takes the child, and grandmamma kisses her daughter, and the

confusion of this first entry has scarcely subsided, when some

other aunts and uncles with more cousins arrive, and the grown-up

cousins flirt with each other, and so do the little cousins too,

for that matter, and nothing is to be heard but a confused din of

talking, laughing, and merriment.



A hesitating double knock at the street-door, heard during a

momentary pause in the conversation, excites a general inquiry of

'Who's that?' and two or three children, who have been standing at

the window, announce in a low voice, that it's 'poor aunt

Margaret.'  Upon which, aunt George leaves the room to welcome the

new-comer; and grandmamma draws herself up, rather stiff and

stately; for Margaret married a poor man without her consent, and

poverty not being a sufficiently weighty punishment for her

offence, has been discarded by her friends, and debarred the

society of her dearest relatives.  But Christmas has come round,

and the unkind feelings that have struggled against better

dispositions during the year, have melted away before its genial

influence, like half-formed ice beneath the morning sun.  It is not

difficult in a moment of angry feeling for a parent to denounce a

disobedient child; but, to banish her at a period of general good-

will and hilarity, from the hearth, round which she has sat on so

many anniversaries of the same day, expanding by slow degrees from

infancy to girlhood, and then bursting, almost imperceptibly, into

a woman, is widely different.  The air of conscious rectitude, and

cold forgiveness, which the old lady has assumed, sits ill upon

her; and when the poor girl is led in by her sister, pale in looks

and broken in hope - not from poverty, for that she could bear, but

from the consciousness of undeserved neglect, and unmerited

unkindness - it is easy to see how much of it is assumed.  A

momentary pause succeeds; the girl breaks suddenly from her sister

and throws herself, sobbing, on her mother's neck.  The father

steps hastily forward, and takes her husband's hand.  Friends crowd

round to offer their hearty congratulations, and happiness and

harmony again prevail.



As to the dinner, it's perfectly delightful - nothing goes wrong,

and everybody is in the very best of spirits, and disposed to

please and be pleased.  Grandpapa relates a circumstantial account

of the purchase of the turkey, with a slight digression relative to

the purchase of previous turkeys, on former Christmas-days, which

grandmamma corroborates in the minutest particular.  Uncle George

tells stories, and carves poultry, and takes wine, and jokes with

the children at the side-table, and winks at the cousins that are

making love, or being made love to, and exhilarates everybody with

his good humour and hospitality; and when, at last, a stout servant

staggers in with a gigantic pudding, with a sprig of holly in the

top, there is such a laughing, and shouting, and clapping of little

chubby hands, and kicking up of fat dumpy legs, as can only be

equalled by the applause with which the astonishing feat of pouring

lighted brandy into mince-pies, is received by the younger

visitors.  Then the dessert! - and the wine! - and the fun!  Such

beautiful speeches, and SUCH songs, from aunt Margaret's husband,

who turns out to be such a nice man, and SO attentive to

grandmamma!  Even grandpapa not only sings his annual song with

unprecedented vigour, but on being honoured with an unanimous

ENCORE, according to annual custom, actually comes out with a new

one which nobody but grandmamma ever heard before; and a young

scapegrace of a cousin, who has been in some disgrace with the old

people, for certain heinous sins of omission and commission -

neglecting to call, and persisting in drinking Burton Ale -

astonishes everybody into convulsions of laughter by volunteering

the most extraordinary comic songs that ever were heard.  And thus

the evening passes, in a strain of rational good-will and

cheerfulness, doing more to awaken the sympathies of every member

of the party in behalf of his neighbour, and to perpetuate their

good feeling during the ensuing year, than half the homilies that

have ever been written, by half the Divines that have ever lived.
