






CHAPTER XI - MAKING A NIGHT OF IT







Damon and Pythias were undoubtedly very good fellows in their way:

the former for his extreme readiness to put in special bail for a

friend:  and the latter for a certain trump-like punctuality in

turning up just in the very nick of time, scarcely less remarkable.

Many points in their character have, however, grown obsolete.

Damons are rather hard to find, in these days of imprisonment for

debt (except the sham ones, and they cost half-a-crown); and, as to

the Pythiases, the few that have existed in these degenerate times,

have had an unfortunate knack of making themselves scarce, at the

very moment when their appearance would have been strictly

classical.  If the actions of these heroes, however, can find no

parallel in modern times, their friendship can.  We have Damon and

Pythias on the one hand.  We have Potter and Smithers on the other;

and, lest the two last-mentioned names should never have reached

the ears of our unenlightened readers, we can do no better than

make them acquainted with the owners thereof.



Mr. Thomas Potter, then, was a clerk in the city, and Mr. Robert

Smithers was a ditto in the same; their incomes were limited, but

their friendship was unbounded.  They lived in the same street,

walked into town every morning at the same hour, dined at the same

slap-bang every day, and revelled in each other's company very

night.  They were knit together by the closest ties of intimacy and

friendship, or, as Mr. Thomas Potter touchingly observed, they were

'thick-and-thin pals, and nothing but it.'  There was a spice of

romance in Mr. Smithers's disposition, a ray of poetry, a gleam of

misery, a sort of consciousness of he didn't exactly know what,

coming across him he didn't precisely know why - which stood out in

fine relief against the off-hand, dashing, amateur-pickpocket-sort-

of-manner, which distinguished Mr. Potter in an eminent degree.



The peculiarity of their respective dispositions, extended itself

to their individual costume.  Mr. Smithers generally appeared in

public in a surtout and shoes, with a narrow black neckerchief and

a brown hat, very much turned up at the sides - peculiarities which

Mr. Potter wholly eschewed, for it was his ambition to do something

in the celebrated 'kiddy' or stage-coach way, and he had even gone

so far as to invest capital in the purchase of a rough blue coat

with wooden buttons, made upon the fireman's principle, in which,

with the addition of a low-crowned, flower-pot-saucer-shaped hat,

he had created no inconsiderable sensation at the Albion in Little

Russell-street, and divers other places of public and fashionable

resort.



Mr. Potter and Mr. Smithers had mutually agreed that, on the

receipt of their quarter's salary, they would jointly and in

company 'spend the evening' - an evident misnomer - the spending

applying, as everybody knows, not to the evening itself but to all

the money the individual may chance to be possessed of, on the

occasion to which reference is made; and they had likewise agreed

that, on the evening aforesaid, they would 'make a night of it' -

an expressive term, implying the borrowing of several hours from

to-morrow morning, adding them to the night before, and

manufacturing a compound night of the whole.



The quarter-day arrived at last - we say at last, because quarter-

days are as eccentric as comets:  moving wonderfully quick when you

have a good deal to pay, and marvellously slow when you have a

little to receive.  Mr. Thomas Potter and Mr. Robert Smithers met

by appointment to begin the evening with a dinner; and a nice,

snug, comfortable dinner they had, consisting of a little

procession of four chops and four kidneys, following each other,

supported on either side by a pot of the real draught stout, and

attended by divers cushions of bread, and wedges of cheese.



When the cloth was removed, Mr. Thomas Potter ordered the waiter to

bring in, two goes of his best Scotch whiskey, with warm water and

sugar, and a couple of his 'very mildest' Havannahs, which the

waiter did.  Mr. Thomas Potter mixed his grog, and lighted his

cigar; Mr. Robert Smithers did the same; and then, Mr. Thomas

Potter jocularly proposed as the first toast, 'the abolition of all

offices whatever' (not sinecures, but counting-houses), which was

immediately drunk by Mr. Robert Smithers, with enthusiastic

applause.  So they went on, talking politics, puffing cigars, and

sipping whiskey-and-water, until the 'goes' - most appropriately so

called - were both gone, which Mr. Robert Smithers perceiving,

immediately ordered in two more goes of the best Scotch whiskey,

and two more of the very mildest Havannahs; and the goes kept

coming in, and the mild Havannahs kept going out, until, what with

the drinking, and lighting, and puffing, and the stale ashes on the

table, and the tallow-grease on the cigars, Mr. Robert Smithers

began to doubt the mildness of the Havannahs, and to feel very much

as if he had been sitting in a hackney-coach with his back to the

horses.



As to Mr. Thomas Potter, he WOULD keep laughing out loud, and

volunteering inarticulate declarations that he was 'all right;' in

proof of which, he feebly bespoke the evening paper after the next

gentleman, but finding it a matter of some difficulty to discover

any news in its columns, or to ascertain distinctly whether it had

any columns at all, walked slowly out to look for the moon, and,

after coming back quite pale with looking up at the sky so long,

and attempting to express mirth at Mr. Robert Smithers having

fallen asleep, by various galvanic chuckles, laid his head on his

arm, and went to sleep also.  When he awoke again, Mr. Robert

Smithers awoke too, and they both very gravely agreed that it was

extremely unwise to eat so many pickled walnuts with the chops, as

it was a notorious fact that they always made people queer and

sleepy; indeed, if it had not been for the whiskey and cigars,

there was no knowing what harm they mightn't have done 'em.  So

they took some coffee, and after paying the bill, - twelve and

twopence the dinner, and the odd tenpence for the waiter - thirteen

shillings in all - started out on their expedition to manufacture a

night.



It was just half-past eight, so they thought they couldn't do

better than go at half-price to the slips at the City Theatre,

which they did accordingly.  Mr. Robert Smithers, who had become

extremely poetical after the settlement of the bill, enlivening the

walk by informing Mr. Thomas Potter in confidence that he felt an

inward presentiment of approaching dissolution, and subsequently

embellishing the theatre, by falling asleep with his head and both

arms gracefully drooping over the front of the boxes.



Such was the quiet demeanour of the unassuming Smithers, and such

were the happy effects of Scotch whiskey and Havannahs on that

interesting person!  But Mr. Thomas Potter, whose great aim it was

to be considered as a 'knowing card,' a 'fast-goer,' and so forth,

conducted himself in a very different manner, and commenced going

very fast indeed - rather too fast at last, for the patience of the

audience to keep pace with him.  On his first entry, he contented

himself by earnestly calling upon the gentlemen in the gallery to

'flare up,' accompanying the demand with another request,

expressive of his wish that they would instantaneously 'form a

union,' both which requisitions were responded to, in the manner

most in vogue on such occasions.



'Give that dog a bone!' cried one gentleman in his shirt-sleeves.



'Where have you been a having half a pint of intermediate beer?'

cried a second.  'Tailor!' screamed a third.  'Barber's clerk!'

shouted a fourth.  'Throw him O-VER!' roared a fifth; while

numerous voices concurred in desiring Mr. Thomas Potter to 'go home

to his mother!'  All these taunts Mr. Thomas Potter received with

supreme contempt, cocking the low-crowned hat a little more on one

side, whenever any reference was made to his personal appearance,

and, standing up with his arms a-kimbo, expressing defiance

melodramatically.



The overture - to which these various sounds had been an AD LIBITUM

accompaniment - concluded, the second piece began, and Mr. Thomas

Potter, emboldened by impunity, proceeded to behave in a most

unprecedented and outrageous manner.  First of all, he imitated the

shake of the principal female singer; then, groaned at the blue

fire; then, affected to be frightened into convulsions of terror at

the appearance of the ghost; and, lastly, not only made a running

commentary, in an audible voice, upon the dialogue on the stage,

but actually awoke Mr. Robert Smithers, who, hearing his companion

making a noise, and having a very indistinct notion where he was,

or what was required of him, immediately, by way of imitating a

good example, set up the most unearthly, unremitting, and appalling

howling that ever audience heard.  It was too much.  'Turn them

out!' was the general cry.  A noise, as of shuffling of feet, and

men being knocked up with violence against wainscoting, was heard:

a hurried dialogue of 'Come out?' - 'I won't!' - 'You shall!' - 'I

shan't!' - 'Give me your card, Sir?' - 'You're a scoundrel, Sir!'

and so forth, succeeded.  A round of applause betokened the

approbation of the audience, and Mr. Robert Smithers and Mr. Thomas

Potter found themselves shot with astonishing swiftness into the

road, without having had the trouble of once putting foot to ground

during the whole progress of their rapid descent.



Mr. Robert Smithers, being constitutionally one of the slow-goers,

and having had quite enough of fast-going, in the course of his

recent expulsion, to last until the quarter-day then next ensuing

at the very least, had no sooner emerged with his companion from

the precincts of Milton-street, than he proceeded to indulge in

circuitous references to the beauties of sleep, mingled with

distant allusions to the propriety of returning to Islington, and

testing the influence of their patent Bramahs over the street-door

locks to which they respectively belonged.  Mr. Thomas Potter,

however, was valorous and peremptory.  They had come out to make a

night of it:  and a night must be made.  So Mr. Robert Smithers,

who was three parts dull, and the other dismal, despairingly

assented; and they went into a wine-vaults, to get materials for

assisting them in making a night; where they found a good many

young ladies, and various old gentlemen, and a plentiful sprinkling

of hackney-coachmen and cab-drivers, all drinking and talking

together; and Mr. Thomas Potter and Mr. Robert Smithers drank small

glasses of brandy, and large glasses of soda, until they began to

have a very confused idea, either of things in general, or of

anything in particular; and, when they had done treating themselves

they began to treat everybody else; and the rest of the

entertainment was a confused mixture of heads and heels, black eyes

and blue uniforms, mud and gas-lights, thick doors, and stone

paving.



Then, as standard novelists expressively inform us - 'all was a

blank!' and in the morning the blank was filled up with the words

'STATION-HOUSE,' and the station-house was filled up with Mr.

Thomas Potter, Mr. Robert Smithers, and the major part of their

wine-vault companions of the preceding night, with a comparatively

small portion of clothing of any kind.  And it was disclosed at the

Police-office, to the indignation of the Bench, and the

astonishment of the spectators, how one Robert Smithers, aided and

abetted by one Thomas Potter, had knocked down and beaten, in

divers streets, at different times, five men, four boys, and three

women; how the said Thomas Potter had feloniously obtained

possession of five door-knockers, two bell-handles, and a bonnet;

how Robert Smithers, his friend, had sworn, at least forty pounds'

worth of oaths, at the rate of five shillings apiece; terrified

whole streets full of Her Majesty's subjects with awful shrieks and

alarms of fire; destroyed the uniforms of five policemen; and

committed various other atrocities, too numerous to recapitulate.

And the magistrate, after an appropriate reprimand, fined Mr.

Thomas Potter and Mr. Thomas Smithers five shillings each, for

being, what the law vulgarly terms, drunk; and thirty-four pounds

for seventeen assaults at forty shillings a-head, with liberty to

speak to the prosecutors.



The prosecutors WERE spoken to, and Messrs. Potter and Smithers

lived on credit, for a quarter, as best they might; and, although

the prosecutors expressed their readiness to be assaulted twice a

week, on the same terms, they have never since been detected in

'making a night of it.'
