






CHAPTER V - THE PARLOUR ORATOR







We had been lounging one evening, down Oxford-street, Holborn,

Cheapside, Coleman-street, Finsbury-square, and so on, with the

intention of returning westward, by Pentonville and the New-road,

when we began to feel rather thirsty, and disposed to rest for five

or ten minutes.  So, we turned back towards an old, quiet, decent

public-house, which we remembered to have passed but a moment

before (it was not far from the City-road), for the purpose of

solacing ourself with a glass of ale.  The house was none of your

stuccoed, French-polished, illuminated palaces, but a modest

public-house of the old school, with a little old bar, and a little

old landlord, who, with a wife and daughter of the same pattern,

was comfortably seated in the bar aforesaid - a snug little room

with a cheerful fire, protected by a large screen:  from behind

which the young lady emerged on our representing our inclination

for a glass of ale.



'Won't you walk into the parlour, sir?' said the young lady, in

seductive tones.



'You had better walk into the parlour, sir,' said the little old

landlord, throwing his chair back, and looking round one side of

the screen, to survey our appearance.



'You had much better step into the parlour, sir,' said the little

old lady, popping out her head, on the other side of the screen.



We cast a slight glance around, as if to express our ignorance of

the locality so much recommended.  The little old landlord observed

it; bustled out of the small door of the small bar; and forthwith

ushered us into the parlour itself.



It was an ancient, dark-looking room, with oaken wainscoting, a

sanded floor, and a high mantel-piece.  The walls were ornamented

with three or four old coloured prints in black frames, each print

representing a naval engagement, with a couple of men-of-war

banging away at each other most vigorously, while another vessel or

two were blowing up in the distance, and the foreground presented a

miscellaneous collection of broken masts and blue legs sticking up

out of the water.  Depending from the ceiling in the centre of the

room, were a gas-light and bell-pull; on each side were three or

four long narrow tables, behind which was a thickly-planted row of

those slippery, shiny-looking wooden chairs, peculiar to hostelries

of this description.  The monotonous appearance of the sanded

boards was relieved by an occasional spittoon; and a triangular

pile of those useful articles adorned the two upper corners of the

apartment.



At the furthest table, nearest the fire, with his face towards the

door at the bottom of the room, sat a stoutish man of about forty,

whose short, stiff, black hair curled closely round a broad high

forehead, and a face to which something besides water and exercise

had communicated a rather inflamed appearance.  He was smoking a

cigar, with his eyes fixed on the ceiling, and had that confident

oracular air which marked him as the leading politician, general

authority, and universal anecdote-relater, of the place.  He had

evidently just delivered himself of something very weighty; for the

remainder of the company were puffing at their respective pipes and

cigars in a kind of solemn abstraction, as if quite overwhelmed

with the magnitude of the subject recently under discussion.



On his right hand sat an elderly gentleman with a white head, and

broad-brimmed brown hat; on his left, a sharp-nosed, light-haired

man in a brown surtout reaching nearly to his heels, who took a

whiff at his pipe, and an admiring glance at the red-faced man,

alternately.



'Very extraordinary!' said the light-haired man after a pause of

five minutes.  A murmur of assent ran through the company.



'Not at all extraordinary - not at all,' said the red-faced man,

awakening suddenly from his reverie, and turning upon the light-

haired man, the moment he had spoken.



'Why should it be extraordinary? - why is it extraordinary? - prove

it to be extraordinary!'



'Oh, if you come to that - ' said the light-haired man, meekly.



'Come to that!' ejaculated the man with the red face; 'but we MUST

come to that.  We stand, in these times, upon a calm elevation of

intellectual attainment, and not in the dark recess of mental

deprivation.  Proof, is what I require - proof, and not assertions,

in these stirring times.  Every gen'lem'n that knows me, knows what

was the nature and effect of my observations, when it was in the

contemplation of the Old-street Suburban Representative Discovery

Society, to recommend a candidate for that place in Cornwall there

- I forget the name of it.  "Mr. Snobee," said Mr. Wilson, "is a

fit and proper person to represent the borough in Parliament."

"Prove it," says I.  "He is a friend to Reform," says Mr. Wilson.

"Prove it," says I.  "The abolitionist of the national debt, the

unflinching opponent of pensions, the uncompromising advocate of

the negro, the reducer of sinecures and the duration of

Parliaments; the extender of nothing but the suffrages of the

people," says Mr. Wilson.  "Prove it," says I.  "His acts prove

it," says he.  "Prove THEM," says I.



'And he could not prove them,' said the red-faced man, looking

round triumphantly; 'and the borough didn't have him; and if you

carried this principle to the full extent, you'd have no debt, no

pensions, no sinecures, no negroes, no nothing.  And then, standing

upon an elevation of intellectual attainment, and having reached

the summit of popular prosperity, you might bid defiance to the

nations of the earth, and erect yourselves in the proud confidence

of wisdom and superiority.  This is my argument - this always has

been my argument - and if I was a Member of the House of Commons

to-morrow, I'd make 'em shake in their shoes with it.  And the red-

faced man, having struck the table very hard with his clenched

fist, to add weight to the declaration, smoked away like a brewery.



'Well!' said the sharp-nosed man, in a very slow and soft voice,

addressing the company in general, 'I always do say, that of all

the gentlemen I have the pleasure of meeting in this room, there is

not one whose conversation I like to hear so much as Mr. Rogers's,

or who is such improving company.'



'Improving company!' said Mr. Rogers, for that, it seemed, was the

name of the red-faced man.  'You may say I am improving company,

for I've improved you all to some purpose; though as to my

conversation being as my friend Mr. Ellis here describes it, that

is not for me to say anything about.  You, gentlemen, are the best

judges on that point; but this I will say, when I came into this

parish, and first used this room, ten years ago, I don't believe

there was one man in it, who knew he was a slave - and now you all

know it, and writhe under it.  Inscribe that upon my tomb, and I am

satisfied.'



'Why, as to inscribing it on your tomb,' said a little greengrocer

with a chubby face, 'of course you can have anything chalked up, as

you likes to pay for, so far as it relates to yourself and your

affairs; but, when you come to talk about slaves, and that there

abuse, you'd better keep it in the family, 'cos I for one don't

like to be called them names, night after night.'



'You ARE a slave,' said the red-faced man, 'and the most pitiable

of all slaves.'



'Werry hard if I am,' interrupted the greengrocer, 'for I got no

good out of the twenty million that was paid for 'mancipation,

anyhow.'



'A willing slave,' ejaculated the red-faced man, getting more red

with eloquence, and contradiction - 'resigning the dearest

birthright of your children - neglecting the sacred call of Liberty

- who, standing imploringly before you, appeals to the warmest

feelings of your heart, and points to your helpless infants, but in

vain.'



'Prove it,' said the greengrocer.



'Prove it!' sneered the man with the red face.  'What! bending

beneath the yoke of an insolent and factious oligarchy; bowed down

by the domination of cruel laws; groaning beneath tyranny and

oppression on every hand, at every side, and in every corner.

Prove it! - '  The red-faced man abruptly broke off, sneered melo-

dramatically, and buried his countenance and his indignation

together, in a quart pot.



'Ah, to be sure, Mr. Rogers,' said a stout broker in a large

waistcoat, who had kept his eyes fixed on this luminary all the

time he was speaking.  'Ah, to be sure,' said the broker with a

sigh, 'that's the point.'



'Of course, of course,' said divers members of the company, who

understood almost as much about the matter as the broker himself.



'You had better let him alone, Tommy,' said the broker, by way of

advice to the little greengrocer; 'he can tell what's o'clock by an

eight-day, without looking at the minute hand, he can.  Try it on,

on some other suit; it won't do with him, Tommy.'



'What is a man?' continued the red-faced specimen of the species,

jerking his hat indignantly from its peg on the wall.  'What is an

Englishman?  Is he to be trampled upon by every oppressor?  Is he

to be knocked down at everybody's bidding?  What's freedom?  Not a

standing army.  What's a standing army?  Not freedom.  What's

general happiness?  Not universal misery.  Liberty ain't the

window-tax, is it?  The Lords ain't the Commons, are they?'  And

the red-faced man, gradually bursting into a radiating sentence, in

which such adjectives as 'dastardly,' 'oppressive,' 'violent,' and

'sanguinary,' formed the most conspicuous words, knocked his hat

indignantly over his eyes, left the room, and slammed the door

after him.



'Wonderful man!' said he of the sharp nose.



'Splendid speaker!' added the broker.



'Great power!' said everybody but the greengrocer.  And as they

said it, the whole party shook their heads mysteriously, and one by

one retired, leaving us alone in the old parlour.



If we had followed the established precedent in all such instances,

we should have fallen into a fit of musing, without delay.  The

ancient appearance of the room - the old panelling of the wall -

the chimney blackened with smoke and age - would have carried us

back a hundred years at least, and we should have gone dreaming on,

until the pewter-pot on the table, or the little beer-chiller on

the fire, had started into life, and addressed to us a long story

of days gone by.  But, by some means or other, we were not in a

romantic humour; and although we tried very hard to invest the

furniture with vitality, it remained perfectly unmoved, obstinate,

and sullen.  Being thus reduced to the unpleasant necessity of

musing about ordinary matters, our thoughts reverted to the red-

faced man, and his oratorical display.



A numerous race are these red-faced men; there is not a parlour, or

club-room, or benefit society, or humble party of any kind, without

its red-faced man.  Weak-pated dolts they are, and a great deal of

mischief they do to their cause, however good.  So, just to hold a

pattern one up, to know the others by, we took his likeness at

once, and put him in here.  And that is the reason why we have

written this paper.
