





CHAPTER VII - THE MISPLACED ATTACHMENT OF MR. JOHN DOUNCE







If we had to make a classification of society, there is a

particular kind of men whom we should immediately set down under

the head of 'Old Boys;' and a column of most extensive dimensions

the old boys would require.  To what precise causes the rapid

advance of old-boy population is to be traced, we are unable to

determine.  It would be an interesting and curious speculation,

but, as we have not sufficient space to devote to it here, we

simply state the fact that the numbers of the old boys have been

gradually augmenting within the last few years, and that they are

at this moment alarmingly on the increase.



Upon a general review of the subject, and without considering it

minutely in detail, we should be disposed to subdivide the old boys

into two distinct classes - the gay old boys, and the steady old

boys.  The gay old boys, are paunchy old men in the disguise of

young ones, who frequent the Quadrant and Regent-street in the day-

time:  the theatres (especially theatres under lady management) at

night; and who assume all the foppishness and levity of boys,

without the excuse of youth or inexperience.  The steady old boys

are certain stout old gentlemen of clean appearance, who are always

to be seen in the same taverns, at the same hours every evening,

smoking and drinking in the same company.



There was once a fine collection of old boys to be seen round the

circular table at Offley's every night, between the hours of half-

past eight and half-past eleven.  We have lost sight of them for

some time.  There were, and may be still, for aught we know, two

splendid specimens in full blossom at the Rainbow Tavern in Fleet-

street, who always used to sit in the box nearest the fireplace,

and smoked long cherry-stick pipes which went under the table, with

the bowls resting on the floor.  Grand old boys they were - fat,

red-faced, white-headed old fellows - always there - one on one

side the table, and the other opposite - puffing and drinking away

in great state.  Everybody knew them, and it was supposed by some

people that they were both immortal.



Mr. John Dounce was an old boy of the latter class (we don't mean

immortal, but steady), a retired glove and braces maker, a widower,

resident with three daughters - all grown up, and all unmarried -

in Cursitor-street, Chancery-lane.  He was a short, round, large-

faced, tubbish sort of man, with a broad-brimmed hat, and a square

coat; and had that grave, but confident, kind of roll, peculiar to

old boys in general.  Regular as clockwork - breakfast at nine -

dress and tittivate a little - down to the Sir Somebody's Head - a

glass of ale and the paper - come back again, and take daughters

out for a walk - dinner at three - glass of grog and pipe - nap -

tea - little walk - Sir Somebody's Head again - capital house -

delightful evenings.  There were Mr. Harris, the law-stationer, and

Mr. Jennings, the robe-maker (two jolly young fellows like

himself), and Jones, the barrister's clerk - rum fellow that Jones

- capital company - full of anecdote! - and there they sat every

night till just ten minutes before twelve, drinking their brandy-

and-water, and smoking their pipes, and telling stories, and

enjoying themselves with a kind of solemn joviality particularly

edifying.



Sometimes Jones would propose a half-price visit to Drury Lane or

Covent Garden, to see two acts of a five-act play, and a new farce,

perhaps, or a ballet, on which occasions the whole four of them

went together:  none of your hurrying and nonsense, but having

their brandy-and-water first, comfortably, and ordering a steak and

some oysters for their supper against they came back, and then

walking coolly into the pit, when the 'rush' had gone in, as all

sensible people do, and did when Mr. Dounce was a young man, except

when the celebrated Master Betty was at the height of his

popularity, and then, sir, - then - Mr. Dounce perfectly well

remembered getting a holiday from business; and going to the pit

doors at eleven o'clock in the forenoon, and waiting there, till

six in the afternoon, with some sandwiches in a pocket-handkerchief

and some wine in a phial; and fainting after all, with the heat and

fatigue, before the play began; in which situation he was lifted

out of the pit, into one of the dress boxes, sir, by five of the

finest women of that day, sir, who compassionated his situation and

administered restoratives, and sent a black servant, six foot high,

in blue and silver livery, next morning with their compliments, and

to know how he found himself, sir - by G-!  Between the acts Mr.

Dounce and Mr. Harris, and Mr. Jennings, used to stand up, and look

round the house, and Jones - knowing fellow that Jones - knew

everybody - pointed out the fashionable and celebrated Lady So-and-

So in the boxes, at the mention of whose name Mr. Dounce, after

brushing up his hair, and adjusting his neckerchief, would inspect

the aforesaid Lady So-and-So through an immense glass, and remark,

either, that she was a 'fine woman - very fine woman, indeed,' or

that 'there might be a little more of her, eh, Jones?'  Just as the

case might happen to be.  When the dancing began, John Dounce and

the other old boys were particularly anxious to see what was going

forward on the stage, and Jones - wicked dog that Jones - whispered

little critical remarks into the ears of John Dounce, which John

Dounce retailed to Mr. Harris and Mr. Harris to Mr. Jennings; and

then they all four laughed, until the tears ran down out of their

eyes.



When the curtain fell, they walked back together, two and two, to

the steaks and oysters; and when they came to the second glass of

brandy-and-water, Jones - hoaxing scamp, that Jones - used to

recount how he had observed a lady in white feathers, in one of the

pit boxes, gazing intently on Mr. Dounce all the evening, and how

he had caught Mr. Dounce, whenever he thought no one was looking at

him, bestowing ardent looks of intense devotion on the lady in

return; on which Mr. Harris and Mr. Jennings used to laugh very

heartily, and John Dounce more heartily than either of them,

acknowledging, however, that the time HAD been when he MIGHT have

done such things; upon which Mr. Jones used to poke him in the

ribs, and tell him he had been a sad dog in his time, which John

Dounce with chuckles confessed.  And after Mr. Harris and Mr.

Jennings had preferred their claims to the character of having been

sad dogs too, they separated harmoniously, and trotted home.



The decrees of Fate, and the means by which they are brought about,

are mysterious and inscrutable.  John Dounce had led this life for

twenty years and upwards, without wish for change, or care for

variety, when his whole social system was suddenly upset and turned

completely topsy-turvy - not by an earthquake, or some other

dreadful convulsion of nature, as the reader would be inclined to

suppose, but by the simple agency of an oyster; and thus it

happened.



Mr. John Dounce was returning one night from the Sir Somebody's

Head, to his residence in Cursitor-street - not tipsy, but rather

excited, for it was Mr. Jennings's birthday, and they had had a

brace of partridges for supper, and a brace of extra glasses

afterwards, and Jones had been more than ordinarily amusing - when

his eyes rested on a newly-opened oyster-shop, on a magnificent

scale, with natives laid, one deep, in circular marble basins in

the windows, together with little round barrels of oysters directed

to Lords and Baronets, and Colonels and Captains, in every part of

the habitable globe.



Behind the natives were the barrels, and behind the barrels was a

young lady of about five-and-twenty, all in blue, and all alone -

splendid creature, charming face and lovely figure!  It is

difficult to say whether Mr. John Dounce's red countenance,

illuminated as it was by the flickering gas-light in the window

before which he paused, excited the lady's risibility, or whether a

natural exuberance of animal spirits proved too much for that

staidness of demeanour which the forms of society rather

dictatorially prescribe.  But certain it is, that the lady smiled;

then put her finger upon her lip, with a striking recollection of

what was due to herself; and finally retired, in oyster-like

bashfulness, to the very back of the counter.  The sad-dog sort of

feeling came strongly upon John Dounce:  he lingered - the lady in

blue made no sign.  He coughed - still she came not.  He entered

the shop.



'Can you open me an oyster, my dear?' said Mr. John Dounce.



'Dare say I can, sir,' replied the lady in blue, with playfulness.

And Mr. John Dounce eat one oyster, and then looked at the young

lady, and then eat another, and then squeezed the young lady's hand

as she was opening the third, and so forth, until he had devoured a

dozen of those at eightpence in less than no time.



'Can you open me half-a-dozen more, my dear?' inquired Mr. John

Dounce.



'I'll see what I can do for you, sir,' replied the young lady in

blue, even more bewitchingly than before; and Mr. John Dounce eat

half-a-dozen more of those at eightpence.



'You couldn't manage to get me a glass of brandy-and-water, my

dear, I suppose?' said Mr. John Dounce, when he had finished the

oysters:  in a tone which clearly implied his supposition that she

could.



'I'll see, sir,' said the young lady:  and away she ran out of the

shop, and down the street, her long auburn ringlets shaking in the

wind in the most enchanting manner; and back she came again,

tripping over the coal-cellar lids like a whipping-top, with a

tumbler of brandy-and-water, which Mr. John Dounce insisted on her

taking a share of, as it was regular ladies' grog - hot, strong,

sweet, and plenty of it.



So, the young lady sat down with Mr. John Dounce, in a little red

box with a green curtain, and took a small sip of the brandy-and-

water, and a small look at Mr. John Dounce, and then turned her

head away, and went through various other serio-pantomimic

fascinations, which forcibly reminded Mr. John Dounce of the first

time he courted his first wife, and which made him feel more

affectionate than ever; in pursuance of which affection, and

actuated by which feeling, Mr. John Dounce sounded the young lady

on her matrimonial engagements, when the young lady denied having

formed any such engagements at all - she couldn't abear the men,

they were such deceivers; thereupon Mr. John Dounce inquired

whether this sweeping condemnation was meant to include other than

very young men; on which the young lady blushed deeply - at least

she turned away her head, and said Mr. John Dounce had made her

blush, so of course she DID blush - and Mr. John Dounce was a long

time drinking the brandy-and-water; and, at last, John Dounce went

home to bed, and dreamed of his first wife, and his second wife,

and the young lady, and partridges, and oysters, and brandy-and-

water, and disinterested attachments.



The next morning, John Dounce was rather feverish with the extra

brandy-and-water of the previous night; and, partly in the hope of

cooling himself with an oyster, and partly with the view of

ascertaining whether he owed the young lady anything, or not, went

back to the oyster-shop.  If the young lady had appeared beautiful

by night, she was perfectly irresistible by day; and, from this

time forward, a change came over the spirit of John Dounce's dream.

He bought shirt-pins; wore a ring on his third finger; read poetry;

bribed a cheap miniature-painter to perpetrate a faint resemblance

to a youthful face, with a curtain over his head, six large books

in the background, and an open country in the distance (this he

called his portrait); 'went on' altogether in such an uproarious

manner, that the three Miss Dounces went off on small pensions, he

having made the tenement in Cursitor-street too warm to contain

them; and in short, comported and demeaned himself in every respect

like an unmitigated old Saracen, as he was.



As to his ancient friends, the other old boys, at the Sir

Somebody's Head, he dropped off from them by gradual degrees; for,

even when he did go there, Jones - vulgar fellow that Jones -

persisted in asking 'when it was to be?' and 'whether he was to

have any gloves?' together with other inquiries of an equally

offensive nature:  at which not only Harris laughed, but Jennings

also; so, he cut the two, altogether, and attached himself solely

to the blue young lady at the smart oyster-shop.



Now comes the moral of the story - for it has a moral after all.

The last-mentioned young lady, having derived sufficient profit and

emolument from John Dounce's attachment, not only refused, when

matters came to a crisis, to take him for better for worse, but

expressly declared, to use her own forcible words, that she

'wouldn't have him at no price;' and John Dounce, having lost his

old friends, alienated his relations, and rendered himself

ridiculous to everybody, made offers successively to a

schoolmistress, a landlady, a feminine tobacconist, and a

housekeeper; and, being directly rejected by each and every of

them, was accepted by his cook, with whom he now lives, a henpecked

husband, a melancholy monument of antiquated misery, and a living

warning to all uxorious old boys.

