






CHAPTER IV - MISS EVANS AND THE EAGLE







Mr. Samuel Wilkins was a carpenter, a journeyman carpenter of small

dimensions, decidedly below the middle size - bordering, perhaps,

upon the dwarfish.  His face was round and shining, and his hair

carefully twisted into the outer corner of each eye, till it formed

a variety of that description of semi-curls, usually known as

'aggerawators.'  His earnings were all-sufficient for his wants,

varying from eighteen shillings to one pound five, weekly - his

manner undeniable - his sabbath waistcoats dazzling.  No wonder

that, with these qualifications, Samuel Wilkins found favour in the

eyes of the other sex:  many women have been captivated by far less

substantial qualifications.  But, Samuel was proof against their

blandishments, until at length his eyes rested on those of a Being

for whom, from that time forth, he felt fate had destined him.  He

came, and conquered - proposed, and was accepted - loved, and was

beloved.  Mr. Wilkins 'kept company' with Jemima Evans.



Miss Evans (or Ivins, to adopt the pronunciation most in vogue with

her circle of acquaintance) had adopted in early life the useful

pursuit of shoe-binding, to which she had afterwards superadded the

occupation of a straw-bonnet maker.  Herself, her maternal parent,

and two sisters, formed an harmonious quartett in the most secluded

portion of Camden-town; and here it was that Mr. Wilkins presented

himself, one Monday afternoon, in his best attire, with his face

more shining and his waistcoat more bright than either had ever

appeared before.  The family were just going to tea, and were SO

glad to see him.  It was quite a little feast; two ounces of seven-

and-sixpenny green, and a quarter of a pound of the best fresh; and

Mr. Wilkins had brought a pint of shrimps, neatly folded up in a

clean belcher, to give a zest to the meal, and propitiate Mrs.

Ivins.  Jemima was 'cleaning herself' up-stairs; so Mr. Samuel

Wilkins sat down and talked domestic economy with Mrs. Ivins,

whilst the two youngest Miss Ivinses poked bits of lighted brown

paper between the bars under the kettle, to make the water boil for

tea.



'I wos a thinking,' said Mr. Samuel Wilkins, during a pause in the

conversation - 'I wos a thinking of taking J'mima to the Eagle to-

night.' - 'O my!' exclaimed Mrs. Ivins.  'Lor! how nice!' said the

youngest Miss Ivins.  'Well, I declare!' added the youngest Miss

Ivins but one.  'Tell J'mima to put on her white muslin, Tilly,'

screamed Mrs. Ivins, with motherly anxiety; and down came J'mima

herself soon afterwards in a white muslin gown carefully hooked and

eyed, a little red shawl, plentifully pinned, a white straw bonnet

trimmed with red ribbons, a small necklace, a large pair of

bracelets, Denmark satin shoes, and open-worked stockings; white

cotton gloves on her fingers, and a cambric pocket-handkerchief,

carefully folded up, in her hand - all quite genteel and ladylike.

And away went Miss J'mima Ivins and Mr. Samuel Wilkins, and a

dress-cane, with a gilt knob at the top, to the admiration and envy

of the street in general, and to the high gratification of Mrs.

Ivins, and the two youngest Miss Ivinses in particular.  They had

no sooner turned into the Pancras-road, than who should Miss J'mima

Ivins stumble upon, by the most fortunate accident in the world,

but a young lady as she knew, with HER young man! - And it is so

strange how things do turn out sometimes - they were actually going

to the Eagle too.  So Mr. Samuel Wilkins was introduced to Miss

J'mima Ivins's friend's young man, and they all walked on together,

talking, and laughing, and joking away like anything; and when they

got as far as Pentonville, Miss Ivins's friend's young man WOULD

have the ladies go into the Crown, to taste some shrub, which,

after a great blushing and giggling, and hiding of faces in

elaborate pocket-handkerchiefs, they consented to do.  Having

tasted it once, they were easily prevailed upon to taste it again;

and they sat out in the garden tasting shrub, and looking at the

Busses alternately, till it was just the proper time to go to the

Eagle; and then they resumed their journey, and walked very fast,

for fear they should lose the beginning of the concert in the

Rotunda.



'How ev'nly!' said Miss J'mima Ivins, and Miss J'mima Ivins's

friend, both at once, when they had passed the gate and were fairly

inside the gardens.  There were the walks, beautifully gravelled

and planted - and the refreshment-boxes, painted and ornamented

like so many snuff-boxes - and the variegated lamps shedding their

rich light upon the company's heads - and the place for dancing

ready chalked for the company's feet - and a Moorish band playing

at one end of the gardens - and an opposition military band playing

away at the other.  Then, the waiters were rushing to and fro with

glasses of negus, and glasses of brandy-and-water, and bottles of

ale, and bottles of stout; and ginger-beer was going off in one

place, and practical jokes were going on in another; and people

were crowding to the door of the Rotunda; and in short the whole

scene was, as Miss J'mima Ivins, inspired by the novelty, or the

shrub, or both, observed - 'one of dazzling excitement.'  As to the

concert-room, never was anything half so splendid.  There was an

orchestra for the singers, all paint, gilding, and plate-glass; and

such an organ!  Miss J'mima Ivins's friend's young man whispered it

had cost 'four hundred pound,' which Mr. Samuel Wilkins said was

'not dear neither;' an opinion in which the ladies perfectly

coincided.  The audience were seated on elevated benches round the

room, and crowded into every part of it; and everybody was eating

and drinking as comfortably as possible.  Just before the concert

commenced, Mr. Samuel Wilkins ordered two glasses of rum-and-water

'warm with - ' and two slices of lemon, for himself and the other

young man, together with 'a pint o' sherry wine for the ladies, and

some sweet carraway-seed biscuits;' and they would have been quite

comfortable and happy, only a strange gentleman with large whiskers

WOULD stare at Miss J'mima Ivins, and another gentleman in a plaid

waistcoat WOULD wink at Miss J'mima Ivins's friend; on which Miss

Jemima Ivins's friend's young man exhibited symptoms of boiling

over, and began to mutter about 'people's imperence,' and 'swells

out o' luck;' and to intimate, in oblique terms, a vague intention

of knocking somebody's head off; which he was only prevented from

announcing more emphatically, by both Miss J'mima Ivins and her

friend threatening to faint away on the spot if he said another

word.



The concert commenced - overture on the organ.  'How solemn!'

exclaimed Miss J'mima Ivins, glancing, perhaps unconsciously, at

the gentleman with the whiskers.  Mr. Samuel Wilkins, who had been

muttering apart for some time past, as if he were holding a

confidential conversation with the gilt knob of the dress-cane,

breathed hard-breathing vengeance, perhaps, - but said nothing.

'The soldier tired,' Miss Somebody in white satin.  'Ancore!' cried

Miss J'mima Ivins's friend.  'Ancore!' shouted the gentleman in the

plaid waistcoat immediately, hammering the table with a stout-

bottle.  Miss J'mima Ivins's friend's young man eyed the man behind

the waistcoat from head to foot, and cast a look of interrogative

contempt towards Mr. Samuel Wilkins.  Comic song, accompanied on

the organ.  Miss J'mima Ivins was convulsed with laughter - so was

the man with the whiskers.  Everything the ladies did, the plaid

waistcoat and whiskers did, by way of expressing unity of sentiment

and congeniality of soul; and Miss J'mima Ivins, and Miss J'mima

Ivins's friend, grew lively and talkative, as Mr. Samuel Wilkins,

and Miss J'mima Ivins's friend's young man, grew morose and surly

in inverse proportion.



Now, if the matter had ended here, the little party might soon have

recovered their former equanimity; but Mr. Samuel Wilkins and his

friend began to throw looks of defiance upon the waistcoat and

whiskers.  And the waistcoat and whiskers, by way of intimating the

slight degree in which they were affected by the looks aforesaid,

bestowed glances of increased admiration upon Miss J'mima Ivins and

friend.  The concert and vaudeville concluded, they promenaded the

gardens.  The waistcoat and whiskers did the same; and made divers

remarks complimentary to the ankles of Miss J'mima Ivins and

friend, in an audible tone.  At length, not satisfied with these

numerous atrocities, they actually came up and asked Miss J'mima

Ivins, and Miss J'mima Ivins's friend, to dance, without taking no

more notice of Mr. Samuel Wilkins, and Miss J'mima Ivins's friend's

young man, than if they was nobody!



'What do you mean by that, scoundrel!' exclaimed Mr. Samuel

Wilkins, grasping the gilt-knobbed dress-cane firmly in his right

hand.  'What's the matter with YOU, you little humbug?' replied the

whiskers.  'How dare you insult me and my friend?' inquired the

friend's young man.  'You and your friend be hanged!' responded the

waistcoat.  'Take that,' exclaimed Mr. Samuel Wilkins.  The ferrule

of the gilt-knobbed dress-cane was visible for an instant, and then

the light of the variegated lamps shone brightly upon it as it

whirled into the air, cane and all.  'Give it him,' said the

waistcoat.  'Horficer!' screamed the ladies.  Miss J'mima Ivins's

beau, and the friend's young man, lay gasping on the gravel, and

the waistcoat and whiskers were seen no more.



Miss J'mima Ivins and friend being conscious that the affray was in

no slight degree attributable to themselves, of course went into

hysterics forthwith; declared themselves the most injured of women;

exclaimed, in incoherent ravings, that they had been suspected -

wrongfully suspected - oh! that they should ever have lived to see

the day - and so forth; suffered a relapse every time they opened

their eyes and saw their unfortunate little admirers; and were

carried to their respective abodes in a hackney-coach, and a state

of insensibility, compounded of shrub, sherry, and excitement.
