





CHAPTER X - SHABBY-GENTEEL PEOPLE







There are certain descriptions of people who, oddly enough, appear

to appertain exclusively to the metropolis.  You meet them, every

day, in the streets of London, but no one ever encounters them

elsewhere; they seem indigenous to the soil, and to belong as

exclusively to London as its own smoke, or the dingy bricks and

mortar.  We could illustrate the remark by a variety of examples,

but, in our present sketch, we will only advert to one class as a

specimen - that class which is so aptly and expressively designated

as 'shabby-genteel.'



Now, shabby people, God knows, may be found anywhere, and genteel

people are not articles of greater scarcity out of London than in

it; but this compound of the two - this shabby-gentility - is as

purely local as the statue at Charing-cross, or the pump at

Aldgate.  It is worthy of remark, too, that only men are shabby-

genteel; a woman is always either dirty and slovenly in the

extreme, or neat and respectable, however poverty-stricken in

appearance.  A very poor man, 'who has seen better days,' as the

phrase goes, is a strange compound of dirty-slovenliness and

wretched attempts at faded smartness.



We will endeavour to explain our conception of the term which forms

the title of this paper.  If you meet a man, lounging up Drury-

Lane, or leaning with his back against a post in Long-acre, with

his hands in the pockets of a pair of drab trousers plentifully

besprinkled with grease-spots:  the trousers made very full over

the boots, and ornamented with two cords down the outside of each

leg - wearing, also, what has been a brown coat with bright

buttons, and a hat very much pinched up at the side, cocked over

his right eye - don't pity him.  He is not shabby-genteel.  The

'harmonic meetings' at some fourth-rate public-house, or the

purlieus of a private theatre, are his chosen haunts; he entertains

a rooted antipathy to any kind of work, and is on familiar terms

with several pantomime men at the large houses.  But, if you see

hurrying along a by-street, keeping as close as he can to the area-

railings, a man of about forty or fifty, clad in an old rusty suit

of threadbare black cloth which shines with constant wear as if it

had been bees-waxed - the trousers tightly strapped down, partly

for the look of the thing and partly to keep his old shoes from

slipping off at the heels, - if you observe, too, that his

yellowish-white neckerchief is carefully pinned up, to conceal the

tattered garment underneath, and that his hands are encased in the

remains of an old pair of beaver gloves, you may set him down as a

shabby-genteel man.  A glance at that depressed face, and timorous

air of conscious poverty, will make your heart ache - always

supposing that you are neither a philosopher nor a political

economist.



We were once haunted by a shabby-genteel man; he was bodily present

to our senses all day, and he was in our mind's eye all night.  The

man of whom Sir Walter Scott speaks in his Demonology, did not

suffer half the persecution from his imaginary gentleman-usher in

black velvet, that we sustained from our friend in quondam black

cloth.  He first attracted our notice, by sitting opposite to us in

the reading-room at the British Museum; and what made the man more

remarkable was, that he always had before him a couple of shabby-

genteel books - two old dog's-eared folios, in mouldy worm-eaten

covers, which had once been smart.  He was in his chair, every

morning, just as the clock struck ten; he was always the last to

leave the room in the afternoon; and when he did, he quitted it

with the air of a man who knew not where else to go, for warmth and

quiet.  There he used to sit all day, as close to the table as

possible, in order to conceal the lack of buttons on his coat:

with his old hat carefully deposited at his feet, where he

evidently flattered himself it escaped observation.



About two o'clock, you would see him munching a French roll or a

penny loaf; not taking it boldly out of his pocket at once, like a

man who knew he was only making a lunch; but breaking off little

bits in his pocket, and eating them by stealth.  He knew too well

it was his dinner.



When we first saw this poor object, we thought it quite impossible

that his attire could ever become worse.  We even went so far, as

to speculate on the possibility of his shortly appearing in a

decent second-hand suit.  We knew nothing about the matter; he grew

more and more shabby-genteel every day.  The buttons dropped off

his waistcoat, one by one; then, he buttoned his coat; and when one

side of the coat was reduced to the same condition as the

waistcoat, he buttoned it over - on the other side.  He looked

somewhat better at the beginning of the week than at the

conclusion, because the neckerchief, though yellow, was not quite

so dingy; and, in the midst of all this wretchedness, he never

appeared without gloves and straps.  He remained in this state for

a week or two.  At length, one of the buttons on the back of the

coat fell off, and then the man himself disappeared, and we thought

he was dead.



We were sitting at the same table about a week after his

disappearance, and as our eyes rested on his vacant chair, we

insensibly fell into a train of meditation on the subject of his

retirement from public life.  We were wondering whether he had hung

himself, or thrown himself off a bridge - whether he really was

dead or had only been arrested - when our conjectures were suddenly

set at rest by the entry of the man himself.  He had undergone some

strange metamorphosis, and walked up the centre of the room with an

air which showed he was fully conscious of the improvement in his

appearance.  It was very odd.  His clothes were a fine, deep,

glossy black; and yet they looked like the same suit; nay, there

were the very darns with which old acquaintance had made us

familiar.  The hat, too - nobody could mistake the shape of that

hat, with its high crown gradually increasing in circumference

towards the top.  Long service had imparted to it a reddish-brown

tint; but, now, it was as black as the coat.  The truth flashed

suddenly upon us - they had been 'revived.'  It is a deceitful

liquid that black and blue reviver; we have watched its effects on

many a shabby-genteel man.  It betrays its victims into a temporary

assumption of importance:  possibly into the purchase of a new pair

of gloves, or a cheap stock, or some other trifling article of

dress.  It elevates their spirits for a week, only to depress them,

if possible, below their original level.  It was so in this case;

the transient dignity of the unhappy man decreased, in exact

proportion as the 'reviver' wore off.  The knees of the

unmentionables, and the elbows of the coat, and the seams

generally, soon began to get alarmingly white.  The hat was once

more deposited under the table, and its owner crept into his seat

as quietly as ever.



There was a week of incessant small rain and mist.  At its

expiration the 'reviver' had entirely vanished, and the shabby-

genteel man never afterwards attempted to effect any improvement in

his outward appearance.



It would be difficult to name any particular part of town as the

principal resort of shabby-genteel men.  We have met a great many

persons of this description in the neighbourhood of the inns of

court.  They may be met with, in Holborn, between eight and ten any

morning; and whoever has the curiosity to enter the Insolvent

Debtors' Court will observe, both among spectators and

practitioners, a great variety of them.  We never went on 'Change,

by any chance, without seeing some shabby-genteel men, and we have

often wondered what earthly business they can have there.  They

will sit there, for hours, leaning on great, dropsical, mildewed

umbrellas, or eating Abernethy biscuits.  Nobody speaks to them,

nor they to any one.  On consideration, we remember to have

occasionally seen two shabby-genteel men conversing together on

'Change, but our experience assures us that this is an uncommon

circumstance, occasioned by the offer of a pinch of snuff, or some

such civility.



It would be a task of equal difficulty, either to assign any

particular spot for the residence of these beings, or to endeavour

to enumerate their general occupations.  We were never engaged in

business with more than one shabby-genteel man; and he was a

drunken engraver, and lived in a damp back-parlour in a new row of

houses at Camden-town, half street, half brick-field, somewhere

near the canal.  A shabby-genteel man may have no occupation, or he

may be a corn agent, or a coal agent, or a wine merchant, or a

collector of debts, or a broker's assistant, or a broken-down

attorney.  He may be a clerk of the lowest description, or a

contributor to the press of the same grade.  Whether our readers

have noticed these men, in their walks, as often as we have, we

know not; this we know - that the miserably poor man (no matter

whether he owes his distresses to his own conduct, or that of

others) who feels his poverty and vainly strives to conceal it, is

one of the most pitiable objects in human nature.  Such objects,

with few exceptions, are shabby-genteel people.
