






CHAPTER IX - THE DANCING ACADEMY







Of all the dancing academies that ever were established, there

never was one more popular in its immediate vicinity than Signor

Billsmethi's, of the 'King's Theatre.'  It was not in Spring-

gardens, or Newman-street, or Berners-street, or Gower-street, or

Charlotte-street, or Percy-street, or any other of the numerous

streets which have been devoted time out of mind to professional

people, dispensaries, and boarding-houses; it was not in the West-

end at all - it rather approximated to the eastern portion of

London, being situated in the populous and improving neighbourhood

of Gray's-inn-lane.  It was not a dear dancing academy - four-and-

sixpence a quarter is decidedly cheap upon the whole.  It was VERY

select, the number of pupils being strictly limited to seventy-

five, and a quarter's payment in advance being rigidly exacted.

There was public tuition and private tuition - an assembly-room and

a parlour.  Signor Billsmethi's family were always thrown in with

the parlour, and included in parlour price; that is to say, a

private pupil had Signor Billsmethi's parlour to dance IN, and

Signor Billsmethi's family to dance WITH; and when he had been

sufficiently broken in in the parlour, he began to run in couples

in the assembly-room.



Such was the dancing academy of Signor Billsmethi, when Mr.

Augustus Cooper, of Fetter-lane, first saw an unstamped

advertisement walking leisurely down Holborn-hill, announcing to

the world that Signor Billsmethi, of the King's Theatre, intended

opening for the season with a Grand Ball.



Now, Mr. Augustus Cooper was in the oil and colour line - just of

age, with a little money, a little business, and a little mother,

who, having managed her husband and HIS business in his lifetime,

took to managing her son and HIS business after his decease; and

so, somehow or other, he had been cooped up in the little back

parlour behind the shop on week-days, and in a little deal box

without a lid (called by courtesy a pew) at Bethel Chapel, on

Sundays, and had seen no more of the world than if he had been an

infant all his days; whereas Young White, at the gas-fitter's over

the way, three years younger than him, had been flaring away like

winkin' - going to the theatre - supping at harmonic meetings -

eating oysters by the barrel - drinking stout by the gallon - even

out all night, and coming home as cool in the morning as if nothing

had happened.  So Mr. Augustus Cooper made up his mind that he

would not stand it any longer, and had that very morning expressed

to his mother a firm determination to be 'blowed,' in the event of

his not being instantly provided with a street-door key.  And he

was walking down Holborn-hill, thinking about all these things, and

wondering how he could manage to get introduced into genteel

society for the first time, when his eyes rested on Signor

Billsmethi's announcement, which it immediately struck him was just

the very thing he wanted; for he should not only be able to select

a genteel circle of acquaintance at once, out of the five-and-

seventy pupils at four-and-sixpence a quarter, but should qualify

himself at the same time to go through a hornpipe in private

society, with perfect ease to himself and great delight to his

friends.  So, he stopped the unstamped advertisement - an animated

sandwich, composed of a boy between two boards - and having

procured a very small card with the Signor's address indented

thereon, walked straight at once to the Signor's house - and very

fast he walked too, for fear the list should be filled up, and the

five-and-seventy completed, before he got there.  The Signor was at

home, and, what was still more gratifying, he was an Englishman!

Such a nice man - and so polite!  The list was not full, but it was

a most extraordinary circumstance that there was only just one

vacancy, and even that one would have been filled up, that very

morning, only Signor Billsmethi was dissatisfied with the

reference, and, being very much afraid that the lady wasn't select,

wouldn't take her.



'And very much delighted I am, Mr. Cooper,' said Signor Billsmethi,

'that I did NOT take her.  I assure you, Mr. Cooper - I don't say

it to flatter you, for I know you're above it - that I consider

myself extremely fortunate in having a gentleman of your manners

and appearance, sir.'



'I am very glad of it too, sir,' said Augustus Cooper.



'And I hope we shall be better acquainted, sir,' said Signor

Billsmethi.



'And I'm sure I hope we shall too, sir,' responded Augustus Cooper.

Just then, the door opened, and in came a young lady, with her hair

curled in a crop all over her head, and her shoes tied in sandals

all over her ankles.



'Don't run away, my dear,' said Signor Billsmethi; for the young

lady didn't know Mr. Cooper was there when she ran in, and was

going to run out again in her modesty, all in confusion-like.

'Don't run away, my dear,' said Signor Billsmethi, 'this is Mr.

Cooper - Mr. Cooper, of Fetter-lane.  Mr. Cooper, my daughter, sir

- Miss Billsmethi, sir, who I hope will have the pleasure of

dancing many a quadrille, minuet, gavotte, country-dance, fandango,

double-hornpipe, and farinagholkajingo with you, sir.  She dances

them all, sir; and so shall you, sir, before you're a quarter

older, sir.'



And Signor Bellsmethi slapped Mr. Augustus Cooper on the back, as

if he had known him a dozen years, - so friendly; - and Mr. Cooper

bowed to the young lady, and the young lady curtseyed to him, and

Signor Billsmethi said they were as handsome a pair as ever he'd

wish to see; upon which the young lady exclaimed, 'Lor, pa!' and

blushed as red as Mr. Cooper himself - you might have thought they

were both standing under a red lamp at a chemist's shop; and before

Mr. Cooper went away it was settled that he should join the family

circle that very night - taking them just as they were - no

ceremony nor nonsense of that kind - and learn his positions in

order that he might lose no time, and be able to come out at the

forthcoming ball.



Well; Mr. Augustus Cooper went away to one of the cheap shoemakers'

shops in Holborn, where gentlemen's dress-pumps are seven-and-

sixpence, and men's strong walking just nothing at all, and bought

a pair of the regular seven-and-sixpenny, long-quartered, town-

mades, in which he astonished himself quite as much as his mother,

and sallied forth to Signor Billsmethi's.  There were four other

private pupils in the parlour:  two ladies and two gentlemen.  Such

nice people!  Not a bit of pride about them.  One of the ladies in

particular, who was in training for a Columbine, was remarkably

affable; and she and Miss Billsmethi took such an interest in Mr.

Augustus Cooper, and joked, and smiled, and looked so bewitching,

that he got quite at home, and learnt his steps in no time.  After

the practising was over, Signor Billsmethi, and Miss Billsmethi,

and Master Billsmethi, and a young lady, and the two ladies, and

the two gentlemen, danced a quadrille - none of your slipping and

sliding about, but regular warm work, flying into corners, and

diving among chairs, and shooting out at the door, - something like

dancing!  Signor Billsmethi in particular, notwithstanding his

having a little fiddle to play all the time, was out on the landing

every figure, and Master Billsmethi, when everybody else was

breathless, danced a hornpipe, with a cane in his hand, and a

cheese-plate on his head, to the unqualified admiration of the

whole company.  Then, Signor Billsmethi insisted, as they were so

happy, that they should all stay to supper, and proposed sending

Master Billsmethi for the beer and spirits, whereupon the two

gentlemen swore, 'strike 'em wulgar if they'd stand that;' and were

just going to quarrel who should pay for it, when Mr. Augustus

Cooper said he would, if they'd have the kindness to allow him -

and they HAD the kindness to allow him; and Master Billsmethi

brought the beer in a can, and the rum in a quart pot.  They had a

regular night of it; and Miss Billsmethi squeezed Mr. Augustus

Cooper's hand under the table; and Mr. Augustus Cooper returned the

squeeze, and returned home too, at something to six o'clock in the

morning, when he was put to bed by main force by the apprentice,

after repeatedly expressing an uncontrollable desire to pitch his

revered parent out of the second-floor window, and to throttle the

apprentice with his own neck-handkerchief.



Weeks had worn on, and the seven-and-sixpenny town-mades had nearly

worn out, when the night arrived for the grand dress-ball at which

the whole of the five-and-seventy pupils were to meet together, for

the first time that season, and to take out some portion of their

respective four-and-sixpences in lamp-oil and fiddlers.  Mr.

Augustus Cooper had ordered a new coat for the occasion - a two-

pound-tenner from Turnstile.  It was his first appearance in

public; and, after a grand Sicilian shawl-dance by fourteen young

ladies in character, he was to open the quadrille department with

Miss Billsmethi herself, with whom he had become quite intimate

since his first introduction.  It WAS a night!  Everything was

admirably arranged.  The sandwich-boy took the hats and bonnets at

the street-door; there was a turn-up bedstead in the back parlour,

on which Miss Billsmethi made tea and coffee for such of the

gentlemen as chose to pay for it, and such of the ladies as the

gentlemen treated; red port-wine negus and lemonade were handed

round at eighteen-pence a head; and in pursuance of a previous

engagement with the public-house at the corner of the street, an

extra potboy was laid on for the occasion.  In short, nothing could

exceed the arrangements, except the company.  Such ladies!  Such

pink silk stockings!  Such artificial flowers!  Such a number of

cabs!  No sooner had one cab set down a couple of ladies, than

another cab drove up and set down another couple of ladies, and

they all knew:  not only one another, but the majority of the

gentlemen into the bargain, which made it all as pleasant and

lively as could be.  Signor Billsmethi, in black tights, with a

large blue bow in his buttonhole, introduced the ladies to such of

the gentlemen as were strangers:  and the ladies talked away - and

laughed they did - it was delightful to see them.



As to the shawl-dance, it was the most exciting thing that ever was

beheld; there was such a whisking, and rustling, and fanning, and

getting ladies into a tangle with artificial flowers, and then

disentangling them again!  And as to Mr. Augustus Cooper's share in

the quadrille, he got through it admirably.  He was missing from

his partner, now and then, certainly, and discovered on such

occasions to be either dancing with laudable perseverance in

another set, or sliding about in perspective, without any definite

object; but, generally speaking, they managed to shove him through

the figure, until he turned up in the right place.  Be this as it

may, when he had finished, a great many ladies and gentlemen came

up and complimented him very much, and said they had never seen a

beginner do anything like it before; and Mr. Augustus Cooper was

perfectly satisfied with himself, and everybody else into the

bargain; and 'stood' considerable quantities of spirits-and-water,

negus, and compounds, for the use and behoof of two or three dozen

very particular friends, selected from the select circle of five-

and-seventy pupils.



Now, whether it was the strength of the compounds, or the beauty of

the ladies, or what not, it did so happen that Mr. Augustus Cooper

encouraged, rather than repelled, the very flattering attentions of

a young lady in brown gauze over white calico who had appeared

particularly struck with him from the first; and when the

encouragements had been prolonged for some time, Miss Billsmethi

betrayed her spite and jealousy thereat by calling the young lady

in brown gauze a 'creeter,' which induced the young lady in brown

gauze to retort, in certain sentences containing a taunt founded on

the payment of four-and-sixpence a quarter, which reference Mr.

Augustus Cooper, being then and there in a state of considerable

bewilderment, expressed his entire concurrence in.  Miss

Billsmethi, thus renounced, forthwith began screaming in the

loudest key of her voice, at the rate of fourteen screams a minute;

and being unsuccessful, in an onslaught on the eyes and face, first

of the lady in gauze and then of Mr. Augustus Cooper, called

distractedly on the other three-and-seventy pupils to furnish her

with oxalic acid for her own private drinking; and, the call not

being honoured, made another rush at Mr. Cooper, and then had her

stay-lace cut, and was carried off to bed.  Mr. Augustus Cooper,

not being remarkable for quickness of apprehension, was at a loss

to understand what all this meant, until Signor Billsmethi

explained it in a most satisfactory manner, by stating to the

pupils, that Mr. Augustus Cooper had made and confirmed divers

promises of marriage to his daughter on divers occasions, and had

now basely deserted her; on which, the indignation of the pupils

became universal; and as several chivalrous gentlemen inquired

rather pressingly of Mr. Augustus Cooper, whether he required

anything for his own use, or, in other words, whether he 'wanted

anything for himself,' he deemed it prudent to make a precipitate

retreat.  And the upshot of the matter was, that a lawyer's letter

came next day, and an action was commenced next week; and that Mr.

Augustus Cooper, after walking twice to the Serpentine for the

purpose of drowning himself, and coming twice back without doing

it, made a confidante of his mother, who compromised the matter

with twenty pounds from the till:  which made twenty pounds four

shillings and sixpence paid to Signor Billsmethi, exclusive of

treats and pumps.  And Mr. Augustus Cooper went back and lived with

his mother, and there he lives to this day; and as he has lost his

ambition for society, and never goes into the world, he will never

see this account of himself, and will never be any the wiser.

