








CHARACTERS









CHAPTER I - THOUGHTS ABOUT PEOPLE







It is strange with how little notice, good, bad, or indifferent, a

man may live and die in London.  He awakens no sympathy in the

breast of any single person; his existence is a matter of interest

to no one save himself; he cannot be said to be forgotten when he

dies, for no one remembered him when he was alive.  There is a

numerous class of people in this great metropolis who seem not to

possess a single friend, and whom nobody appears to care for.

Urged by imperative necessity in the first instance, they have

resorted to London in search of employment, and the means of

subsistence.  It is hard, we know, to break the ties which bind us

to our homes and friends, and harder still to efface the thousand

recollections of happy days and old times, which have been

slumbering in our bosoms for years, and only rush upon the mind, to

bring before it associations connected with the friends we have

left, the scenes we have beheld too probably for the last time, and

the hopes we once cherished, but may entertain no more.  These men,

however, happily for themselves, have long forgotten such thoughts.

Old country friends have died or emigrated; former correspondents

have become lost, like themselves, in the crowd and turmoil of some

busy city; and they have gradually settled down into mere passive

creatures of habit and endurance.



We were seated in the enclosure of St. James's Park the other day,

when our attention was attracted by a man whom we immediately put

down in our own mind as one of this class.  He was a tall, thin,

pale person, in a black coat, scanty gray trousers, little pinched-

up gaiters, and brown beaver gloves.  He had an umbrella in his

hand - not for use, for the day was fine - but, evidently, because

he always carried one to the office in the morning.  He walked up

and down before the little patch of grass on which the chairs are

placed for hire, not as if he were doing it for pleasure or

recreation, but as if it were a matter of compulsion, just as he

would walk to the office every morning from the back settlements of

Islington.  It was Monday; he had escaped for four-and-twenty hours

from the thraldom of the desk; and was walking here for exercise

and amusement - perhaps for the first time in his life.  We were

inclined to think he had never had a holiday before, and that he

did not know what to do with himself.  Children were playing on the

grass; groups of people were loitering about, chatting and

laughing; but the man walked steadily up and down, unheeding and

unheeded his spare, pale face looking as if it were incapable of

bearing the expression of curiosity or interest.



There was something in the man's manner and appearance which told

us, we fancied, his whole life, or rather his whole day, for a man

of this sort has no variety of days.  We thought we almost saw the

dingy little back office into which he walks every morning, hanging

his hat on the same peg, and placing his legs beneath the same

desk:  first, taking off that black coat which lasts the year

through, and putting on the one which did duty last year, and which

he keeps in his desk to save the other.  There he sits till five

o'clock, working on, all day, as regularly as the dial over the

mantel-piece, whose loud ticking is as monotonous as his whole

existence:  only raising his head when some one enters the

counting-house, or when, in the midst of some difficult

calculation, he looks up to the ceiling as if there were

inspiration in the dusty skylight with a green knot in the centre

of every pane of glass.  About five, or half-past, he slowly

dismounts from his accustomed stool, and again changing his coat,

proceeds to his usual dining-place, somewhere near Bucklersbury.

The waiter recites the bill of fare in a rather confidential manner

- for he is a regular customer - and after inquiring 'What's in the

best cut?' and 'What was up last?' he orders a small plate of roast

beef, with greens, and half-a-pint of porter.  He has a small plate

to-day, because greens are a penny more than potatoes, and he had

'two breads' yesterday, with the additional enormity of 'a cheese'

the day before.  This important point settled, he hangs up his hat

- he took it off the moment he sat down - and bespeaks the paper

after the next gentleman.  If he can get it while he is at dinner,

he eats with much greater zest; balancing it against the water-

bottle, and eating a bit of beef, and reading a line or two,

alternately.  Exactly at five minutes before the hour is up, he

produces a shilling, pays the reckoning, carefully deposits the

change in his waistcoat-pocket (first deducting a penny for the

waiter), and returns to the office, from which, if it is not

foreign post night, he again sallies forth, in about half an hour.

He then walks home, at his usual pace, to his little back room at

Islington, where he has his tea; perhaps solacing himself during

the meal with the conversation of his landlady's little boy, whom

he occasionally rewards with a penny, for solving problems in

simple addition.  Sometimes, there is a letter or two to take up to

his employer's, in Russell-square; and then, the wealthy man of

business, hearing his voice, calls out from the dining-parlour, -

'Come in, Mr. Smith:' and Mr. Smith, putting his hat at the feet of

one of the hall chairs, walks timidly in, and being condescendingly

desired to sit down, carefully tucks his legs under his chair, and

sits at a considerable distance from the table while he drinks the

glass of sherry which is poured out for him by the eldest boy, and

after drinking which, he backs and slides out of the room, in a

state of nervous agitation from which he does not perfectly

recover, until he finds himself once more in the Islington-road.

Poor, harmless creatures such men are; contented but not happy;

broken-spirited and humbled, they may feel no pain, but they never

know pleasure.



Compare these men with another class of beings who, like them, have

neither friend nor companion, but whose position in society is the

result of their own choice.  These are generally old fellows with

white heads and red faces, addicted to port wine and Hessian boots,

who from some cause, real or imaginary - generally the former, the

excellent reason being that they are rich, and their relations poor

- grow suspicious of everybody, and do the misanthropical in

chambers, taking great delight in thinking themselves unhappy, and

making everybody they come near, miserable.  You may see such men

as these, anywhere; you will know them at coffee-houses by their

discontented exclamations and the luxury of their dinners; at

theatres, by their always sitting in the same place and looking

with a jaundiced eye on all the young people near them; at church,

by the pomposity with which they enter, and the loud tone in which

they repeat the responses; at parties, by their getting cross at

whist and hating music.  An old fellow of this kind will have his

chambers splendidly furnished, and collect books, plate, and

pictures about him in profusion; not so much for his own

gratification, as to be superior to those who have the desire, but

not the means, to compete with him.  He belongs to two or three

clubs, and is envied, and flattered, and hated by the members of

them all.  Sometimes he will be appealed to by a poor relation - a

married nephew perhaps - for some little assistance:  and then he

will declaim with honest indignation on the improvidence of young

married people, the worthlessness of a wife, the insolence of

having a family, the atrocity of getting into debt with a hundred

and twenty-five pounds a year, and other unpardonable crimes;

winding up his exhortations with a complacent review of his own

conduct, and a delicate allusion to parochial relief.  He dies,

some day after dinner, of apoplexy, having bequeathed his property

to a Public Society, and the Institution erects a tablet to his

memory, expressive of their admiration of his Christian conduct in

this world, and their comfortable conviction of his happiness in

the next.



But, next to our very particular friends, hackney-coachmen, cabmen

and cads, whom we admire in proportion to the extent of their cool

impudence and perfect self-possession, there is no class of people

who amuse us more than London apprentices.  They are no longer an

organised body, bound down by solemn compact to terrify his

Majesty's subjects whenever it pleases them to take offence in

their heads and staves in their hands.  They are only bound, now,

by indentures, and, as to their valour, it is easily restrained by

the wholesome dread of the New Police, and a perspective view of a

damp station-house, terminating in a police-office and a reprimand.

They are still, however, a peculiar class, and not the less

pleasant for being inoffensive.  Can any one fail to have noticed

them in the streets on Sunday?  And were there ever such harmless

efforts at the grand and magnificent as the young fellows display!

We walked down the Strand, a Sunday or two ago, behind a little

group; and they furnished food for our amusement the whole way.

They had come out of some part of the city; it was between three

and four o'clock in the afternoon; and they were on their way to

the Park.  There were four of them, all arm-in-arm, with white kid

gloves like so many bridegrooms, light trousers of unprecedented

patterns, and coats for which the English language has yet no name

- a kind of cross between a great-coat and a surtout, with the

collar of the one, the skirts of the other, and pockets peculiar to

themselves.



Each of the gentlemen carried a thick stick, with a large tassel at

the top, which he occasionally twirled gracefully round; and the

whole four, by way of looking easy and unconcerned, were walking

with a paralytic swagger irresistibly ludicrous.  One of the party

had a watch about the size and shape of a reasonable Ribstone

pippin, jammed into his waistcoat-pocket, which he carefully

compared with the clocks at St. Clement's and the New Church, the

illuminated clock at Exeter 'Change, the clock of St. Martin's

Church, and the clock of the Horse Guards.  When they at last

arrived in St. James's Park, the member of the party who had the

best-made boots on, hired a second chair expressly for his feet,

and flung himself on this two-pennyworth of sylvan luxury with an

air which levelled all distinctions between Brookes's and Snooks's,

Crockford's and Bagnigge Wells.



We may smile at such people, but they can never excite our anger.

They are usually on the best terms with themselves, and it follows

almost as a matter of course, in good humour with every one about

them.  Besides, they are always the faint reflection of higher

lights; and, if they do display a little occasional foolery in

their own proper persons, it is surely more tolerable than

precocious puppyism in the Quadrant, whiskered dandyism in Regent-

street and Pall-mall, or gallantry in its dotage anywhere.
