





CHAPTER IV.

STORM



AND it got lonesomer and lonesomer. There was

the big sky up there, empty and awful deep; and

the ocean down there without a thing on it but just the

waves. All around us was a ring, where the sky and

the water come together; yes, a monstrous big ring it

was, and we right in the dead center of it -- plumb in

the center. We was racing along like a prairie fire, but

it never made any difference, we couldn't seem to git

past that center no way. I couldn't see that we ever

gained an inch on that ring. It made a body feel

creepy, it was so curious and unaccountable.



Well, everything was so awful still that we got to

talking in a very low voice, and kept on getting creepier

and lonesomer and less and less talky, till at last the

talk ran dry altogether, and we just set there and

"thunk," as Jim calls it, and never said a word the

longest time.



The professor never stirred till the sun was overhead,

then he stood up and put a kind of triangle to his eye,

and Tom said it was a sextant and he was taking the

sun to see whereabouts the balloon was. Then he

ciphered a little and looked in a book, and then he

begun to carry on again. He said lots of wild things,

and, among others, he said he would keep up this

hundred-mile gait till the middle of to-morrow after-

noon, and then he'd land in London.



We said we would be humbly thankful.



He was turning away, but he whirled around when

we said that, and give us a long look of his blackest

kind -- one of the maliciousest and suspiciousest looks

I ever see. Then he says:



"You want to leave me. Don't try to deny it."



We didn't know what to say, so we held in and

didn't say nothing at all.



He went aft and set down, but he couldn't seem to

git that thing out of his mind. Every now and then he

would rip out something about it, and try to make us

answer him, but we dasn't.



It got lonesomer and lonesomer right along, and it

did seem to me I couldn't stand it. It was still worse

when night begun to come on. By and by Tom

pinched me and whispers:



"Look!"



I took a glance aft, and see the professor taking a

whet out of a bottle. I didn't like the looks of that.

By and by he took another drink, and pretty soon he

begun to sing. It was dark now, and getting black

and stormy. He went on singing, wilder and wilder,

and the thunder begun to mutter, and the wind to

wheeze and moan among the ropes, and altogether it

was awful. It got so black we couldn't see him any

more, and wished we couldn't hear him, but we could.

Then he got still; but he warn't still ten minutes till

we got suspicious, and wished he would start up his

noise again, so we could tell where he was. By and by

there was a flash of lightning, and we see him start to

get up, but he staggered and fell down. We heard

him scream out in the dark:



"They don't want to go to England. All right, I'll

change the course. They want to leave me. I know

they do. Well, they shall -- and NOW!"



I 'most died when he said that. Then he was still

again -- still so long I couldn't bear it, and it did seem

to me the lightning wouldn't EVER come again. But at

last there was a blessed flash, and there he was, on his

hands and knees crawling, and not four feet from us.

My, but his eyes was terrible! He made a lunge for

Tom, and says, "Overboard YOU go!" but it was

already pitch-dark again, and I couldn't see whether

he got him or not, and Tom didn't make a sound.



There was another long, horrible wait; then there

was a flash, and I see Tom's head sink down outside

the boat and disappear. He was on the rope-ladder

that dangled down in the air from the gunnel. The

professor let off a shout and jumped for him, and

straight off it was pitch-dark again, and Jim groaned

out, "Po' Mars Tom, he's a goner!" and made a

jump for the professor, but the professor warn't there.



Then we heard a couple of terrible screams, and then

another not so loud, and then another that was 'way

below, and you could only JUST hear it; and I heard

Jim say, "Po' Mars Tom!"



Then it was awful still, and I reckon a person could

'a' counted four thousand before the next flash come.

When it come I see Jim on his knees, with his arms

on the locker and his face buried in them, and he was

crying. Before I could look over the edge it was all

dark again, and I was glad, because I didn't want to

see. But when the next flash come, I was watching,

and down there I see somebody a-swinging in the wind

on the ladder, and it was Tom!



"Come up!" I shouts; "come up, Tom!"



His voice was so weak, and the wind roared so, I

couldn't make out what he said, but I thought he asked

was the professor up there. I shouts:



"No, he's down in the ocean! Come up! Can

we help you?"



Of course, all this in the dark.



"Huck, who is you hollerin' at?"



"I'm hollerin' at Tom."



"Oh, Huck, how kin you act so, when you know

po' Mars Tom --" Then he let off an awful scream,

and flung his head and his arms back and let off another

one, because there was a white glare just then, and he

had raised up his face just in time to see Tom's, as

white as snow, rise above the gunnel and look him right

in the eye. He thought it was Tom's ghost, you

see.



Tom clumb aboard, and when Jim found it WAS him,

and not his ghost, he hugged him, and called him all

sorts of loving names, and carried on like he was gone

crazy, he was so glad. Says I:



"What did you wait for, Tom? Why didn't you

come up at first?"



"I dasn't, Huck. I knowed somebody plunged

down past me, but I didn't know who it was in the

dark. It could 'a' been you, it could 'a' been Jim."



That was the way with Tom Sawyer -- always sound.

He warn't coming up till he knowed where the pro-

fessor was.



The storm let go about this time with all its might;

and it was dreadful the way the thunder boomed and

tore, and the lightning glared out, and the wind sung

and screamed in the rigging, and the rain come down.

One second you couldn't see your hand before you,

and the next you could count the threads in your coat-

sleeve, and see a whole wide desert of waves pitching

and tossing through a kind of veil of rain. A storm

like that is the loveliest thing there is, but it ain't at its

best when you are up in the sky and lost, and it's wet

and lonesome, and there's just been a death in the

family.



We set there huddled up in the bow, and talked low

about the poor professor; and everybody was sorry

for him, and sorry the world had made fun of him and

treated him so harsh, when he was doing the best he

could, and hadn't a friend nor nobody to encourage

him and keep him from brooding his mind away and

going deranged. There was plenty of clothes and

blankets and everything at the other end, but we

thought we'd ruther take the rain than go meddling

back there.
