





CHAPTER VI.

IT'S A CARAVAN



I WAS so weak that the only thing I wanted was a

chance to lay down, so I made straight for my

locker-bunk, and stretched myself out there. But a

body couldn't get back his strength in no such oven as

that, so Tom give the command to soar, and Jim

started her aloft.



We had to go up a mile before we struck comfort-

able weather where it was breezy and pleasant and just

right, and pretty soon I was all straight again. Tom

had been setting quiet and thinking; but now he jumps

up and says:



"I bet you a thousand to one I know where we are.

We're in the Great Sahara, as sure as guns!"



He was so excited he couldn't hold still; but I

wasn't. I says:



"Well, then, where's the Great Sahara? In Eng-

land or in Scotland?"



"'Tain't in either; it's in Africa."



Jim's eyes bugged out, and he begun to stare down

with no end of interest, because that was where his

originals come from; but I didn't more than half be-

lieve it. I couldn't, you know; it seemed too awful

far away for us to have traveled.



But Tom was full of his discovery, as he called it,

and said the lions and the sand meant the Great Desert,

sure. He said he could 'a' found out, before we

sighted land, that we was crowding the land some-

wheres, if he had thought of one thing; and when we

asked him what, he said:



"These clocks. They're chronometers. You al-

ways read about them in sea voyages. One of them

is keeping Grinnage time, and the other is keeping St.

Louis time, like my watch. When we left St. Louis it

was four in the afternoon by my watch and this clock,

and it was ten at night by this Grinnage clock. Well,

at this time of the year the sun sets at about seven

o'clock. Now I noticed the time yesterday evening

when the sun went down, and it was half-past five

o'clock by the Grinnage clock, and half past 11 A.M.

by my watch and the other clock. You see, the sun

rose and set by my watch in St. Louis, and the Grin-

nage clock was six hours fast; but we've come so far

east that it comes within less than half an hour of set-

ting by the Grinnage clock now, and I'm away out --

more than four hours and a half out. You see, that

meant that we was closing up on the longitude of

Ireland, and would strike it before long if we was

p'inted right -- which we wasn't. No, sir, we've been

a-wandering -- wandering 'way down south of east, and

it's my opinion we are in Africa. Look at this map.

You see how the shoulder of Africa sticks out to the

west. Think how fast we've traveled; if we had gone

straight east we would be long past England by this

time. You watch for noon, all of you, and we'll stand

up, and when we can't cast a shadow we'll find that

this Grinnage clock is coming mighty close to marking

twelve. Yes, sir, I think we're in Africa; and it's just

bully."



Jim was gazing down with the glass. He shook his

head and says:



"Mars Tom, I reckon dey's a mistake som'er's.

hain't seen no niggers yit."



"That's nothing; they don't live in the desert.

What is that, 'way off yonder? Gimme a glass."



He took a long look, and said it was like a black

string stretched across the sand, but he couldn't guess

what it was.



"Well," I says, "I reckon maybe you've got a

chance now to find out whereabouts this balloon is,

because as like as not that is one of these lines here,

that's on the map, that you call meridians of longi-

tude, and we can drop down and look at its number,

and --"



"Oh, shucks, Huck Finn, I never see such a lunk-

head as you. Did you s'pose there's meridians of

longitude on the EARTH?"



"Tom Sawyer, they're set down on the map, and

you know it perfectly well, and here they are, and you

can see for yourself."



"Of course they're on the map, but that's nothing;

there ain't any on the GROUND."



"Tom, do you know that to be so?"



"Certainly I do."



"Well, then, that map's a liar again. I never see

such a liar as that map."




He fired up at that, and I was ready for him, and

Jim was warming his opinion, too, and next minute

we'd 'a' broke loose on another argument, if Tom

hadn't dropped the glass and begun to clap his hands

like a maniac and sing out:



"Camels! -- Camels!"



So I grabbed a glass and Jim, too, and took a look,

but I was disappointed, and says:



"Camels your granny; they're spiders."



"Spiders in a desert, you shad? Spiders walking

in a procession? You don't ever reflect, Huck Finn,

and I reckon you really haven't got anything to

reflect WITH. Don't you know we're as much as a

mile up in the air, and that that string of crawlers is

two or three miles away? Spiders, good land! Spiders

as big as a cow? Perhaps you'd like to go down

and milk one of 'em. But they're camels, just the

same. It's a caravan, that's what it is, and it's a mile

long."



"Well, then, let's go down and look at it. I

don't believe in it, and ain't going to till I see it and

know it."



"All right," he says, and give the command:



"Lower away."



As we come slanting down into the hot weather, we

could see that it was camels, sure enough, plodding

along, an everlasting string of them, with bales strapped

to them, and several hundred men in long white robes,

and a thing like a shawl bound over their heads and

hanging down with tassels and fringes; and some of

the men had long guns and some hadn't, and some

was riding and some was walking. And the weatherJ--

well, it was just roasting. And how slow they did

creep along! We swooped down now, all of a

sudden, and stopped about a hundred yards over their

heads.



The men all set up a yell, and some of them fell flat

on their stomachs, some begun to fire their guns at us,

and the rest broke and scampered every which way,

and so did the camels.



We see that we was making trouble, so we went up

again about a mile, to the cool weather, and watched

them from there. It took them an hour to get together

and form the procession again; then they started along,

but we could see by the glasses that they wasn't pay-

ing much attention to anything but us. We poked

along, looking down at them with the glasses, and by

and by we see a big sand mound, and something like

people the other side of it, and there was something

like a man laying on top of the mound that raised his

head up every now and then, and seemed to be watch-

ing the caravan or us, we didn't know which. As the

caravan got nearer, he sneaked down on the other side

and rushed to the other men and horses -- for that is

what they was -- and we see them mount in a hurry;

and next, here they come, like a house afire, some with

lances and some with long guns, and all of them yell-

ing the best they could.



They come a-tearing down on to the caravan, and the

next minute both sides crashed together and was all

mixed up, and there was such another popping of guns

as you never heard, and the air got so full of smoke

you could only catch glimpses of them struggling

together. There must 'a' been six hundred men in

that battle, and it was terrible to see. Then they

broke up into gangs and groups, fighting tooth and

nail, and scurrying and scampering around, and laying

into each other like everything; and whenever the

smoke cleared a little you could see dead and wounded

people and camels scattered far and wide and all about,

and camels racing off in every direction.



At last the robbers see they couldn't win, so their

chief sounded a signal, and all that was left of them

broke away and went scampering across the plain.

The last man to go snatched up a child and carried it

off in front of him on his horse, and a woman run

screaming and begging after him, and followed him

away off across the plain till she was separated a long

ways from her people; but it warn't no use, and she

had to give it up, and we see her sink down on the

sand and cover her face with her hands. Then Tom

took the hellum, and started for that yahoo, and we

come a-whizzing down and made a swoop, and knocked

him out of the saddle, child and all; and he was jarred

considerable, but the child wasn't hurt, but laid there

working its hands and legs in the air like a tumble-bug

that's on its back and can't turn over. The man went

staggering off to overtake his horse, and didn't know

what had hit him, for we was three or four hundred

yards up in the air by this time.



We judged the woman would go and get the child

now; but she didn't. We could see her, through the

glass, still setting there, with her head bowed down on

her knees; so of course she hadn't seen the perform-

ance, and thought her child was clean gone with the

man. She was nearly a half a mile from her people,

so we thought we might go down to the child, which

was about a quarter of a mile beyond her, and snake

it to her before the caravan people could git to us to

do us any harm; and besides, we reckoned they had

enough business on their hands for one while, anyway,

with the wounded. We thought we'd chance it, and

we did. We swooped down and stopped, and Jim

shinned down the ladder and fetched up the kid, which

was a nice fat little thing, and in a noble good humor,

too, considering it was just out of a battle and been

tumbled off of a horse; and then we started for the

mother, and stopped back of her and tolerable near

by, and Jim slipped down and crept up easy, and when

he was close back of her the child goo-goo'd, the way

a child does, and she heard it, and whirled and fetched

a shriek of joy, and made a jump for the kid and

snatched it and hugged it, and dropped it and hugged

Jim, and then snatched off a gold chain and hung it

around Jim's neck, and hugged him again, and jerked

up the child again, a-sobbing and glorifying all the

time; and Jim he shoved for the ladder and up it, and

in a minute we was back up in the sky and the woman

was staring up, with the back of her head between her

shoulders and the child with its arms locked around

her neck. And there she stood, as long as we was in

sight a-sailing away in the sky.

