




CHAPTER III.

TOM EXPLAINS



WE went to sleep about four o'clock, and woke up

about eight. The professor was setting back

there at his end, looking glum. He pitched us some

breakfast, but he told us not to come abaft the midship

compass. That was about the middle of the boat.

Well, when you are sharp-set, and you eat and satisfy

yourself, everything looks pretty different from what it

done before. It makes a body feel pretty near com-

fortable, even when he is up in a balloon with a genius.

We got to talking together.



There was one thing that kept bothering me, and by

and by I says:



"Tom, didn't we start east?"



"Yes."



"How fast have we been going?"



"Well, you heard what the professor said when he

was raging round. Sometimes, he said, we was making

fifty miles an hour, sometimes ninety, sometimes a

hundred; said that with a gale to help he could make

three hundred any time, and said if he wanted the gale,

and wanted it blowing the right direction, he only had

to go up higher or down lower to find it."



"Well, then, it's just as I reckoned. The professor

lied."



"Why?"



"Because if we was going so fast we ought to be

past Illinois, oughtn't we?"



"Certainly."



"Well, we ain't."



"What's the reason we ain't?"



"I know by the color. We're right over Illinois

yet. And you can see for yourself that Indiana ain't

in sight."



"I wonder what's the matter with you, Huck. You

know by the COLOR?"



"Yes, of course I do."



"What's the color got to do with it?"



"It's got everything to do with it. Illinois is green,

Indiana is pink. You show me any pink down here,

if you can. No, sir; it's green."



"Indiana PINK? Why, what a lie!"



"It ain't no lie; I've seen it on the map, and it's

pink."



You never see a person so aggravated and disgusted.

He says:



"Well, if I was such a numbskull as you, Huck

Finn, I would jump over. Seen it on the map! Huck

Finn, did you reckon the States was the same color

out-of-doors as they are on the map?"



"Tom Sawyer, what's a map for? Ain't it to learn

you facts?"



"Of course."



"Well, then, how's it going to do that if it tells lies?

That's what I want to know."



"Shucks, you muggins! It don't tell lies."



"It don't, don't it?"



"No, it don't."



"All right, then; if it don't, there ain't no two

States the same color. You git around THAT if you

can, Tom Sawyer."



He see I had him, and Jim see it too; and I tell

you, I felt pretty good, for Tom Sawyer was always a

hard person to git ahead of. Jim slapped his leg and

says:



"I tell YOU! dat's smart, dat's right down smart.

Ain't no use, Mars Tom; he got you DIS time, sho'!"

He slapped his leg again, and says, "My LAN', but it

was smart one!"



I never felt so good in my life; and yet I didn't

know I was saying anything much till it was out. I

was just mooning along, perfectly careless, and not

expecting anything was going to happen, and never

THINKING of such a thing at all, when, all of a sudden,

out it came. Why, it was just as much a surprise to

me as it was to any of them. It was just the same way

it is when a person is munching along on a hunk of

corn-pone, and not thinking about anything, and all of

a sudden bites into a di'mond. Now all that HE knows

first off is that it's some kind of gravel he's bit into;

but he don't find out it's a di'mond till he gits it out

and brushes off the sand and crumbs and one thing or

another, and has a look at it, and then he's surprised

and glad -- yes, and proud too; though when you

come to look the thing straight in the eye, he ain't

entitled to as much credit as he would 'a' been if he'd

been HUNTING di'monds. You can see the difference

easy if you think it over. You see, an accident, that

way, ain't fairly as big a thing as a thing that's done

a-purpose. Anybody could find that di'mond in that

corn-pone; but mind you, it's got to be somebody

that's got THAT KIND OF A CORN-PONE. That's where that

feller's credit comes in, you see; and that's where

mine comes in. I don't claim no great things -- I

don't reckon I could 'a' done it again -- but I done it

that time; that's all I claim. And I hadn't no more

idea I could do such a thing, and warn't any more

thinking about it or trying to, than you be this minute.

Why, I was just as ca'm, a body couldn't be any

ca'mer, and yet, all of a sudden, out it come. I've

often thought of that time, and I can remember just

the way everything looked, same as if it was only last

week. I can see it all: beautiful rolling country with

woods and fields and lakes for hundreds and hundreds

of miles all around, and towns and villages scattered

everywheres under us, here and there and yonder; and

the professor mooning over a chart on his little table,

and Tom's cap flopping in the rigging where it was

hung up to dry. And one thing in particular was a

bird right alongside, not ten foot off, going our way

and trying to keep up, but losing ground all the time;

and a railroad train doing the same thing down there,

sliding among the trees and farms, and pouring out a

long cloud of black smoke and now and then a little

puff of white; and when the white was gone so long

you had almost forgot it, you would hear a little faint

toot, and that was the whistle. And we left the bird

and the train both behind, 'WAY behind, and done it

easy, too.



But Tom he was huffy, and said me and Jim was a

couple of ignorant blatherskites, and then he says:



"Suppose there's a brown calf and a big brown dog,

and an artist is making a picture of them. What is the

MAIN thing that that artist has got to do? He has got

to paint them so you can tell them apart the minute

you look at them, hain't he? Of course. Well, then,

do you want him to go and paint BOTH of them brown?

Certainly you don't. He paints one of them blue,

and then you can't make no mistake. It's just the

same with the maps. That's why they make every

State a different color; it ain't to deceive you, it's to

keep you from deceiving yourself."



But I couldn't see no argument about that, and

neither could Jim. Jim shook his head, and says:



"Why, Mars Tom, if you knowed what chuckle-

heads dem painters is, you'd wait a long time before

you'd fetch one er DEM in to back up a fac'. I's

gwine to tell you, den you kin see for you'self. I see

one of 'em a-paintin' away, one day, down in ole

Hank Wilson's back lot, en I went down to see, en he

was paintin' dat old brindle cow wid de near horn

gone -- you knows de one I means. En I ast him

what he's paintin' her for, en he say when he git her

painted, de picture's wuth a hundred dollars. Mars

Tom, he could a got de cow fer fifteen, en I tole him

so. Well, sah, if you'll b'lieve me, he jes' shuck his

head, dat painter did, en went on a-dobbin'. Bless

you, Mars Tom, DEY don't know nothin'."



Tom lost his temper. I notice a person 'most always

does that's got laid out in an argument. He told us to

shut up, and maybe we'd feel better. Then he see a

town clock away off down yonder, and he took up the

glass and looked at it, and then looked at his silver

turnip, and then at the clock, and then at the turnip

again, and says:



"That's funny! That clock's near about an hour

fast."



So he put up his turnip. Then he see another clock,

and took a look, and it was an hour fast too. That

puzzled him.



"That's a mighty curious thing," he says. "I

don't understand it."



Then he took the glass and hunted up another clock,

and sure enough it was an hour fast too. Then his

eyes began to spread and his breath to come out kinder

gaspy like, and he says:



"Ger-reat Scott, it's the LONGITUDE!"



I says, considerably scared:



"Well, what's been and gone and happened now?"



"Why, the thing that's happened is that this old

bladder has slid over Illinois and Indiana and Ohio like

nothing, and this is the east end of Pennsylvania or

New York, or somewheres around there."



"Tom Sawyer, you don't mean it!"



"Yes, I do, and it's dead sure. We've covered

about fifteen degrees of longitude since we left St.

Louis yesterday afternoon, and them clocks are right.

We've come close on to eight hundred miles."



I didn't believe it, but it made the cold streaks

trickle down my back just the same. In my experi-

ence I knowed it wouldn't take much short of two

weeks to do it down the Mississippi on a raft.

Jim was working his mind and studying. Pretty

soon he says:



"Mars Tom, did you say dem clocks uz right?"



"Yes, they're right."



"Ain't yo' watch right, too?"



"She's right for St. Louis, but she's an hour wrong

for here."



"Mars Tom, is you tryin' to let on dat de time ain't

de SAME everywheres?"



"No, it ain't the same everywheres, by a long

shot."



Jim looked distressed, and says:



"It grieves me to hear you talk like dat, Mars Tom;

I's right down ashamed to hear you talk like dat, arter

de way you's been raised. Yassir, it'd break yo' Aunt

Polly's heart to hear you."



Tom was astonished. He looked Jim over wonder-

ing, and didn't say nothing, and Jim went on:



"Mars Tom, who put de people out yonder in St.

Louis? De Lord done it. Who put de people here

whar we is? De Lord done it. Ain' dey bofe his

children? 'Cose dey is. WELL, den! is he gwine to

SCRIMINATE 'twixt 'em?"



"Scriminate! I never heard such ignorance. There

ain't no discriminating about it. When he makes you

and some more of his children black, and makes the

rest of us white, what do you call that?"



Jim see the p'int. He was stuck. He couldn't

answer. Tom says:



"He does discriminate, you see, when he wants to;

but this case HERE ain't no discrimination of his, it's

man's. The Lord made the day, and he made the

night; but he didn't invent the hours, and he didn't

distribute them around. Man did that."



"Mars Tom, is dat so? Man done it?"



"Certainly."



"Who tole him he could?"



"Nobody. He never asked."



Jim studied a minute, and says:



"Well, dat do beat me. I wouldn't 'a' tuck no

sich resk. But some people ain't scared o' nothin'.

Dey bangs right ahead; DEY don't care what happens.

So den dey's allays an hour's diff'unce everywhah,

Mars Tom?"



"An hour? No! It's four minutes difference for

every degree of longitude, you know. Fifteen of 'em's

an hour, thirty of 'em's two hours, and so on. When

it's one clock Tuesday morning in England, it's eight

o'clock the night before in New York."



Jim moved a little way along the locker, and you

could see he was insulted. He kept shaking his head

and muttering, and so I slid along to him and patted

him on the leg, and petted him up, and got him over

the worst of his feelings, and then he says:



"Mars Tom talkin' sich talk as dat! Choosday in

one place en Monday in t'other, bofe in the same day!

Huck, dis ain't no place to joke -- up here whah we is.

Two days in one day! How you gwine to get two

days inter one day? Can't git two hours inter one

hour, kin you? Can't git two niggers inter one nigger

skin, kin you? Can't git two gallons of whisky inter a

one-gallon jug, kin you? No, sir, 'twould strain de

jug. Yes, en even den you couldn't, I don't believe.

Why, looky here, Huck, s'posen de Choosday was

New Year's -- now den! is you gwine to tell me it's

dis year in one place en las' year in t'other, bofe in de

identical same minute? It's de beatenest rubbage! I

can't stan' it -- I can't stan' to hear tell 'bout it."

Then he begun to shiver and turn gray, and Tom

says:



"NOW what's the matter? What's the trouble?"



Jim could hardly speak, but he says:



"Mars Tom, you ain't jokin', en it's SO?"



"No, I'm not, and it is so."



Jim shivered again, and says:



"Den dat Monday could be de las' day, en dey

wouldn't be no las' day in England, en de dead

wouldn't be called. We mustn't go over dah, Mars

Tom. Please git him to turn back; I wants to be

whah --"



All of a sudden we see something, and all jumped

up, and forgot everything and begun to gaze. Tom

says:



"Ain't that the --" He catched his breath, then

says: "It IS, sure as you live! It's the ocean!"



That made me and Jim catch our breath, too. Then

we all stood petrified but happy, for none of us had

ever seen an ocean, or ever expected to. Tom kept

muttering:



"Atlantic Ocean -- Atlantic. Land, don't it sound

great! And that's IT -- and WE are looking at it -- we!

Why, it's just too splendid to believe!"



Then we see a big bank of black smoke; and when

we got nearer, it was a city -- and a monster she was,

too, with a thick fringe of ships around one edge; and

we wondered if it was New York, and begun to jaw

and dispute about it, and, first we knowed, it slid from

under us and went flying behind, and here we was, out

over the very ocean itself, and going like a cyclone.

Then we woke up, I tell you!



We made a break aft and raised a wail, and begun to

beg the professor to turn back and land us, but

he jerked out his pistol and motioned us back,

and we went, but nobody will ever know how bad we

felt.



The land was gone, all but a little streak, like a

snake, away off on the edge of the water, and down

under us was just ocean, ocean, ocean -- millions of

miles of it, heaving and pitching and squirming, and

white sprays blowing from the wave-tops, and only a

few ships in sight, wallowing around and laying over,

first on one side and then on t'other, and sticking their

bows under and then their sterns; and before long

there warn't no ships at all, and we had the sky and

the whole ocean all to ourselves, and the roomiest place

I ever see and the lonesomest.

