




CHAPTER II.

THE BALLOON ASCENSION



WELL, Tom got up one thing after another, but

they all had tender spots about 'em somewheres,

and he had to shove 'em aside. So at last he was

about in despair. Then the St. Louis papers begun to

talk a good deal about the balloon that was going to

sail to Europe, and Tom sort of thought he wanted

to go down and see what it looked like, but couldn't

make up his mind. But the papers went on talking,

and so he allowed that maybe if he didn't go he

mightn't ever have another chance to see a balloon;

and next, he found out that Nat Parsons was going

down to see it, and that decided him, of course. He

wasn't going to have Nat Parsons coming back brag-

ging about seeing the balloon, and him having to listen

to it and keep quiet. So he wanted me and Jim to go

too, and we went.



It was a noble big balloon, and had wings and fans

and all sorts of things, and wasn't like any balloon you

see in pictures. It was away out toward the edge of

town, in a vacant lot, corner of Twelfth street; and

there was a big crowd around it, making fun of it, and

making fun of the man, -- a lean pale feller with that

soft kind of moonlight in his eyes, you know, -- and

they kept saying it wouldn't go. It made him hot to

hear them, and he would turn on them and shake his

fist and say they was animals and blind, but some day

they would find they had stood face to face with one

of the men that lifts up nations and makes civilizations,

and was too dull to know it; and right here on this

spot their own children and grandchildren would build

a monument to him that would outlast a thousand

years, but his name would outlast the monument.

And then the crowd would burst out in a laugh again,

and yell at him, and ask him what was his name before

he was married, and what he would take to not do it,

and what was his sister's cat's grandmother's name,

and all the things that a crowd says when they've got

hold of a feller that they see they can plague. Well,

some things they said WAS funny, -- yes, and mighty

witty too, I ain't denying that, -- but all the same it

warn't fair nor brave, all them people pitching on one,

and they so glib and sharp, and him without any gift

of talk to answer back with. But, good land! what

did he want to sass back for? You see, it couldn't do

him no good, and it was just nuts for them. They

HAD him, you know. But that was his way. I reckon

he couldn't help it; he was made so, I judge. He

was a good enough sort of cretur, and hadn't no harm

in him, and was just a genius, as the papers said, which

wasn't his fault. We can't all be sound: we've got to

be the way we're made. As near as I can make out,

geniuses think they know it all, and so they won't take

people's advice, but always go their own way, which

makes everybody forsake them and despise them, and

that is perfectly natural. If they was humbler, and

listened and tried to learn, it would be better for them.



The part the professor was in was like a boat, and

was big and roomy, and had water-tight lockers around

the inside to keep all sorts of things in, and a body

could sit on them, and make beds on them, too. We

went aboard, and there was twenty people there, snoop-

ing around and examining, and old Nat Parsons was

there, too. The professor kept fussing around getting

ready, and the people went ashore, drifting out one at

a time, and old Nat he was the last. Of course it

wouldn't do to let him go out behind US. We mustn't

budge till he was gone, so we could be last ourselves.



But he was gone now, so it was time for us to follow.

I heard a big shout, and turned around -- the city was

dropping from under us like a shot! It made me sick

all through, I was so scared. Jim turned gray and

couldn't say a word, and Tom didn't say nothing, but

looked excited. The city went on dropping down,

and down, and down; but we didn't seem to be doing

nothing but just hang in the air and stand still. The

houses got smaller and smaller, and the city pulled

itself together, closer and closer, and the men and

wagons got to looking like ants and bugs crawling

around, and the streets like threads and cracks; and

then it all kind of melted together, and there wasn't

any city any more it was only a big scar on the earth,

and it seemed to me a body could see up the river and

down the river about a thousand miles, though of

course it wasn't so much. By and by the earth was a

ball -- just a round ball, of a dull color, with shiny

stripes wriggling and winding around over it, which

was rivers. The Widder Douglas always told me the

earth was round like a ball, but I never took any stock

in a lot of them superstitions o' hers, and of course I

paid no attention to that one, because I could see my-

self that the world was the shape of a plate, and flat.

I used to go up on the hill, and take a look around

and prove it for myself, because I reckon the best way

to get a sure thing on a fact is to go and examine for

yourself, and not take anybody's say-so. But I had to

give in now that the widder was right. That is, she

was right as to the rest of the world, but she warn't

right about the part our village is in; that part is the

shape of a plate, and flat, I take my oath!



The professor had been quiet all this time, as if he

was asleep; but he broke loose now, and he was mighty

bitter. He says something like this:



"Idiots! They said it wouldn't go; and they

wanted to examine it, and spy around and get the

secret of it out of me. But I beat them. Nobody

knows the secret but me. Nobody knows what makes

it move but me; and it's a new power -- a new power,

and a thousand times the strongest in the earth!

Steam's foolishness to it! They said I couldn't go to

Europe. To Europe! Why, there's power aboard to

last five years, and feed for three months. They are

fools! What do they know about it? Yes, and they

said my air-ship was flimsy. Why, she's good for

fifty years! I can sail the skies all my life if I want

to, and steer where I please, though they laughed at

that, and said I couldn't. Couldn't steer! Come

here, boy; we'll see. You press these buttons as I

tell you."



He made Tom steer the ship all about and every

which way, and learnt him the whole thing in nearly

no time; and Tom said it was perfectly easy. He

made him fetch the ship down 'most to the earth, and

had him spin her along so close to the Illinois prairies

that a body could talk to the farmers, and hear every-

thing they said perfectly plain; and he flung out

printed bills to them that told about the balloon, and

said it was going to Europe. Tom got so he could

steer straight for a tree till he got nearly to it, and then

dart up and skin right along over the top of it. Yes,

and he showed Tom how to land her; and he done it

first-rate, too, and set her down in the prairies as soft

as wool. But the minute we started to skip out the

professor says, "No, you don't!" and shot her up in

the air again. It was awful. I begun to beg, and so

did Jim; but it only give his temper a rise, and he

begun to rage around and look wild out of his eyes,

and I was scared of him.



Well, then he got on to his troubles again, and

mourned and grumbled about the way he was treated,

and couldn't seem to git over it, and especially people's

saying his ship was flimsy. He scoffed at that, and at

their saying she warn't simple and would be always

getting out of order. Get out of order! That graveled

him; he said that she couldn't any more get out of

order than the solar sister.



He got worse and worse, and I never see a person

take on so. It give me the cold shivers to see him,

and so it did Jim. By and by he got to yelling and

screaming, and then he swore the world shouldn't ever

have his secret at all now, it had treated him so mean.

He said he would sail his balloon around the globe just

to show what he could do, and then he would sink it in

the sea, and sink us all along with it, too. Well, it was

the awfulest fix to be in, and here was night coming

on!



He give us something to eat, and made us go to the

other end of the boat, and he laid down on a locker,

where he could boss all the works, and put his old

pepper-box revolver under his head, and said if any-

body come fooling around there trying to land her, he

would kill him.



We set scrunched up together, and thought consider-

able, but didn't say much -- only just a word once in a

while when a body had to say something or bust, we

was so scared and worried. The night dragged along

slow and lonesome. We was pretty low down, and the

moonshine made everything soft and pretty, and the

farmhouses looked snug and homeful, and we could

hear the farm sounds, and wished we could be down

there; but, laws! we just slipped along over them like

a ghost, and never left a track.



Away in the night, when all the sounds was late

sounds, and the air had a late feel, and a late smell,

too -- about a two-o'clock feel, as near as I could make

out -- Tom said the professor was so quiet this time

he must be asleep, and we'd better --



"Better what?" I says in a whisper, and feeling sick

all over, because I knowed what he was thinking about.



"Better slip back there and tie him, and land the

ship," he says.



I says: "No, sir! Don' you budge, Tom Sawyer."



And Jim -- well, Jim was kind o' gasping, he was so

scared. He says:



"Oh, Mars Tom, DON'T! Ef you teches him, we's

gone -- we's gone sho'! I ain't gwine anear him, not

for nothin' in dis worl'. Mars Tom, he's plumb crazy."



Tom whispers and says -- "That's WHY we've got to

do something. If he wasn't crazy I wouldn't give

shucks to be anywhere but here; you couldn't hire me

to get out -- now that I've got used to this balloon and

over the scare of being cut loose from the solid ground

-- if he was in his right mind. But it's no good politics,

sailing around like this with a person that's out of his

head, and says he's going round the world and then

drown us all. We've GOT to do something, I tell you,

and do it before he wakes up, too, or we mayn't ever

get another chance. Come!"



But it made us turn cold and creepy just to think of

it, and we said we wouldn't budge. So Tom was for

slipping back there by himself to see if he couldn't get

at the steering-gear and land the ship. We begged and

begged him not to, but it warn't no use; so he got

down on his hands and knees, and begun to crawl an

inch at a time, we a-holding our breath and watching.

After he got to the middle of the boat he crept slower

than ever, and it did seem like years to me. But at

last we see him get to the professor's head, and sort

of raise up soft and look a good spell in his face and

listen. Then we see him begin to inch along again

toward the professor's feet where the steering-buttons

was. Well, he got there all safe, and was reaching

slow and steady toward the buttons, but he knocked

down something that made a noise, and we see him

slump down flat an' soft in the bottom, and lay still.

The professor stirred, and says, "What's that?" But

everybody kept dead still and quiet, and he begun to

mutter and mumble and nestle, like a person that's

going to wake up, and I thought I was going to die, I

was so worried and scared.



Then a cloud slid over the moon, and I 'most cried,

I was so glad. She buried herself deeper and deeper

into the cloud, and it got so dark we couldn't see Tom.

Then it began to sprinkle rain, and we could hear the

professor fussing at his ropes and things and abusing

the weather. We was afraid every minute he would

touch Tom, and then we would be goners, and no

help; but Tom was already on his way back, and when

we felt his hands on our knees my breath stopped

sudden, and my heart fell down 'mongst my other works,

because I couldn't tell in the dark but it might be the

professor! which I thought it WAS.



Dear! I was so glad to have him back that I was

just as near happy as a person could be that was up in

the air that way with a deranged man. You can't land

a balloon in the dark, and so I hoped it would keep on

raining, for I didn't want Tom to go meddling any

more and make us so awful uncomfortable. Well, I

got my wish. It drizzled and drizzled along the rest

of the night, which wasn't long, though it did seem so;

and at daybreak it cleared, and the world looked

mighty soft and gray and pretty, and the forests and

fields so good to see again, and the horses and cattle

standing sober and thinking. Next, the sun come a-

blazing up gay and splendid, and then we began to feel

rusty and stretchy, and first we knowed we was all

asleep.

