




CHAPTER V.

LAND



WE tried to make some plans, but we couldn't come

to no agreement. Me and Jim was for turning

around and going back home, but Tom allowed that

by the time daylight come, so we could see our way,

we would be so far toward England that we might as

well go there, and come back in a ship, and have the

glory of saying we done it.



About midnight the storm quit and the moon come

out and lit up the ocean, and we begun to feel com-

fortable and drowsy; so we stretched out on the

lockers and went to sleep, and never woke up again

till sun-up. The sea was sparkling like di'monds, and

it was nice weather, and pretty soon our things was all

dry again.



We went aft to find some breakfast, and the first

thing we noticed was that there was a dim light burning

in a compass back there under a hood. Then Tom was

disturbed. He says:



"You know what that means, easy enough. It

means that somebody has got to stay on watch and

steer this thing the same as he would a ship, or she'll

wander around and go wherever the wind wants her

to."



"Well," I says, "what's she been doing since --

er -- since we had the accident?"



"Wandering," he says, kinder troubled --" wander-

ing, without any doubt. She's in a wind now that's

blowing her south of east. We don't know how long

that's been going on, either."



So then he p'inted her east, and said he would hold

her there till we rousted out the breakfast. The pro-

fessor had laid in everything a body could want; he

couldn't 'a' been better fixed. There wasn't no milk

for the coffee, but there was water, and everything

else you could want, and a charcoal stove and the

fixings for it, and pipes and cigars and matches; and

wine and liquor, which warn't in our line; and books,

and maps, and charts, and an accordion; and furs,

and blankets, and no end of rubbish, like brass beads

and brass jewelry, which Tom said was a sure sign that

he had an idea of visiting among savages. There was

money, too. Yes, the professor was well enough fixed.



After breakfast Tom learned me and Jim how to

steer, and divided us all up into four-hour watches,

turn and turn about; and when his watch was out I

took his place, and he got out the professor's papers

and pens and wrote a letter home to his aunt Polly, tell-

ing her everything that had happened to us, and dated

it "IN THE WELKIN, APPROACHING ENGLAND," and folded

it together and stuck it fast with a red wafer, and

directed it, and wrote above the direction, in big

writing, "FROM TOM SAWYER, THE ERRONORT," and said

it would stump old Nat Parsons, the postmaster, when

it come along in the mail. I says:



"Tom Sawyer, this ain't no welkin, it's a balloon."



"Well, now, who SAID it was a welkin, smarty?"



"You've wrote it on the letter, anyway."



"What of it? That don't mean that the balloon's

the welkin."



"Oh, I thought it did. Well, then, what is a

welkin?"



I see in a minute he was stuck. He raked and

scraped around in his mind, but he couldn't find noth-

ing, so he had to say:



"I don't know, and nobody don't know. It's just

a word, and it's a mighty good word, too. There

ain't many that lays over it. I don't believe there's

ANY that does."



"Shucks!" I says. "But what does it MEAN? --

that's the p'int. "



"I don't know what it means, I tell you. It's a

word that people uses for -- for -- well, it's orna-

mental. They don't put ruffles on a shirt to keep a

person warm, do they?"



"Course they don't."



"But they put them ON, don't they?"



"Yes."



"All right, then; that letter I wrote is a shirt, and

the welkin's the ruffle on it."



I judged that that would gravel Jim, and it did.



"Now, Mars Tom, it ain't no use to talk like dat;

en, moreover, it's sinful. You knows a letter ain't no

shirt, en dey ain't no ruffles on it, nuther. Dey ain't

no place to put 'em on; you can't put em on, and

dey wouldn't stay ef you did."



"Oh DO shut up, and wait till something's started

that you know something about."



"Why, Mars Tom, sholy you can't mean to say I

don't know about shirts, when, goodness knows, I's

toted home de washin' ever sence --"



"I tell you, this hasn't got anything to do with

shirts. I only --"



"Why, Mars Tom, you said yo'self dat a letter --"



"Do you want to drive me crazy? Keep still. I

only used it as a metaphor."



That word kinder bricked us up for a minute. Then

Jim says -- rather timid, because he see Tom was get-

ting pretty tetchy:



"Mars Tom, what is a metaphor?"



"A metaphor's a -- well, it's a -- a -- a metaphor's

an illustration." He see THAT didn't git home, so he

tried again. "When I say birds of a feather flocks

together, it's a metaphorical way of saying --"



"But dey DON'T, Mars Tom. No, sir, 'deed dey

don't. Dey ain't no feathers dat's more alike den a

bluebird en a jaybird, but ef you waits till you catches

dem birds together, you'll --"



"Oh, give us a rest! You can't get the simplest

little thing through your thick skull. Now don't bother

me any more."



Jim was satisfied to stop. He was dreadful pleased

with himself for catching Tom out. The minute Tom

begun to talk about birds I judged he was a goner,

because Jim knowed more about birds than both of us

put together. You see, he had killed hundreds and

hundreds of them, and that's the way to find out

about birds. That's the way people does that writes

books about birds, and loves them so that they'll

go hungry and tired and take any amount of trouble to

find a new bird and kill it. Their name is ornitholo-

gers, and I could have been an ornithologer myself,

because I always loved birds and creatures; and I

started out to learn how to be one, and I see a bird

setting on a limb of a high tree, singing with its head

tilted back and its mouth open, and before I thought I

fired, and his song stopped and he fell straight down

from the limb, all limp like a rag, and I run and picked

him up and he was dead, and his body was warm in my

hand, and his head rolled about this way and that, like

his neck was broke, and there was a little white skin

over his eyes, and one little drop of blood on the side

of his head; and, laws! I couldn't see nothing more

for the tears; and I hain't never murdered no creature

since that warn't doing me no harm, and I ain't going

to.



But I was aggravated about that welkin. I wanted

to know. I got the subject up again, and then Tom

explained, the best he could. He said when a person

made a big speech the newspapers said the shouts of

the people made the welkin ring. He said they always

said that, but none of them ever told what it was, so

he allowed it just meant outdoors and up high. Well,

that seemed sensible enough, so I was satisfied, and

said so. That pleased Tom and put him in a good 

humor again, and he says:



"Well, it's all right, then; and we'll let bygones

be bygones. I don't know for certain what a welkin

is, but when we land in London we'll make it ring,

anyway, and don't you forget it."



He said an erronort was a person who sailed around

in balloons; and said it was a mighty sight finer to be

Tom Sawyer the Erronort than to be Tom Sawyer the

Traveler, and we would be heard of all round the

world, if we pulled through all right, and so he wouldn't

give shucks to be a traveler now.



Toward the middle of the afternoon we got every-

thing ready to land, and we felt pretty good, too, and

proud; and we kept watching with the glasses, like

Columbus discovering America. But we couldn't see

nothing but ocean. The afternoon wasted out and the

sun shut down, and still there warn't no land any-

wheres. We wondered what was the matter, but

reckoned it would come out all right, so we went on

steering east, but went up on a higher level so we

wouldn't hit any steeples or mountains in the dark.



It was my watch till midnight, and then it was Jim's;

but Tom stayed up, because he said ship captains done

that when they was making the land, and didn't stand

no regular watch.



Well, when daylight come, Jim give a shout, and we

jumped up and looked over, and there was the land

sure enough -- land all around, as far as you could see,

and perfectly level and yaller. We didn't know how

long we'd been over it. There warn't no trees, nor

hills, nor rocks, nor towns, and Tom and Jim had took

it for the sea. They took it for the sea in a dead

ca'm; but we was so high up, anyway, that if it had

been the sea and rough, it would 'a' looked smooth, all

the same, in the night, that way.



We was all in a powerful excitement now, and

grabbed the glasses and hunted everywheres for Lon-

don, but couldn't find hair nor hide of it, nor any

other settlement -- nor any sign of a lake or a river,

either. Tom was clean beat. He said it warn't his

notion of England; he thought England looked like

America, and always had that idea. So he said we

better have breakfast, and then drop down and inquire

the quickest way to London. We cut the breakfast

pretty short, we was so impatient. As we slanted

along down, the weather began to moderate, and

pretty soon we shed our furs. But it kept ON moder-

ating, and in a precious little while it was 'most too

moderate. We was close down now, and just blistering!



We settled down to within thirty foot of the land --

that is, it was land if sand is land; for this wasn't any-

thing but pure sand. Tom and me clumb down the

ladder and took a run to stretch our legs, and it felt

amazing good -- that is, the stretching did, but the

sand scorched our feet like hot embers. Next, we see

somebody coming, and started to meet him; but we

heard Jim shout, and looked around and he was fairly

dancing, and making signs, and yelling. We couldn't

make out what he said, but we was scared anyway, and

begun to heel it back to the balloon. When we got

close enough, we understood the words, and they

made me sick:



"Run! Run fo' yo' life! Hit's a lion; I kin see

him thoo de glass! Run, boys; do please heel it de

bes' you kin. He's bu'sted outen de menagerie, en

dey ain't nobody to stop him!"



It made Tom fly, but it took the stiffening all out of

my legs. I could only just gasp along the way you do

in a dream when there's a ghost gaining on you.



Tom got to the ladder and shinned up it a piece and

waited for me; and as soon as I got a foothold on it

he shouted to Jim to soar away. But Jim had clean

lost his head, and said he had forgot how. So Tom

shinned along up and told me to follow; but the lion

was arriving, fetching a most ghastly roar with every

lope, and my legs shook so I dasn't try to take one of

them out of the rounds for fear the other one would

give way under me.



But Tom was aboard by this time, and he started the

balloon up a little, and stopped it again as soon as the

end of the ladder was ten or twelve feet above ground.

And there was the lion, a-ripping around under me,

and roaring and springing up in the air at the ladder,

and only missing it about a quarter of an inch, it

seemed to me. It was delicious to be out of his reach,

perfectly delicious, and made me feel good and thank-

ful all up one side; but I was hanging there helpless

and couldn't climb, and that made me feel perfectly

wretched and miserable all down the other. It is most

seldom that a person feels so mixed like that; and it is

not to be recommended, either.



Tom asked me what he'd better do, but I didn't

know. He asked me if I could hold on whilst he sailed

away to a safe place and left the lion behind. I said I

could if he didn't go no higher than he was now; but

if he went higher I would lose my head and fall, sure.

So he said, "Take a good grip," and he started.



"Don't go so fast," I shouted. "It makes my

head swim."



He had started like a lightning express. He slowed

down, and we glided over the sand slower, but still in

a kind of sickening way; for it IS uncomfortable to see

things sliding and gliding under you like that, and not

a sound.



But pretty soon there was plenty of sound, for the

lion was catching up. His noise fetched others. You

could see them coming on the lope from every direc-

tion, and pretty soon there was a couple of dozen of

them under me, jumping up at the ladder and snarling

and snapping at each other; and so we went skimming

along over the sand, and these fellers doing what they

could to help us to not forgit the occasion; and then

some other beasts come, without an invite, and they

started a regular riot down there.



We see this plan was a mistake. We couldn't ever

git away from them at this gait, and I couldn't hold on

forever. So Tom took a think, and struck another

idea. That was, to kill a lion with the pepper-box

revolver, and then sail away while the others stopped

to fight over the carcass. So he stopped the balloon

still, and done it, and then we sailed off while the fuss

was going on, and come down a quarter of a mile off,

and they helped me aboard; but by the time we was

out of reach again, that gang was on hand once more.

And when they see we was really gone and they

couldn't get us, they sat down on their hams and

looked up at us so kind of disappointed that it was as

much as a person could do not to see THEIR side of the

matter.

