





CHAPTER VII.

TOM RESPECTS THE FLEA



"NOON!" says Tom, and so it was. His shadder

was just a blot around his feet. We looked,

and the Grinnage clock was so close to twelve the

difference didn't amount to nothing. So Tom said

London was right north of us or right south of us, one

or t'other, and he reckoned by the weather and the

sand and the camels it was north; and a good many

miles north, too; as many as from New York to the

city of Mexico, he guessed.



Jim said he reckoned a balloon was a good deal the

fastest thing in the world, unless it might be some

kinds of birds -- a wild pigeon, maybe, or a railroad.



But Tom said he had read about railroads in England

going nearly a hundred miles an hour for a little ways,

and there never was a bird in the world that could do

that -- except one, and that was a flea.



"A flea? Why, Mars Tom, in de fust place he

ain't a bird, strickly speakin' --"



"He ain't a bird, eh? Well, then, what is he?"



"I don't rightly know, Mars Tom, but I speck he's

only jist a' animal. No, I reckon dat won't do, nuther,

he ain't big enough for a' animal. He mus' be a bug.

Yassir, dat's what he is, he's a bug."



"I bet he ain't, but let it go. What's your second

place?"



"Well, in de second place, birds is creturs dat goes

a long ways, but a flea don't."



"He don't, don't he? Come, now, what IS a long

distance, if you know?"



"Why, it's miles, and lots of 'em -- anybody knows

dat."



"Can't a man walk miles?"



"Yassir, he kin."



"As many as a railroad?"



"Yassir, if you give him time."



"Can't a flea?"



"Well -- I s'pose so -- ef you gives him heaps of

time."



"Now you begin to see, don't you, that DISTANCE

ain't the thing to judge by, at all; it's the time it takes

to go the distance IN that COUNTS, ain't it?"



"Well, hit do look sorter so, but I wouldn't 'a'

b'lieved it, Mars Tom."



"It's a matter of PROPORTION, that's what it is; and

when you come to gauge a thing's speed by its size,

where's your bird and your man and your railroad,

alongside of a flea? The fastest man can't run more

than about ten miles in an hour -- not much over ten

thousand times his own length. But all the books says

any common ordinary third-class flea can jump a hun-

dred and fifty times his own length; yes, and he can

make five jumps a second too -- seven hundred and

fifty times his own length, in one little second -- for he

don't fool away any time stopping and starting -- he

does them both at the same time; you'll see, if you

try to put your finger on him. Now that's a common,

ordinary, third-class flea's gait; but you take an Eye-

talian FIRST-class, that's been the pet of the nobility all

his life, and hasn't ever knowed what want or sickness

or exposure was, and he can jump more than three

hundred times his own length, and keep it up all day,

five such jumps every second, which is fifteen hundred

times his own length. Well, suppose a man could go

fifteen hundred times his own length in a second -- say,

a mile and a half. It's ninety miles a minute; it's

considerable more than five thousand miles an hour.

Where's your man NOW? -- yes, and your bird, and

your railroad, and your balloon? Laws, they don't

amount to shucks 'longside of a flea. A flea is just

a comet b'iled down small."



Jim was a good deal astonished, and so was I. Jim

said:



"Is dem figgers jist edjackly true, en no jokin' en

no lies, Mars Tom?"



"Yes, they are; they're perfectly true."



"Well, den, honey, a body's got to respec' a flea.

I ain't had no respec' for um befo', sca'sely, but dey

ain't no gittin' roun' it, dey do deserve it, dat's

certain."



"Well, I bet they do. They've got ever so much

more sense, and brains, and brightness, in proportion

to their size, than any other cretur in the world. A

person can learn them 'most anything; and they learn

it quicker than any other cretur, too. They've been

learnt to haul little carriages in harness, and go this

way and that way and t'other way according to their

orders; yes, and to march and drill like soldiers, doing

it as exact, according to orders, as soldiers does it.

They've been learnt to do all sorts of hard and

troublesome things. S'pose you could cultivate a flea

up to the size of a man, and keep his natural

smartness a-growing and a-growing right along up,

bigger and bigger, and keener and keener, in the same

proportion -- where'd the human race be, do you

reckon? That flea would be President of the United

States, and you couldn't any more prevent it than you

can prevent lightning."



"My lan', Mars Tom, I never knowed dey was so

much TO de beas'. No, sir, I never had no idea of it,

and dat's de fac'."



"There's more to him, by a long sight, than there

is to any other cretur, man or beast, in proportion to

size. He's the interestingest of them all. People have

so much to say about an ant's strength, and an ele-

phant's, and a locomotive's. Shucks, they don't begin

with a flea. He can lift two or three hundred times his

own weight. And none of them can come anywhere

near it. And, moreover, he has got notions of his

own, and is very particular, and you can't fool him;

his instinct, or his judgment, or whatever it is, is per-

fectly sound and clear, and don't ever make a mistake.

People think all humans are alike to a flea. It ain't

so. There's folks that he won't go near, hungry or

not hungry, and I'm one of them. I've never had one

of them on me in my life."



"Mars Tom!"



"It's so; I ain't joking."



"Well, sah, I hain't ever heard de likes o' dat befo'."

Jim couldn't believe it, and I couldn't; so we had to

drop down to the sand and git a supply and see. Tom

was right. They went for me and Jim by the thou-

sand, but not a one of them lit on Tom. There warn't

no explaining it, but there it was and there warn't no

getting around it. He said it had always been just so,

and he'd just as soon be where there was a million of

them as not; they'd never touch him nor bother

him.



We went up to the cold weather to freeze 'em out,

and stayed a little spell, and then come back to the

comfortable weather and went lazying along twenty or

twenty-five miles an hour, the way we'd been doing for

the last few hours. The reason was, that the longer

we was in that solemn, peaceful desert, the more the

hurry and fuss got kind of soothed down in us, and

the more happier and contented and satisfied we got to

feeling, and the more we got to liking the desert, and

then loving it. So we had cramped the speed down,

as I was saying, and was having a most noble good

lazy time, sometimes watching through the glasses,

sometimes stretched out on the lockers reading, some-

times taking a nap.



It didn't seem like we was the same lot that was in

such a state to find land and git ashore, but it was.

But we had got over that -- clean over it. We was

used to the balloon now and not afraid any more, and

didn't want to be anywheres else. Why, it seemed

just like home; it 'most seemed as if I had been born

and raised in it, and Jim and Tom said the same. And

always I had had hateful people around me, a-nagging

at me, and pestering of me, and scolding, and finding

fault, and fussing and bothering, and sticking to me,

and keeping after me, and making me do this, and

making me do that and t'other, and always selecting

out the things I didn't want to do, and then giving me

Sam Hill because I shirked and done something else,

and just aggravating the life out of a body all the time;

but up here in the sky it was so still and sunshiny and

lovely, and plenty to eat, and plenty of sleep, and

strange things to see, and no nagging and no pester-

ing, and no good people, and just holiday all the time.

Land, I warn't in no hurry to git out and buck at

civilization again. Now, one of the worst things about

civilization is, that anybody that gits a letter with

trouble in it comes and tells you all about it and makes

you feel bad, and the newspapers fetches you the

troubles of everybody all over the world, and keeps

you downhearted and dismal 'most all the time, and

it's such a heavy load for a person. I hate them

newspapers; and I hate letters; and if I had my way

I wouldn't allow nobody to load his troubles on to

other folks he ain't acquainted with, on t'other side of

the world, that way. Well, up in a balloon there ain't

any of that, and it's the darlingest place there is.



We had supper, and that night was one of the

prettiest nights I ever see. The moon made it just

like daylight, only a heap softer; and once we see a

lion standing all alone by himself, just all alone on the

earth, it seemed like, and his shadder laid on the sand

by him like a puddle of ink. That's the kind of moon-

light to have.



Mainly we laid on our backs and talked; we didn't

want to go to sleep. Tom said we was right in the

midst of the Arabian Nights now. He said it was right

along here that one of the cutest things in that book

happened; so we looked down and watched while he

told about it, because there ain't anything that is so

interesting to look at as a place that a book has talked

about. It was a tale about a camel-driver that had lost

his camel, and he come along in the desert and met a

man, and says:



"Have you run across a stray camel to-day?"



And the man says:



"Was he blind in his left eye?"



"Yes."



"Had he lost an upper front tooth?"



"Yes."



"Was his off hind leg lame?"



"Yes."



"Was he loaded with millet-seed on one side and

honey on the other?"



"Yes, but you needn't go into no more details --

that's the one, and I'm in a hurry. Where did you

see him?"



"I hain't seen him at all," the man says.



"Hain't seen him at all? How can you describe

him so close, then?"



"Because when a person knows how to use his eyes,

everything has got a meaning to it; but most people's

eyes ain't any good to them. I knowed a camel had

been along, because I seen his track. I knowed he

was lame in his off hind leg because he had favored

that foot and trod light on it, and his track showed it.

I knowed he was blind on his left side because he only

nibbled the grass on the right side of the trail. I

knowed he had lost an upper front tooth because where

he bit into the sod his teeth-print showed it. The

millet-seed sifted out on one side -- the ants told me

that; the honey leaked out on the other -- the flies

told me that. I know all about your camel, but I

hain't seen him."



Jim says:



"Go on, Mars Tom, hit's a mighty good tale, and

powerful interestin'."



"That's all," Tom says.



"ALL?" says Jim, astonished. "What 'come o'

de camel?"



"I don't know."



"Mars Tom, don't de tale say?"



"No."



Jim puzzled a minute, then he says:



"Well! Ef dat ain't de beatenes' tale ever I struck.

Jist gits to de place whah de intrust is gittin' red-hot,

en down she breaks. Why, Mars Tom, dey ain't no

SENSE in a tale dat acts like dat. Hain't you got no

IDEA whether de man got de camel back er not?"



"No, I haven't."



I see myself there warn't no sense in the tale, to

chop square off that way before it come to anything,

but I warn't going to say so, because I could see Tom

was souring up pretty fast over the way it flatted out

and the way Jim had popped on to the weak place in

it, and I don't think it's fair for everybody to pile on

to a feller when he's down. But Tom he whirls on

me and says:



"What do YOU think of the tale?"



Of course, then, I had to come out and make a clean

breast and say it did seem to me, too, same as it did

to Jim, that as long as the tale stopped square in the

middle and never got to no place, it really warn't

worth the trouble of telling.



Tom's chin dropped on his breast, and 'stead of

being mad, as I reckoned he'd be, to hear me scoff at

his tale that way, he seemed to be only sad; and he

says:



"Some people can see, and some can't -- just as

that man said. Let alone a camel, if a cyclone had

gone by, YOU duffers wouldn't 'a' noticed the

track."



I don't know what he meant by that, and he didn't

say; it was just one of his irrulevances, I reckon -- he

was full of them, sometimes, when he was in a close

place and couldn't see no other way out -- but I didn't

mind. We'd spotted the soft place in that tale sharp

enough, he couldn't git away from that little fact. It

graveled him like the nation, too, I reckon, much as

he tried not to let on.

