




CHAPTER XII.

JIM STANDING SIEGE



THE next few meals was pretty sandy, but that

don't make no difference when you are hungry;

and when you ain't it ain't no satisfaction to eat, any-

way, and so a little grit in the meat ain't no particular

drawback, as far as I can see.



Then we struck the east end of the Desert at last,

sailing on a northeast course. Away off on the edge

of the sand, in a soft pinky light, we see three little

sharp roofs like tents, and Tom says:



"It's the pyramids of Egypt."



It made my heart fairly jump. You see, I had seen

a many and a many a picture of them, and heard tell

about them a hundred times, and yet to come on them

all of a sudden, that way, and find they was REAL, 'stead

of imaginations, 'most knocked the breath out of me

with surprise. It's a curious thing, that the more you

hear about a grand and big and bully thing or person,

the more it kind of dreamies out, as you may say, and

gets to be a big dim wavery figger made out of moon-

shine and nothing solid to it. It's just so with George

Washington, and the same with them pyramids.



And moreover, besides, the thing they always said

about them seemed to me to be stretchers. There was

a feller come to the Sunday-school once, and had a

picture of them, and made a speech, and said the big-

gest pyramid covered thirteen acres, and was most five

hundred foot high, just a steep mountain, all built out

of hunks of stone as big as a bureau, and laid up

in perfectly regular layers, like stair-steps. Thirteen

acres, you see, for just one building; it's a farm. If

it hadn't been in Sunday-school, I would 'a' judged it

was a lie; and outside I was certain of it. And he

said there was a hole in the pyramid, and you could go

in there with candles, and go ever so far up a long

slanting tunnel, and come to a large room in the

stomach of that stone mountain, and there you would

find a big stone chest with a king in it, four thousand

years old. I said to myself, then, if that ain't a lie I

will eat that king if they will fetch him, for even

Methusalem warn't that old, and nobody claims it.



As we come a little nearer we see the yaller sand

come to an end in a long straight edge like a blanket,

and on to it was joined, edge to edge, a wide country

of bright green, with a snaky stripe crooking through

it, and Tom said it was the Nile. It made my heart

jump again, for the Nile was another thing that wasn't

real to me. Now I can tell you one thing which is

dead certain: if you will fool along over three thou-

sand miles of yaller sand, all glimmering with heat so

that it makes your eyes water to look at it, and you've

been a considerable part of a week doing it, the green

country will look so like home and heaven to you that

it will make your eyes water AGAIN.



It was just so with me, and the same with Jim.



And when Jim got so he could believe it WAS the

land of Egypt he was looking at, he wouldn't enter it

standing up, but got down on his knees and took off

his hat, because he said it wasn't fitten' for a humble

poor nigger to come any other way where such men

had been as Moses and Joseph and Pharaoh and the

other prophets. He was a Presbyterian, and had a

most deep respect for Moses which was a Presbyterian,

too, he said. He was all stirred up, and says:



"Hit's de lan' of Egypt, de lan' of Egypt, en I's

'lowed to look at it wid my own eyes! En dah's de

river dat was turn' to blood, en I's looking at de very

same groun' whah de plagues was, en de lice, en de

frogs, en de locus', en de hail, en whah dey marked

de door-pos', en de angel o' de Lord come by in de

darkness o' de night en slew de fust-born in all de lan'

o' Egypt. Ole Jim ain't worthy to see dis day!"



And then he just broke down and cried, he was so

thankful. So between him and Tom there was talk

enough, Jim being excited because the land was so full

of history -- Joseph and his brethren, Moses in the

bulrushers, Jacob coming down into Egypt to buy

corn, the silver cup in the sack, and all them interesting

things; and Tom just as excited too, because the land

was so full of history that was in HIS line, about

Noureddin, and Bedreddin, and such like monstrous

giants, that made Jim's wool rise, and a raft of other

Arabian Nights folks, which the half of them never

done the things they let on they done, I don't believe.



Then we struck a disappointment, for one of them

early morning fogs started up, and it warn't no use to

sail over the top of it, because we would go by Egypt,

sure, so we judged it was best to set her by compass

straight for the place where the pyramids was gitting

blurred and blotted out, and then drop low and skin

along pretty close to the ground and keep a sharp

lookout. Tom took the hellum, I stood by to let go

the anchor, and Jim he straddled the bow to dig

through the fog with his eyes and watch out for danger

ahead. We went along a steady gait, but not very

fast, and the fog got solider and solider, so solid that

Jim looked dim and ragged and smoky through it. It

was awful still, and we talked low and was anxious.

Now and then Jim would say:



"Highst her a p'int, Mars Tom, highst her!" and

up she would skip, a foot or two, and we would slide

right over a flat-roofed mud cabin, with people that

had been asleep on it just beginning to turn out and

gap and stretch; and once when a feller was clear up

on his hind legs so he could gap and stretch better, we

took him a blip in the back and knocked him off. By

and by, after about an hour, and everything dead still

and we a-straining our ears for sounds and holding our

breath, the fog thinned a little, very sudden, and Jim

sung out in an awful scare:



"Oh, for de lan's sake, set her back, Mars Tom,

here's de biggest giant outen de 'Rabian Nights a-

comin' for us!" and he went over backwards in the

boat.



Tom slammed on the back-action, and as we slowed

to a standstill a man's face as big as our house at home

looked in over the gunnel, same as a house looks out

of its windows, and I laid down and died. I must 'a'

been clear dead and gone for as much as a minute or

more; then I come to, and Tom had hitched a boat-

hook on to the lower lip of the giant and was holding

the balloon steady with it whilst he canted his head

back and got a good long look up at that awful face.



Jim was on his knees with his hands clasped, gazing

up at the thing in a begging way, and working his lips,

but not getting anything out. I took only just a

glimpse, and was fading out again, but Tom says:



"He ain't alive, you fools; it's the Sphinx!"



I never see Tom look so little and like a fly;

but that was because the giant's head was so big and

awful. Awful, yes, so it was, but not dreadful any

more, because you could see it was a noble face,

and kind of sad, and not thinking about you, but about

other things and larger. It was stone, reddish stone,

and its nose and ears battered, and that give it an

abused look, and you felt sorrier for it for that.



We stood off a piece, and sailed around it and over

it, and it was just grand. It was a man's head, or

maybe a woman's, on a tiger's body a hundred and

twenty-five foot long, and there was a dear little temple

between its front paws. All but the head used to be

under the sand, for hundreds of years, maybe thou-

sands, but they had just lately dug the sand away and

found that little temple. It took a power of sand to

bury that cretur; most as much as it would to bury a

steamboat, I reckon.



We landed Jim on top of the head, with an American

flag to protect him, it being a foreign land; then we

sailed off to this and that and t'other distance, to git

what Tom called effects and perspectives and propor-

tions, and Jim he done the best he could, striking all

the different kinds of attitudes and positions he could

study up, but standing on his head and working his

legs the way a frog does was the best. The further we

got away, the littler Jim got, and the grander the

Sphinx got, till at last it was only a clothespin on a

dome, as you might say. That's the way perspective

brings out the correct proportions, Tom said; he said

Julus Cesar's niggers didn't know how big he was,

they was too close to him.



Then we sailed off further and further, till we

couldn't see Jim at all any more, and then that great

figger was at its noblest, a-gazing out over the Nile

Valley so still and solemn and lonesome, and all the

little shabby huts and things that was scattered about it

clean disappeared and gone, and nothing around it now

but a soft wide spread of yaller velvet, which was the

sand.



That was the right place to stop, and we done it.

We set there a-looking and a-thinking for a half an

hour, nobody a-saying anything, for it made us feel

quiet and kind of solemn to remember it had been

looking over that valley just that same way, and think-

ing its awful thoughts all to itself for thousands of

years. and nobody can't find out what they are to this

day.



At last I took up the glass and see some little black

things a-capering around on that velvet carpet, and

some more a-climbing up the cretur's back, and then I

see two or three wee puffs of white smoke, and told

Tom to look. He done it, and says:



"They're bugs. No -- hold on; they -- why, I be-

lieve they're men. Yes, it's men -- men and horses

both. They're hauling a long ladder up onto the

Sphinx's back -- now ain't that odd? And now they're

trying to lean it up a -- there's some more puffs of

smoke -- it's guns! Huck, they're after Jim."



We clapped on the power, and went for them a-

biling. We was there in no time, and come a-whizzing

down amongst them, and they broke and scattered every

which way, and some that was climbing the ladder after

Jim let go all holts and fell. We soared up and found

him laying on top of the head panting and most

tuckered out, partly from howling for help and partly

from scare. He had been standing a siege a long time

-- a week, HE said, but it warn't so, it only just seemed

so to him because they was crowding him so. They

had shot at him, and rained the bullets all around him,

but he warn't hit, and when they found he wouldn't

stand up and the bullets couldn't git at him when he

was laying down, they went for the ladder, and then

he knowed it was all up with him if we didn't come

pretty quick. Tom was very indignant, and asked him

why he didn't show the flag and command them to GIT,

in the name of the United States. Jim said he done

it, but they never paid no attention. Tom said he

would have this thing looked into at Washington, and

says:



"You'll see that they'll have to apologize for insult-

ing the flag, and pay an indemnity, too, on top of it

even if they git off THAT easy."



Jim says:



"What's an indemnity, Mars Tom?"



"It's cash, that's what it is."



"Who gits it, Mars Tom?"



"Why, WE do."



"En who gits de apology?"



"The United States. Or, we can take whichever

we please. We can take the apology, if we want to,

and let the gov'ment take the money."



"How much money will it be, Mars Tom?"



"Well, in an aggravated case like this one, it will

be at least three dollars apiece, and I don't know but

more."



"Well, den, we'll take de money, Mars Tom, blame

de 'pology. Hain't dat yo' notion, too? En hain't it

yourn, Huck?"



We talked it over a little and allowed that that was as

good a way as any, so we agreed to take the money.

It was a new business to me, and I asked Tom if

countries always apologized when they had done wrong,

and he says:



"Yes; the little ones does."



We was sailing around examining the pyramids, you

know, and now we soared up and roosted on the flat top

of the biggest one, and found it was just like what the

man said in the Sunday-school. It was like four pairs

of stairs that starts broad at the bottom and slants up

and comes together in a point at the top, only these

stair-steps couldn't be clumb the way you climb other

stairs; no, for each step was as high as your chin, and

you have to be boosted up from behind. The two

other pyramids warn't far away, and the people moving

about on the sand between looked like bugs crawling,

we was so high above them.



Tom he couldn't hold himself he was so worked up

with gladness and astonishment to be in such a cele-

brated place, and he just dripped history from every

pore, seemed to me. He said he couldn't scarcely

believe he was standing on the very identical spot the

prince flew from on the Bronze Horse. It was in the

Arabian Night times, he said. Somebody give the

prince a bronze horse with a peg in its shoulder, and

he could git on him and fly through the air like a bird,

and go all over the world, and steer it by turning the

peg, and fly high or low and land wherever he wanted

to.



When he got done telling it there was one of them

uncomfortable silences that comes, you know, when a

person has been telling a whopper and you feel sorry

for him and wish you could think of some way to

change the subject and let him down easy, but git stuck

and don't see no way, and before you can pull your

mind together and DO something, that silence has got in

and spread itself and done the business. I was embar-

rassed, Jim he was embarrassed, and neither of us

couldn't say a word. Well, Tom he glowered at me a

minute, and says:



"Come, out with it. What do you think?"



I says:



"Tom Sawyer, YOU don't believe that, yourself."



"What's the reason I don't? What's to hender

me?"



"There's one thing to hender you: it couldn't

happen, that's all."



"What's the reason it couldn't happen?"



"You tell me the reason it COULD happen."



"This balloon is a good enough reason it could

happen, I should reckon."



"WHY is it?"



"WHY is it? I never saw such an idiot. Ain't this

balloon and the bronze horse the same thing under

different names?"



"No, they're not. One is a balloon and the other's

a horse. It's very different. Next you'll be saying a

house and a cow is the same thing."



"By Jackson, Huck's got him ag'in! Dey ain't no

wigglin' outer dat!"



"Shut your head, Jim; you don't know what you're

talking about. And Huck don't. Look here, Huck,

I'll make it plain to you, so you can understand. You

see, it ain't the mere FORM that's got anything to do

with their being similar or unsimilar, it's the PRINCI-

PLE involved; and the principle is the same in both.

Don't you see, now?"



I turned it over in my mind, and says:



"Tom, it ain't no use. Principles is all very well,

but they don't git around that one big fact, that the

thing that a balloon can do ain't no sort of proof of

what a horse can do."



"Shucks, Huck, you don't get the idea at all. Now

look here a minute -- it's perfectly plain. Don't we

fly through the air?"



"Yes."



"Very well. Don't we fly high or fly low, just as

we please?"



"Yes."



"Don't we steer whichever way we want to?"



"Yes."



"And don't we land when and where we please?"



"Yes."



"How do we move the balloon and steer it?"



"By touching the buttons."



"NOW I reckon the thing is clear to you at last. In

the other case the moving and steering was done by

turning a peg. We touch a button, the prince turned

a peg. There ain't an atom of difference, you see. I

knowed I could git it through your head if I stuck to it

long enough."



He felt so happy he begun to whistle. But me and

Jim was silent, so he broke off surprised, and says:



"Looky here, Huck Finn, don't you see it YET?"



I says:



"Tom Sawyer, I want to ask you some questions."



"Go ahead," he says, and I see Jim chirk up to

listen.



"As I understand it, the whole thing is in the buttons

and the peg -- the rest ain't of no consequence. A

button is one shape, a peg is another shape, but that

ain't any matter?"



"No, that ain't any matter, as long as they've both

got the same power."



"All right, then. What is the power that's in a

candle and in a match?"



"It's the fire."



"It's the same in both, then?"



"Yes, just the same in both."



"All right. Suppose I set fire to a carpenter shop

with a match, what will happen to that carpenter

shop?"



"She'll burn up."



"And suppose I set fire to this pyramid with a

candle -- will she burn up?"



"Of course she won't."



"All right. Now the fire's the same, both times.

WHY does the shop burn, and the pyramid don't?"



"Because the pyramid CAN'T burn."



"Aha! and A HORSE CAN'T FLY!"



"My lan', ef Huck ain't got him ag'in! Huck's

landed him high en dry dis time, I tell you! Hit's

de smartes' trap I ever see a body walk inter -- en

ef I --"



But Jim was so full of laugh he got to strangling and

couldn't go on, and Tom was that mad to see how neat

I had floored him, and turned his own argument ag'in

him and knocked him all to rags and flinders with it,

that all he could manage to say was that whenever he

heard me and Jim try to argue it made him ashamed

of the human race. I never said nothing; I was feel-

ing pretty well satisfied. When I have got the best of

a person that way, it ain't my way to go around crow-

ing about it the way some people does, for I consider

that if I was in his place I wouldn't wish him to crow

over me. It's better to be generous, that's what I

think.

