





Tom Sawyer Abroad

by Mark Twain



CHAPTER I.

TOM SEEKS NEW ADVENTURES



DO you reckon Tom Sawyer was satisfied after all

them adventures? I mean the adventures we had

down the river, and the time we set the darky Jim free

and Tom got shot in the leg. No, he wasn't. It only

just p'isoned him for more. That was all the effect it

had. You see, when we three came back up the river

in glory, as you may say, from that long travel, and

the village received us with a torchlight procession and

speeches, and everybody hurrah'd and shouted, it

made us heroes, and that was what Tom Sawyer had

always been hankering to be.



For a while he WAS satisfied. Everybody made

much of him, and he tilted up his nose and stepped

around the town as though he owned it. Some called

him Tom Sawyer the Traveler, and that just swelled

him up fit to bust. You see he laid over me and Jim

considerable, because we only went down the river on

a raft and came back by the steamboat, but Tom went

by the steamboat both ways. The boys envied me and

Jim a good deal, but land! they just knuckled to the

dirt before TOM.



Well, I don't know; maybe he might have been

satisfied if it hadn't been for old Nat Parsons, which

was postmaster, and powerful long and slim, and kind

o' good-hearted and silly, and bald-headed, on account

of his age, and about the talkiest old cretur I ever see.

For as much as thirty years he'd been the only man in

the village that had a reputation -- I mean a reputation

for being a traveler, and of course he was mortal proud

of it, and it was reckoned that in the course of that

thirty years he had told about that journey over a

million times and enjoyed it every time. And now

comes along a boy not quite fifteen, and sets everybody

admiring and gawking over HIS travels, and it just give

the poor old man the high strikes. It made him sick

to listen to Tom, and to hear the people say "My

land!" "Did you ever!" "My goodness sakes

alive!" and all such things; but he couldn't pull away

from it, any more than a fly that's got its hind leg fast

in the molasses. And always when Tom come to a

rest, the poor old cretur would chip in on HIS same old

travels and work them for all they were worth; but

they were pretty faded, and didn't go for much, and it

was pitiful to see. And then Tom would take another

innings, and then the old man again -- and so on, and

so on, for an hour and more, each trying to beat out

the other.



You see, Parsons' travels happened like this: When

he first got to be postmaster and was green in the busi-

ness, there come a letter for somebody he didn't know,

and there wasn't any such person in the village. Well,

he didn't know what to do, nor how to act, and there

the letter stayed and stayed, week in and week out, till

the bare sight of it gave him a conniption. The postage

wasn't paid on it, and that was another thing to worry

about. There wasn't any way to collect that ten cents,

and he reckon'd the gov'ment would hold him respon-

sible for it and maybe turn him out besides, when they

found he hadn't collected it. Well, at last he couldn't

stand it any longer. He couldn't sleep nights, he

couldn't eat, he was thinned down to a shadder, yet

he da'sn't ask anybody's advice, for the very person

he asked for advice might go back on him and let the

gov'ment know about the letter. He had the letter

buried under the floor, but that did no good; if he

happened to see a person standing over the place it'd

give him the cold shivers, and loaded him up with

suspicions, and he would sit up that night till the town

was still and dark, and then he would sneak there and

get it out and bury it in another place. Of course,

people got to avoiding him and shaking their heads

and whispering, because, the way he was looking and

acting, they judged he had killed somebody or done

something terrible, they didn't know what, and if he

had been a stranger they would've lynched him.



Well, as I was saying, it got so he couldn't stand it

any longer; so he made up his mind to pull out for

Washington, and just go to the President of the United

States and make a clean breast of the whole thing, not

keeping back an atom, and then fetch the letter out and

lay it before the whole gov'ment, and say, "Now,

there she is -- do with me what you're a mind to;

though as heaven is my judge I am an innocent man

and not deserving of the full penalties of the law and

leaving behind me a family that must starve and yet

hadn't had a thing to do with it, which is the whole

truth and I can swear to it."



So he did it. He had a little wee bit of steamboat-

ing, and some stage-coaching, but all the rest of the

way was horseback, and it took him three weeks to get

to Washington. He saw lots of land and lots of vil-

lages and four cities. He was gone 'most eight weeks,

and there never was such a proud man in the village as

he when he got back. His travels made him the greatest

man in all that region, and the most talked about; and

people come from as much as thirty miles back in the

country, and from over in the Illinois bottoms, too,

just to look at him -- and there they'd stand and gawk,

and he'd gabble. You never see anything like it.



Well, there wasn't any way now to settle which was

the greatest traveler; some said it was Nat, some said

it was Tom. Everybody allowed that Nat had seen

the most longitude, but they had to give in that what-

ever Tom was short in longitude he had made up in

latitude and climate. It was about a stand-off; so both

of them had to whoop up their dangerous adventures,

and try to get ahead THAT way. That bullet-wound in

Tom's leg was a tough thing for Nat Parsons to buck

against, but he bucked the best he could; and at a

disadvantage, too, for Tom didn't set still as he'd orter

done, to be fair, but always got up and sauntered

around and worked his limp while Nat was painting up

the adventure that HE had in Washington; for Tom

never let go that limp when his leg got well, but prac-

ticed it nights at home, and kept it good as new right

along.



Nat's adventure was like this; I don't know how

true it is; maybe he got it out of a paper, or some-

where, but I will say this for him, that he DID know

how to tell it. He could make anybody's flesh crawl,

and he'd turn pale and hold his breath when he told

it, and sometimes women and girls got so faint they

couldn't stick it out. Well, it was this way, as near as

I can remember:



He come a-loping into Washington, and put up his

horse and shoved out to the President's house with his

letter, and they told him the President was up to the

Capitol, and just going to start for Philadelphia -- not

a minute to lose if he wanted to catch him. Nat 'most

dropped, it made him so sick. His horse was put up,

and he didn't know what to do. But just then along

comes a darky driving an old ramshackly hack, and he

see his chance. He rushes out and shouts: "A half a

dollar if you git me to the Capitol in half an hour, and

a quarter extra if you do it in twenty minutes!"



"Done!" says the darky.



Nat he jumped in and slammed the door, and away

they went a-ripping and a-tearing over the roughest

road a body ever see, and the racket of it was some-

thing awful. Nat passed his arms through the loops

and hung on for life and death, but pretty soon the

hack hit a rock and flew up in the air, and the bottom

fell out, and when it come down Nat's feet was on the

ground, and he see he was in the most desperate danger

if he couldn't keep up with the hack. He was horrible

scared, but he laid into his work for all he was worth,

and hung tight to the arm-loops and made his legs

fairly fly. He yelled and shouted to the driver to

stop, and so did the crowds along the street, for they

could see his legs spinning along under the coach, and

his head and shoulders bobbing inside through the

windows, and he was in awful danger; but the more

they all shouted the more the nigger whooped and

yelled and lashed the horses and shouted, "Don't you

fret, I'se gwine to git you dah in time, boss; I's gwine

to do it, sho'!" for you see he thought they were all

hurrying him up, and, of course, he couldn't hear any-

thing for the racket he was making. And so they went

ripping along, and everybody just petrified to see it;

and when they got to the Capitol at last it was the

quickest trip that ever was made, and everybody said

so. The horses laid down, and Nat dropped, all tuck-

ered out, and he was all dust and rags and barefooted;

but he was in time and just in time, and caught the

President and give him the letter, and everything was

all right, and the President give him a free pardon on

the spot, and Nat give the nigger two extra quarters

instead of one, because he could see that if he hadn't

had the hack he wouldn't'a' got there in time, nor

anywhere near it.



It WAS a powerful good adventure, and Tom Sawyer

had to work his bullet-wound mighty lively to hold his

own against it.



Well, by and by Tom's glory got to paling down

gradu'ly, on account of other things turning up for the

people to talk about -- first a horse-race, and on top of

that a house afire, and on top of that the circus, and

on top of that the eclipse; and that started a revival,

same as it always does, and by that time there wasn't

any more talk about Tom, so to speak, and you never

see a person so sick and disgusted.



Pretty soon he got to worrying and fretting right

along day in and day out, and when I asked him what

WAS he in such a state about, he said it 'most broke his

heart to think how time was slipping away, and him

getting older and older, and no wars breaking out and

no way of making a name for himself that he could

see. Now that is the way boys is always thinking, but

he was the first one I ever heard come out and say it.



So then he set to work to get up a plan to make him

celebrated; and pretty soon he struck it, and offered to

take me and Jim in. Tom Sawyer was always free and

generous that way. There's a-plenty of boys that's

mighty good and friendly when YOU'VE got a good

thing, but when a good thing happens to come their

way they don't say a word to you, and try to hog it

all. That warn't ever Tom Sawyer's way, I can say

that for him. There's plenty of boys that will come

hankering and groveling around you when you've got

an apple and beg the core off of you; but when they've

got one, and you beg for the core and remind them

how you give them a core one time, they say thank

you 'most to death, but there ain't a-going to be no

core. But I notice they always git come up with; all

you got to do is to wait.



Well, we went out in the woods on the hill, and Tom

told us what it was. It was a crusade.



"What's a crusade?" I says.



He looked scornful, the way he's always done when

he was ashamed of a person, and says:



"Huck Finn, do you mean to tell me you don't

know what a crusade is?"



"No," says I, "I don't. And I don't care to,

nuther. I've lived till now and done without it, and

had my health, too. But as soon as you tell me, I'll

know, and that's soon enough. I don't see any use in

finding out things and clogging up my head with them

when I mayn't ever have any occasion to use 'em.

There was Lance Williams, he learned how to talk

Choctaw here till one come and dug his grave for him.

Now, then, what's a crusade? But I can tell you one

thing before you begin; if it's a patent-right, there's

no money in it. Bill Thompson he --"



"Patent-right!" says he. "I never see such an

idiot. Why, a crusade is a kind of war."



I thought he must be losing his mind. But no, he

was in real earnest, and went right on, perfectly

ca'm.



"A crusade is a war to recover the Holy Land from

the paynim."



"Which Holy Land?"



"Why, the Holy Land -- there ain't but one."



"What do we want of it?"



"Why, can't you understand? It's in the hands of

the paynim, and it's our duty to take it away from

them."



"How did we come to let them git hold of it?"



"We didn't come to let them git hold of it. They

always had it."



"Why, Tom, then it must belong to them, don't it?"



"Why of course it does. Who said it didn't?"



I studied over it, but couldn't seem to git at the

right of it, no way. I says:



"It's too many for me, Tom Sawyer. If I had a

farm and it was mine, and another person wanted it,

would it be right for him to --"



"Oh, shucks! you don't know enough to come in

when it rains, Huck Finn. It ain't a farm, it's entirely

different. You see, it's like this. They own the land,

just the mere land, and that's all they DO own; but it

was our folks, our Jews and Christians, that made it

holy, and so they haven't any business to be there

defiling it. It's a shame, and we ought not to stand it

a minute. We ought to march against them and take

it away from them."



"Why, it does seem to me it's the most mixed-up

thing I ever see! Now, if I had a farm and another

person --"



"Don't I tell you it hasn't got anything to do with

farming? Farming is business, just common low-down

business: that's all it is, it's all you can say for it; but

this is higher, this is religious, and totally different."



"Religious to go and take the land away from

people that owns it?"



"Certainly; it's always been considered so."



Jim he shook his head, and says:



"Mars Tom, I reckon dey's a mistake about it

somers -- dey mos' sholy is. I's religious myself, en

I knows plenty religious people, but I hain't run across

none dat acts like dat."



It made Tom hot, and he says:



"Well, it's enough to make a body sick, such

mullet-headed ignorance! If either of you'd read any-

thing about history, you'd know that Richard Cur de

Loon, and the Pope, and Godfrey de Bulleyn, and lots

more of the most noble-hearted and pious people in

the world, hacked and hammered at the paynims for

more than two hundred years trying to take their land

away from them, and swum neck-deep in blood the

whole time -- and yet here's a couple of sap-headed

country yahoos out in the backwoods of Missouri set-

ting themselves up to know more about the rights and

wrongs of it than they did! Talk about cheek!"



Well, of course, that put a more different light on it,

and me and Jim felt pretty cheap and ignorant, and

wished we hadn't been quite so chipper. I couldn't

say nothing, and Jim he couldn't for a while; then he

says:



"Well, den, I reckon it's all right; beca'se ef dey

didn't know, dey ain't no use for po' ignorant folks

like us to be trying to know; en so, ef it's our duty,

we got to go en tackle it en do de bes' we can. Same

time, I feel as sorry for dem paynims as Mars Tom.

De hard part gwine to be to kill folks dat a body hain't

been 'quainted wid and dat hain't done him no harm.

Dat's it, you see. Ef we wuz to go 'mongst 'em, jist

we three, en say we's hungry, en ast 'em for a bite to

eat, why, maybe dey's jist like yuther people. Don't

you reckon dey is? Why, DEY'D give it, I know dey

would, en den --"



"Then what?"



"Well, Mars Tom, my idea is like dis. It ain't no

use, we CAN'T kill dem po' strangers dat ain't doin' us

no harm, till we've had practice -- I knows it perfectly

well, Mars Tom -- 'deed I knows it perfectly well. But

ef we takes a' axe or two, jist you en me en Huck, en

slips acrost de river to-night arter de moon's gone

down, en kills dat sick fam'ly dat's over on the Sny,

en burns dey house down, en --"



"Oh, you make me tired!" says Tom. "I don't

want to argue any more with people like you and Huck

Finn, that's always wandering from the subject, and

ain't got any more sense than to try to reason out a

thing that's pure theology by the laws that protect real

estate!"



Now that's just where Tom Sawyer warn't fair. Jim

didn't mean no harm, and I didn't mean no harm.

We knowed well enough that he was right and we was

wrong, and all we was after was to get at the HOW of

it, and that was all; and the only reason he couldn't

explain it so we could understand it was because we

was ignorant -- yes, and pretty dull, too, I ain't deny-

ing that; but, land! that ain't no crime, I should think.



But he wouldn't hear no more about it -- just said if

we had tackled the thing in the proper spirit, he would

'a' raised a couple of thousand knights and put them

in steel armor from head to heel, and made me a lieu-

tenant and Jim a sutler, and took the command himself

and brushed the whole paynim outfit into the sea like

flies and come back across the world in a glory like

sunset. But he said we didn't know enough to take

the chance when we had it, and he wouldn't ever offer

it again. And he didn't. When he once got set, you

couldn't budge him.



But I didn't care much. I am peaceable, and don't

get up rows with people that ain't doing nothing to

me. I allowed if the paynim was satisfied I was, and

we would let it stand at that.



Now Tom he got all that notion out of Walter Scott's

book, which he was always reading. And it WAS a

wild notion, because in my opinion he never could've

raised the men, and if he did, as like as not he would've

got licked. I took the book and read all about it, and

as near as I could make it out, most of the folks that

shook farming to go crusading had a mighty rocky

time of it.

