




                     CHAPTER 3

              An Astounding Discovery



  WHAT is the matter?" cried the cook, entering the room; "when will

master have his dinner?"

  "Never."

  "And, his supper?"

  "I don't know. He says he will eat no more, neither shall I. My

uncle has determined to fast and make me fast until he makes out

this abominable inscription," I replied.

  "You will be starved to death," she said.

  I was very much of the same opinion, but not liking to say so,

sent her away, and began some of my usual work of classification.

But try as I might, nothing could keep me from thinking alternately of

the stupid manuscript and of the pretty Gretchen.

  Several times I thought of going out, but my uncle would have been

angry at my absence. At the end of an hour, my allotted task was done.

How to pass the time? I began by lighting my pipe. Like all other

students, I delighted in tobacco; and, seating myself in the great

armchair, I began to think.

  Where was my uncle? I could easily imagine him tearing along some

solitary road, gesticulating, talking to himself, cutting the air with

his cane, and still thinking of the absurd bit of hieroglyphics. Would

he hit upon some clue? Would he come home in better humor? While these

thoughts were passing through my brain, I mechanically took up the

execrable puzzle and tried every imaginable way of grouping the

letters. I put them together by twos, by threes, fours, and fives-

in vain. Nothing intelligible came out, except that the fourteenth,

fifteenth, and sixteenth made ice in English; the eighty-fourth,

eighty-fifth, and eighty-sixth, the word sir; then at last I seemed to

find the Latin words rota, mutabile, ira, nec, atra.

  "Ha! there seems to be some truth in my uncle's notion, thought I.

  Then again I seemed to find the word luco, which means sacred

wood. Then in the third line I appeared to make out labiled, a perfect

Hebrew word, and at the last the syllables mere, are, mer, which

were French.

  It was enough to drive one mad. Four different idioms in this absurd

phrase. What connection could there be between ice, sir, anger, cruel,

sacred wood, changing, mother, are, and sea? The first and the last

might, in a sentence connected with Iceland, mean sea of ice. But what

of the rest of this monstrous cryptograph?

  I was, in fact, fighting against an insurmountable difficulty; my

brain was almost on fire; my eyes were strained with staring at the

parchment; the whole absurd collection of letters appeared to dance

before my vision in a number of black little groups. My mind was

possessed with temporary hallucination- I was stifling. I wanted

air. Mechanically I fanned myself with the document, of which now I

saw the back and then the front.

  Imagine my surprise when glancing at the back of the wearisome

puzzle, the ink having gone through, I clearly made out Latin words,

and among others craterem and terrestre.

  I had discovered the secret!

  It came upon me like a flash of lightning. I had got the clue. All

you had to do to understand the document was to read it backwards. All

the ingenious ideas of the Professor were realized; he had dictated it

rightly to me; by a mere accident I had discovered what he so much

desired.

  My delight, my emotion may be imagined, my eyes were dazzled and I

trembled so that at first I could make nothing of it. One look,

however, would tell me all I wished to know.

  "Let me read," I said to myself, after drawing a long breath.

  I spread it before me on the table, I passed my finger over each

letter, I spelled it through; in my excitement I read it out.

  What horror and stupefaction took possession of my soul. I was

like a man who had received a knock-down blow. Was it possible that

I really read the terrible secret, and it had really been

accomplished! A man had dared to do- what?

  No living being should ever know.

  "Never!" cried I, jumping up. "Never shall my uncle be made aware of

the dread secret. He would be quite capable of undertaking the

terrible journey. Nothing would check him, nothing stop him. Worse, he

would compel me to accompany him, and we should be lost forever. But

no; such folly and madness cannot be allowed."

  I was almost beside myself with rage and fury.

  "My worthy uncle is already nearly mad," I cried aloud. "This

would finish him. By some accident he may make the discovery; in which

case, we are both lost. Perish the fearful secret- let the flames

forever bury it in oblivion."

  I snatched up book and parchment, and was about to cast them into

the fire, when the door opened and my uncle entered.

  I had scarcely time to put down the wretched documents before my

uncle was by my side. He was profoundly absorbed. His thoughts were

evidently bent on the terrible parchment. Some new combination had

probably struck him while taking his walk.

  He seated himself in his armchair, and with a pen began to make an

algebraical calculation. I watched him with anxious eyes. My flesh

crawled as it became probable that he would discover the secret.

  His combinations I knew now were useless, I having discovered the

one only clue. For three mortal hours he continued without speaking

a word, without raising his head, scratching, rewriting, calculating

over and over again. I knew that in time he must hit upon the right

phrase. The letters of every alphabet have only a certain number of

combinations. But then years might elapse before he would arrive at

the correct solution.

  Still time went on; night came, the sounds in the streets ceased-

and still my uncle went on, not even answering our worthy cook when

she called us to supper.

  I did not dare to leave him, so waved her away, and at last fell

asleep on the sofa.

  When I awoke my uncle was still at work. His red eyes, his pallid

countenance, his matted hair, his feverish hands, his hectically

flushed cheeks, showed how terrible had been his struggle with the

impossible, and what fearful fatigue he had undergone during that long

sleepless night. It made me quite ill to look at him. Though he was

rather severe with me, I loved him, and my heart ached at his

sufferings. He was so overcome by one idea that he could not even

get in a passion! All his energies were focused on one point. And I

knew that by speaking one little word all this suffering would

cease. I could not speak it.

  My heart was, nevertheless, inclining towards him. Why, then, did

I remain silent? In the interest of my uncle himself.

  "Nothing shall make me speak," I muttered. "He will want to follow

in the footsteps of the other! I know him well. His imagination is a

perfect volcano, and to make discoveries in the interests of geology

he would sacrifice his life. I will therefore be silent and strictly

keep the secret I have discovered. To reveal it would be suicidal.

He would not only rush, himself, to destruction, but drag me with

him."

  I crossed my arms, looked another way and smoked- resolved never

to speak.

  When our cook wanted to go out to market, or on any other errand,

she found the front door locked and the key taken away. Was this

done purposely or not? Surely Professor Hardwigg did not intend the

old woman and myself to become martyrs to his obstinate will. Were

we to be starved to death? A frightful recollection came to my mind.

Once we had fed on bits and scraps for a week while he sorted some

curiosities. It gave me the cramp even to think of it!

  I wanted my breakfast, and I saw no way of getting it. Still my

resolution held good. I would starve rather than yield. But the cook

began to take me seriously to task. What was to be done? She could not

go out; and I dared not.

  My uncle continued counting and writing; his imagination seemed to

have translated him to the skies. He neither thought of eating nor

drinking. In this way twelve o'clock came round. I was hungry, and

there was nothing in the house. The cook had eaten the last bit of

bread. This could not go on. It did, however, until two, when my

sensations were terrible. After all, I began to think the document

very absurd. Perhaps it might only be a gigantic hoax. Besides, some

means would surely be found to keep my uncle back from attempting

any such absurd expedition. On the other hand, if he did attempt

anything so quixotic, I should not be compelled to accompany him.

Another line of reasoning partially decided me. Very likely he would

make the discovery himself when I should have suffered starvation

for nothing. Under the influence of hunger this reasoning appeared

admirable. I determined to tell all.

  The question now arose as to how it was to be done. I was still

dwelling on the thought, when he rose and put on his hat.

  What! go out and lock us in? Never!

  "Uncle," I began.

  He did not appear even to hear me.

  "Professor Hardwigg," I cried.

  "What," he retorted, "did you speak?"

  "How about the key?"

  "What key- the key of the door?

  "No- of these horrible hieroglyphics?

  He looked at me from under his spectacles, and started at the odd

expression of my face. Rushing forward, he clutched me by the arm

and keenly examined my countenance. His very look was an

interrogation.

  I simply nodded.

  With an incredulous shrug of the shoulders, he turned upon his heel.

Undoubtedly he thought I had gone mad.

  "I have made a very important discovery."

  His eyes flashed with excitement. His hand was lifted in a

menacing attitude. For a moment neither of us spoke. It is hard to say

which was most excited.

  "You don't mean to say that you have any idea of the meaning of

the scrawl?"

  "I do," was my desperate reply. "Look at the sentence as dictated by

you."

  "Well," but it means nothing," was the angry answer.

  "Nothing if you read from left to right, but mark, if from right

to left-"

  "Backwards!" cried my uncle, in wild amazement. "Oh most cunning

Saknussemm; and I to be such a blockhead!"

  He snatched up the document, gazed at it with haggard eye, and

read it out as I had done.

  It read as follows:



      In Sneffels Yoculis craterem kem delibat

      umbra Scartaris Julii intra calendas descende,

      audas viator, et terrestre centrum attinges.

      Kod feci. Arne Saknussemm



  Which dog Latin being translated, reads as follows:



  Descend into the crater of Yocul of Sneffels, which the shade of

Scartaris caresses, before the kalends of July, audacious traveler,

and you will reach the center of the earth. I did it.

                                            ARNE SAKNUSSEMM



  My uncle leaped three feet from the ground with joy. He looked

radiant and handsome. He rushed about the room wild with delight and

satisfaction. He knocked over tables and chairs. He threw his books

about until at last, utterly exhausted, he fell into his armchair.

  "What's o'clock?" he asked.

  "About three."

  "My dinner does not seem to have done me much good," he observed.

"Let me have something to eat. We can then start at once. Get my

portmanteau ready."

  "What for?"

  "And your own," he continued. "We start at once."

  My horror may be conceived. I resolved however to show no fear.

Scientific reasons were the only ones likely to influence my uncle.

Now, there were many against this terrible journey. The very idea of

going down to the center of the earth was simply absurd. I

determined therefore to argue the point after dinner.

  My uncle's rage was now directed against the cook for having no

dinner ready. My explanation however satisfied him, and having

gotten the key, she soon contrived to get sufficient to satisfy our

voracious appetites.

  During the repast my uncle was rather gay than otherwise. He made

some of those peculiar jokes which belong exclusively to the

learned. As soon, however, as dessert was over, he called me to his

study. We each took a chair on opposite sides of the table.

  "Henry," he said, in a soft and winning voice; "I have always

believed you ingenious, and you have rendered me a service never to be

forgotten. Without you, this great, this wondrous discovery would

never have been made. It is my duty, therefore, to insist on your

sharing the glory."

  "He is in a good humor," thought I; "I'll soon let him know my

opinion of glory."

  "In the first place," he continued, "you must keep the whole

affair a profound secret. There is no more envious race of men than

scientific discoverers. Many would start on the same journey. At all

events, we will be the first in the field."

  "I doubt your having many competitors," was my reply.

  "A man of real scientific acquirements would be delighted at the

chance. We should find a perfect stream of pilgrims on the traces of

Arne Saknussemm, if this document were once made public."

  "But, my dear sir, is not this paper very likely to be a hoax?" I

urged.

  "The book in which we find it is sufficient proof of its

authenticity," he replied.

  "I thoroughly allow that the celebrated Professor wrote the lines,

but only, I believe, as a kind of mystification," was my answer.

  Scarcely were the words out of my mouth, when I was sorry I had

uttered them. My uncle looked at me with a dark and gloomy scowl,

and I began to be alarmed for the results of our conversation. His

mood soon changed, however, and a smile took the place of a frown.

  "We shall see," he remarked, with decisive emphasis.

  "But see, what is all this about Yocul, and Sneffels, and this

Scartaris? I have never heard anything about them."

  "The very point to which I am coming. I lately received from my

friend Augustus Peterman, of Leipzig, a map. Take down the third atlas

from the second shelf, series Z, plate 4."

  I rose, went to the shelf, and presently returned with the volume

indicated.

  "This," said my uncle, "is one of the best maps of Iceland. I

believe it will settle all your doubts, difficulties and objections."

  With a grim hope to the contrary, I stooped over the map.
