




                     CHAPTER 33

                 Our Route Reversed



  HERE ends what I call "My Journal" of our voyage on board the

raft, which journal was happily saved from the wreck. I proceed with

my narrative as I did before I commenced my daily notes.

  What happened when the terrible shock took place, when the raft

was cast upon the rocky shore, it would be impossible for me now to

say. I felt myself precipitated violently into the boiling waves,

and if I escaped from a certain and cruel death, it was wholly owing

to the determination of the faithful Hans, who, clutching me by the

arm, saved me from the yawning abyss.

  The courageous Icelander then carried me in his powerful arms, far

out of the reach of the waves, and laid me down upon a burning expanse

of sand, where I found myself some time afterwards in the company of

my uncle, the Professor.

  Then he quietly returned towards the fatal rocks, against which

the furious waves were beating, in order to save any stray waifs

from the wreck. This man was always practical and thoughtful. I

could not utter a word; I was quite overcome with emotion; my whole

body was broken and bruised with fatigue; it took hours before I was

anything like myself.

  Meanwhile, there fell a fearful deluge of rain, drenching us to

the skin. Its very violence, however, proclaimed the approaching end

of the storm. Some overhanging rocks afforded us a slight protection

from the torrents.

  Under this shelter, Hans prepared some food, which, however, I was

unable to touch; and, exhausted by the three weary days and nights

of watching, we fell into a deep and painful sleep. My dreams were

fearful, but at last exhausted nature asserted her supremacy, and I

slumbered.

  Next day when I awoke the change was magical. The weather was

magnificent. Air and sea, as if by mutual consent, had regained

their serenity. Every trace of the storm, even the faintest, had

disappeared. I was saluted on my awakening by the first joyous tones I

had heard from the Professor for many a day. His gaiety, indeed, was

something terrible.

  "Well, my lad," he cried, rubbing his hands together, "have you

slept soundly?

  Might it not have been supposed that we were in the old house on the

Konigstrasse; that I had just come down quietly to my breakfast; and

that my marriage with Gretchen was to take place that very day? My

uncle's coolness was exasperating.

  Alas, considering how the tempest had driven us in an easterly

direction, we had passed under the whole of Germany, under the city of

Hamburg where I had been so happy, under the very street which

contained all I loved and cared for in the world.

  It was a positive fact that I was only separated from her by a

distance of forty leagues. But these forty leagues were of hard,

impenetrable granite!

  All these dreary and miserable reflections passed through my mind,

before I attempted to answer my uncle's question.

  "Why, what is the matter?" he cried. "Cannot you say whether you

have slept well or not?"

  "I have slept very well," was my reply, "but every bone in my body

aches. I suppose that will lead to nothing."

  "Nothing at all, my boy. It is only the result of the fatigue of the

last few days- that is all.

  "You appear- if I may be allowed to say so- to be very jolly this

morning," I said.

  "Delighted, my dear boy, delighted. Was never happier in my life. We

have at last reached the wished-for port."

  "The end of our expedition?" cried I, in a tone of considerable

surprise.

  "No; but to the confines of that sea which I began to fear would

never end, but go round the whole world. We will now tranquilly resume

our journey by land, and once again endeavor to dive into the center

of the earth."

  "My dear uncle," I began, in a hesitating kind of way, "allow me

to ask you one question."

  "Certainly, Harry; a dozen if you think proper."

  "One will suffice. How about getting back?" I asked.

  "How about getting back? What a question to ask. We have not as

yet reached the end of our journey."

  "I know that. All I want to know is how you propose we shall

manage the return voyage?"

  "In the most simple manner in the world," said the imperturbable

Professor. "Once we reach the exact center of this sphere, either we

shall find a new road by which to ascend to the surface, or we shall

simply turn round and go back by the way we came. I have every

reason to believe that while we are traveling forward, it will not

close behind us."

  "Then one of the first matters to see to will be to repair the

raft," was my rather melancholy response.

  "Of course. We must attend to that above all things," continued

the Professor.

  "Then comes the all-important question of provisions," I urged.

"Have we anything like enough left to enable us to accomplish such

great, such amazing, designs as you contemplate carrying out?"

  "I have seen into the matter, and my answer is in the affirmative.

Hans is a very clever fellow, and I have reason to believe that he has

saved the greater part of the cargo. But the best way to satisfy

your scruples is to come and judge for yourself."

  Saying which, he led the way out of the kind of open grotto in which

we had taken shelter. I had almost begun to hope that which I should

rather have feared, and this was the impossibility of such a shipwreck

leaving even the slightest signs of what it had carried as freight.

I was, however, thoroughly mistaken.

  As soon as I reached the shores of this inland sea, I found Hans

standing gravely in the midst of a large number of things laid out

in complete order. My uncle wrung his hands with deep and silent

gratitude. His heart was too full for speech.

  This man, whose superhuman devotion to his employers I not only

never saw surpassed, nor even equaled, had been hard at work all the

time we slept, and at the risk of his life had succeeded in saving the

most precious articles of our cargo.

  Of course, under the circumstances, we necessarily experienced

several severe losses. Our weapons had wholly vanished. But experience

had taught us to do without them. The provision of powder had,

however, remained intact, after having narrowly escaped blowing us all

to atoms in the storm.

  "Well," said the Professor, who was now ready to make the best of

everything, "as we have no guns, all we have to do is to give up all

idea of hunting."

  "Yes, my dear sir, we can do without them, but what about all our

instruments?"

  "Here is the manometer, the most useful of all, and which I gladly

accept in lieu of the rest. With it alone I can calculate the depth as

we proceed; by its means alone I shall be able to decide when we

have reached the center of the earth. Ha, ha! but for this little

instrument we might make a mistake, and run the risk of coming out

at the antipodes!"

  All this was said amid bursts of unnatural laughter.

  "But the compass," I cried, "without that what can we do?"

  "Here it is, safe and sound!" he cried, with real joy, "ah, ah,

and here we have the chronometer and the thermometers. Hans the hunter

is indeed an invaluable man!"

  It was impossible to deny this fact. As far as the nautical and

other instruments were concerned, nothing was wanting. Then on further

examination, I found ladders, cords, pickaxes, crowbars, and

shovels, all scattered about on the shore.

  There was, however, finally the most important question of all,

and that was, provisions.

  "But what are we to do for food?" I asked.

  "Let us see to the commissariat department", replied my uncle

gravely.

  The boxes which contained our supply of food for the voyage were

placed in a row along the strand, and were in a capital state of

preservation; the sea had in every case respected their contents,

and to sum up in one sentence, taking into consideration, biscuits,

salt meat, Schiedam and dried fish, we could still calculate on having

about four months' supply, if used with prudence and caution.

  "Four months," cried the sanguine Professor in high glee. "Then we

shall have plenty of time both to go and to come, and with what

remains I undertake to give a grand dinner to my colleagues of the

Johanneum."

  I sighed. I should by this time have become used to the

temperament of my uncle, and yet this man astonished me more and

more every day. He was the greatest human enigma I ever had known.

  "Now," he, "before we do anything else, we must lay in a stock of

fresh water. The rain has fallen in abundance, and filled the

hollows of the granite. There is a rich supply of water, and we have

no fear of suffering from thirst, which in our circumstances is of the

last importance. As for the raft, I shall recommend Hans to repair

it to the best of his abilities; though I have every reason to believe

we shall not require it again."

  "How is that?" I cried, more amazed than ever at my uncle's style of

reasoning.

  "I have an idea, my dear boy; it is none other than this simple

fact; we shall not come out by the same opening as that by which we

entered."

  I began to look at my uncle with vague suspicion. An idea had more

than once taken possession of me; and this was, that he was going mad.

And yet, little did I think how true and prophetic his words were

doomed to be.

  "And now," he said, "having seen to all these matters of detail,

to breakfast."

  I followed him to a sort of projecting cape, after he had given

his last instructions to our guide. In this original position, with

dried meat, biscuit, and a delicious cup of tea, we made a

satisfactory meal- I may say one of the most welcome and pleasant I

ever remember. Exhaustion, the keen atmosphere, the state of calm

after so much agitation, all contributed to give me an excellent

appetite. Indeed, it contributed very much to producing a pleasant and

cheerful state of mind.

  While breakfast was in hand, and between the sips of warm tea, I

asked my uncle if he had any idea of how we now stood in relation to

the world above.

  "For my part," I added, "I think it will be rather difficult to

determine."

  "Well, if we were compelled to fix the exact spot," said my uncle,

it might be difficult, since during the three days of that awful

tempest I could keep no account either of the quickness of our pace,

or of the direction in which the raft was going. Still, we will

endeavor to approximate to the truth. We shall not, I believe, be so

very far out."

  "Well, if I recollect rightly," I replied, "our last observation was

made at the geyser island."

  "Harry's Island, my boy! Harry's Island. Do not decline the honor of

having named it; given your name to an island discovered by us, the

first human beings who trod it since the creation of the world!"

  "Let it be so, then. At Harry's Island we had already gone over

two hundred and seventy leagues of sea, and we were, I believe,

about six hundred leagues, more or less, from Iceland."

  "Good. I am glad to see that you remember so well. Let us start from

that point, and let us count four days of storm, during which our rate

of traveling must have been very great. I should say that our velocity

must have been about eighty leagues to the twenty-four hours."

  I agreed that I thought this a fair calculation. There were then

three hundred leagues to be added to the grand total.

  "Yes, and the Central Sea must extend at least six hundred leagues

from side to side. Do you know, my boy, Harry, that we have discovered

an inland lake larger than the Mediterranean?"

  "Certainly, and we only know of its extent in one way. It may be

hundreds of miles in length."

  "Very likely."

  "Then," said I, after calculating for some for some minutes, "if

your previsions are right, we are at this moment exactly under the

Mediterranean itself."

  "Do you think so?"

  "Yes, I am almost certain of it. Are we not nine hundred leagues

distant from Reykjavik?"

  "That is perfectly true, and a famous bit of road we have

traveled, my boy. But why we should be under the Mediterranean more

than under Turkey or the Atlantic Ocean can only be known when we

are sure of not having deviated from our course; and of this we know

nothing."

  "I do not think we were driven very far from our course; the wind

appears to me to have been always about the same. My opinion is that

this shore must be situated to the southeast of Port Gretchen."

  "Good- I hope so. It will, however, be easy to decide the matter

by taking the bearings from our departure by means of the compass.

Come along, and we will consult that invaluable invention."

  The Professor now walked eagerly in the direction of the rock

where the indefatigable Hans had placed the instruments in safety.

My uncle was gay and lighthearted; he rubbed his hands, and assumed

all sorts of attitudes. He was to all appearance once more a young

man. Since I had known him, never had he been so amiable and pleasant.

I followed him, rather curious to know whether I had made any

mistake in my estimation of our position.

  As soon as we had reached the rock, my uncle took the compass,

placed it horizontally before him, and looked keenly at the needle.

  As he had at first shaken it to give it vivacity, it oscillated

considerably, and then slowly assumed its right position under the

influence of the magnetic power.

  The Professor bent his eyes curiously over the wondrous

instrument. A violent start immediately showed the extent of his

emotion.

  He closed his eyes, rubbed them, and took another and a keener

survey.

  Then he turned slowly round to me, stupefaction depicted on his

countenance.

  "What is the matter?" said I, beginning to be alarmed.

  He could not speak. He was too overwhelmed for words. He simply

pointed to the instrument.

  I examined it eagerly according to his mute directions, and a loud

cry of surprise escaped my lips. The needle of the compass pointed due

north- in the direction we expected was the south!

  It pointed to the shore instead of to the high seas.

  I shook the compass; I examined it with a curious and anxious eye.

It was in a state of perfection. No blemish in any way explained the

phenomenon. Whatever position we forced the needle into, it returned

invariably to the same unexpected point.

  It was useless attempting to conceal from ourselves the fatal truth.

  There could be no doubt about it, unwelcome as was the fact, that

during the tempest, there had been a sudden slant of wind, of which we

had been unable to take any account, and thus the raft had carried

us back to the shores we had left, apparently forever, so many days

before!

