




                     CHAPTER 18

                  The Wrong Road!



  NEXT day, our departure took place at a very early hour. There was

no time for the least delay. According to my account, we had five

days' hard work to get back to the place where the galleries divided.

  I can never tell all the sufferings we endured upon our return. My

uncle bore them like a man who has been in the wrong- that is, with

concentrated and suppressed anger; Hans, with all the resignation of

his pacific character; and I- I confess that I did nothing but

complain, and despair. I had no heart for this bad fortune.

  But there was one consolation. Defeat at the outset would probably

upset the whole journey!

  As I had expected from the first, our supply of water gave

completely out on our first day's march. Our provision of liquids

was reduced to our supply of Schiedam; but this horrible- nay, I

will say it- this infernal liquor burnt the throat, and I could not

even bear the sight of it. I found the temperature to be stifling. I

was paralyzed with fatigue. More than once I was about to fall

insensible to the ground. The whole party then halted, and the

worthy Icelander and my excellent uncle did their best to console

and comfort me. I could, however, plainly see that my uncle was

contending painfully against the extreme fatigues of our journey,

and the awful torture generated by the absence of water.

  At length a time came when I ceased to recollect anything- when

all was one awfull hideous, fantastic dream!

  At last, on Tuesday, the seventh of the month of July, after

crawling on our hands and knees for many hours, more dead than

alive, we reached the point of junction between the galleries. I lay

like a log, an inert mass of human flesh on the arid lava soil. It was

then ten in the morning.

  Hans and my uncle, leaning against the wall, tried to nibble away at

some pieces of biscuit, while deep groans and sighs escaped from my

scorched and swollen lips. Then I fell off into a kind of deep

lethargy.

  Presently I felt my uncle approach, and lift me up tenderly in his

arms.

  "Poor boy," I heard him say in a tone of deep commiseration.

  I was profoundly touched by these words, being by no means

accustomed to signs of womanly weakness in the Professor. I caught his

trembling hands in mine and gave them a gentle pressure. He allowed me

to do so without resistance, looking at me kindly all the time. His

eyes were wet with tears.

  I then saw him take the gourd which he wore at his side. To my

surprise, or rather to my stupefaction, he placed it to my lips.

  "Drink, my boy," he said.

  Was it possible my ears had not deceived me? Was my uncle mad? I

looked at him, with, I am sure, quite an idiotic expression. I could

not believe him. I too much feared the counteraction of

disappointment.

  "Drink"' he said again.

  Had I heard aright? Before, however, I could ask myself the question

a second time, a mouthful of water cooled my parched lips and

throat- one mouthful, but I do believe it brought me back to life.

  I thanked my uncle by clasping my hands. My heart was too full to

speak.

  "Yes," said he, "one mouthful of water, the very last- do you

hear, my boy- the very last! I have taken care of it at the bottom

of my bottle as the apple of my eye. Twenty times, a hundred times,

I have resisted the fearful desire to drink it. But- no- no, Harry,

I saved it for you."

  "My dear uncle," I exclaimed, and the big tears rolled down my hot

and feverish cheeks.

  "Yes, my poor boy, I knew that when you reached this place, this

crossroad in the earth, you would fall down half dead, and I saved

my last drop of water in order to restore you.

  "Thanks," I cried; "thanks from my heart."

  As little as my thirst was really quenched, I had nevertheless

partially recovered my strength. The contracted muscles of my throat

relaxed- and the inflammation of my lips in some measure subsided.

At all events, I was able to speak.

  "Well," I said, "there can be no doubt now as to what we have to do.

Water has utterly failed us; our journey is therefore at an end. Let

us return."

  While I spoke thus, my uncle evidently avoided my face: he held down

his head; his eyes were turned in every possible direction but the

right one.

  "Yes," I continued, getting excited by my own words, we must go back

to Sneffels. May heaven give us strength to enable us once more to

revisit the light of day. Would that we now stood on the summit of the

crater."

  "Go back," said my uncle, speaking to himself, "and must it be so?"

  "Go back- yes, and without losing a single moment", I vehemently

cried.

  For some moments there was silence under that dark and gloomy vault.

  "So, my dear Harry," said the Professor in a very singular tone of

voice, "those few drops of water have not sufficed to restore your

energy and courage."

  "Courage!" I cried.

  "I see that you are quite as downcast as before- and still give

way to discouragement and despair."

  What, then, was the man made of, and what other projects were

entering his fertile and audacious brain!

  "You are not discouraged, sir?"

  "What! Give up just as we are on the verge of success?" he cried.

"Never, never shall it be said that Professor Hardwigg retreated."

  "Then we must make up our minds to perish," I cried with a

helpless sigh.

  "No, Harry, my boy, certainly not. Go, leave me, I am very far

from desiring your death. Take Hans with you. I will go on alone."

  "You ask us to leave you?"

  "Leave me, I say. I have undertaken this dangerous and perilous

adventure. I will carry it to the end- or I will never return to the

surface of Mother Earth. Go, Harry- once more I say to you- go!"

  My uncle as he spoke was terribly excited. His voice, which before

had been tender, almost womanly, became harsh and menacing. He

appeared to be struggling with desperate energy against the

impossible. I did not wish to abandon him at the bottom of that abyss,

while, on the other hand, the instinct of preservation told me to fly.

  Meanwhile, our guide was looking on with profound calmness and

indifference. He appeared to be an unconcerned party, and yet he

perfectly well knew what was going on between us. Our gestures

sufficiently indicated the different roads each wished to follow-and

which each tried to influence the other to undertake. But Hans

appeared not to take the slightest interest in what was really a

question of life and death for us all, but waited quite ready to

obey the signal which should say go aloft, or to resume his

desperate journey into the interior of the earth.

  How then I wished with all my heart and soul that I could make him

understand my words. My representations, my sighs and groans, the

earnest accents in which I should have spoken would have convinced

that cold, hard nature. Those fearful dangers and perils of which

the stolid guide had no idea, I would have pointed them out to him-

I would have, as it were, made him see and feel. Between us, we

might have convinced the obstinate Professor. If the worst had come to

the worst, we could have compelled him to return to the summit of

Sneffels.

  I quietly approached Hans. I caught his hand in mine. He never moved

a muscle. I indicated to him the road to the top of the crater. He

remained motionless. My panting form, my haggard countenance, must

have indicated the extent of my sufferings. The Icelander gently shook

his head and pointed to my uncle.

  "Master," he said.

  The word is Icelandic as well as English.

  "The master!" I cried, beside myself with fury- "madman! no- I

tell you he is not the master of our lives; we must fly! we must

drag him with us! do you hear me? Do you understand me, I say?"

  I have already explained that I held Hans by the arm. I tried to

make him rise from his seat. I struggled with him and tried to force

him away. My uncle now interposed.

  "My good Henry, be calm," he said. "You will obtain nothing from

my devoted follower; therefore, listen to what I have to say."

  I folded my arms, as well as I could, and looked my uncle full in

the face.

  "This wretched want of water," he said, "is the sole obstacle to the

success of my project. In the entire gallery, made of lava, schist,

and coal, it is true we found not one liquid molecule. It is quite

possible that we may be more fortunate in the western tunnel."

  My sole reply was to shake my head with an air of deep incredulity.

  "Listen to me to the end," said the Professor in his well-known

lecturing voice. "While you lay yonder without life or motion, I

undertook a reconnoitering journey into the conformation of this other

gallery. I have discovered that it goes directly downwards into the

bowels of the earth, and in a few hours will take us to the old

granitic formation. In this we shall undoubtedly find innumerable

springs. The nature of the rock makes this a mathematical certainty,

and instinct agrees with logic to say that it is so. Now, this is

the serious proposition which I have to make to you. When

Christopher Columbus asked of his men three days to discover the

land of promise, his men ill, terrified, and hopeless, yet gave him

three days- and the New World was discovered. Now I, the Christopher

Columbus of this subterranean region, only ask of you one more day.

If, when that time is expired, I have not found the water of which

we are in search, I swear to you, I will give up my mighty

enterprise and return to the earth's surface."

  Despite my irritation and despair, I knew how much it cost my

uncle to make this proposition, and to hold such conciliatory

language. Under the circumstances, what could I do but yield?

  "Well," I cried, "let it be as you wish, and may heaven reward

your superhuman energy. But as, unless we discover water, our hours

are numbered, let us lose no time, but go ahead."
