




                     CHAPTER 31

                  The Sea Monster



  WEDNESDAY, August 19th. Fortunately the wind, which for the

present blows with some violence, has allowed us to escape from the

scene of the unparalleled and extraordinary struggle. Hans with his

usual imperturbable calm remained at the helm. My uncle, who for a

short time had been withdrawn from his absorbing reveries by the novel

incidents of this sea fight, fell back again apparently into a brown

study. His eyes were fixed impatiently on the widespread ocean.

  Our voyage now became monotonous and uniform. Dull as it has become,

I have no desire to have it broken by any repetition of the perils and

adventures of yesterday.



  Thursday, August 20th. The wind is now N. N. E., and blows very

irregularly. It has changed to fitful gusts. The temperature is

exceedingly high. We are now progressing at the average rate of

about ten miles and a half per hour.

  About twelve o'clock a distant sound as of thunder fell upon our

ears. I make a note of the fact without even venturing a suggestion as

to its cause. It was one continued roar as of a sea falling over

mighty rocks.

  "Far off in the distance," said the Professor dogmatically, "there

is some rock or some island against which the seal lashed to fury by

the wind, is breaking violently."

  Hans, without saying a word, clambered to the top of the mast, but

could make out nothing. The ocean was level in every direction as

far as the eye could reach.

  Three hours passed away without any sign to indicate what might be

before us. The sound began to assume that of a mighty cataract.

  I expressed my opinion on this point strongly to my uncle. He merely

shook his head. I, however, am strongly impressed by a conviction that

I am not wrong. Are we advancing towards some mighty waterfall which

shall cast us into the abyss? Probably this mode of descending into

the abyss may be agreeable to the Professor, because it would be

something like the vertical descent he is so eager to make. I

entertain a very different opinion.

  Whatever be the truth, it is certain that not many leagues distant

there must be some very extraordinary phenomenon, for as we advance

the roar becomes something mighty and stupendous. Is it in the

water, or in the air?

  I cast hasty glances aloft at the suspended vapors, and I seek to

penetrate their mighty depths. But the vault above is tranquil. The

clouds, which are now elevated to the very summit, appear utterly

still and motionless, and completely lost in the irradiation of

electric light. It is necessary, therefore, to seek for the cause of

this phenomenon elsewhere.

  I examine the horizon, now perfectly calm, pure, and free from all

haze. Its aspect still remains unchanged. But if this awful noise

proceeds from a cataract- if, so to speak in plain English, this

vast interior ocean is precipitated into a lower basin- if these

tremendous roars are produced by the noise of falling waters, the

current would increase in activity, and its increasing swiftness would

give me some idea of the extent of the peril with which we are

menaced. I consult the current. It simply does not exist: there is

no such thing. An empty bottle cast into the water lies to leeward

without motion.

  About four o'clock Hans rises, clambers up the mast, and reaches the

truck itself. From this elevated position his looks are cast around.

They take in a vast circumference of the ocean. At last, his eyes

remain fixed. His face expresses no astonishment, but his eyes

slightly dilate.

  "He has seen something at last," cried my uncle.

  "I think so", I replied.

  Hans came down, stood beside us, and pointed with his right hand

to the south.

  "Der nere," he said.

  "There," replied my uncle.

  And seizing his telescope, he looked at it with great attention

for about a minute, which to me appeared an age. I knew not what to

think or expect.

  "Yes, yes," he cried in a tone of considerable surprise, "there it

is."

  "What?" I asked.

  "A tremendous spurt of water rising out of the waves."

  "Some other marine monster, I cried, already alarmed.

  "Perhaps."

  "Then let us steer more to the westward, for we know what we have to

expect from antediluvian animals," was my eager reply.

  "Go ahead," said my uncle.

  I turned towards Hans. Hans was at the tiller steering with his

usual imperturbable calm.

  Nevertheless, if from the distance which separated us from this

creature, a distance which must be estimated at not less than a

dozen leagues, one could see the column of water spurting from the

blow-hole of the great animal, his dimensions must be something

preternatural. To fly is, therefore, the course to be suggested by

ordinary prudence. But we have not come into that part of the world to

be prudent. Such is my uncle's determination.

  We, accordingly, continued to advance. The nearer we come, the

loftier is the spouting water. What monster can fill himself with such

huge volumes of water, and then unceasingly spout them out in such

lofty jets?

  At eight o'clock in the evening, reckoning as above ground, where

there is day and night, we are not more than two leagues from the

mighty beast. Its long, black, enormous, mountainous body, lies on the

top of the water like an island. But then sailors have been said to

have gone ashore on sleeping whales, mistaking them for land. Is it

illusion, or is it fear? Its length cannot be less than a thousand

fathoms. What, then, is this cetaceous monster of which no Cuvier ever

thought?

  It is quite motionless and presents the appearance of sleep. The sea

seems unable to lift him upwards; it is rather the waves which break

on his huge and gigantic frame. The waterspout, rising to a height

of five hundred feet, breaks in spray with a dull, sullen roar.

  We advance, like senseless lunatics, towards this mighty mass.

  I honestly confess that I was abjectly afraid. I declared that I

would go no farther. I threatened in my terror to cut the sheet of the

sail. I attacked the Professor with considerable acrimony, calling him

foolhardy, mad, I know not what. He made no answer.

  Suddenly the imperturbable Hans once more pointed his finger to

the menacing object: "Holme!"

  "An island!" cried my uncle.

  "An island?" I replied, shrugging my shoulders at this poor

attempt at deception.

  "Of course it is," cried my uncle, bursting into a loud and joyous

laugh.

  "But the waterspout?"

  "Geyser," said Hans.

  "Yes, of course- a geyser," replied my uncle, still laughing, "a

geyser like those common in Iceland. Jets like this are the great

wonders of the country."

  At first I would not allow that I had been so grossly deceived. What

could be more ridiculous than to have taken an island for a marine

monster? But kick as one may, one must yield to evidence, and I was

finally convinced of my error. It was nothing, after all, but a

natural phenomenon.

  As we approached nearer and nearer, the dimensions of the liquid

sheaf of waters became truly grand and stupendous. The island had,

at a distance, presented the appearance of an enormous whale, whose

head rose high above the waters. The geyser, a word the Icelanders

pronounce geysir, and which signifies fury, rose majestically from its

summit. Dull detonations are heard every now and then, and the

enormous jet, taken as it were with sudden fury, shakes its plume of

vapor, and bounds into the first layer of the clouds. It is alone.

Neither spurts of vapor nor hot springs surround it, and the whole

volcanic power of that region is concentrated in one sublime column.

The rays of electric light mix with this dazzling sheaf, every drop as

it falls assuming the prismatic colors of the rainbow.

  "Let us go on shore," said the Professor, after some minutes of

silence.

  It is necessary, however, to take great precaution, in order to

avoid the weight of falling waters, which would cause the raft to

founder in an instant. Hans, however, steers admirably, and brings

us to the other extremity of the island.

  I was the first to leap on the rock. My uncle followed, while the

eider-duck hunter remained still, like a man above any childish

sources of astonishment. We were now walking on granite mixed with

siliceous sandstone; the soil shivered under our feet like the sides

of boilers in which over-heated steam is forcibly confined. It is

burning. We soon came in sight of the little central basin from

which rose the geyser. I plunged a thermometer into the water which

ran bubbling from the center, and it marked a heat of a hundred and

sixty-three degrees!

  This water, therefore, came from some place where the heat was

intense. This was singularly in contradiction with the theories of

Professor Hardwigg. I could not help telling him my opinion on the

subject.

  "Well," said he sharply, "and what does this prove against my

doctrine?

  "Nothing," replied I dryly, seeing that I was running my head

against a foregone conclusion.

  Nevertheless, I am compelled to confess that until now we have

been most remarkably fortunate, and that this voyage is being

accomplished in most favorable conditions of temperature; but it

appears evident, in fact, certain, that we shall sooner or later

arrive at one of those regions where the central heat will reach its

utmost limits, and will go far beyond all the possible gradations of

thermometers.

  Visions of the Hades of the ancients, believed to be in the center

of the earth, floated through my imagination.

  We shall, however, see what we shall see. That is the Professor's

favorite phrase now. Having christened the volcanic island by the name

of his nephew, the leader of the expedition turned away and gave the

signal for embarkation.

  I stood still, however, for some minutes, gazing upon the

magnificent geyser. I soon was able to perceive that the upward

tendency of the water was irregular; now it diminished in intensity,

and then, suddenly, it regained new vigor, which I attributed to the

variation of the pressure of the accumulated vapors in its reservoir.

  At last we took our departure, going carefully round the projecting,

and rather dangerous, rocks of the southern side. Hans had taken

advantage of this brief halt to repair the raft.

  Before we took our final departure from the island, however, I

made some observations to calculate the distance we had gone over, and

I put them down in my journal. Since we left Port Gretchen, we had

traveled two hundred and seventy leagues- more than eight hundred

miles- on this great inland sea; we were, therefore, six hundred and

twenty leagues from Iceland, and exactly under England.

