




                     CHAPTER 9

             We Meet with adventures



  THE weather was overcast but settled, when we commenced our

adventurous and perilous journey. We had neither to fear fatiguing

heat nor drenching rain. It was, in fact, real tourist weather.

  As there was nothing I liked better than horse exercise, the

pleasure of riding through an unknown country caused the early part of

our enterprise to be particularly agreeable to me.

  I began to enjoy the exhilarating delight of traveling, a life of

desire, gratification and liberty. The truth is, that my spirits

rose so rapidly, that I began to be indifferent to what had once

appeared to be a terrible journey.

  "After all," I said to myself, "what do I risk? Simply to take a

journey through a curious country, to climb a remarkable mountain, and

if the worst comes to the worst, to descend into the crater of an

extinct volcano."

  There could be no doubt that this was all this terrible Saknussemm

had done. As to the existence of a gallery, or of subterraneous

passages leading into the interior of the earth, the idea was simply

absurd, the hallucination of a distempered imagination. All, then,

that may be required of me I will do cheerfully, and will create no

difficulty.

  It was just before we left Reykjavik that I came to this decision.

  Hans, our extraordinary guide, went first, walking with a steady,

rapid, unvarying step. Our two horses with the luggage followed of

their own accord, without requiring whip or spur. My uncle and I

came behind, cutting a very tolerable figure upon our small but

vigorous animals.

  Iceland is one of the largest islands in Europe. It contains

thirty thousand square miles of surface, and has about seventy

thousand inhabitants. Geographers have divided it into four parts, and

we had to cross the southwest quarter which in the vernacular is

called Sudvestr Fjordungr.

  Hans, on taking his departure from Reykjavik, had followed the

line of the sea. We took our way through poor and sparse meadows,

which made a desperate effort every year to show a little green.

They very rarely succeed in a good show of yellow.

  The rugged summits of the rocky hills were dimly visible on the edge

of the horizon, through the misty fogs; every now and then some

heavy flakes of snow showed conspicuous in the morning light, while

certain lofty and pointed rocks were first lost in the grey low

clouds, their summits clearly visible above, like jagged reefs

rising from a troublous sea.

  Every now and then a spur of rock came down through the arid ground,

leaving us scarcely room to pass. Our horses, however, appeared not

only well acquainted with the country, but by a kind of instinct, knew

which was the best road. My uncle had not even the satisfaction of

urging forward his steed by whip, spur, or voice. It was utterly

useless to show any signs of impatience. I could not help smiling to

see him look so big on his little horse; his long legs now and then

touching the ground made him look like a six-footed centaur.

  "Good beast, good beast," he would cry. "I assure you, "Good

beast, good beast, Henry, that I begin to think no animal is more

intelligent than an Icelandic horse. Snow, tempest, impracticable

roads, rocks, icebergs- nothing stops him. He is brave; he is sober;

he is safe; he never makes a false step; never glides or slips from

his path. I dare to say that if any river, any fjord has to be

crossed- and I have no doubt there will be many- you will see him

enter the water without hesitation like an amphibious like an

amphibious animal, and reach the opposite side in safety. We must not,

however, attempt to hurry him; we must allow him to have his own

way, and I will undertake to say that between us we shall do our ten

leagues a day."

  "We may do so," was my reply, "but what about our worthy guide?"

  "I have not the slightest anxiety about him: that sort of people

go ahead without knowing even what they are about. Look at Hans. He

moves so little that it is impossible for him to become fatigued.

Besides, if he were to complain of weariness, he could have the loan

of my horse. I should have a violent attack of the cramp if I were not

to have some sort of exercise. My arms are right- but my legs are

getting a little stiff."

  All this while we were advancing at a rapid pace. The country we had

reached was already nearly a desert. Here and there could be seen an

isolated farm, some solitary bur, or Icelandic house, built of wood,

earth, fragments of lava- looking like beggars on the highway of life.

These wretched and miserable huts excited in us such pity that we felt

half disposed to leave alms at every door. In this country there are

no roads, paths are nearly unknown, and vegetation, poor as it was,

slowly as it reached perfection, soon obliterated all traces of the

few travelers who passed from place to place.

  Nevertheless, this division of the province, situated only a few

miles from the capital, is considered one of the best cultivated and

most thickly peopled in all Iceland. What, then, must be the state

of the less known and more distant parts of the island? After

traveling fully half a Danish mile, we had met neither a farmer at the

door of his hut, nor even a wandering shepherd with his wild and

savage flock.

  A few stray cows and sheep were only seen occasionally. What,

then, must we expect when we come to the upheaved regions- to the

districts broken and roughened from volcanic eruptions and

subterraneous commotions?

  We were to learn this all in good time. I saw, however, on

consulting the map, that we avoided a good deal of this rough country,

by following the winding and desolate shores of the sea. In reality,

the great volcanic movement of the island, and all its attendant

phenomena, are concentrated in the interior of the island; there,

horizontal layers or strata of rocks, piled one upon the other,

eruptions of basaltic origin, and streams of lava, have given this

country a kind of supernatural reputation.

  Little did I expect, however, the spectacle which awaited us when we

reached the peninsula of Sneffels, where agglomerations of nature's

ruins form a kind of terrible chaos.

  Some two hours or more after we had left the city of Reykjavik, we

reached the little town called Aoalkirkja, or the principal church. It

consists simply of a few houses- not what in England or Germany we

should call a hamlet.

  Hans stopped here one half hour. He shared our frugal breakfast,

answered Yes, and No to my uncle's questions as to the nature of the

road, and at last when asked where we were to pass the night was as

laconic as usual.

  "Gardar!" was his one-worded reply.

  I took occasion to consult the map, to see where Gardar was to be

found. After looking keenly I found a small town of that name on the

borders of the Hvalfjord, about four miles from Reykjavik. I pointed

this out to my uncle, who made a very energetic grimace.

  "Only four miles out of twenty-two? Why it is only a little walk."

  He was about to make some energetic observation to the guide, but

Hans, without taking the slightest notice of him, went in front of the

horses, and walked ahead with the same imperturbable phlegm he had

always exhibited.

  Three hours later, still traveling over those apparently

interminable and sandy prairies, we were compelled to go round the

Kollafjord, an easier and shorter cut than crossing the gulfs. Shortly

after we entered a place of communal jurisdiction called Ejulberg, and

the clock of which would then have struck twelve, if any Icelandic

church had been rich enough to possess so valuable and useful an

article. These sacred edifices are, however, very much like these

people, who do without watches- and never miss them.

  Here the horses were allowed to take some rest and refreshment, then

following a narrow strip of shore between high rocks and the sea, they

took us without further halt to the Aoalkirkja of Brantar, and after

another mile to Saurboer Annexia, a chapel of ease, situated on the

southern bank of the Hvalfjord.

  It was four o'clock in the evening and we had traveled four Danish

miles, about equal to twenty English.

  The fjord was in this place about half a mile in width. The sweeping

and broken waves came rolling in upon the pointed rocks; the gulf

was surrounded by rocky walls- a mighty cliff, three thousand feet

in height, remarkable for its brown strata, separated here and there

by beds of tufa of a reddish hue. Now, whatever may have been the

intelligence of our horses, I had not the slightest reliance upon

them, as a means of crossing a stormy arm of the sea. To ride over

salt water upon the back of a little horse seemed to me absurd.

  "If they are really intelligent," I said to myself, "they will

certainly not make the attempt. In any case, I shall trust rather to

my own intelligence than theirs."

  But my uncle was in no humor to wait. He dug his heels into the

sides of his steed, and made for the shore. His horse went to the very

edge of the water, sniffed at the approaching wave and retreated.

  My uncle, who was, sooth to say, quite as obstinate as the beast

he bestrode, insisted on his making the desired advance. This

attempt was followed by a new refusal on the part of the horse which

quietly shook his head. This demonstration of rebellion was followed

by a volley of words and a stout application of whipcord; also

followed by kicks on the part of the horse, which threw its head and

heels upwards and tried to throw his rider. At length the sturdy

little pony, spreading out his legs, in a stiff and ludicrous

attitude, got from under the Professor's legs, and left him

standing, with both feet on a separate stone, like the Colossus of

Rhodes.

  "Wretched animal!" cried my uncle, suddenly transformed into a

foot passenger- and as angry and ashamed as a dismounted cavalry

officer on the field of battle.

  "Farja," said the guide, tapping him familiarly on the shoulder.

  "What, a ferry boat!

  "Der," answered Hans, pointing to where lay the boat in

question-"there."

  "Well," I cried, quite delighted with the information; "so it is."

  "Why did you not say so before," cried my uncle; "why not start at

once?"

  "Tidvatten," said the guide.

  "What does he say?" I asked, considerably puzzled by the delay and

the dialogue.

  "He says tide," replied my uncle, translating the Danish word for my

information.

  "Of course I understand- we must wait till the tide serves."

  "For bida?" asked my uncle.

  "Ja," replied Hans.

  My uncle frowned, stamped his feet and then followed the horses to

where the boat lay.

  I thoroughly understood and appreciated the necessity for waiting,

before crossing the fjord, for that moment when the sea at its highest

point is in a state of slack water. As neither the ebb nor flow can

then be felt, the ferry boat was in no danger of being carried out

to sea, or dashed upon the rocky coast.

  The favorable moment did not come until six o'clock in the

evening. Then my uncle, myself, and guide, two boatmen and the four

horses got into a very awkward flat-bottom boat. Accustomed as I had

been to the steam ferry boats of the Elbe, I found the long oars of

the boatmen but sorry means of locomotion. We were more than an hour

in crossing the fjord; but at length the passage was concluded without

accident.

  Half an hour later we reached Gardar.

