




                     CHAPTER 28

                 Launching the Raft



  ON the morning of the next day, to my great surprise, I awoke

completely restored. I thought a bath would be delightful after my

long illness and sufferings. So, soon after rising, I went and plunged

into the waters of this new Mediterranean. The bath was cool, fresh

and invigorating.

  I came back to breakfast with an excellent appetite. Hans, our

worthy guide, thoroughly understood how to cook such eatables as we

were able to provide; he had both fire and water at discretion, so

that he was enabled slightly to vary the weary monotony of our

ordinary repast.

  Our morning meal was like a capital English breakfast, with coffee

by way of a windup. And never had this delicious beverage been so

welcome and refreshing.

  My uncle had sufficient regard for my state of health not to

interrupt me in the enjoyment of the meal, but he was evidently

delighted when I had finished.

  "Now then," said he, "come with me. It is the height of the tide,

and I am anxious to study its curious phenomena."

  "What"' I cried, rising in astonishment, "did you say the tide,

Uncle?"

  "Certainly I did."

  "You do not mean to say," I replied, in a tone of respectful

doubt, "that the influence of the sun and moon is felt here below."

  "And pray why not? Are not all bodies influenced by the law of

universal attraction? Why should this vast underground sea be exempt

from the general law, the rule of the universe? Besides, there is

nothing like that which is proved and demonstrated. Despite the

great atmospheric pressure down here, you will notice that this inland

sea rises and falls with as much regularity as the Atlantic itself."

  As my uncle spoke, we reached the sandy shore, and saw and heard the

waves breaking monotonously on the beach. They were evidently rising.

  "This is truly the flood," I cried, looking at the water at my feet.

  "Yes, my excellent nephew," replied my uncle, rubbing his hands with

the gusto of a philosopher, "and you see by these several streaks of

foam that the tide rises at least ten or twelve feet."

  "It is indeed marvelous."

  "By no means," he responded; "on the contrary, it is quite natural."

  "It may appear so in your eyes, my dear uncle," was my reply, "but

all the phenomena of the place appear to me to partake of the

marvelous. It is almost impossible to believe that which I see. Who in

his wildest dreams could have imagined that, beneath the crust of

our earth, there could exist a real ocean, with ebbing and flowing

tides, with its changes of winds, and even its storms! I for one

should have laughed the suggestion to scorn."

  "But, Harry, my boy, why not?" inquired my uncle, with a pitying

smile; "is there any physical reason in opposition to it?

  "Well, if we give up the great theory of the central heat of the

earth, I certainly can offer no reasons why anything should be

looked upon as impossible."

  "Then you will own," he added, "that the system of Sir Humphry

Davy is wholly justified by what we have seen?"

  "I allow that it is- and that point once granted, I certainly can

see no reason for doubting the existence of seas and other wonders,

even countries, in the interior of the globe."

  "That is so- but of course these varied countries are uninhabited?"

  "Well, I grant that it is more likely than not: still, I do not

see why this sea should not have given shelter to some species of

unknown fish."

  "Hitherto we have not discovered any, and the probabilities are

rather against our ever doing so," observed the Professor.

  I was losing my skepticism in the presence of these wonders.

  "Well, I am determined to solve the question. It is my intention

to try my luck with my fishing line and hook."

  "Certainly; make the experiment," said my uncle, pleased with my

enthusiasm. "While we are about it, it will certainly be only proper

to discover all the secrets of this extraordinary region."

  "But, after all, where are we now?" I asked; "all this time I have

quite forgotten to ask you a question, which, doubtless, your

philosophical instruments have long since answered."

  "Well," replied the Professor, "examining the situation from only

one point of view, we are now distant three hundred and fifty

leagues from Iceland."

  "So much?" was my exclamation.

  "I have gone over the matter several times, and am sure not to

have made a mistake of five hundred yards," replied my uncle

positively.

  "And as to the direction- are we still going to the southeast?"

  "Yes, with a western declination* of nineteen degrees, forty-two

minutes, just as it is above. As for the inclination** I have

discovered a very curious fact."



  *The declination is the variation of the needle from the true

meridian of a place.

  **Inclination is the dip of the magnetic needle with a tendency to

incline towards the earth.



  "What may that be, Uncle? Your information interests me."

  "Why, that the needle instead of dipping towards the pole as it does

on earth, in the northern hemisphere, has an upward tendency."

  "This proves," I cried, "that the great point of magnetic attraction

lies somewhere between the surface of the earth and the spot we have

succeeded in reaching."

  "Exactly, my observant nephew," exclaimed my uncle, elated and

delighted, "and it is quite probable that if we succeed in getting

toward the polar regions- somewhere near the seventy-third degree of

latitude, where Sir James Ross discovered the magnetic pole, we

shall behold the needle point directly upward. We have therefore

discovered by analogy, that this great center of attraction is not

situated at a very great depth."

  "Well," said I, rather surprised, "this discovery will astonish

experimental philosophers. It was never suspected."

  "Science, great, mighty and in the end unerring," replied my uncle

dogmatically, "science has fallen into many errors- errors which

have been fortunate and useful rather than otherwise, for they have

been the steppingstones to truth."

  After some further discussion, I turned to another matter.

  "Have you any idea of the depth we have reached?"

  "We are now," continued the Professor, "exactly thirty-five leagues-

above a hundred miles- down into the interior of the earth."

  "So," said I, after measuring the distance on the map, "we are now

beneath the Scottish Highlands, and have over our heads the lofty

Grampian Hills."

  "You are quite right," said the Professor, laughing; "it sounds very

alarming, the weight being heavy- but the vault which supports this

vast mass of earth and rock is solid and safe; the mighty Architect of

the Universe has constructed it of solid materials. Man, even in his

highest flights of vivid and poetic imagination, never thought of such

things! What are the finest arches of our bridges, what the vaulted

roofs of our cathedrals, to that mighty dome above us, and beneath

which floats an ocean with its storms and calms and tides!"

  "I admire it all as much as you can, Uncle, and have no fear that

our granite sky will fall upon our heads. But now that we have

discussed matters of science and discovery, what are your future

intentions? Are you not thinking of getting back to the surface of our

beautiful earth?"

  This was said more as a feeler than with any hope of success.

  "Go back, nephew," cried my uncle in a tone of alarm, "you are not

surely thinking of anything so absurd or cowardly. No, my intention is

to advance and continue our journey. We have as yet been singularly

fortunate, and henceforth I hope we shall be more so."

  "But," said I, "how are we to cross yonder liquid plain?"

  "It is not my intention to leap into it head foremost, or even to

swim across it, like Leander over the Hellespont. But as oceans are,

after all, only great lakes, inasmuch as they are surrounded by

land, so does it stand to reason, that this central sea is

circumscribed by granite surroundings."

  "Doubtless," was my natural reply.

  "Well, then, do you not think that when once we reach the other end,

we shall find some means of continuing our journey?"

  "Probably, but what extent do you allow to this internal ocean?"

  "Well, I should fancy it to extend about forty or fifty leagues-

more or less."

  "But even supposing this approximation to be a correct one- what

then?" I asked.

  "My dear boy, we have no time for further discussion. We shall

embark tomorrow."

  I looked around with surprise and incredulity. I could see nothing

in the shape of boat or vessel.

  "What!" I cried, "we are about to launch out upon an unknown sea;

and where, if I may ask, is the vessel to carry us?"

  "Well, my dear boy, it will not be exactly what you would call a

vessel. For the present we must be content with a good and solid

raft."

  "A raft," I cried, incredulously, "but down here a raft is as

impossible of construction as a vessel- and I am at a loss to

imagine-"

  "My good Harry- if you were to listen instead of talking so much,

you would hear," said my uncle, waxing a little impatient.

  "I should hear?"

  "Yes- certain knocks with the hammer, which Hans is now employing to

make the raft. He has been at work for many hours."

  "Making a raft?"

  "Yes."

  "But where has he found trees suitable for such a construction?"

  "He found the trees all ready to his hand. Come, and you shall see

our excellent guide at work."

  More and more amazed at what I heard and saw, I followed my uncle

like one in a dream.

  After a walk of about a quarter of an hour, I saw Hans at work on

the other side of the promontory which formed our natural port. A

few minutes more and I was beside him. To my great surprise, on the

sandy shore lay a half-finished raft. It was made from beams of a very

peculiar wood, and a great number of limbs, joints, boughs, and pieces

lay about, sufficient to have constructed a fleet of ships and boats.

  I turned to my uncle, silent with astonishment and awe.

  "Where did all this wood come from?" I cried; "what wood is it?"

  "Well, there is pinewood, fir, and the palms of the northern

regions, mineralized by the action of the sea," he replied,

sententiously.

  "Can it be possible?"

  "Yes," said the learned Professor, "what you see is called fossil

wood."

  "But then," cried I, after reflecting for a moment, "like the

lignites, it must be as hard and as heavy as iron, and therefore

will certainly not float."

  "Sometimes that is the case. Many of these woods have become true

anthracites, but others again, like those you see before you, have

only undergone one phase of fossil transformation. But there is no

proof like demonstration," added my uncle, picking one or two of these

precious waifs and casting them into the sea.

  The piece of wood, after having disappeared for a moment, came to

the surface, and floated about with the oscillation produced by wind

and tide.

  "Are you convinced?" said my uncle, with a self-satisfied smile.

  "I am convinced," I cried, "that what I see is incredible."

  The fact was that my journey into the interior of the earth was

rapidly changing all preconceived notions, and day by day preparing me

for the marvelous.

  I should not have been surprised to have seen a fleet of native

canoes afloat upon that silent sea.

  The very next evening, thanks to the industry and ability of Hans,

the raft was finished. It was about ten feet long and five feet

wide. The beams bound together with stout ropes, were solid and

firm, and once launched by our united efforts, the improvised vessel

floated tranquilly upon the waters of what the Professor had well

named the Central Sea.

