


CHAPTER XI - FROM PITTSBURG TO CINCINNATI IN A WESTERN STEAMBOAT.  

CINCINNATI



THE Messenger was one among a crowd of high-pressure steamboats, 

clustered together by a wharf-side, which, looked down upon from 

the rising ground that forms the landing-place, and backed by the 

lofty bank on the opposite side of the river, appeared no larger 

than so many floating models.  She had some forty passengers on 

board, exclusive of the poorer persons on the lower deck; and in 

half an hour, or less, proceeded on her way.



We had, for ourselves, a tiny state-room with two berths in it, 

opening out of the ladies' cabin.  There was, undoubtedly, 

something satisfactory in this 'location,' inasmuch as it was in 

the stern, and we had been a great many times very gravely 

recommended to keep as far aft as possible, 'because the steamboats 

generally blew up forward.'  Nor was this an unnecessary caution, 

as the occurrence and circumstances of more than one such fatality 

during our stay sufficiently testified.  Apart from this source of 

self-congratulation, it was an unspeakable relief to have any 

place, no matter how confined, where one could be alone:  and as 

the row of little chambers of which this was one, had each a second 

glass-door besides that in the ladies' cabin, which opened on a 

narrow gallery outside the vessel, where the other passengers 

seldom came, and where one could sit in peace and gaze upon the 

shifting prospect, we took possession of our new quarters with much 

pleasure.



If the native packets I have already described be unlike anything 

we are in the habit of seeing on water, these western vessels are 

still more foreign to all the ideas we are accustomed to entertain 

of boats.  I hardly know what to liken them to, or how to describe 

them.



In the first place, they have no mast, cordage, tackle, rigging, or 

other such boat-like gear; nor have they anything in their shape at 

all calculated to remind one of a boat's head, stem, sides, or 

keel.  Except that they are in the water, and display a couple of 

paddle-boxes, they might be intended, for anything that appears to 

the contrary, to perform some unknown service, high and dry, upon a 

mountain top.  There is no visible deck, even:  nothing but a long, 

black, ugly roof covered with burnt-out feathery sparks; above 

which tower two iron chimneys, and a hoarse escape valve, and a 

glass steerage-house.  Then, in order as the eye descends towards 

the water, are the sides, and doors, and windows of the state-

rooms, jumbled as oddly together as though they formed a small 

street, built by the varying tastes of a dozen men:  the whole is 

supported on beams and pillars resting on a dirty barge, but a few 

inches above the water's edge:  and in the narrow space between 

this upper structure and this barge's deck, are the furnace fires 

and machinery, open at the sides to every wind that blows, and 

every storm of rain it drives along its path.



Passing one of these boats at night, and seeing the great body of 

fire, exposed as I have just described, that rages and roars 

beneath the frail pile of painted wood:  the machinery, not warded 

off or guarded in any way, but doing its work in the midst of the 

crowd of idlers and emigrants and children, who throng the lower 

deck:  under the management, too, of reckless men whose 

acquaintance with its mysteries may have been of six months' 

standing:  one feels directly that the wonder is, not that there 

should be so many fatal accidents, but that any journey should be 

safely made.



Within, there is one long narrow cabin, the whole length of the 

boat; from which the state-rooms open, on both sides.  A small 

portion of it at the stern is partitioned off for the ladies; and 

the bar is at the opposite extreme.  There is a long table down the 

centre, and at either end a stove.  The washing apparatus is 

forward, on the deck.  It is a little better than on board the 

canal boat, but not much.  In all modes of travelling, the American 

customs, with reference to the means of personal cleanliness and 

wholesome ablution, are extremely negligent and filthy; and I 

strongly incline to the belief that a considerable amount of 

illness is referable to this cause.



We are to be on board the Messenger three days:  arriving at 

Cincinnati (barring accidents) on Monday morning.  There are three 

meals a day.  Breakfast at seven, dinner at half-past twelve, 

supper about six.  At each, there are a great many small dishes and 

plates upon the table, with very little in them; so that although 

there is every appearance of a mighty 'spread,' there is seldom 

really more than a joint:  except for those who fancy slices of 

beet-root, shreds of dried beef, complicated entanglements of 

yellow pickle; maize, Indian corn, apple-sauce, and pumpkin.



Some people fancy all these little dainties together (and sweet 

preserves beside), by way of relish to their roast pig.  They are 

generally those dyspeptic ladies and gentlemen who eat unheard-of 

quantities of hot corn bread (almost as good for the digestion as a 

kneaded pin-cushion), for breakfast, and for supper.  Those who do 

not observe this custom, and who help themselves several times 

instead, usually suck their knives and forks meditatively, until 

they have decided what to take next:  then pull them out of their 

mouths:  put them in the dish; help themselves; and fall to work 

again.  At dinner, there is nothing to drink upon the table, but 

great jugs full of cold water.  Nobody says anything, at any meal, 

to anybody.  All the passengers are very dismal, and seem to have 

tremendous secrets weighing on their minds.  There is no 

conversation, no laughter, no cheerfulness, no sociality, except in 

spitting; and that is done in silent fellowship round the stove, 

when the meal is over.  Every man sits down, dull and languid; 

swallows his fare as if breakfasts, dinners, and suppers, were 

necessities of nature never to be coupled with recreation or 

enjoyment; and having bolted his food in a gloomy silence, bolts 

himself, in the same state.  But for these animal observances, you 

might suppose the whole male portion of the company to be the 

melancholy ghosts of departed book-keepers, who had fallen dead at 

the desk:  such is their weary air of business and calculation.  

Undertakers on duty would be sprightly beside them; and a collation 

of funeral-baked meats, in comparison with these meals, would be a 

sparkling festivity.



The people are all alike, too.  There is no diversity of character.  

They travel about on the same errands, say and do the same things 

in exactly the same manner, and follow in the same dull cheerless 

round.  All down the long table, there is scarcely a man who is in 

anything different from his neighbour.  It is quite a relief to 

have, sitting opposite, that little girl of fifteen with the 

loquacious chin:  who, to do her justice, acts up to it, and fully 

identifies nature's handwriting, for of all the small chatterboxes 

that ever invaded the repose of drowsy ladies' cabin, she is the 

first and foremost.  The beautiful girl, who sits a little beyond 

her - farther down the table there - married the young man with the 

dark whiskers, who sits beyond HER, only last month.  They are 

going to settle in the very Far West, where he has lived four 

years, but where she has never been.  They were both overturned in 

a stage-coach the other day (a bad omen anywhere else, where 

overturns are not so common), and his head, which bears the marks 

of a recent wound, is bound up still.  She was hurt too, at the 

same time, and lay insensible for some days; bright as her eyes 

are, now.



Further down still, sits a man who is going some miles beyond their 

place of destination, to 'improve' a newly-discovered copper mine.  

He carries the village - that is to be - with him:  a few frame 

cottages, and an apparatus for smelting the copper.  He carries its 

people too.  They are partly American and partly Irish, and herd 

together on the lower deck; where they amused themselves last 

evening till the night was pretty far advanced, by alternately 

firing off pistols and singing hymns.



They, and the very few who have been left at table twenty minutes, 

rise, and go away.  We do so too; and passing through our little 

state-room, resume our seats in the quiet gallery without.



A fine broad river always, but in some parts much wider than in 

others:  and then there is usually a green island, covered with 

trees, dividing it into two streams.  Occasionally, we stop for a 

few minutes, maybe to take in wood, maybe for passengers, at some 

small town or village (I ought to say city, every place is a city 

here); but the banks are for the most part deep solitudes, 

overgrown with trees, which, hereabouts, are already in leaf and 

very green.  For miles, and miles, and miles, these solitudes are 

unbroken by any sign of human life or trace of human footstep; nor 

is anything seen to move about them but the blue jay, whose colour 

is so bright, and yet so delicate, that it looks like a flying 

flower.  At lengthened intervals a log cabin, with its little space 

of cleared land about it, nestles under a rising ground, and sends 

its thread of blue smoke curling up into the sky.  It stands in the 

corner of the poor field of wheat, which is full of great unsightly 

stumps, like earthy butchers'-blocks.  Sometimes the ground is only 

just now cleared:  the felled trees lying yet upon the soil:  and 

the log-house only this morning begun.  As we pass this clearing, 

the settler leans upon his axe or hammer, and looks wistfully at 

the people from the world.  The children creep out of the temporary 

hut, which is like a gipsy tent upon the ground, and clap their 

hands and shout.  The dog only glances round at us, and then looks 

up into his master's face again, as if he were rendered uneasy by 

any suspension of the common business, and had nothing more to do 

with pleasurers.  And still there is the same, eternal foreground.  

The river has washed away its banks, and stately trees have fallen 

down into the stream.  Some have been there so long, that they are 

mere dry, grizzly skeletons.  Some have just toppled over, and 

having earth yet about their roots, are bathing their green heads 

in the river, and putting forth new shoots and branches.  Some are 

almost sliding down, as you look at them.  And some were drowned so 

long ago, that their bleached arms start out from the middle of the 

current, and seem to try to grasp the boat, and drag it under 

water.



Through such a scene as this, the unwieldy machine takes its 

hoarse, sullen way:  venting, at every revolution of the paddles, a 

loud high-pressure blast; enough, one would think, to waken up the 

host of Indians who lie buried in a great mound yonder:  so old, 

that mighty oaks and other forest trees have struck their roots 

into its earth; and so high, that it is a hill, even among the 

hills that Nature planted round it.  The very river, as though it 

shared one's feelings of compassion for the extinct tribes who 

lived so pleasantly here, in their blessed ignorance of white 

existence, hundreds of years ago, steals out of its way to ripple 

near this mound:  and there are few places where the Ohio sparkles 

more brightly than in the Big Grave Creek.



All this I see as I sit in the little stern-gallery mentioned just 

now.  Evening slowly steals upon the landscape and changes it 

before me, when we stop to set some emigrants ashore.



Five men, as many women, and a little girl.  All their worldly 

goods are a bag, a large chest and an old chair:  one, old, high-

backed, rush-bottomed chair:  a solitary settler in itself.  They 

are rowed ashore in the boat, while the vessel stands a little off 

awaiting its return, the water being shallow.  They are landed at 

the foot of a high bank, on the summit of which are a few log 

cabins, attainable only by a long winding path.  It is growing 

dusk; but the sun is very red, and shines in the water and on some 

of the tree-tops, like fire.



The men get out of the boat first; help out the women; take out the 

bag, the chest, the chair; bid the rowers 'good-bye;' and shove the 

boat off for them.  At the first plash of the oars in the water, 

the oldest woman of the party sits down in the old chair, close to 

the water's edge, without speaking a word.  None of the others sit 

down, though the chest is large enough for many seats.  They all 

stand where they landed, as if stricken into stone; and look after 

the boat.  So they remain, quite still and silent:  the old woman 

and her old chair, in the centre the bag and chest upon the shore, 

without anybody heeding them all eyes fixed upon the boat.  It 

comes alongside, is made fast, the men jump on board, the engine is 

put in motion, and we go hoarsely on again.  There they stand yet, 

without the motion of a hand.  I can see them through my glass, 

when, in the distance and increasing darkness, they are mere specks 

to the eye:  lingering there still:  the old woman in the old 

chair, and all the rest about her:  not stirring in the least 

degree.  And thus I slowly lose them.



The night is dark, and we proceed within the shadow of the wooded 

bank, which makes it darker.  After gliding past the sombre maze of 

boughs for a long time, we come upon an open space where the tall 

trees are burning.  The shape of every branch and twig is expressed 

in a deep red glow, and as the light wind stirs and ruffles it, 

they seem to vegetate in fire.  It is such a sight as we read of in 

legends of enchanted forests:  saving that it is sad to see these 

noble works wasting away so awfully, alone; and to think how many 

years must come and go before the magic that created them will rear 

their like upon this ground again.  But the time will come; and 

when, in their changed ashes, the growth of centuries unborn has 

struck its roots, the restless men of distant ages will repair to 

these again unpeopled solitudes; and their fellows, in cities far 

away, that slumber now, perhaps, beneath the rolling sea, will read 

in language strange to any ears in being now, but very old to them, 

of primeval forests where the axe was never heard, and where the 

jungled ground was never trodden by a human foot.



Midnight and sleep blot out these scenes and thoughts:  and when 

the morning shines again, it gilds the house-tops of a lively city, 

before whose broad paved wharf the boat is moored; with other 

boats, and flags, and moving wheels, and hum of men around it; as 

though there were not a solitary or silent rood of ground within 

the compass of a thousand miles.



Cincinnati is a beautiful city; cheerful, thriving, and animated.  

I have not often seen a place that commends itself so favourably 

and pleasantly to a stranger at the first glance as this does:  

with its clean houses of red and white, its well-paved roads, and 

foot-ways of bright tile.  Nor does it become less prepossessing on 

a closer acquaintance.  The streets are broad and airy, the shops 

extremely good, the private residences remarkable for their 

elegance and neatness.  There is something of invention and fancy 

in the varying styles of these latter erections, which, after the 

dull company of the steamboat, is perfectly delightful, as 

conveying an assurance that there are such qualities still in 

existence.  The disposition to ornament these pretty villas and 

render them attractive, leads to the culture of trees and flowers, 

and the laying out of well-kept gardens, the sight of which, to 

those who walk along the streets, is inexpressibly refreshing and 

agreeable.  I was quite charmed with the appearance of the town, 

and its adjoining suburb of Mount Auburn:  from which the city, 

lying in an amphitheatre of hills, forms a picture of remarkable 

beauty, and is seen to great advantage.



There happened to be a great Temperance Convention held here on the 

day after our arrival; and as the order of march brought the 

procession under the windows of the hotel in which we lodged, when 

they started in the morning, I had a good opportunity of seeing it.  

It comprised several thousand men; the members of various 

'Washington Auxiliary Temperance Societies;' and was marshalled by 

officers on horseback, who cantered briskly up and down the line, 

with scarves and ribbons of bright colours fluttering out behind 

them gaily.  There were bands of music too, and banners out of 

number:  and it was a fresh, holiday-looking concourse altogether.



I was particularly pleased to see the Irishmen, who formed a 

distinct society among themselves, and mustered very strong with 

their green scarves; carrying their national Harp and their 

Portrait of Father Mathew, high above the people's heads.  They 

looked as jolly and good-humoured as ever; and, working (here) the 

hardest for their living and doing any kind of sturdy labour that 

came in their way, were the most independent fellows there, I 

thought.



The banners were very well painted, and flaunted down the street 

famously.  There was the smiting of the rock, and the gushing forth 

of the waters; and there was a temperate man with 'considerable of 

a hatchet' (as the standard-bearer would probably have said), 

aiming a deadly blow at a serpent which was apparently about to 

spring upon him from the top of a barrel of spirits.  But the chief 

feature of this part of the show was a huge allegorical device, 

borne among the ship-carpenters, on one side whereof the steamboat 

Alcohol was represented bursting her boiler and exploding with a 

great crash, while upon the other, the good ship Temperance sailed 

away with a fair wind, to the heart's content of the captain, crew, 

and passengers.



After going round the town, the procession repaired to a certain 

appointed place, where, as the printed programme set forth, it 

would be received by the children of the different free schools, 

'singing Temperance Songs.'  I was prevented from getting there, in 

time to hear these Little Warblers, or to report upon this novel 

kind of vocal entertainment:  novel, at least, to me:  but I found 

in a large open space, each society gathered round its own banners, 

and listening in silent attention to its own orator.  The speeches, 

judging from the little I could hear of them, were certainly 

adapted to the occasion, as having that degree of relationship to 

cold water which wet blankets may claim:  but the main thing was 

the conduct and appearance of the audience throughout the day; and 

that was admirable and full of promise.



Cincinnati is honourably famous for its free schools, of which it 

has so many that no person's child among its population can, by 

possibility, want the means of education, which are extended, upon 

an average, to four thousand pupils, annually.  I was only present 

in one of these establishments during the hours of instruction.  In 

the boys' department, which was full of little urchins (varying in 

their ages, I should say, from six years old to ten or twelve), the 

master offered to institute an extemporary examination of the 

pupils in algebra; a proposal, which, as I was by no means 

confident of my ability to detect mistakes in that science, I 

declined with some alarm.  In the girls' school, reading was 

proposed; and as I felt tolerably equal to that art, I expressed my 

willingness to hear a class.  Books were distributed accordingly, 

and some half-dozen girls relieved each other in reading paragraphs 

from English History.  But it seemed to be a dry compilation, 

infinitely above their powers; and when they had blundered through 

three or four dreary passages concerning the Treaty of Amiens, and 

other thrilling topics of the same nature (obviously without 

comprehending ten words), I expressed myself quite satisfied.  It 

is very possible that they only mounted to this exalted stave in 

the Ladder of Learning for the astonishment of a visitor; and that 

at other times they keep upon its lower rounds; but I should have 

been much better pleased and satisfied if I had heard them 

exercised in simpler lessons, which they understood.



As in every other place I visited, the judges here were gentlemen 

of high character and attainments.  I was in one of the courts for 

a few minutes, and found it like those to which I have already 

referred.  A nuisance cause was trying; there were not many 

spectators; and the witnesses, counsel, and jury, formed a sort of 

family circle, sufficiently jocose and snug.



The society with which I mingled, was intelligent, courteous, and 

agreeable.  The inhabitants of Cincinnati are proud of their city 

as one of the most interesting in America:  and with good reason:  

for beautiful and thriving as it is now, and containing, as it 

does, a population of fifty thousand souls, but two-and-fifty years 

have passed away since the ground on which it stands (bought at 

that time for a few dollars) was a wild wood, and its citizens were 

but a handful of dwellers in scattered log huts upon the river's 

shore.
