

CHAPTER X - SOME FURTHER ACCOUNT OF THE CANAL BOAT, ITS DOMESTIC 

ECONOMY, AND ITS PASSENGERS.  JOURNEY TO PITTSBURG ACROSS THE 

ALLEGHANY MOUNTAINS.  PITTSBURG



AS it continued to rain most perseveringly, we all remained below:  

the damp gentlemen round the stove, gradually becoming mildewed by 

the action of the fire; and the dry gentlemen lying at full length 

upon the seats, or slumbering uneasily with their faces on the 

tables, or walking up and down the cabin, which it was barely 

possible for a man of the middle height to do, without making bald 

places on his head by scraping it against the roof.  At about six 

o'clock, all the small tables were put together to form one long 

table, and everybody sat down to tea, coffee, bread, butter, 

salmon, shad, liver, steaks, potatoes, pickles, ham, chops, black-

puddings, and sausages.



'Will you try,' said my opposite neighbour, handing me a dish of 

potatoes, broken up in milk and butter, 'will you try some of these 

fixings?'



There are few words which perform such various duties as this word 

'fix.'  It is the Caleb Quotem of the American vocabulary.  You 

call upon a gentleman in a country town, and his help informs you 

that he is 'fixing himself' just now, but will be down directly:  

by which you are to understand that he is dressing.  You inquire, 

on board a steamboat, of a fellow-passenger, whether breakfast will 

be ready soon, and he tells you he should think so, for when he was 

last below, they were 'fixing the tables:' in other words, laying 

the cloth.  You beg a porter to collect your luggage, and he 

entreats you not to be uneasy, for he'll 'fix it presently:' and if 

you complain of indisposition, you are advised to have recourse to 

Doctor So-and-so, who will 'fix you' in no time.



One night, I ordered a bottle of mulled wine at an hotel where I 

was staying, and waited a long time for it; at length it was put 

upon the table with an apology from the landlord that he feared it 

wasn't 'fixed properly.' And I recollect once, at a stage-coach 

dinner, overhearing a very stern gentleman demand of a waiter who 

presented him with a plate of underdone roast-beef, 'whether he 

called THAT, fixing God A'mighty's vittles?'



There is no doubt that the meal, at which the invitation was 

tendered to me which has occasioned this digression, was disposed 

of somewhat ravenously; and that the gentlemen thrust the broad-

bladed knives and the two-pronged forks further down their throats 

than I ever saw the same weapons go before, except in the hands of 

a skilful juggler:  but no man sat down until the ladies were 

seated; or omitted any little act of politeness which could 

contribute to their comfort.  Nor did I ever once, on any occasion, 

anywhere, during my rambles in America, see a woman exposed to the 

slightest act of rudeness, incivility, or even inattention.



By the time the meal was over, the rain, which seemed to have worn 

itself out by coming down so fast, was nearly over too; and it 

became feasible to go on deck:  which was a great relief, 

notwithstanding its being a very small deck, and being rendered 

still smaller by the luggage, which was heaped together in the 

middle under a tarpaulin covering; leaving, on either side, a path 

so narrow, that it became a science to walk to and fro without 

tumbling overboard into the canal.  It was somewhat embarrassing at 

first, too, to have to duck nimbly every five minutes whenever the 

man at the helm cried 'Bridge!' and sometimes, when the cry was 

'Low Bridge,' to lie down nearly flat.  But custom familiarises one 

to anything, and there were so many bridges that it took a very 

short time to get used to this.



As night came on, and we drew in sight of the first range of hills, 

which are the outposts of the Alleghany Mountains, the scenery, 

which had been uninteresting hitherto, became more bold and 

striking.  The wet ground reeked and smoked, after the heavy fall 

of rain, and the croaking of the frogs (whose noise in these parts 

is almost incredible) sounded as though a million of fairy teams 

with bells were travelling through the air, and keeping pace with 

us.  The night was cloudy yet, but moonlight too:  and when we 

crossed the Susquehanna river - over which there is an 

extraordinary wooden bridge with two galleries, one above the 

other, so that even there, two boat teams meeting, may pass without 

confusion - it was wild and grand.



I have mentioned my having been in some uncertainty and doubt, at 

first, relative to the sleeping arrangements on board this boat.  I 

remained in the same vague state of mind until ten o'clock or 

thereabouts, when going below, I found suspended on either side of 

the cabin, three long tiers of hanging bookshelves, designed 

apparently for volumes of the small octavo size.  Looking with 

greater attention at these contrivances (wondering to find such 

literary preparations in such a place), I descried on each shelf a 

sort of microscopic sheet and blanket; then I began dimly to 

comprehend that the passengers were the library, and that they were 

to be arranged, edge-wise, on these shelves, till morning.



I was assisted to this conclusion by seeing some of them gathered 

round the master of the boat, at one of the tables, drawing lots 

with all the anxieties and passions of gamesters depicted in their 

countenances; while others, with small pieces of cardboard in their 

hands, were groping among the shelves in search of numbers 

corresponding with those they had drawn.  As soon as any gentleman 

found his number, he took possession of it by immediately 

undressing himself and crawling into bed.  The rapidity with which 

an agitated gambler subsided into a snoring slumberer, was one of 

the most singular effects I have ever witnessed.  As to the ladies, 

they were already abed, behind the red curtain, which was carefully 

drawn and pinned up the centre; though as every cough, or sneeze, 

or whisper, behind this curtain, was perfectly audible before it, 

we had still a lively consciousness of their society.



The politeness of the person in authority had secured to me a shelf 

in a nook near this red curtain, in some degree removed from the 

great body of sleepers:  to which place I retired, with many 

acknowledgments to him for his attention.  I found it, on after-

measurement, just the width of an ordinary sheet of Bath post 

letter-paper; and I was at first in some uncertainty as to the best 

means of getting into it.  But the shelf being a bottom one, I 

finally determined on lying upon the floor, rolling gently in, 

stopping immediately I touched the mattress, and remaining for the 

night with that side uppermost, whatever it might be.  Luckily, I 

came upon my back at exactly the right moment.  I was much alarmed 

on looking upward, to see, by the shape of his half-yard of sacking 

(which his weight had bent into an exceedingly tight bag), that 

there was a very heavy gentleman above me, whom the slender cords 

seemed quite incapable of holding; and I could not help reflecting 

upon the grief of my wife and family in the event of his coming 

down in the night.  But as I could not have got up again without a 

severe bodily struggle, which might have alarmed the ladies; and as 

I had nowhere to go to, even if I had; I shut my eyes upon the 

danger, and remained there.



One of two remarkable circumstances is indisputably a fact, with 

reference to that class of society who travel in these boats.  

Either they carry their restlessness to such a pitch that they 

never sleep at all; or they expectorate in dreams, which would be a 

remarkable mingling of the real and ideal.  All night long, and 

every night, on this canal, there was a perfect storm and tempest 

of spitting; and once my coat, being in the very centre of the 

hurricane sustained by five gentlemen (which moved vertically, 

strictly carrying out Reid's Theory of the Law of Storms), I was 

fain the next morning to lay it on the deck, and rub it down with 

fair water before it was in a condition to be worn again.



Between five and six o'clock in the morning we got up, and some of 

us went on deck, to give them an opportunity of taking the shelves 

down; while others, the morning being very cold, crowded round the 

rusty stove, cherishing the newly kindled fire, and filling the 

grate with those voluntary contributions of which they had been so 

liberal all night.  The washing accommodations were primitive.  

There was a tin ladle chained to the deck, with which every 

gentleman who thought it necessary to cleanse himself (many were 

superior to this weakness), fished the dirty water out of the 

canal, and poured it into a tin basin, secured in like manner.  

There was also a jack-towel.  And, hanging up before a little 

looking-glass in the bar, in the immediate vicinity of the bread 

and cheese and biscuits, were a public comb and hair-brush.



At eight o'clock, the shelves being taken down and put away and the 

tables joined together, everybody sat down to the tea, coffee, 

bread, butter, salmon, shad, liver, steak, potatoes, pickles, ham, 

chops, black-puddings, and sausages, all over again.  Some were 

fond of compounding this variety, and having it all on their plates 

at once.  As each gentleman got through his own personal amount of 

tea, coffee, bread, butter, salmon, shad, liver, steak, potatoes, 

pickles, ham, chops, black-puddings, and sausages, he rose up and 

walked off.  When everybody had done with everything, the fragments 

were cleared away:  and one of the waiters appearing anew in the 

character of a barber, shaved such of the company as desired to be 

shaved; while the remainder looked on, or yawned over their 

newspapers.  Dinner was breakfast again, without the tea and 

coffee; and supper and breakfast were identical.



There was a man on board this boat, with a light fresh-coloured 

face, and a pepper-and-salt suit of clothes, who was the most 

inquisitive fellow that can possibly be imagined.  He never spoke 

otherwise than interrogatively.  He was an embodied inquiry.  

Sitting down or standing up, still or moving, walking the deck or 

taking his meals, there he was, with a great note of interrogation 

in each eye, two in his cocked ears, two more in his turned-up nose 

and chin, at least half a dozen more about the corners of his 

mouth, and the largest one of all in his hair, which was brushed 

pertly off his forehead in a flaxen clump.  Every button in his 

clothes said, 'Eh?  What's that?  Did you speak?  Say that again, 

will you?'  He was always wide awake, like the enchanted bride who 

drove her husband frantic; always restless; always thirsting for 

answers; perpetually seeking and never finding.  There never was 

such a curious man.



I wore a fur great-coat at that time, and before we were well clear 

of the wharf, he questioned me concerning it, and its price, and 

where I bought it, and when, and what fur it was, and what it 

weighed, and what it cost.  Then he took notice of my watch, and 

asked me what THAT cost, and whether it was a French watch, and 

where I got it, and how I got it, and whether I bought it or had it 

given me, and how it went, and where the key-hole was, and when I 

wound it, every night or every morning, and whether I ever forgot 

to wind it at all, and if I did, what then?  Where had I been to 

last, and where was I going next, and where was I going after that, 

and had I seen the President, and what did he say, and what did I 

say, and what did he say when I had said that?  Eh?  Lor now! do 

tell!



Finding that nothing would satisfy him, I evaded his questions 

after the first score or two, and in particular pleaded ignorance 

respecting the name of the fur whereof the coat was made.  I am 

unable to say whether this was the reason, but that coat fascinated 

him afterwards; he usually kept close behind me as I walked, and 

moved as I moved, that he might look at it the better; and he 

frequently dived into narrow places after me at the risk of his 

life, that he might have the satisfaction of passing his hand up 

the back, and rubbing it the wrong way.



We had another odd specimen on board, of a different kind.  This 

was a thin-faced, spare-figured man of middle age and stature, 

dressed in a dusty drabbish-coloured suit, such as I never saw 

before.  He was perfectly quiet during the first part of the 

journey:  indeed I don't remember having so much as seen him until 

he was brought out by circumstances, as great men often are.  The 

conjunction of events which made him famous, happened, briefly, 

thus.



The canal extends to the foot of the mountain, and there, of 

course, it stops; the passengers being conveyed across it by land 

carriage, and taken on afterwards by another canal boat, the 

counterpart of the first, which awaits them on the other side.  

There are two canal lines of passage-boats; one is called The 

Express, and one (a cheaper one) The Pioneer.  The Pioneer gets 

first to the mountain, and waits for the Express people to come up; 

both sets of passengers being conveyed across it at the same time.  

We were the Express company; but when we had crossed the mountain, 

and had come to the second boat, the proprietors took it into their 

beads to draft all the Pioneers into it likewise, so that we were 

five-and-forty at least, and the accession of passengers was not at 

all of that kind which improved the prospect of sleeping at night.  

Our people grumbled at this, as people do in such cases; but 

suffered the boat to be towed off with the whole freight aboard 

nevertheless; and away we went down the canal.  At home, I should 

have protested lustily, but being a foreigner here, I held my 

peace.  Not so this passenger.  He cleft a path among the people on 

deck (we were nearly all on deck), and without addressing anybody 

whomsoever, soliloquised as follows:



'This may suit YOU, this may, but it don't suit ME.  This may be 

all very well with Down Easters, and men of Boston raising, but it 

won't suit my figure nohow; and no two ways about THAT; and so I 

tell you.  Now!  I'm from the brown forests of Mississippi, I am, 

and when the sun shines on me, it does shine - a little.  It don't 

glimmer where I live, the sun don't.  No.  I'm a brown forester, I 

am.  I an't a Johnny Cake.  There are no smooth skins where I live.  

We're rough men there.  Rather.  If Down Easters and men of Boston 

raising like this, I'm glad of it, but I'm none of that raising nor 

of that breed.  No.  This company wants a little fixing, IT does.  

I'm the wrong sort of man for 'em, I am.  They won't like me, THEY 

won't.  This is piling of it up, a little too mountainous, this 

is.'  At the end of every one of these short sentences he turned 

upon his heel, and walked the other way; checking himself abruptly 

when he had finished another short sentence, and turning back 

again.



It is impossible for me to say what terrific meaning was hidden in 

the words of this brown forester, but I know that the other 

passengers looked on in a sort of admiring horror, and that 

presently the boat was put back to the wharf, and as many of the 

Pioneers as could be coaxed or bullied into going away, were got 

rid of.



When we started again, some of the boldest spirits on board, made 

bold to say to the obvious occasion of this improvement in our 

prospects, 'Much obliged to you, sir;' whereunto the brown forester 

(waving his hand, and still walking up and down as before), 

replied, 'No you an't.  You're none o' my raising.  You may act for 

yourselves, YOU may.  I have pinted out the way.  Down Easters and 

Johnny Cakes can follow if they please.  I an't a Johnny Cake, I 

an't.  I am from the brown forests of the Mississippi, I am' - and 

so on, as before.  He was unanimously voted one of the tables for 

his bed at night - there is a great contest for the tables - in 

consideration for his public services:  and he had the warmest 

corner by the stove throughout the rest of the journey.  But I 

never could find out that he did anything except sit there; nor did 

I hear him speak again until, in the midst of the bustle and 

turmoil of getting the luggage ashore in the dark at Pittsburg, I 

stumbled over him as he sat smoking a cigar on the cabin steps, and 

heard him muttering to himself, with a short laugh of defiance, 'I 

an't a Johnny Cake, - I an't.  I'm from the brown forests of the 

Mississippi, I am, damme!'  I am inclined to argue from this, that 

he had never left off saying so; but I could not make an affidavit 

of that part of the story, if required to do so by my Queen and 

Country.



As we have not reached Pittsburg yet, however, in the order of our 

narrative, I may go on to remark that breakfast was perhaps the 

least desirable meal of the day, as in addition to the many savoury 

odours arising from the eatables already mentioned, there were 

whiffs of gin, whiskey, brandy, and rum, from the little bar hard 

by, and a decided seasoning of stale tobacco.  Many of the 

gentlemen passengers were far from particular in respect of their 

linen, which was in some cases as yellow as the little rivulets 

that had trickled from the corners of their mouths in chewing, and 

dried there.  Nor was the atmosphere quite free from zephyr 

whisperings of the thirty beds which had just been cleared away, 

and of which we were further and more pressingly reminded by the 

occasional appearance on the table-cloth of a kind of Game, not 

mentioned in the Bill of Fare.



And yet despite these oddities - and even they had, for me at 

least, a humour of their own - there was much in this mode of 

travelling which I heartily enjoyed at the time, and look back upon 

with great pleasure.  Even the running up, bare-necked, at five 

o'clock in the morning, from the tainted cabin to the dirty deck; 

scooping up the icy water, plunging one's head into it, and drawing 

it out, all fresh and glowing with the cold; was a good thing.  The 

fast, brisk walk upon the towing-path, between that time and 

breakfast, when every vein and artery seemed to tingle with health; 

the exquisite beauty of the opening day, when light came gleaming 

off from everything; the lazy motion of the boat, when one lay idly 

on the deck, looking through, rather than at, the deep blue sky; 

the gliding on at night, so noiselessly, past frowning hills, 

sullen with dark trees, and sometimes angry in one red, burning 

spot high up, where unseen men lay crouching round a fire; the 

shining out of the bright stars undisturbed by noise of wheels or 

steam, or any other sound than the limpid rippling of the water as 

the boat went on:  all these were pure delights.



Then there were new settlements and detached log-cabins and frame-

houses, full of interest for strangers from an old country:  cabins 

with simple ovens, outside, made of clay; and lodgings for the pigs 

nearly as good as many of the human quarters; broken windows, 

patched with worn-out hats, old clothes, old boards, fragments of 

blankets and paper; and home-made dressers standing in the open air 

without the door, whereon was ranged the household store, not hard 

to count, of earthen jars and pots.  The eye was pained to see the 

stumps of great trees thickly strewn in every field of wheat, and 

seldom to lose the eternal swamp and dull morass, with hundreds of 

rotten trunks and twisted branches steeped in its unwholesome 

water.  It was quite sad and oppressive, to come upon great tracts 

where settlers had been burning down the trees, and where their 

wounded bodies lay about, like those of murdered creatures, while 

here and there some charred and blackened giant reared aloft two 

withered arms, and seemed to call down curses on his foes.  

Sometimes, at night, the way wound through some lonely gorge, like 

a mountain pass in Scotland, shining and coldly glittering in the 

light of the moon, and so closed in by high steep hills all round, 

that there seemed to be no egress save through the narrower path by 

which we had come, until one rugged hill-side seemed to open, and 

shutting out the moonlight as we passed into its gloomy throat, 

wrapped our new course in shade and darkness.



We had left Harrisburg on Friday.  On Sunday morning we arrived at 

the foot of the mountain, which is crossed by railroad.  There are 

ten inclined planes; five ascending, and five descending; the 

carriages are dragged up the former, and let slowly down the 

latter, by means of stationary engines; the comparatively level 

spaces between, being traversed, sometimes by horse, and sometimes 

by engine power, as the case demands.  Occasionally the rails are 

laid upon the extreme verge of a giddy precipice; and looking from 

the carriage window, the traveller gazes sheer down, without a 

stone or scrap of fence between, into the mountain depths below.  

The journey is very carefully made, however; only two carriages 

travelling together; and while proper precautions are taken, is not 

to be dreaded for its dangers.



It was very pretty travelling thus, at a rapid pace along the 

heights of the mountain in a keen wind, to look down into a valley 

full of light and softness; catching glimpses, through the tree-

tops, of scattered cabins; children running to the doors; dogs 

bursting out to bark, whom we could see without hearing:  terrified 

pigs scampering homewards; families sitting out in their rude 

gardens; cows gazing upward with a stupid indifference; men in 

their shirt-sleeves looking on at their unfinished houses, planning 

out to-morrow's work; and we riding onward, high above them, like a 

whirlwind.  It was amusing, too, when we had dined, and rattled 

down a steep pass, having no other moving power than the weight of 

the carriages themselves, to see the engine released, long after 

us, come buzzing down alone, like a great insect, its back of green 

and gold so shining in the sun, that if it had spread a pair of 

wings and soared away, no one would have had occasion, as I 

fancied, for the least surprise.  But it stopped short of us in a 

very business-like manner when we reached the canal:  and, before 

we left the wharf, went panting up this hill again, with the 

passengers who had waited our arrival for the means of traversing 

the road by which we had come.



On the Monday evening, furnace fires and clanking hammers on the 

banks of the canal, warned us that we approached the termination of 

this part of our journey.  After going through another dreamy place 

- a long aqueduct across the Alleghany River, which was stranger 

than the bridge at Harrisburg, being a vast, low, wooden chamber 

full of water - we emerged upon that ugly confusion of backs of 

buildings and crazy galleries and stairs, which always abuts on 

water, whether it be river, sea, canal, or ditch:  and were at 

Pittsburg.



Pittsburg is like Birmingham in England; at least its townspeople 

say so.  Setting aside the streets, the shops, the houses, waggons, 

factories, public buildings, and population, perhaps it may be.  It 

certainly has a great quantity of smoke hanging about it, and is 

famous for its iron-works.  Besides the prison to which I have 

already referred, this town contains a pretty arsenal and other 

institutions.  It is very beautifully situated on the Alleghany 

River, over which there are two bridges; and the villas of the 

wealthier citizens sprinkled about the high grounds in the 

neighbourhood, are pretty enough.  We lodged at a most excellent 

hotel, and were admirably served.  As usual it was full of 

boarders, was very large, and had a broad colonnade to every story 

of the house.



We tarried here three days.  Our next point was Cincinnati:  and as 

this was a steamboat journey, and western steamboats usually blow 

up one or two a week in the season, it was advisable to collect 

opinions in reference to the comparative safety of the vessels 

bound that way, then lying in the river.  One called the Messenger 

was the best recommended.  She had been advertised to start 

positively, every day for a fortnight or so, and had not gone yet, 

nor did her captain seem to have any very fixed intention on the 

subject.  But this is the custom:  for if the law were to bind down 

a free and independent citizen to keep his word with the public, 

what would become of the liberty of the subject?  Besides, it is in 

the way of trade.  And if passengers be decoyed in the way of 

trade, and people be inconvenienced in the way of trade, what man, 

who is a sharp tradesman himself, shall say, 'We must put a stop to 

this?'



Impressed by the deep solemnity of the public announcement, I 

(being then ignorant of these usages) was for hurrying on board in 

a breathless state, immediately; but receiving private and 

confidential information that the boat would certainly not start 

until Friday, April the First, we made ourselves very comfortable 

in the mean while, and went on board at noon that day.

