

CHAPTER XVII - SLAVERY



THE upholders of slavery in America - of the atrocities of which 

system, I shall not write one word for which I have not had ample 

proof and warrant - may be divided into three great classes.



The first, are those more moderate and rational owners of human 

cattle, who have come into the possession of them as so many coins 

in their trading capital, but who admit the frightful nature of the 

Institution in the abstract, and perceive the dangers to society 

with which it is fraught:  dangers which however distant they may 

be, or howsoever tardy in their coming on, are as certain to fall 

upon its guilty head, as is the Day of Judgment.



The second, consists of all those owners, breeders, users, buyers 

and sellers of slaves, who will, until the bloody chapter has a 

bloody end, own, breed, use, buy, and sell them at all hazards:  

who doggedly deny the horrors of the system in the teeth of such a 

mass of evidence as never was brought to bear on any other subject, 

and to which the experience of every day contributes its immense 

amount; who would at this or any other moment, gladly involve 

America in a war, civil or foreign, provided that it had for its 

sole end and object the assertion of their right to perpetuate 

slavery, and to whip and work and torture slaves, unquestioned by 

any human authority, and unassailed by any human power; who, when 

they speak of Freedom, mean the Freedom to oppress their kind, and 

to be savage, merciless, and cruel; and of whom every man on his 

own ground, in republican America, is a more exacting, and a 

sterner, and a less responsible despot than the Caliph Haroun 

Alraschid in his angry robe of scarlet.



The third, and not the least numerous or influential, is composed 

of all that delicate gentility which cannot bear a superior, and 

cannot brook an equal; of that class whose Republicanism means, 'I 

will not tolerate a man above me:  and of those below, none must 

approach too near;' whose pride, in a land where voluntary 

servitude is shunned as a disgrace, must be ministered to by 

slaves; and whose inalienable rights can only have their growth in 

negro wrongs.



It has been sometimes urged that, in the unavailing efforts which 

have been made to advance the cause of Human Freedom in the 

republic of America (strange cause for history to treat of!), 

sufficient regard has not been had to the existence of the first 

class of persons; and it has been contended that they are hardly 

used, in being confounded with the second.  This is, no doubt, the 

case; noble instances of pecuniary and personal sacrifice have 

already had their growth among them; and it is much to be regretted 

that the gulf between them and the advocates of emancipation should 

have been widened and deepened by any means:  the rather, as there 

are, beyond dispute, among these slave-owners, many kind masters 

who are tender in the exercise of their unnatural power.  Still, it 

is to be feared that this injustice is inseparable from the state 

of things with which humanity and truth are called upon to deal.  

Slavery is not a whit the more endurable because some hearts are to 

be found which can partially resist its hardening influences; nor 

can the indignant tide of honest wrath stand still, because in its 

onward course it overwhelms a few who are comparatively innocent, 

among a host of guilty.



The ground most commonly taken by these better men among the 

advocates of slavery, is this:  'It is a bad system; and for myself 

I would willingly get rid of it, if I could; most willingly.  But 

it is not so bad, as you in England take it to be.  You are 

deceived by the representations of the emancipationists.  The 

greater part of my slaves are much attached to me.  You will say 

that I do not allow them to be severely treated; but I will put it 

to you whether you believe that it can be a general practice to 

treat them inhumanly, when it would impair their value, and would 

be obviously against the interests of their masters.'



Is it the interest of any man to steal, to game, to waste his 

health and mental faculties by drunkenness, to lie, forswear 

himself, indulge hatred, seek desperate revenge, or do murder?  No.  

All these are roads to ruin.  And why, then, do men tread them?  

Because such inclinations are among the vicious qualities of 

mankind.  Blot out, ye friends of slavery, from the catalogue of 

human passions, brutal lust, cruelty, and the abuse of 

irresponsible power (of all earthly temptations the most difficult 

to be resisted), and when ye have done so, and not before, we will 

inquire whether it be the interest of a master to lash and maim the 

slaves, over whose lives and limbs he has an absolute control!



But again:  this class, together with that last one I have named, 

the miserable aristocracy spawned of a false republic, lift up 

their voices and exclaim 'Public opinion is all-sufficient to 

prevent such cruelty as you denounce.'  Public opinion!  Why, 

public opinion in the slave States IS slavery, is it not?  Public 

opinion, in the slave States, has delivered the slaves over, to the 

gentle mercies of their masters.  Public opinion has made the laws, 

and denied the slaves legislative protection.  Public opinion has 

knotted the lash, heated the branding-iron, loaded the rifle, and 

shielded the murderer.  Public opinion threatens the abolitionist 

with death, if he venture to the South; and drags him with a rope 

about his middle, in broad unblushing noon, through the first city 

in the East.  Public opinion has, within a few years, burned a 

slave alive at a slow fire in the city of St. Louis; and public 

opinion has to this day maintained upon the bench that estimable 

judge who charged the jury, impanelled there to try his murderers, 

that their most horrid deed was an act of public opinion, and being 

so, must not be punished by the laws the public sentiment had made.  

Public opinion hailed this doctrine with a howl of wild applause, 

and set the prisoners free, to walk the city, men of mark, and 

influence, and station, as they had been before.



Public opinion! what class of men have an immense preponderance 

over the rest of the community, in their power of representing 

public opinion in the legislature? the slave-owners.  They send 

from their twelve States one hundred members, while the fourteen 

free States, with a free population nearly double, return but a 

hundred and forty-two.  Before whom do the presidential candidates 

bow down the most humbly, on whom do they fawn the most fondly, and 

for whose tastes do they cater the most assiduously in their 

servile protestations?  The slave-owners always.



Public opinion! hear the public opinion of the free South, as 

expressed by its own members in the House of Representatives at 

Washington.  'I have a great respect for the chair,' quoth North 

Carolina, 'I have a great respect for the chair as an officer of 

the house, and a great respect for him personally; nothing but that 

respect prevents me from rushing to the table and tearing that 

petition which has just been presented for the abolition of slavery 

in the district of Columbia, to pieces.' - 'I warn the 

abolitionists,' says South Carolina, 'ignorant, infuriated 

barbarians as they are, that if chance shall throw any of them into 

our hands, he may expect a felon's death.' - 'Let an abolitionist 

come within the borders of South Carolina,' cries a third; mild 

Carolina's colleague; 'and if we can catch him, we will try him, 

and notwithstanding the interference of all the governments on 

earth, including the Federal government, we will HANG him.'



Public opinion has made this law. - It has declared that in 

Washington, in that city which takes its name from the father of 

American liberty, any justice of the peace may bind with fetters 

any negro passing down the street and thrust him into jail:  no 

offence on the black man's part is necessary.  The justice says, 'I 

choose to think this man a runaway:' and locks him up.  Public 

opinion impowers the man of law when this is done, to advertise the 

negro in the newspapers, warning his owner to come and claim him, 

or he will be sold to pay the jail fees.  But supposing he is a 

free black, and has no owner, it may naturally be presumed that he 

is set at liberty.  No:  HE IS SOLD TO RECOMPENSE HIS JAILER.  This 

has been done again, and again, and again.  He has no means of 

proving his freedom; has no adviser, messenger, or assistance of 

any sort or kind; no investigation into his case is made, or 

inquiry instituted.  He, a free man, who may have served for years, 

and bought his liberty, is thrown into jail on no process, for no 

crime, and on no pretence of crime:  and is sold to pay the jail 

fees.  This seems incredible, even of America, but it is the law.



Public opinion is deferred to, in such cases as the following:  

which is headed in the newspapers:-





'INTERESTING LAW-CASE.



'An interesting case is now on trial in the Supreme Court, arising 

out of the following facts.  A gentleman residing in Maryland had 

allowed an aged pair of his slaves, substantial though not legal 

freedom for several years.  While thus living, a daughter was born 

to them, who grew up in the same liberty, until she married a free 

negro, and went with him to reside in Pennsylvania.  They had 

several children, and lived unmolested until the original owner 

died, when his heir attempted to regain them; but the magistrate 

before whom they were brought, decided that he had no jurisdiction 

in the case.  THE OWNER SEIZED THE WOMAN AND HER CHILDREN ITS THE 

NIGHT, AND CARRIED THEM TO MARYLAND.'





'Cash for negroes,' 'cash for negroes,' 'cash for negroes,' is the 

heading of advertisements in great capitals down the long columns 

of the crowded journals.  Woodcuts of a runaway negro with manacled 

hands, crouching beneath a bluff pursuer in top boots, who, having 

caught him, grasps him by the throat, agreeably diversify the 

pleasant text.  The leading article protests against 'that 

abominable and hellish doctrine of abolition, which is repugnant 

alike to every law of God and nature.'  The delicate mamma, who 

smiles her acquiescence in this sprightly writing as she reads the 

paper in her cool piazza, quiets her youngest child who clings 

about her skirts, by promising the boy 'a whip to beat the little 

niggers with.' - But the negroes, little and big, are protected by 

public opinion.



Let us try this public opinion by another test, which is important 

in three points of view:  first, as showing how desperately timid 

of the public opinion slave-owners are, in their delicate 

descriptions of fugitive slaves in widely circulated newspapers; 

secondly, as showing how perfectly contented the slaves are, and 

how very seldom they run away; thirdly, as exhibiting their entire 

freedom from scar, or blemish, or any mark of cruel infliction, as 

their pictures are drawn, not by lying abolitionists, but by their 

own truthful masters.



The following are a few specimens of the advertisements in the 

public papers.  It is only four years since the oldest among them 

appeared; and others of the same nature continue to be published 

every day, in shoals.



'Ran away, Negress Caroline.  Had on a collar with one prong turned 

down.'



'Ran away, a black woman, Betsy.  Had an iron bar on her right 

leg.'



'Ran away, the negro Manuel.  Much marked with irons.'



'Ran away, the negress Fanny.  Had on an iron band about her neck.'



'Ran away, a negro boy about twelve years old.  Had round his neck 

a chain dog-collar with "De Lampert" engraved on it.'



'Ran away, the negro Hown.  Has a ring of iron on his left foot.  

Also, Grise, HIS WIFE, having a ring and chain on the left leg.'



'Ran away, a negro boy named James.  Said boy was ironed when he 

left me.'



'Committed to jail, a man who calls his name John.  He has a clog 

of iron on his right foot which will weigh four or five pounds.'



'Detained at the police jail, the negro wench, Myra.  Has several 

marks of LASHING, and has irons on her feet.'



'Ran away, a negro woman and two children.  A few days before she 

went off, I burnt her with a hot iron, on the left side of her 

face.  I tried to make the letter M.'



'Ran away, a negro man named Henry; his left eye out, some scars 

from a dirk on and under his left arm, and much scarred with the 

whip.'



'One hundred dollars reward, for a negro fellow, Pompey, 40 years 

old.  He is branded on the left jaw.'



'Committed to jail, a negro man.  Has no toes on the left foot.'



'Ran away, a negro woman named Rachel.  Has lost all her toes 

except the large one.'



'Ran away, Sam.  He was shot a short time since through the hand, 

and has several shots in his left arm and side.'



'Ran away, my negro man Dennis.  Said negro has been shot in the 

left arm between the shoulder and elbow, which has paralysed the 

left hand.'



'Ran away, my negro man named Simon.  He has been shot badly, in 

his back and right arm.'



'Ran away, a negro named Arthur.  Has a considerable scar across 

his breast and each arm, made by a knife; loves to talk much of the 

goodness of God.'



'Twenty-five dollars reward for my man Isaac.  He has a scar on his 

forehead, caused by a blow; and one on his back, made by a shot 

from a pistol.'



'Ran away, a negro girl called Mary.  Has a small scar over her 

eye, a good many teeth missing, the letter A is branded on her 

cheek and forehead.'



'Ran away, negro Ben.  Has a scar on his right hand; his thumb and 

forefinger being injured by being shot last fall.  A part of the 

bone came out.  He has also one or two large scars on his back and 

hips.'



'Detained at the jail, a mulatto, named Tom.  Has a scar on the 

right cheek, and appears to have been burned with powder on the 

face.'



'Ran away, a negro man named Ned.  Three of his fingers are drawn 

into the palm of his hand by a cut.  Has a scar on the back of his 

neck, nearly half round, done by a knife.'



'Was committed to jail, a negro man.  Says his name is Josiah.  His 

back very much scarred by the whip; and branded on the thigh and 

hips in three or four places, thus (J M).  The rim of his right ear 

has been bit or cut off.'



'Fifty dollars reward, for my fellow Edward.  He has a scar on the 

corner of his mouth, two cuts on and under his arm, and the letter 

E on his arm.'



'Ran away, negro boy Ellie.  Has a scar on one of his arms from the 

bite of a dog.'



'Ran away, from the plantation of James Surgette, the following 

negroes:  Randal, has one ear cropped; Bob, has lost one eye; 

Kentucky Tom, has one jaw broken.'



'Ran away, Anthony.  One of his ears cut off, and his left hand cut 

with an axe.'



'Fifty dollars reward for the negro Jim Blake.  Has a piece cut out 

of each ear, and the middle finger of the left hand cut off to the 

second joint.'



'Ran away, a negro woman named Maria.  Has a scar on one side of 

her cheek, by a cut.  Some scars on her back.'



'Ran away, the Mulatto wench Mary.  Has a cut on the left arm, a 

scar on the left shoulder, and two upper teeth missing.'



I should say, perhaps, in explanation of this latter piece of 

description, that among the other blessings which public opinion 

secures to the negroes, is the common practice of violently 

punching out their teeth.  To make them wear iron collars by day 

and night, and to worry them with dogs, are practices almost too 

ordinary to deserve mention.



'Ran away, my man Fountain.  Has holes in his ears, a scar on the 

right side of his forehead, has been shot in the hind part of his 

legs, and is marked on the back with the whip.'



'Two hundred and fifty dollars reward for my negro man Jim.  He is 

much marked with shot in his right thigh.  The shot entered on the 

outside, halfway between the hip and knee joints.'



'Brought to jail, John.  Left ear cropt.'



'Taken up, a negro man.  Is very much scarred about the face and 

body, and has the left ear bit off.'



'Ran away, a black girl, named Mary.  Has a scar on her cheek, and 

the end of one of her toes cut off.'



'Ran away, my Mulatto woman, Judy.  She has had her right arm 

broke.'



'Ran away, my negro man, Levi.  His left hand has been burnt, and I 

think the end of his forefinger is off.'



'Ran away, a negro man, NAMED WASHINGTON.  Has lost a part of his 

middle finger, and the end of his little finger.'



'Twenty-five dollars reward for my man John.  The tip of his nose 

is bit off.'



'Twenty-five dollars reward for the negro slave, Sally.  Walks AS 

THOUGH crippled in the back.'



'Ran away, Joe Dennis.  Has a small notch in one of his ears.'



'Ran away, negro boy, Jack.  Has a small crop out of his left ear.'



'Ran away, a negro man, named Ivory.  Has a small piece cut out of 

the top of each ear.'



While upon the subject of ears, I may observe that a distinguished 

abolitionist in New York once received a negro's ear, which had 

been cut off close to the head, in a general post letter.  It was 

forwarded by the free and independent gentleman who had caused it 

to be amputated, with a polite request that he would place the 

specimen in his 'collection.'



I could enlarge this catalogue with broken arms, and broken legs, 

and gashed flesh, and missing teeth, and lacerated backs, and bites 

of dogs, and brands of red-hot irons innumerable:  but as my 

readers will be sufficiently sickened and repelled already, I will 

turn to another branch of the subject.



These advertisements, of which a similar collection might be made 

for every year, and month, and week, and day; and which are coolly 

read in families as things of course, and as a part of the current 

news and small-talk; will serve to show how very much the slaves 

profit by public opinion, and how tender it is in their behalf.  

But it may be worth while to inquire how the slave-owners, and the 

class of society to which great numbers of them belong, defer to 

public opinion in their conduct, not to their slaves but to each 

other; how they are accustomed to restrain their passions; what 

their bearing is among themselves; whether they are fierce or 

gentle; whether their social customs be brutal, sanguinary, and 

violent, or bear the impress of civilisation and refinement.



That we may have no partial evidence from abolitionists in this 

inquiry, either, I will once more turn to their own newspapers, and 

I will confine myself, this time, to a selection from paragraphs 

which appeared from day to day, during my visit to America, and 

which refer to occurrences happening while I was there.  The 

italics in these extracts, as in the foregoing, are my own.



These cases did not ALL occur, it will be seen, in territory 

actually belonging to legalised Slave States, though most, and 

those the very worst among them did, as their counterparts 

constantly do; but the position of the scenes of action in 

reference to places immediately at hand, where slavery is the law; 

and the strong resemblance between that class of outrages and the 

rest; lead to the just presumption that the character of the 

parties concerned was formed in slave districts, and brutalised by 

slave customs.





'HORRIBLE TRAGEDY.





'By a slip from THE SOUTHPORT TELEGRAPH, Wisconsin, we learn that 

the Hon. Charles C. P. Arndt, Member of the Council for Brown 

county, was shot dead ON THE FLOOR OF THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, by James 

R. Vinyard, Member from Grant county.  THE AFFAIR grew out of a 

nomination for Sheriff of Grant county.  Mr. E. S. Baker was 

nominated and supported by Mr. Arndt.  This nomination was opposed 

by Vinyard, who wanted the appointment to vest in his own brother.  

In the course of debate, the deceased made some statements which 

Vinyard pronounced false, and made use of violent and insulting 

language, dealing largely in personalities, to which Mr. A. made no 

reply.  After the adjournment, Mr. A. stepped up to Vinyard, and 

requested him to retract, which he refused to do, repeating the 

offensive words.  Mr. Arndt then made a blow at Vinyard, who 

stepped back a pace, drew a pistol, and shot him dead.



'The issue appears to have been provoked on the part of Vinyard, 

who was determined at all hazards to defeat the appointment of 

Baker, and who, himself defeated, turned his ire and revenge upon 

the unfortunate Arndt.'





'THE WISCONSIN TRAGEDY.





Public indignation runs high in the territory of Wisconsin, in 

relation to the murder of C. C. P. Arndt, in the Legislative Hall 

of the Territory.  Meetings have been held in different counties of 

Wisconsin, denouncing THE PRACTICE OF SECRETLY BEARING ARMS IN THE 

LEGISLATIVE CHAMBERS OF THE COUNTRY.  We have seen the account of 

the expulsion of James R. Vinyard, the perpetrator of the bloody 

deed, and are amazed to hear, that, after this expulsion by those 

who saw Vinyard kill Mr. Arndt in the presence of his aged father, 

who was on a visit to see his son, little dreaming that he was to 

witness his murder, JUDGE DUNN HAS DISCHARGED VINYARD ON BAIL.  The 

Miners' Free Press speaks IN TERMS OF MERITED REBUKE at the outrage 

upon the feelings of the people of Wisconsin.  Vinyard was within 

arm's length of Mr. Arndt, when he took such deadly aim at him, 

that he never spoke.  Vinyard might at pleasure, being so near, 

have only wounded him, but he chose to kill him.'





'MURDER.





By a letter in a St. Louis paper of the '4th, we notice a terrible 

outrage at Burlington, Iowa.  A Mr. Bridgman having had a 

difficulty with a citizen of the place, Mr. Ross; a brother-in-law 

of the latter provided himself with one of Colt's revolving 

pistols, met Mr. B. in the street, AND DISCHARGED THE CONTENTS OF 

FIVE OF THE BARRELS AT HIM:  EACH SHOT TAKING EFFECT.  Mr. B., 

though horribly wounded, and dying, returned the fire, and killed 

Ross on the spot.'





'TERRIBLE DEATH OF ROBERT POTTER.





'From the "Caddo Gazette," of the 12th inst., we learn the 

frightful death of Colonel Robert Potter. . . . He was beset in his 

house by an enemy, named Rose.  He sprang from his couch, seized 

his gun, and, in his night-clothes, rushed from the house.  For 

about two hundred yards his speed seemed to defy his pursuers; but, 

getting entangled in a thicket, he was captured.  Rose told him 

THAT HE INTENDED TO ACT A GENEROUS PART, and give him a chance for 

his life.  He then told Potter he might run, and he should not be 

interrupted till he reached a certain distance.  Potter started at 

the word of command, and before a gun was fired he had reached the 

lake.  His first impulse was to jump in the water and dive for it, 

which he did.  Rose was close behind him, and formed his men on the 

bank ready to shoot him as he rose.  In a few seconds he came up to 

breathe; and scarce had his head reached the surface of the water 

when it was completely riddled with the shot of their guns, and he 

sunk, to rise no more!'





'MURDER IN ARKANSAS.





'We understand THAT A SEVERE RENCONTRE CAME OFF a few days since in 

the Seneca Nation, between Mr. Loose, the sub-agent of the mixed 

band of the Senecas, Quapaw, and Shawnees, and Mr. James Gillespie, 

of the mercantile firm of Thomas G. Allison and Co., of Maysville, 

Benton, County Ark, in which the latter was slain with a bowie-

knife.  Some difficulty had for some time existed between the 

parties.  It is said that Major Gillespie brought on the attack 

with a cane.  A severe conflict ensued, during which two pistols 

were fired by Gillespie and one by Loose.  Loose then stabbed 

Gillespie with one of those never-failing weapons, a bowie-knife.  

The death of Major G. is much regretted, as he was a liberal-minded 

and energetic man.  Since the above was in type, we have learned 

that Major Allison has stated to some of our citizens in town that 

Mr. Loose gave the first blow.  We forbear to give any particulars, 

as THE MATTER WILL BE THE SUBJECT OF JUDICIAL INVESTIGATION.'





'FOUL DEED.





The steamer Thames, just from Missouri river, brought us a 

handbill, offering a reward of 500 dollars, for the person who 

assassinated Lilburn W. Baggs, late Governor of this State, at 

Independence, on the night of the 6th inst.  Governor Baggs, it is 

stated in a written memorandum, was not dead, but mortally wounded.



'Since the above was written, we received a note from the clerk of 

the Thames, giving the following particulars.  Gov. Baggs was shot 

by some villain on Friday, 6th inst., in the evening, while sitting 

in a room in his own house in Independence.  His son, a boy, 

hearing a report, ran into the room, and found the Governor sitting 

in his chair, with his jaw fallen down, and his head leaning back; 

on discovering the injury done to his father, he gave the alarm.  

Foot tracks were found in the garden below the window, and a pistol 

picked up supposed to have been overloaded, and thrown from the 

hand of the scoundrel who fired it.  Three buck shots of a heavy 

load, took effect; one going through his mouth, one into the brain, 

and another probably in or near the brain; all going into the back 

part of the neck and head.  The Governor was still alive on the 

morning of the 7th; but no hopes for his recovery by his friends, 

and but slight hopes from his physicians.



'A man was suspected, and the Sheriff most probably has possession 

of him by this time.



'The pistol was one of a pair stolen some days previous from a 

baker in Independence, and the legal authorities have the 

description of the other.'





'RENCONTRE.





'An unfortunate AFFAIR took place on Friday evening in Chatres 

Street, in which one of our most respectable citizens received a 

dangerous wound, from a poignard, in the abdomen.  From the Bee 

(New Orleans) of yesterday, we learn the following particulars.  It 

appears that an article was published in the French side of the 

paper on Monday last, containing some strictures on the Artillery 

Battalion for firing their guns on Sunday morning, in answer to 

those from the Ontario and Woodbury, and thereby much alarm was 

caused to the families of those persons who were out all night 

preserving the peace of the city.  Major C. Gally, Commander of the 

battalion, resenting this, called at the office and demanded the 

author's name; that of Mr. P. Arpin was given to him, who was 

absent at the time.  Some angry words then passed with one of the 

proprietors, and a challenge followed; the friends of both parties 

tried to arrange the affair, but failed to do so.  On Friday 

evening, about seven o'clock, Major Gally met Mr. P. Arpin in 

Chatres Street, and accosted him.  "Are you Mr. Arpin?"



'"Yes, sir."



'"Then I have to tell you that you are a - " (applying an 

appropriate epithet).



'"I shall remind you of your words, sir."



'"But I have said I would break my cane on your shoulders."



'"I know it, but I have not yet received the blow."



'At these words, Major Gally, having a cane in his hands, struck 

Mr. Arpin across the face, and the latter drew a poignard from his 

pocket and stabbed Major Gally in the abdomen.



'Fears are entertained that the wound will be mortal.  WE 

UNDERSTAND THAT MR. ARPIN HAS GIVEN SECURITY FOR HIS APPEARANCE AT 

THE CRIMINAL COURT TO ANSWER THE CHARGE.'





'AFFRAY IN MISSISSIPPI.





'On the 27th ult., in an affray near Carthage, Leake county, 

Mississippi, between James Cottingham and John Wilburn, the latter 

was shot by the former, and so horribly wounded, that there was no 

hope of his recovery.  On the 2nd instant, there was an affray at 

Carthage between A. C. Sharkey and George Goff, in which the latter 

was shot, and thought mortally wounded.  Sharkey delivered himself 

up to the authorities, BUT CHANGED HIS MIND AND ESCAPED!'





'PERSONAL ENCOUNTER.





'An encounter took place in Sparta, a few days since, between the 

barkeeper of an hotel, and a man named Bury.  It appears that Bury 

had become somewhat noisy, AND THAT THE BARKEEPER, DETERMINED TO 

PRESERVE ORDER, HAD THREATENED TO SHOOT BURY, whereupon Bury drew a 

pistol and shot the barkeeper down.  He was not dead at the last 

accounts, but slight hopes were entertained of his recovery.'





'DUEL.





'The clerk of the steamboat TRIBUNE informs us that another duel 

was fought on Tuesday last, by Mr. Robbins, a bank officer in 

Vicksburg, and Mr. Fall, the editor of the Vicksburg Sentinel.  

According to the arrangement, the parties had six pistols each, 

which, after the word "Fire!" THEY WERE TO DISCHARGE AS FAST AS 

THEY PLEASED.  Fall fired two pistols without effect.  Mr. Robbins' 

first shot took effect in Fall's thigh, who fell, and was unable to 

continue the combat.'





'AFFRAY IN CLARKE COUNTY.





'An UNFORTUNATE AFFRAY occurred in Clarke county (MO.), near 

Waterloo, on Tuesday the 19th ult., which originated in settling 

the partnership concerns of Messrs. M'Kane and M'Allister, who had 

been engaged in the business of distilling, and resulted in the 

death of the latter, who was shot down by Mr. M'Kane, because of 

his attempting to take possession of seven barrels of whiskey, the 

property of M'Kane, which had been knocked off to M'Allister at a 

sheriff's sale at one dollar per barrel.  M'Kane immediately fled 

AND AT THE LATEST DATES HAD NOT BEEN TAKEN.



'THIS UNFORTUNATE AFFRAY caused considerable excitement in the 

neighbourhood, as both the parties were men with large families 

depending upon them and stood well in the community.'





I will quote but one more paragraph, which, by reason of its 

monstrous absurdity, may be a relief to these atrocious deeds.





'AFFAIR OF HONOUR.





'We have just heard the particulars of a meeting which took place 

on Six Mile Island, on Tuesday, between two young bloods of our 

city:  Samuel Thurston, AGED FIFTEEN, and William Hine, AGED 

THIRTEEN years.  They were attended by young gentlemen of the same 

age.  The weapons used on the occasion, were a couple of Dickson's 

best rifles; the distance, thirty yards.  They took one fire, 

without any damage being sustained by either party, except the ball 

of Thurston's gun passing through the crown of Hine's hat.  THROUGH 

THE INTERCESSION OF THE BOARD OF HONOUR, the challenge was 

withdrawn, and the difference amicably adjusted.'



If the reader will picture to himself the kind of Board of Honour 

which amicably adjusted the difference between these two little 

boys, who in any other part of the world would have been amicably 

adjusted on two porters' backs and soundly flogged with birchen 

rods, he will be possessed, no doubt, with as strong a sense of its 

ludicrous character, as that which sets me laughing whenever its 

image rises up before me.



Now, I appeal to every human mind, imbued with the commonest of 

common sense, and the commonest of common humanity; to all 

dispassionate, reasoning creatures, of any shade of opinion; and 

ask, with these revolting evidences of the state of society which 

exists in and about the slave districts of America before them, can 

they have a doubt of the real condition of the slave, or can they 

for a moment make a compromise between the institution or any of 

its flagrant, fearful features, and their own just consciences?  

Will they say of any tale of cruelty and horror, however aggravated 

in degree, that it is improbable, when they can turn to the public 

prints, and, running, read such signs as these, laid before them by 

the men who rule the slaves:  in their own acts and under their own 

hands?



Do we not know that the worst deformity and ugliness of slavery are 

at once the cause and the effect of the reckless license taken by 

these freeborn outlaws?  Do we not know that the man who has been 

born and bred among its wrongs; who has seen in his childhood 

husbands obliged at the word of command to flog their wives; women, 

indecently compelled to hold up their own garments that men might 

lay the heavier stripes upon their legs, driven and harried by 

brutal overseers in their time of travail, and becoming mothers on 

the field of toil, under the very lash itself; who has read in 

youth, and seen his virgin sisters read, descriptions of runaway 

men and women, and their disfigured persons, which could not be 

published elsewhere, of so much stock upon a farm, or at a show of 

beasts:- do we not know that that man, whenever his wrath is 

kindled up, will be a brutal savage?  Do we not know that as he is 

a coward in his domestic life, stalking among his shrinking men and 

women slaves armed with his heavy whip, so he will be a coward out 

of doors, and carrying cowards' weapons hidden in his breast, will 

shoot men down and stab them when he quarrels?  And if our reason 

did not teach us this and much beyond; if we were such idiots as to 

close our eyes to that fine mode of training which rears up such 

men; should we not know that they who among their equals stab and 

pistol in the legislative halls, and in the counting-house, and on 

the marketplace, and in all the elsewhere peaceful pursuits of 

life, must be to their dependants, even though they were free 

servants, so many merciless and unrelenting tyrants?



What! shall we declaim against the ignorant peasantry of Ireland, 

and mince the matter when these American taskmasters are in 

question?  Shall we cry shame on the brutality of those who 

hamstring cattle:  and spare the lights of Freedom upon earth who 

notch the ears of men and women, cut pleasant posies in the 

shrinking flesh, learn to write with pens of red-hot iron on the 

human face, rack their poetic fancies for liveries of mutilation 

which their slaves shall wear for life and carry to the grave, 

breaking living limbs as did the soldiery who mocked and slew the 

Saviour of the world, and set defenceless creatures up for targets!  

Shall we whimper over legends of the tortures practised on each 

other by the Pagan Indians, and smile upon the cruelties of 

Christian men!  Shall we, so long as these things last, exult above 

the scattered remnants of that race, and triumph in the white 

enjoyment of their possessions?  Rather, for me, restore the forest 

and the Indian village; in lieu of stars and stripes, let some poor 

feather flutter in the breeze; replace the streets and squares by 

wigwams; and though the death-song of a hundred haughty warriors 

fill the air, it will be music to the shriek of one unhappy slave.



On one theme, which is commonly before our eyes, and in respect of 

which our national character is changing fast, let the plain Truth 

be spoken, and let us not, like dastards, beat about the bush by 

hinting at the Spaniard and the fierce Italian.  When knives are 

drawn by Englishmen in conflict let it be said and known:  'We owe 

this change to Republican Slavery.  These are the weapons of 

Freedom.  With sharp points and edges such as these, Liberty in 

America hews and hacks her slaves; or, failing that pursuit, her 

sons devote them to a better use, and turn them on each other.'

