


CHAPTER XVIII - CONCLUDING REMARKS



THERE are many passages in this book, where I have been at some 

pains to resist the temptation of troubling my readers with my own 

deductions and conclusions:  preferring that they should judge for 

themselves, from such premises as I have laid before them.  My only 

object in the outset, was, to carry them with me faithfully 

wheresoever I went:  and that task I have discharged.



But I may be pardoned, if on such a theme as the general character 

of the American people, and the general character of their social 

system, as presented to a stranger's eyes, I desire to express my 

own opinions in a few words, before I bring these volumes to a 

close.



They are, by nature, frank, brave, cordial, hospitable, and 

affectionate.  Cultivation and refinement seem but to enhance their 

warmth of heart and ardent enthusiasm; and it is the possession of 

these latter qualities in a most remarkable degree, which renders 

an educated American one of the most endearing and most generous of 

friends.  I never was so won upon, as by this class; never yielded 

up my full confidence and esteem so readily and pleasurably, as to 

them; never can make again, in half a year, so many friends for 

whom I seem to entertain the regard of half a life.



These qualities are natural, I implicitly believe, to the whole 

people.  That they are, however, sadly sapped and blighted in their 

growth among the mass; and that there are influences at work which 

endanger them still more, and give but little present promise of 

their healthy restoration; is a truth that ought to be told.



It is an essential part of every national character to pique itself 

mightily upon its faults, and to deduce tokens of its virtue or its 

wisdom from their very exaggeration.  One great blemish in the 

popular mind of America, and the prolific parent of an innumerable 

brood of evils, is Universal Distrust.  Yet the American citizen 

plumes himself upon this spirit, even when he is sufficiently 

dispassionate to perceive the ruin it works; and will often adduce 

it, in spite of his own reason, as an instance of the great 

sagacity and acuteness of the people, and their superior shrewdness 

and independence.



'You carry,' says the stranger, 'this jealousy and distrust into 

every transaction of public life.  By repelling worthy men from 

your legislative assemblies, it has bred up a class of candidates 

for the suffrage, who, in their very act, disgrace your 

Institutions and your people's choice.  It has rendered you so 

fickle, and so given to change, that your inconstancy has passed 

into a proverb; for you no sooner set up an idol firmly, than you 

are sure to pull it down and dash it into fragments:  and this, 

because directly you reward a benefactor, or a public servant, you 

distrust him, merely because he is rewarded; and immediately apply 

yourselves to find out, either that you have been too bountiful in 

your acknowledgments, or he remiss in his deserts.  Any man who 

attains a high place among you, from the President downwards, may 

date his downfall from that moment; for any printed lie that any 

notorious villain pens, although it militate directly against the 

character and conduct of a life, appeals at once to your distrust, 

and is believed.  You will strain at a gnat in the way of 

trustfulness and confidence, however fairly won and well deserved; 

but you will swallow a whole caravan of camels, if they be laden 

with unworthy doubts and mean suspicions.  Is this well, think you, 

or likely to elevate the character of the governors or the 

governed, among you?'



The answer is invariably the same:  'There's freedom of opinion 

here, you know.  Every man thinks for himself, and we are not to be 

easily overreached.  That's how our people come to be suspicious.'



Another prominent feature is the love of 'smart' dealing:  which 

gilds over many a swindle and gross breach of trust; many a 

defalcation, public and private; and enables many a knave to hold 

his head up with the best, who well deserves a halter; though it 

has not been without its retributive operation, for this smartness 

has done more in a few years to impair the public credit, and to 

cripple the public resources, than dull honesty, however rash, 

could have effected in a century.  The merits of a broken 

speculation, or a bankruptcy, or of a successful scoundrel, are not 

gauged by its or his observance of the golden rule, 'Do as you 

would be done by,' but are considered with reference to their 

smartness.  I recollect, on both occasions of our passing that ill-

fated Cairo on the Mississippi, remarking on the bad effects such 

gross deceits must have when they exploded, in generating a want of 

confidence abroad, and discouraging foreign investment:  but I was 

given to understand that this was a very smart scheme by which a 

deal of money had been made:  and that its smartest feature was, 

that they forgot these things abroad, in a very short time, and 

speculated again, as freely as ever.  The following dialogue I have 

held a hundred times:  'Is it not a very disgraceful circumstance 

that such a man as So-and-so should be acquiring a large property 

by the most infamous and odious means, and notwithstanding all the 

crimes of which he has been guilty, should be tolerated and abetted 

by your Citizens?  He is a public nuisance, is he not?'  'Yes, 

sir.'  'A convicted liar?'  'Yes, sir.'  'He has been kicked, and 

cuffed, and caned?'  'Yes, sir.'  'And he is utterly dishonourable, 

debased, and profligate?'  'Yes, sir.'  'In the name of wonder, 

then, what is his merit?'  'Well, sir, he is a smart man.'



In like manner, all kinds of deficient and impolitic usages are 

referred to the national love of trade; though, oddly enough, it 

would be a weighty charge against a foreigner that he regarded the 

Americans as a trading people.  The love of trade is assigned as a 

reason for that comfortless custom, so very prevalent in country 

towns, of married persons living in hotels, having no fireside of 

their own, and seldom meeting from early morning until late at 

night, but at the hasty public meals.  The love of trade is a 

reason why the literature of America is to remain for ever 

unprotected 'For we are a trading people, and don't care for 

poetry:' though we DO, by the way, profess to be very proud of our 

poets:  while healthful amusements, cheerful means of recreation, 

and wholesome fancies, must fade before the stern utilitarian joys 

of trade.



These three characteristics are strongly presented at every turn, 

full in the stranger's view.  But, the foul growth of America has a 

more tangled root than this; and it strikes its fibres, deep in its 

licentious Press.



Schools may be erected, East, West, North, and South; pupils be 

taught, and masters reared, by scores upon scores of thousands; 

colleges may thrive, churches may be crammed, temperance may be 

diffused, and advancing knowledge in all other forms walk through 

the land with giant strides:  but while the newspaper press of 

America is in, or near, its present abject state, high moral 

improvement in that country is hopeless.  Year by year, it must and 

will go back; year by year, the tone of public feeling must sink 

lower down; year by year, the Congress and the Senate must become 

of less account before all decent men; and year by year, the memory 

of the Great Fathers of the Revolution must be outraged more and 

more, in the bad life of their degenerate child.



Among the herd of journals which are published in the States, there 

are some, the reader scarcely need be told, of character and 

credit.  From personal intercourse with accomplished gentlemen 

connected with publications of this class, I have derived both 

pleasure and profit.  But the name of these is Few, and of the 

others Legion; and the influence of the good, is powerless to 

counteract the moral poison of the bad.



Among the gentry of America; among the well-informed and moderate:  

in the learned professions; at the bar and on the bench:  there is, 

as there can be, but one opinion, in reference to the vicious 

character of these infamous journals.  It is sometimes contended - 

I will not say strangely, for it is natural to seek excuses for 

such a disgrace - that their influence is not so great as a visitor 

would suppose.  I must be pardoned for saying that there is no 

warrant for this plea, and that every fact and circumstance tends 

directly to the opposite conclusion.



When any man, of any grade of desert in intellect or character, can 

climb to any public distinction, no matter what, in America, 

without first grovelling down upon the earth, and bending the knee 

before this monster of depravity; when any private excellence is 

safe from its attacks; when any social confidence is left unbroken 

by it, or any tie of social decency and honour is held in the least 

regard; when any man in that free country has freedom of opinion, 

and presumes to think for himself, and speak for himself, without 

humble reference to a censorship which, for its rampant ignorance 

and base dishonesty, he utterly loathes and despises in his heart; 

when those who most acutely feel its infamy and the reproach it 

casts upon the nation, and who most denounce it to each other, dare 

to set their heels upon, and crush it openly, in the sight of all 

men:  then, I will believe that its influence is lessening, and men 

are returning to their manly senses.  But while that Press has its 

evil eye in every house, and its black hand in every appointment in 

the state, from a president to a postman; while, with ribald 

slander for its only stock in trade, it is the standard literature 

of an enormous class, who must find their reading in a newspaper, 

or they will not read at all; so long must its odium be upon the 

country's head, and so long must the evil it works, be plainly 

visible in the Republic.



To those who are accustomed to the leading English journals, or to 

the respectable journals of the Continent of Europe; to those who 

are accustomed to anything else in print and paper; it would be 

impossible, without an amount of extract for which I have neither 

space nor inclination, to convey an adequate idea of this frightful 

engine in America.  But if any man desire confirmation of my 

statement on this head, let him repair to any place in this city of 

London, where scattered numbers of these publications are to be 

found; and there, let him form his own opinion. (1)



It would be well, there can be no doubt, for the American people as 

a whole, if they loved the Real less, and the Ideal somewhat more.  

It would be well, if there were greater encouragement to lightness 

of heart and gaiety, and a wider cultivation of what is beautiful, 

without being eminently and directly useful.  But here, I think the 

general remonstrance, 'we are a new country,' which is so often 

advanced as an excuse for defects which are quite unjustifiable, as 

being, of right, only the slow growth of an old one, may be very 

reasonably urged:  and I yet hope to hear of there being some other 

national amusement in the United States, besides newspaper 

politics.



They certainly are not a humorous people, and their temperament 

always impressed me is being of a dull and gloomy character.  In 

shrewdness of remark, and a certain cast-iron quaintness, the 

Yankees, or people of New England, unquestionably take the lead; as 

they do in most other evidences of intelligence.  But in travelling 

about, out of the large cities - as I have remarked in former parts 

of these volumes - I was quite oppressed by the prevailing 

seriousness and melancholy air of business:  which was so general 

and unvarying, that at every new town I came to, I seemed to meet 

the very same people whom I had left behind me, at the last.  Such 

defects as are perceptible in the national manners, seem, to me, to 

be referable, in a great degree, to this cause:  which has 

generated a dull, sullen persistence in coarse usages, and rejected 

the graces of life as undeserving of attention.  There is no doubt 

that Washington, who was always most scrupulous and exact on points 

of ceremony, perceived the tendency towards this mistake, even in 

his time, and did his utmost to correct it.



I cannot hold with other writers on these subjects that the 

prevalence of various forms of dissent in America, is in any way 

attributable to the non-existence there of an established church:  

indeed, I think the temper of the people, if it admitted of such an 

Institution being founded amongst them, would lead them to desert 

it, as a matter of course, merely because it WAS established.  But, 

supposing it to exist, I doubt its probable efficacy in summoning 

the wandering sheep to one great fold, simply because of the 

immense amount of dissent which prevails at home; and because I do 

not find in America any one form of religion with which we in 

Europe, or even in England, are unacquainted.  Dissenters resort 

thither in great numbers, as other people do, simply because it is 

a land of resort; and great settlements of them are founded, 

because ground can be purchased, and towns and villages reared, 

where there were none of the human creation before.  But even the 

Shakers emigrated from England; our country is not unknown to Mr. 

Joseph Smith, the apostle of Mormonism, or to his benighted 

disciples; I have beheld religious scenes myself in some of our 

populous towns which can hardly be surpassed by an American camp-

meeting; and I am not aware that any instance of superstitious 

imposture on the one hand, and superstitious credulity on the 

other, has had its origin in the United States, which we cannot 

more than parallel by the precedents of Mrs. Southcote, Mary Tofts 

the rabbit-breeder, or even Mr. Thorn of Canterbury:  which latter 

case arose, some time after the dark ages had passed away.



The Republican Institutions of America undoubtedly lead the people 

to assert their self-respect and their equality; but a traveller is 

bound to bear those Institutions in his mind, and not hastily to 

resent the near approach of a class of strangers, who, at home, 

would keep aloof.  This characteristic, when it was tinctured with 

no foolish pride, and stopped short of no honest service, never 

offended me; and I very seldom, if ever, experienced its rude or 

unbecoming display.  Once or twice it was comically developed, as 

in the following case; but this was an amusing incident, and not 

the rule, or near it.



I wanted a pair of boots at a certain town, for I had none to 

travel in, but those with the memorable cork soles, which were much 

too hot for the fiery decks of a steamboat.  I therefore sent a 

message to an artist in boots, importing, with my compliments, that 

I should be happy to see him, if he would do me the polite favour 

to call.  He very kindly returned for answer, that he would 'look 

round' at six o'clock that evening.



I was lying on the sofa, with a book and a wine-glass, at about 

that time, when the door opened, and a gentleman in a stiff cravat, 

within a year or two on either side of thirty, entered, in his hat 

and gloves; walked up to the looking-glass; arranged his hair; took 

off his gloves; slowly produced a measure from the uttermost depths 

of his coat-pocket; and requested me, in a languid tone, to 'unfix' 

my straps.  I complied, but looked with some curiosity at his hat, 

which was still upon his head.  It might have been that, or it 

might have been the heat - but he took it off.  Then, he sat 

himself down on a chair opposite to me; rested an arm on each knee; 

and, leaning forward very much, took from the ground, by a great 

effort, the specimen of metropolitan workmanship which I had just 

pulled off:  whistling, pleasantly, as he did so.  He turned it 

over and over; surveyed it with a contempt no language can express; 

and inquired if I wished him to fix me a boot like THAT?  I 

courteously replied, that provided the boots were large enough, I 

would leave the rest to him; that if convenient and practicable, I 

should not object to their bearing some resemblance to the model 

then before him; but that I would be entirely guided by, and would 

beg to leave the whole subject to, his judgment and discretion.  

'You an't partickler, about this scoop in the heel, I suppose 

then?' says he:  'we don't foller that, here.'  I repeated my last 

observation.  He looked at himself in the glass again; went closer 

to it to dash a grain or two of dust out of the corner of his eye; 

and settled his cravat.  All this time, my leg and foot were in the 

air.  'Nearly ready, sir?' I inquired.  'Well, pretty nigh,' he 

said; 'keep steady.'  I kept as steady as I could, both in foot and 

face; and having by this time got the dust out, and found his 

pencil-case, he measured me, and made the necessary notes.  When he 

had finished, he fell into his old attitude, and taking up the boot 

again, mused for some time.  'And this,' he said, at last, 'is an 

English boot, is it?  This is a London boot, eh?'  'That, sir,' I 

replied, 'is a London boot.'  He mused over it again, after the 

manner of Hamlet with Yorick's skull; nodded his head, as who 

should say, 'I pity the Institutions that led to the production of 

this boot!'; rose; put up his pencil, notes, and paper - glancing 

at himself in the glass, all the time - put on his hat - drew on 

his gloves very slowly; and finally walked out.  When he had been 

gone about a minute, the door reopened, and his hat and his head 

reappeared.  He looked round the room, and at the boot again, which 

was still lying on the floor; appeared thoughtful for a minute; and 

then said 'Well, good arternoon.'  'Good afternoon, sir,' said I:  

and that was the end of the interview.



There is but one other head on which I wish to offer a remark; and 

that has reference to the public health.  In so vast a country, 

where there are thousands of millions of acres of land yet 

unsettled and uncleared, and on every rood of which, vegetable 

decomposition is annually taking place; where there are so many 

great rivers, and such opposite varieties of climate; there cannot 

fail to be a great amount of sickness at certain seasons.  But I 

may venture to say, after conversing with many members of the 

medical profession in America, that I am not singular in the 

opinion that much of the disease which does prevail, might be 

avoided, if a few common precautions were observed.  Greater means 

of personal cleanliness, are indispensable to this end; the custom 

of hastily swallowing large quantities of animal food, three times 

a-day, and rushing back to sedentary pursuits after each meal, must 

be changed; the gentler sex must go more wisely clad, and take more 

healthful exercise; and in the latter clause, the males must be 

included also.  Above all, in public institutions, and throughout 

the whole of every town and city, the system of ventilation, and 

drainage, and removal of impurities requires to be thoroughly 

revised.  There is no local Legislature in America which may not 

study Mr. Chadwick's excellent Report upon the Sanitary Condition 

of our Labouring Classes, with immense advantage.



* * * * * *



I HAVE now arrived at the close of this book.  I have little reason 

to believe, from certain warnings I have had since I returned to 

England, that it will be tenderly or favourably received by the 

American people; and as I have written the Truth in relation to the 

mass of those who form their judgments and express their opinions, 

it will be seen that I have no desire to court, by any adventitious 

means, the popular applause.



It is enough for me, to know, that what I have set down in these 

pages, cannot cost me a single friend on the other side of the 

Atlantic, who is, in anything, deserving of the name.  For the 

rest, I put my trust, implicitly, in the spirit in which they have 

been conceived and penned; and I can bide my time.



I have made no reference to my reception, nor have I suffered it to 

influence me in what I have written; for, in either case, I should 

have offered but a sorry acknowledgment, compared with that I bear 

within my breast, towards those partial readers of my former books, 

across the Water, who met me with an open hand, and not with one 

that closed upon an iron muzzle.





THE END

