


CHAPTER XIII - A JAUNT TO THE LOOKING-GLASS PRAIRIE AND BACK



I MAY premise that the word Prairie is variously pronounced 

PARAAER, PAREARER, PAROARER.  The latter mode of pronunciation is 

perhaps the most in favour.



We were fourteen in all, and all young men:  indeed it is a 

singular though very natural feature in the society of these 

distant settlements, that it is mainly composed of adventurous 

persons in the prime of life, and has very few grey heads among it.  

There were no ladies:  the trip being a fatiguing one:  and we were 

to start at five o'clock in the morning punctually.



I was called at four, that I might be certain of keeping nobody 

waiting; and having got some bread and milk for breakfast, threw up 

the window and looked down into the street, expecting to see the 

whole party busily astir, and great preparations going on below.  

But as everything was very quiet, and the street presented that 

hopeless aspect with which five o'clock in the morning is familiar 

elsewhere, I deemed it as well to go to bed again, and went 

accordingly.



I woke again at seven o'clock, and by that time the party had 

assembled, and were gathered round, one light carriage, with a very 

stout axletree; one something on wheels like an amateur carrier's 

cart; one double phaeton of great antiquity and unearthly 

construction; one gig with a great hole in its back and a broken 

head; and one rider on horseback who was to go on before.  I got 

into the first coach with three companions; the rest bestowed 

themselves in the other vehicles; two large baskets were made fast 

to the lightest; two large stone jars in wicker cases, technically 

known as demi-johns, were consigned to the 'least rowdy' of the 

party for safe-keeping; and the procession moved off to the 

ferryboat, in which it was to cross the river bodily, men, horses, 

carriages, and all, as the manner in these parts is.



We got over the river in due course, and mustered again before a 

little wooden box on wheels, hove down all aslant in a morass, with 

'MERCHANT TAILOR' painted in very large letters over the door.  

Having settled the order of proceeding, and the road to be taken, 

we started off once more and began to make our way through an ill-

favoured Black Hollow, called, less expressively, the American 

Bottom.



The previous day had been - not to say hot, for the term is weak 

and lukewarm in its power of conveying an idea of the temperature.  

The town had been on fire; in a blaze.  But at night it had come on 

to rain in torrents, and all night long it had rained without 

cessation.  We had a pair of very strong horses, but travelled at 

the rate of little more than a couple of miles an hour, through one 

unbroken slough of black mud and water.  It had no variety but in 

depth.  Now it was only half over the wheels, now it hid the 

axletree, and now the coach sank down in it almost to the windows.  

The air resounded in all directions with the loud chirping of the 

frogs, who, with the pigs (a coarse, ugly breed, as unwholesome-

looking as though they were the spontaneous growth of the country), 

had the whole scene to themselves.  Here and there we passed a log 

hut:  but the wretched cabins were wide apart and thinly scattered, 

for though the soil is very rich in this place, few people can 

exist in such a deadly atmosphere.  On either side of the track, if 

it deserve the name, was the thick 'bush;' and everywhere was 

stagnant, slimy, rotten, filthy water.



As it is the custom in these parts to give a horse a gallon or so 

of cold water whenever he is in a foam with heat, we halted for 

that purpose, at a log inn in the wood, far removed from any other 

residence.  It consisted of one room, bare-roofed and bare-walled 

of course, with a loft above.  The ministering priest was a swarthy 

young savage, in a shirt of cotton print like bed-furniture, and a 

pair of ragged trousers.  There were a couple of young boys, too, 

nearly naked, lying idle by the well; and they, and he, and THE 

traveller at the inn, turned out to look at us.



The traveller was an old man with a grey gristly beard two inches 

long, a shaggy moustache of the same hue, and enormous eyebrows; 

which almost obscured his lazy, semi-drunken glance, as he stood 

regarding us with folded arms:  poising himself alternately upon 

his toes and heels.  On being addressed by one of the party, he 

drew nearer, and said, rubbing his chin (which scraped under his 

horny hand like fresh gravel beneath a nailed shoe), that he was 

from Delaware, and had lately bought a farm 'down there,' pointing 

into one of the marshes where the stunted trees were thickest.  He 

was 'going,' he added, to St. Louis, to fetch his family, whom he 

had left behind; but he seemed in no great hurry to bring on these 

incumbrances, for when we moved away, he loitered back into the 

cabin, and was plainly bent on stopping there so long as his money 

lasted.  He was a great politician of course, and explained his 

opinions at some length to one of our company; but I only remember 

that he concluded with two sentiments, one of which was, Somebody 

for ever; and the other, Blast everybody else! which is by no means 

a bad abstract of the general creed in these matters.



When the horses were swollen out to about twice their natural 

dimensions (there seems to be an idea here, that this kind of 

inflation improves their going), we went forward again, through mud 

and mire, and damp, and festering heat, and brake and bush, 

attended always by the music of the frogs and pigs, until nearly 

noon, when we halted at a place called Belleville.



Belleville was a small collection of wooden houses, huddled 

together in the very heart of the bush and swamp.  Many of them had 

singularly bright doors of red and yellow; for the place had been 

lately visited by a travelling painter, 'who got along,' as I was 

told, 'by eating his way.'  The criminal court was sitting, and was 

at that moment trying some criminals for horse-stealing:  with whom 

it would most likely go hard:  for live stock of all kinds being 

necessarily very much exposed in the woods, is held by the 

community in rather higher value than human life; and for this 

reason, juries generally make a point of finding all men indicted 

for cattle-stealing, guilty, whether or no.



The horses belonging to the bar, the judge, and witnesses, were 

tied to temporary racks set up roughly in the road; by which is to 

be understood, a forest path, nearly knee-deep in mud and slime.



There was an hotel in this place, which, like all hotels in 

America, had its large dining-room for the public table.  It was an 

odd, shambling, low-roofed out-house, half-cowshed and half-

kitchen, with a coarse brown canvas table-cloth, and tin sconces 

stuck against the walls, to hold candles at supper-time.  The 

horseman had gone forward to have coffee and some eatables 

prepared, and they were by this time nearly ready.  He had ordered 

'wheat-bread and chicken fixings,' in preference to 'corn-bread and 

common doings.'  The latter kind of rejection includes only pork 

and bacon.  The former comprehends broiled ham, sausages, veal 

cutlets, steaks, and such other viands of that nature as may be 

supposed, by a tolerably wide poetical construction, 'to fix' a 

chicken comfortably in the digestive organs of any lady or 

gentleman.



On one of the door-posts at this inn, was a tin plate, whereon was 

inscribed in characters of gold, 'Doctor Crocus;' and on a sheet of 

paper, pasted up by the side of this plate, was a written 

announcement that Dr. Crocus would that evening deliver a lecture 

on Phrenology for the benefit of the Belleville public; at a 

charge, for admission, of so much a head.



Straying up-stairs, during the preparation of the chicken fixings, 

I happened to pass the doctor's chamber; and as the door stood wide 

open, and the room was empty, I made bold to peep in.



It was a bare, unfurnished, comfortless room, with an unframed 

portrait hanging up at the head of the bed; a likeness, I take it, 

of the Doctor, for the forehead was fully displayed, and great 

stress was laid by the artist upon its phrenological developments.  

The bed itself was covered with an old patch-work counterpane.  The 

room was destitute of carpet or of curtain.  There was a damp 

fireplace without any stove, full of wood ashes; a chair, and a 

very small table; and on the last-named piece of furniture was 

displayed, in grand array, the doctor's library, consisting of some 

half-dozen greasy old books.



Now, it certainly looked about the last apartment on the whole 

earth out of which any man would be likely to get anything to do 

him good.  But the door, as I have said, stood coaxingly open, and 

plainly said in conjunction with the chair, the portrait, the 

table, and the books, 'Walk in, gentlemen, walk in!  Don't be ill, 

gentlemen, when you may be well in no time.  Doctor Crocus is here, 

gentlemen, the celebrated Dr. Crocus!  Dr. Crocus has come all this 

way to cure you, gentlemen.  If you haven't heard of Dr. Crocus, 

it's your fault, gentlemen, who live a little way out of the world 

here:  not Dr. Crocus's.  Walk in, gentlemen, walk in!'



In the passage below, when I went down-stairs again, was Dr. Crocus 

himself.  A crowd had flocked in from the Court House, and a voice 

from among them called out to the landlord, 'Colonel! introduce 

Doctor Crocus.'



'Mr. Dickens,' says the colonel, 'Doctor Crocus.'



Upon which Doctor Crocus, who is a tall, fine-looking Scotchman, 

but rather fierce and warlike in appearance for a professor of the 

peaceful art of healing, bursts out of the concourse with his right 

arm extended, and his chest thrown out as far as it will possibly 

come, and says:



'Your countryman, sir!'



Whereupon Doctor Crocus and I shake hands; and Doctor Crocus looks 

as if I didn't by any means realise his expectations, which, in a 

linen blouse, and a great straw hat, with a green ribbon, and no 

gloves, and my face and nose profusely ornamented with the stings 

of mosquitoes and the bites of bugs, it is very likely I did not.



'Long in these parts, sir?' says I.



'Three or four months, sir,' says the Doctor.



'Do you think of soon returning to the old country?' says I.



Doctor Crocus makes no verbal answer, but gives me an imploring 

look, which says so plainly 'Will you ask me that again, a little 

louder, if you please?' that I repeat the question.



'Think of soon returning to the old country, sir!' repeats the 

Doctor.



'To the old country, sir,' I rejoin.



Doctor Crocus looks round upon the crowd to observe the effect he 

produces, rubs his hands, and says, in a very loud voice:



'Not yet awhile, sir, not yet.  You won't catch me at that just 

yet, sir.  I am a little too fond of freedom for THAT, sir.  Ha, 

ha!  It's not so easy for a man to tear himself from a free country 

such as this is, sir.  Ha, ha!  No, no!  Ha, ha!  None of that till 

one's obliged to do it, sir.  No, no!'



As Doctor Crocus says these latter words, he shakes his head, 

knowingly, and laughs again.  Many of the bystanders shake their 

heads in concert with the doctor, and laugh too, and look at each 

other as much as to say, 'A pretty bright and first-rate sort of 

chap is Crocus!' and unless I am very much mistaken, a good many 

people went to the lecture that night, who never thought about 

phrenology, or about Doctor Crocus either, in all their lives 

before.



From Belleville, we went on, through the same desolate kind of 

waste, and constantly attended, without the interval of a moment, 

by the same music; until, at three o'clock in the afternoon, we 

halted once more at a village called Lebanon to inflate the horses 

again, and give them some corn besides:  of which they stood much 

in need.  Pending this ceremony, I walked into the village, where I 

met a full-sized dwelling-house coming down-hill at a round trot, 

drawn by a score or more of oxen.



The public-house was so very clean and good a one, that the 

managers of the jaunt resolved to return to it and put up there for 

the night, if possible.  This course decided on, and the horses 

being well refreshed, we again pushed forward, and came upon the 

Prairie at sunset.



It would be difficult to say why, or how - though it was possibly 

from having heard and read so much about it - but the effect on me 

was disappointment.  Looking towards the setting sun, there lay, 

stretched out before my view, a vast expanse of level ground; 

unbroken, save by one thin line of trees, which scarcely amounted 

to a scratch upon the great blank; until it met the glowing sky, 

wherein it seemed to dip:  mingling with its rich colours, and 

mellowing in its distant blue.  There it lay, a tranquil sea or 

lake without water, if such a simile be admissible, with the day 

going down upon it:  a few birds wheeling here and there:  and 

solitude and silence reigning paramount around.  But the grass was 

not yet high; there were bare black patches on the ground; and the 

few wild flowers that the eye could see, were poor and scanty.  

Great as the picture was, its very flatness and extent, which left 

nothing to the imagination, tamed it down and cramped its interest.  

I felt little of that sense of freedom and exhilaration which a 

Scottish heath inspires, or even our English downs awaken.  It was 

lonely and wild, but oppressive in its barren monotony.  I felt 

that in traversing the Prairies, I could never abandon myself to 

the scene, forgetful of all else; as I should do instinctively, 

were the heather underneath my feet, or an iron-bound coast beyond; 

but should often glance towards the distant and frequently-receding 

line of the horizon, and wish it gained and passed.  It is not a 

scene to be forgotten, but it is scarcely one, I think (at all 

events, as I saw it), to remember with much pleasure, or to covet 

the looking-on again, in after-life.



We encamped near a solitary log-house, for the sake of its water, 

and dined upon the plain.  The baskets contained roast fowls, 

buffalo's tongue (an exquisite dainty, by the way), ham, bread, 

cheese, and butter; biscuits, champagne, sherry; lemons and sugar 

for punch; and abundance of rough ice.  The meal was delicious, and 

the entertainers were the soul of kindness and good humour.  I have 

often recalled that cheerful party to my pleasant recollection 

since, and shall not easily forget, in junketings nearer home with 

friends of older date, my boon companions on the Prairie.



Returning to Lebanon that night, we lay at the little inn at which 

we had halted in the afternoon.  In point of cleanliness and 

comfort it would have suffered by no comparison with any English 

alehouse, of a homely kind, in England.



Rising at five o'clock next morning, I took a walk about the 

village:  none of the houses were strolling about to-day, but it 

was early for them yet, perhaps:  and then amused myself by 

lounging in a kind of farm-yard behind the tavern, of which the 

leading features were, a strange jumble of rough sheds for stables; 

a rude colonnade, built as a cool place of summer resort; a deep 

well; a great earthen mound for keeping vegetables in, in winter 

time; and a pigeon-house, whose little apertures looked, as they do 

in all pigeon-houses, very much too small for the admission of the 

plump and swelling-breasted birds who were strutting about it, 

though they tried to get in never so hard.  That interest 

exhausted, I took a survey of the inn's two parlours, which were 

decorated with coloured prints of Washington, and President 

Madison, and of a white-faced young lady (much speckled by the 

flies), who held up her gold neck-chain for the admiration of the 

spectator, and informed all admiring comers that she was 'Just 

Seventeen:' although I should have thought her older.  In the best 

room were two oil portraits of the kit-cat size, representing the 

landlord and his infant son; both looking as bold as lions, and 

staring out of the canvas with an intensity that would have been 

cheap at any price.  They were painted, I think, by the artist who 

had touched up the Belleville doors with red and gold; for I seemed 

to recognise his style immediately.



After breakfast, we started to return by a different way from that 

which we had taken yesterday, and coming up at ten o'clock with an 

encampment of German emigrants carrying their goods in carts, who 

had made a rousing fire which they were just quitting, stopped 

there to refresh.  And very pleasant the fire was; for, hot though 

it had been yesterday, it was quite cold to-day, and the wind blew 

keenly.  Looming in the distance, as we rode along, was another of 

the ancient Indian burial-places, called The Monks' Mound; in 

memory of a body of fanatics of the order of La Trappe, who founded 

a desolate convent there, many years ago, when there were no 

settlers within a thousand miles, and were all swept off by the 

pernicious climate:  in which lamentable fatality, few rational 

people will suppose, perhaps, that society experienced any very 

severe deprivation.



The track of to-day had the same features as the track of 

yesterday.  There was the swamp, the bush, and the perpetual chorus 

of frogs, the rank unseemly growth, the unwholesome steaming earth.  

Here and there, and frequently too, we encountered a solitary 

broken-down waggon, full of some new settler's goods.  It was a 

pitiful sight to see one of these vehicles deep in the mire; the 

axle-tree broken; the wheel lying idly by its side; the man gone 

miles away, to look for assistance; the woman seated among their 

wandering household gods with a baby at her breast, a picture of 

forlorn, dejected patience; the team of oxen crouching down 

mournfully in the mud, and breathing forth such clouds of vapour 

from their mouths and nostrils, that all the damp mist and fog 

around seemed to have come direct from them.



In due time we mustered once again before the merchant tailor's, 

and having done so, crossed over to the city in the ferry-boat:  

passing, on the way, a spot called Bloody Island, the duelling-

ground of St. Louis, and so designated in honour of the last fatal 

combat fought there, which was with pistols, breast to breast.  

Both combatants fell dead upon the ground; and possibly some 

rational people may think of them, as of the gloomy madmen on the 

Monks' Mound, that they were no great loss to the community.

