


CHAPTER XII - FROM CINCINNATI TO LOUISVILLE IN ANOTHER WESTERN 

STEAMBOAT; AND FROM LOUISVILLE TO ST. LOUIS IN ANOTHER.  ST. LOUIS



LEAVING Cincinnati at eleven o'clock in the forenoon, we embarked 

for Louisville in the Pike steamboat, which, carrying the mails, 

was a packet of a much better class than that in which we had come 

from Pittsburg.  As this passage does not occupy more than twelve 

or thirteen hours, we arranged to go ashore that night:  not 

coveting the distinction of sleeping in a state-room, when it was 

possible to sleep anywhere else.



There chanced to be on board this boat, in addition to the usual 

dreary crowd of passengers, one Pitchlynn, a chief of the Choctaw 

tribe of Indians, who SENT IN HIS CARD to me, and with whom I had 

the pleasure of a long conversation.



He spoke English perfectly well, though he had not begun to learn 

the language, he told me, until he was a young man grown.  He had 

read many books; and Scott's poetry appeared to have left a strong 

impression on his mind:  especially the opening of The Lady of the 

Lake, and the great battle scene in Marmion, in which, no doubt 

from the congeniality of the subjects to his own pursuits and 

tastes, he had great interest and delight.  He appeared to 

understand correctly all he had read; and whatever fiction had 

enlisted his sympathy in its belief, had done so keenly and 

earnestly.  I might almost say fiercely.  He was dressed in our 

ordinary everyday costume, which hung about his fine figure 

loosely, and with indifferent grace.  On my telling him that I 

regretted not to see him in his own attire, he threw up his right 

arm, for a moment, as though he were brandishing some heavy weapon, 

and answered, as he let it fall again, that his race were losing 

many things besides their dress, and would soon be seen upon the 

earth no more:  but he wore it at home, he added proudly.



He told me that he had been away from his home, west of the 

Mississippi, seventeen months:  and was now returning.  He had been 

chiefly at Washington on some negotiations pending between his 

Tribe and the Government:  which were not settled yet (he said in a 

melancholy way), and he feared never would be:  for what could a 

few poor Indians do, against such well-skilled men of business as 

the whites?  He had no love for Washington; tired of towns and 

cities very soon; and longed for the Forest and the Prairie.



I asked him what he thought of Congress?  He answered, with a 

smile, that it wanted dignity, in an Indian's eyes.



He would very much like, he said, to see England before he died; 

and spoke with much interest about the great things to be seen 

there.  When I told him of that chamber in the British Museum 

wherein are preserved household memorials of a race that ceased to 

be, thousands of years ago, he was very attentive, and it was not 

hard to see that he had a reference in his mind to the gradual 

fading away of his own people.



This led us to speak of Mr. Catlin's gallery, which he praised 

highly:  observing that his own portrait was among the collection, 

and that all the likenesses were 'elegant.'  Mr. Cooper, he said, 

had painted the Red Man well; and so would I, he knew, if I would 

go home with him and hunt buffaloes, which he was quite anxious I 

should do.  When I told him that supposing I went, I should not be 

very likely to damage the buffaloes much, he took it as a great 

joke and laughed heartily.



He was a remarkably handsome man; some years past forty, I should 

judge; with long black hair, an aquiline nose, broad cheek-bones, a 

sunburnt complexion, and a very bright, keen, dark, and piercing 

eye.  There were but twenty thousand of the Choctaws left, he said, 

and their number was decreasing every day.  A few of his brother 

chiefs had been obliged to become civilised, and to make themselves 

acquainted with what the whites knew, for it was their only chance 

of existence.  But they were not many; and the rest were as they 

always had been.  He dwelt on this:  and said several times that 

unless they tried to assimilate themselves to their conquerors, 

they must be swept away before the strides of civilised society.



When we shook hands at parting, I told him he must come to England, 

as he longed to see the land so much:  that I should hope to see 

him there, one day:  and that I could promise him he would be well 

received and kindly treated.  He was evidently pleased by this 

assurance, though he rejoined with a good-humoured smile and an 

arch shake of his head, that the English used to be very fond of 

the Red Men when they wanted their help, but had not cared much for 

them, since.



He took his leave; as stately and complete a gentleman of Nature's 

making, as ever I beheld; and moved among the people in the boat, 

another kind of being.  He sent me a lithographed portrait of 

himself soon afterwards; very like, though scarcely handsome 

enough; which I have carefully preserved in memory of our brief 

acquaintance.



There was nothing very interesting in the scenery of this day's 

journey, which brought us at midnight to Louisville.  We slept at 

the Galt House; a splendid hotel; and were as handsomely lodged as 

though we had been in Paris, rather than hundreds of miles beyond 

the Alleghanies.



The city presenting no objects of sufficient interest to detain us 

on our way, we resolved to proceed next day by another steamboat, 

the Fulton, and to join it, about noon, at a suburb called 

Portland, where it would be delayed some time in passing through a 

canal.



The interval, after breakfast, we devoted to riding through the 

town, which is regular and cheerful:  the streets being laid out at 

right angles, and planted with young trees.  The buildings are 

smoky and blackened, from the use of bituminous coal, but an 

Englishman is well used to that appearance, and indisposed to 

quarrel with it.  There did not appear to be much business 

stirring; and some unfinished buildings and improvements seemed to 

intimate that the city had been overbuilt in the ardour of 'going-

a-head,' and was suffering under the re-action consequent upon such 

feverish forcing of its powers.



On our way to Portland, we passed a 'Magistrate's office,' which 

amused me, as looking far more like a dame school than any police 

establishment:  for this awful Institution was nothing but a little 

lazy, good-for-nothing front parlour, open to the street; wherein 

two or three figures (I presume the magistrate and his myrmidons) 

were basking in the sunshine, the very effigies of languor and 

repose.  It was a perfect picture of justice retired from business 

for want of customers; her sword and scales sold off; napping 

comfortably with her legs upon the table.



Here, as elsewhere in these parts, the road was perfectly alive 

with pigs of all ages; lying about in every direction, fast 

asleep.; or grunting along in quest of hidden dainties.  I had 

always a sneaking kindness for these odd animals, and found a 

constant source of amusement, when all others failed, in watching 

their proceedings.  As we were riding along this morning, I 

observed a little incident between two youthful pigs, which was so 

very human as to be inexpressibly comical and grotesque at the 

time, though I dare say, in telling, it is tame enough.



One young gentleman (a very delicate porker with several straws 

sticking about his nose, betokening recent investigations in a 

dung-hill) was walking deliberately on, profoundly thinking, when 

suddenly his brother, who was lying in a miry hole unseen by him, 

rose up immediately before his startled eyes, ghostly with damp 

mud.  Never was pig's whole mass of blood so turned.  He started 

back at least three feet, gazed for a moment, and then shot off as 

hard as he could go:  his excessively little tail vibrating with 

speed and terror like a distracted pendulum.  But before he had 

gone very far, he began to reason with himself as to the nature of 

this frightful appearance; and as he reasoned, he relaxed his speed 

by gradual degrees; until at last he stopped, and faced about.  

There was his brother, with the mud upon him glazing in the sun, 

yet staring out of the very same hole, perfectly amazed at his 

proceedings!  He was no sooner assured of this; and he assured 

himself so carefully that one may almost say he shaded his eyes 

with his hand to see the better; than he came back at a round trot, 

pounced upon him, and summarily took off a piece of his tail; as a 

caution to him to be careful what he was about for the future, and 

never to play tricks with his family any more.



We found the steamboat in the canal, waiting for the slow process 

of getting through the lock, and went on board, where we shortly 

afterwards had a new kind of visitor in the person of a certain 

Kentucky Giant whose name is Porter, and who is of the moderate 

height of seven feet eight inches, in his stockings.



There never was a race of people who so completely gave the lie to 

history as these giants, or whom all the chroniclers have so 

cruelly libelled.  Instead of roaring and ravaging about the world, 

constantly catering for their cannibal larders, and perpetually 

going to market in an unlawful manner, they are the meekest people 

in any man's acquaintance:  rather inclining to milk and vegetable 

diet, and bearing anything for a quiet life.  So decidedly are 

amiability and mildness their characteristics, that I confess I 

look upon that youth who distinguished himself by the slaughter of 

these inoffensive persons, as a false-hearted brigand, who, 

pretending to philanthropic motives, was secretly influenced only 

by the wealth stored up within their castles, and the hope of 

plunder.  And I lean the more to this opinion from finding that 

even the historian of those exploits, with all his partiality for 

his hero, is fain to admit that the slaughtered monsters in 

question were of a very innocent and simple turn; extremely 

guileless and ready of belief; lending a credulous ear to the most 

improbable tales; suffering themselves to be easily entrapped into 

pits; and even (as in the case of the Welsh Giant) with an excess 

of the hospitable politeness of a landlord, ripping themselves 

open, rather than hint at the possibility of their guests being 

versed in the vagabond arts of sleight-of-hand and hocus-pocus.



The Kentucky Giant was but another illustration of the truth of 

this position.  He had a weakness in the region of the knees, and a 

trustfulness in his long face, which appealed even to five-feet 

nine for encouragement and support.  He was only twenty-five years 

old, he said, and had grown recently, for it had been found 

necessary to make an addition to the legs of his inexpressibles.  

At fifteen he was a short boy, and in those days his English father 

and his Irish mother had rather snubbed him, as being too small of 

stature to sustain the credit of the family.  He added that his 

health had not been good, though it was better now; but short 

people are not wanting who whisper that he drinks too hard.



I understand he drives a hackney-coach, though how he does it, 

unless he stands on the footboard behind, and lies along the roof 

upon his chest, with his chin in the box, it would be difficult to 

comprehend.  He brought his gun with him, as a curiosity.



Christened 'The Little Rifle,' and displayed outside a shop-window, 

it would make the fortune of any retail business in Holborn.  When 

he had shown himself and talked a little while, he withdrew with 

his pocket-instrument, and went bobbing down the cabin, among men 

of six feet high and upwards, like a light-house walking among 

lamp-posts.



Within a few minutes afterwards, we were out of the canal, and in 

the Ohio river again.



The arrangements of the boat were like those of the Messenger, and 

the passengers were of the same order of people.  We fed at the 

same times, on the same kind of viands, in the same dull manner, 

and with the same observances.  The company appeared to be 

oppressed by the same tremendous concealments, and had as little 

capacity of enjoyment or light-heartedness.  I never in my life did 

see such listless, heavy dulness as brooded over these meals:  the 

very recollection of it weighs me down, and makes me, for the 

moment, wretched.  Reading and writing on my knee, in our little 

cabin, I really dreaded the coming of the hour that summoned us to 

table; and was as glad to escape from it again, as if it had been a 

penance or a punishment.  Healthy cheerfulness and good spirits 

forming a part of the banquet, I could soak my crusts in the 

fountain with Le Sage's strolling player, and revel in their glad 

enjoyment:  but sitting down with so many fellow-animals to ward 

off thirst and hunger as a business; to empty, each creature, his 

Yahoo's trough as quickly as he can, and then slink sullenly away; 

to have these social sacraments stripped of everything but the mere 

greedy satisfaction of the natural cravings; goes so against the 

grain with me, that I seriously believe the recollection of these 

funeral feasts will be a waking nightmare to me all my life.



There was some relief in this boat, too, which there had not been 

in the other, for the captain (a blunt, good-natured fellow) had 

his handsome wife with him, who was disposed to be lively and 

agreeable, as were a few other lady-passengers who had their seats 

about us at the same end of the table.  But nothing could have made 

head against the depressing influence of the general body.  There 

was a magnetism of dulness in them which would have beaten down the 

most facetious companion that the earth ever knew.  A jest would 

have been a crime, and a smile would have faded into a grinning 

horror.  Such deadly, leaden people; such systematic plodding, 

weary, insupportable heaviness; such a mass of animated indigestion 

in respect of all that was genial, jovial, frank, social, or 

hearty; never, sure, was brought together elsewhere since the world 

began.



Nor was the scenery, as we approached the junction of the Ohio and 

Mississippi rivers, at all inspiriting in its influence.  The trees 

were stunted in their growth; the banks were low and flat; the 

settlements and log cabins fewer in number:  their inhabitants more 

wan and wretched than any we had encountered yet.  No songs of 

birds were in the air, no pleasant scents, no moving lights and 

shadows from swift passing clouds.  Hour after hour, the changeless 

glare of the hot, unwinking sky, shone upon the same monotonous 

objects.  Hour after hour, the river rolled along, as wearily and 

slowly as the time itself.



At length, upon the morning of the third day, we arrived at a spot 

so much more desolate than any we had yet beheld, that the 

forlornest places we had passed, were, in comparison with it, full 

of interest.  At the junction of the two rivers, on ground so flat 

and low and marshy, that at certain seasons of the year it is 

inundated to the house-tops, lies a breeding-place of fever, ague, 

and death; vaunted in England as a mine of Golden Hope, and 

speculated in, on the faith of monstrous representations, to many 

people's ruin.  A dismal swamp, on which the half-built houses rot 

away:  cleared here and there for the space of a few yards; and 

teeming, then, with rank unwholesome vegetation, in whose baleful 

shade the wretched wanderers who are tempted hither, droop, and 

die, and lay their bones; the hateful Mississippi circling and 

eddying before it, and turning off upon its southern course a slimy 

monster hideous to behold; a hotbed of disease, an ugly sepulchre, 

a grave uncheered by any gleam of promise:  a place without one 

single quality, in earth or air or water, to commend it:  such is 

this dismal Cairo.



But what words shall describe the Mississippi, great father of 

rivers, who (praise be to Heaven) has no young children like him!  

An enormous ditch, sometimes two or three miles wide, running 

liquid mud, six miles an hour:  its strong and frothy current 

choked and obstructed everywhere by huge logs and whole forest 

trees:  now twining themselves together in great rafts, from the 

interstices of which a sedgy, lazy foam works up, to float upon the 

water's top; now rolling past like monstrous bodies, their tangled 

roots showing like matted hair; now glancing singly by like giant 

leeches; and now writhing round and round in the vortex of some 

small whirlpool, like wounded snakes.  The banks low, the trees 

dwarfish, the marshes swarming with frogs, the wretched cabins few 

and far apart, their inmates hollow-cheeked and pale, the weather 

very hot, mosquitoes penetrating into every crack and crevice of 

the boat, mud and slime on everything:  nothing pleasant in its 

aspect, but the harmless lightning which flickers every night upon 

the dark horizon.



For two days we toiled up this foul stream, striking constantly 

against the floating timber, or stopping to avoid those more 

dangerous obstacles, the snags, or sawyers, which are the hidden 

trunks of trees that have their roots below the tide.  When the 

nights are very dark, the look-out stationed in the head of the 

boat, knows by the ripple of the water if any great impediment be 

near at hand, and rings a bell beside him, which is the signal for 

the engine to be stopped:  but always in the night this bell has 

work to do, and after every ring, there comes a blow which renders 

it no easy matter to remain in bed.



The decline of day here was very gorgeous; tingeing the firmament 

deeply with red and gold, up to the very keystone of the arch above 

us.  As the sun went down behind the bank, the slightest blades of 

grass upon it seemed to become as distinctly visible as the 

arteries in the skeleton of a leaf; and when, as it slowly sank, 

the red and golden bars upon the water grew dimmer, and dimmer yet, 

as if they were sinking too; and all the glowing colours of 

departing day paled, inch by inch, before the sombre night; the 

scene became a thousand times more lonesome and more dreary than 

before, and all its influences darkened with the sky.



We drank the muddy water of this river while we were upon it.  It 

is considered wholesome by the natives, and is something more 

opaque than gruel.  I have seen water like it at the Filter-shops, 

but nowhere else.



On the fourth night after leaving Louisville, we reached St. Louis, 

and here I witnessed the conclusion of an incident, trifling enough 

in itself, but very pleasant to see, which had interested me during 

the whole journey.



There was a little woman on board, with a little baby; and both 

little woman and little child were cheerful, good-looking, bright-

eyed, and fair to see.  The little woman had been passing a long 

time with her sick mother in New York, and had left her home in St. 

Louis, in that condition in which ladies who truly love their lords 

desire to be.  The baby was born in her mother's house; and she had 

not seen her husband (to whom she was now returning), for twelve 

months:  having left him a month or two after their marriage.



Well, to be sure, there never was a little woman so full of hope, 

and tenderness, and love, and anxiety, as this little woman was:  

and all day long she wondered whether 'He' would be at the wharf; 

and whether 'He' had got her letter; and whether, if she sent the 

baby ashore by somebody else, 'He' would know it, meeting it in the 

street:  which, seeing that he had never set eyes upon it in his 

life, was not very likely in the abstract, but was probable enough, 

to the young mother.  She was such an artless little creature; and 

was in such a sunny, beaming, hopeful state; and let out all this 

matter clinging close about her heart, so freely; that all the 

other lady passengers entered into the spirit of it as much as she; 

and the captain (who heard all about it from his wife) was wondrous 

sly, I promise you:  inquiring, every time we met at table, as in 

forgetfulness, whether she expected anybody to meet her at St. 

Louis, and whether she would want to go ashore the night we reached 

it (but he supposed she wouldn't), and cutting many other dry jokes 

of that nature.  There was one little weazen, dried-apple-faced old 

woman, who took occasion to doubt the constancy of husbands in such 

circumstances of bereavement; and there was another lady (with a 

lap-dog) old enough to moralize on the lightness of human 

affections, and yet not so old that she could help nursing the 

baby, now and then, or laughing with the rest, when the little 

woman called it by its father's name, and asked it all manner of 

fantastic questions concerning him in the joy of her heart.



It was something of a blow to the little woman, that when we were 

within twenty miles of our destination, it became clearly necessary 

to put this baby to bed.  But she got over it with the same good 

humour; tied a handkerchief round her head; and came out into the 

little gallery with the rest.  Then, such an oracle as she became 

in reference to the localities! and such facetiousness as was 

displayed by the married ladies! and such sympathy as was shown by 

the single ones! and such peals of laughter as the little woman 

herself (who would just as soon have cried) greeted every jest 

with!



At last, there were the lights of St. Louis, and here was the 

wharf, and those were the steps:  and the little woman covering her 

face with her hands, and laughing (or seeming to laugh) more than 

ever, ran into her own cabin, and shut herself up.  I have no doubt 

that in the charming inconsistency of such excitement, she stopped 

her ears, lest she should hear 'Him' asking for her:  but I did not 

see her do it.



Then, a great crowd of people rushed on board, though the boat was 

not yet made fast, but was wandering about, among the other boats, 

to find a landing-place:  and everybody looked for the husband:  

and nobody saw him:  when, in the midst of us all - Heaven knows 

how she ever got there - there was the little woman clinging with 

both arms tight round the neck of a fine, good-looking, sturdy 

young fellow! and in a moment afterwards, there she was again, 

actually clapping her little hands for joy, as she dragged him 

through the small door of her small cabin, to look at the baby as 

he lay asleep!



We went to a large hotel, called the Planter's House:  built like 

an English hospital, with long passages and bare walls, and sky-

lights above the room-doors for the free circulation of air.  There 

were a great many boarders in it; and as many lights sparkled and 

glistened from the windows down into the street below, when we 

drove up, as if it had been illuminated on some occasion of 

rejoicing.  It is an excellent house, and the proprietors have most 

bountiful notions of providing the creature comforts.  Dining alone 

with my wife in our own room, one day, I counted fourteen dishes on 

the table at once.



In the old French portion of the town, the thoroughfares are narrow 

and crooked, and some of the houses are very quaint and 

picturesque:  being built of wood, with tumble-down galleries 

before the windows, approachable by stairs or rather ladders from 

the street.  There are queer little barbers' shops and drinking-

houses too, in this quarter; and abundance of crazy old tenements 

with blinking casements, such as may be seen in Flanders.  Some of 

these ancient habitations, with high garret gable-windows perking 

into the roofs, have a kind of French shrug about them; and being 

lop-sided with age, appear to hold their heads askew, besides, as 

if they were grimacing in astonishment at the American 

Improvements.



It is hardly necessary to say, that these consist of wharfs and 

warehouses, and new buildings in all directions; and of a great 

many vast plans which are still 'progressing.'  Already, however, 

some very good houses, broad streets, and marble-fronted shops, 

have gone so far ahead as to be in a state of completion; and the 

town bids fair in a few years to improve considerably:  though it 

is not likely ever to vie, in point of elegance or beauty, with 

Cincinnati.



The Roman Catholic religion, introduced here by the early French 

settlers, prevails extensively.  Among the public institutions are 

a Jesuit college; a convent for 'the Ladies of the Sacred Heart;' 

and a large chapel attached to the college, which was in course of 

erection at the time of my visit, and was intended to be 

consecrated on the second of December in the next year.  The 

architect of this building, is one of the reverend fathers of the 

school, and the works proceed under his sole direction.  The organ 

will be sent from Belgium.



In addition to these establishments, there is a Roman Catholic 

cathedral, dedicated to Saint Francis Xavier; and a hospital, 

founded by the munificence of a deceased resident, who was a member 

of that church.  It also sends missionaries from hence among the 

Indian tribes.



The Unitarian church is represented, in this remote place, as in 

most other parts of America, by a gentleman of great worth and 

excellence.  The poor have good reason to remember and bless it; 

for it befriends them, and aids the cause of rational education, 

without any sectarian or selfish views.  It is liberal in all its 

actions; of kind construction; and of wide benevolence.



There are three free-schools already erected, and in full operation 

in this city.  A fourth is building, and will soon be opened.



No man ever admits the unhealthiness of the place he dwells in 

(unless he is going away from it), and I shall therefore, I have no 

doubt, be at issue with the inhabitants of St. Louis, in 

questioning the perfect salubrity of its climate, and in hinting 

that I think it must rather dispose to fever, in the summer and 

autumnal seasons.  Just adding, that it is very hot, lies among 

great rivers, and has vast tracts of undrained swampy land around 

it, I leave the reader to form his own opinion.



As I had a great desire to see a Prairie before turning back from 

the furthest point of my wanderings; and as some gentlemen of the 

town had, in their hospitable consideration, an equal desire to 

gratify me; a day was fixed, before my departure, for an expedition 

to the Looking-Glass Prairie, which is within thirty miles of the 

town.  Deeming it possible that my readers may not object to know 

what kind of thing such a gipsy party may be at that distance from 

home, and among what sort of objects it moves, I will describe the 

jaunt in another chapter.
