


CHAPTER II - THE PASSAGE OUT


WE all dined together that day; and a rather formidable party we 

were:  no fewer than eighty-six strong.  The vessel being pretty 

deep in the water, with all her coals on board and so many 

passengers, and the weather being calm and quiet, there was but 

little motion; so that before the dinner was half over, even those 

passengers who were most distrustful of themselves plucked up 

amazingly; and those who in the morning had returned to the 

universal question, 'Are you a good sailor?' a very decided 

negative, now either parried the inquiry with the evasive reply, 

'Oh! I suppose I'm no worse than anybody else;' or, reckless of all 

moral obligations, answered boldly 'Yes:' and with some irritation 

too, as though they would add, 'I should like to know what you see 

in ME, sir, particularly, to justify suspicion!'



Notwithstanding this high tone of courage and confidence, I could 

not but observe that very few remained long over their wine; and 

that everybody had an unusual love of the open air; and that the 

favourite and most coveted seats were invariably those nearest to 

the door.  The tea-table, too, was by no means as well attended as 

the dinner-table; and there was less whist-playing than might have 

been expected.  Still, with the exception of one lady, who had 

retired with some precipitation at dinner-time, immediately after 

being assisted to the finest cut of a very yellow boiled leg of 

mutton with very green capers, there were no invalids as yet; and 

walking, and smoking, and drinking of brandy-and-water (but always 

in the open air), went on with unabated spirit, until eleven 

o'clock or thereabouts, when 'turning in' - no sailor of seven 

hours' experience talks of going to bed - became the order of the 

night.  The perpetual tramp of boot-heels on the decks gave place 

to a heavy silence, and the whole human freight was stowed away 

below, excepting a very few stragglers, like myself, who were 

probably, like me, afraid to go there.



To one unaccustomed to such scenes, this is a very striking time on 

shipboard.  Afterwards, and when its novelty had long worn off, it 

never ceased to have a peculiar interest and charm for me.  The 

gloom through which the great black mass holds its direct and 

certain course; the rushing water, plainly heard, but dimly seen; 

the broad, white, glistening track, that follows in the vessel's 

wake; the men on the look-out forward, who would be scarcely 

visible against the dark sky, but for their blotting out some score 

of glistening stars; the helmsman at the wheel, with the 

illuminated card before him, shining, a speck of light amidst the 

darkness, like something sentient and of Divine intelligence; the 

melancholy sighing of the wind through block, and rope, and chain; 

the gleaming forth of light from every crevice, nook, and tiny 

piece of glass about the decks, as though the ship were filled with 

fire in hiding, ready to burst through any outlet, wild with its 

resistless power of death and ruin.  At first, too, and even when 

the hour, and all the objects it exalts, have come to be familiar, 

it is difficult, alone and thoughtful, to hold them to their proper 

shapes and forms.  They change with the wandering fancy; assume the 

semblance of things left far away; put on the well-remembered 

aspect of favourite places dearly loved; and even people them with 

shadows.  Streets, houses, rooms; figures so like their usual 

occupants, that they have startled me by their reality, which far 

exceeded, as it seemed to me, all power of mine to conjure up the 

absent; have, many and many a time, at such an hour, grown suddenly 

out of objects with whose real look, and use, and purpose, I was as 

well acquainted as with my own two hands.



My own two hands, and feet likewise, being very cold, however, on 

this particular occasion, I crept below at midnight.  It was not 

exactly comfortable below.  It was decidedly close; and it was 

impossible to be unconscious of the presence of that extraordinary 

compound of strange smells, which is to be found nowhere but on 

board ship, and which is such a subtle perfume that it seems to 

enter at every pore of the skin, and whisper of the hold.  Two 

passengers' wives (one of them my own) lay already in silent 

agonies on the sofa; and one lady's maid (MY lady's) was a mere 

bundle on the floor, execrating her destiny, and pounding her curl-

papers among the stray boxes.  Everything sloped the wrong way:  

which in itself was an aggravation scarcely to be borne.  I had 

left the door open, a moment before, in the bosom of a gentle 

declivity, and, when I turned to shut it, it was on the summit of a 

lofty eminence.  Now every plank and timber creaked, as if the ship 

were made of wicker-work; and now crackled, like an enormous fire 

of the driest possible twigs.  There was nothing for it but bed; so 

I went to bed.



It was pretty much the same for the next two days, with a tolerably 

fair wind and dry weather.  I read in bed (but to this hour I don't 

know what) a good deal; and reeled on deck a little; drank cold 

brandy-and-water with an unspeakable disgust, and ate hard biscuit 

perseveringly:  not ill, but going to be.



It is the third morning.  I am awakened out of my sleep by a dismal 

shriek from my wife, who demands to know whether there's any 

danger.  I rouse myself, and look out of bed.  The water-jug is 

plunging and leaping like a lively dolphin; all the smaller 

articles are afloat, except my shoes, which are stranded on a 

carpet-bag, high and dry, like a couple of coal-barges.  Suddenly I 

see them spring into the air, and behold the looking-glass, which 

is nailed to the wall, sticking fast upon the ceiling.  At the same 

time the door entirely disappears, and a new one is opened in the 

floor.  Then I begin to comprehend that the state-room is standing 

on its head.



Before it is possible to make any arrangement at all compatible 

with this novel state of things, the ship rights.  Before one can 

say 'Thank Heaven!' she wrongs again.  Before one can cry she IS 

wrong, she seems to have started forward, and to be a creature 

actually running of its own accord, with broken knees and failing 

legs, through every variety of hole and pitfall, and stumbling 

constantly.  Before one can so much as wonder, she takes a high 

leap into the air.  Before she has well done that, she takes a deep 

dive into the water.  Before she has gained the surface, she throws 

a summerset.  The instant she is on her legs, she rushes backward.  

And so she goes on staggering, heaving, wrestling, leaping, diving, 

jumping, pitching, throbbing, rolling, and rocking:  and going 

through all these movements, sometimes by turns, and sometimes 

altogether:  until one feels disposed to roar for mercy.



A steward passes.  'Steward!'  'Sir?'  'What IS the matter? what DO 

you call this?'  'Rather a heavy sea on, sir, and a head-wind.'



A head-wind!  Imagine a human face upon the vessel's prow, with 

fifteen thousand Samsons in one bent upon driving her back, and 

hitting her exactly between the eyes whenever she attempts to 

advance an inch.  Imagine the ship herself, with every pulse and 

artery of her huge body swollen and bursting under this 

maltreatment, sworn to go on or die.  Imagine the wind howling, the 

sea roaring, the rain beating:  all in furious array against her.  

Picture the sky both dark and wild, and the clouds, in fearful 

sympathy with the waves, making another ocean in the air.  Add to 

all this, the clattering on deck and down below; the tread of 

hurried feet; the loud hoarse shouts of seamen; the gurgling in and 

out of water through the scuppers; with, every now and then, the 

striking of a heavy sea upon the planks above, with the deep, dead, 

heavy sound of thunder heard within a vault; - and there is the 

head-wind of that January morning.



I say nothing of what may be called the domestic noises of the 

ship:  such as the breaking of glass and crockery, the tumbling 

down of stewards, the gambols, overhead, of loose casks and truant 

dozens of bottled porter, and the very remarkable and far from 

exhilarating sounds raised in their various state-rooms by the 

seventy passengers who were too ill to get up to breakfast.  I say 

nothing of them:  for although I lay listening to this concert for 

three or four days, I don't think I heard it for more than a 

quarter of a minute, at the expiration of which term, I lay down 

again, excessively sea-sick.



Not sea-sick, be it understood, in the ordinary acceptation of the 

term:  I wish I had been:  but in a form which I have never seen or 

heard described, though I have no doubt it is very common.  I lay 

there, all the day long, quite coolly and contentedly; with no 

sense of weariness, with no desire to get up, or get better, or 

take the air; with no curiosity, or care, or regret, of any sort or 

degree, saving that I think I can remember, in this universal 

indifference, having a kind of lazy joy - of fiendish delight, if 

anything so lethargic can be dignified with the title - in the fact 

of my wife being too ill to talk to me.  If I may be allowed to 

illustrate my state of mind by such an example, I should say that I 

was exactly in the condition of the elder Mr. Willet, after the 

incursion of the rioters into his bar at Chigwell.  Nothing would 

have surprised me.  If, in the momentary illumination of any ray of 

intelligence that may have come upon me in the way of thoughts of 

Home, a goblin postman, with a scarlet coat and bell, had come into 

that little kennel before me, broad awake in broad day, and, 

apologising for being damp through walking in the sea, had handed 

me a letter directed to myself, in familiar characters, I am 

certain I should not have felt one atom of astonishment:  I should 

have been perfectly satisfied.  If Neptune himself had walked in, 

with a toasted shark on his trident, I should have looked upon the 

event as one of the very commonest everyday occurrences.



Once - once - I found myself on deck.  I don't know how I got 

there, or what possessed me to go there, but there I was; and 

completely dressed too, with a huge pea-coat on, and a pair of 

boots such as no weak man in his senses could ever have got into.  

I found myself standing, when a gleam of consciousness came upon 

me, holding on to something.  I don't know what.  I think it was 

the boatswain:  or it may have been the pump:  or possibly the cow.  

I can't say how long I had been there; whether a day or a minute.  

I recollect trying to think about something (about anything in the 

whole wide world, I was not particular) without the smallest 

effect.  I could not even make out which was the sea, and which the 

sky, for the horizon seemed drunk, and was flying wildly about in 

all directions.  Even in that incapable state, however, I 

recognised the lazy gentleman standing before me:  nautically clad 

in a suit of shaggy blue, with an oilskin hat.  But I was too 

imbecile, although I knew it to be he, to separate him from his 

dress; and tried to call him, I remember, PILOT.  After another 

interval of total unconsciousness, I found he had gone, and 

recognised another figure in its place.  It seemed to wave and 

fluctuate before me as though I saw it reflected in an unsteady 

looking-glass; but I knew it for the captain; and such was the 

cheerful influence of his face, that I tried to smile:  yes, even 

then I tried to smile.  I saw by his gestures that he addressed me; 

but it was a long time before I could make out that he remonstrated 

against my standing up to my knees in water - as I was; of course I 

don't know why.  I tried to thank him, but couldn't.  I could only 

point to my boots - or wherever I supposed my boots to be - and say 

in a plaintive voice, 'Cork soles:' at the same time endeavouring, 

I am told, to sit down in the pool.  Finding that I was quite 

insensible, and for the time a maniac, he humanely conducted me 

below.



There I remained until I got better:  suffering, whenever I was 

recommended to eat anything, an amount of anguish only second to 

that which is said to be endured by the apparently drowned, in the 

process of restoration to life.  One gentleman on board had a 

letter of introduction to me from a mutual friend in London.  He 

sent it below with his card, on the morning of the head-wind; and I 

was long troubled with the idea that he might be up, and well, and 

a hundred times a day expecting me to call upon him in the saloon.  

I imagined him one of those cast-iron images - I will not call them 

men - who ask, with red faces, and lusty voices, what sea-sickness 

means, and whether it really is as bad as it is represented to be.  

This was very torturing indeed; and I don't think I ever felt such 

perfect gratification and gratitude of heart, as I did when I heard 

from the ship's doctor that he had been obliged to put a large 

mustard poultice on this very gentleman's stomach.  I date my 

recovery from the receipt of that intelligence.



It was materially assisted though, I have no doubt, by a heavy gale 

of wind, which came slowly up at sunset, when we were about ten 

days out, and raged with gradually increasing fury until morning, 

saving that it lulled for an hour a little before midnight.  There 

was something in the unnatural repose of that hour, and in the 

after gathering of the storm, so inconceivably awful and 

tremendous, that its bursting into full violence was almost a 

relief.



The labouring of the ship in the troubled sea on this night I shall 

never forget.  'Will it ever be worse than this?' was a question I 

had often heard asked, when everything was sliding and bumping 

about, and when it certainly did seem difficult to comprehend the 

possibility of anything afloat being more disturbed, without 

toppling over and going down.  But what the agitation of a steam-

vessel is, on a bad winter's night in the wild Atlantic, it is 

impossible for the most vivid imagination to conceive.  To say that 

she is flung down on her side in the waves, with her masts dipping 

into them, and that, springing up again, she rolls over on the 

other side, until a heavy sea strikes her with the noise of a 

hundred great guns, and hurls her back - that she stops, and 

staggers, and shivers, as though stunned, and then, with a violent 

throbbing at her heart, darts onward like a monster goaded into 

madness, to be beaten down, and battered, and crushed, and leaped 

on by the angry sea - that thunder, lightning, hail, and rain, and 

wind, are all in fierce contention for the mastery - that every 

plank has its groan, every nail its shriek, and every drop of water 

in the great ocean its howling voice - is nothing.  To say that all 

is grand, and all appalling and horrible in the last degree, is 

nothing.  Words cannot express it.  Thoughts cannot convey it.  

Only a dream can call it up again, in all its fury, rage, and 

passion.



And yet, in the very midst of these terrors, I was placed in a 

situation so exquisitely ridiculous, that even then I had as strong 

a sense of its absurdity as I have now, and could no more help 

laughing than I can at any other comical incident, happening under 

circumstances the most favourable to its enjoyment.  About midnight 

we shipped a sea, which forced its way through the skylights, burst 

open the doors above, and came raging and roaring down into the 

ladies' cabin, to the unspeakable consternation of my wife and a 

little Scotch lady - who, by the way, had previously sent a message 

to the captain by the stewardess, requesting him, with her 

compliments, to have a steel conductor immediately attached to the 

top of every mast, and to the chimney, in order that the ship might 

not be struck by lightning.  They and the handmaid before 

mentioned, being in such ecstasies of fear that I scarcely knew 

what to do with them, I naturally bethought myself of some 

restorative or comfortable cordial; and nothing better occurring to 

me, at the moment, than hot brandy-and-water, I procured a tumbler 

full without delay.  It being impossible to stand or sit without 

holding on, they were all heaped together in one corner of a long 

sofa - a fixture extending entirely across the cabin - where they 

clung to each other in momentary expectation of being drowned.  

When I approached this place with my specific, and was about to 

administer it with many consolatory expressions to the nearest 

sufferer, what was my dismay to see them all roll slowly down to 

the other end!  And when I staggered to that end, and held out the 

glass once more, how immensely baffled were my good intentions by 

the ship giving another lurch, and their all rolling back again!  I 

suppose I dodged them up and down this sofa for at least a quarter 

of an hour, without reaching them once; and by the time I did catch 

them, the brandy-and-water was diminished, by constant spilling, to 

a teaspoonful.  To complete the group, it is necessary to recognise 

in this disconcerted dodger, an individual very pale from sea-

sickness, who had shaved his beard and brushed his hair, last, at 

Liverpool:  and whose only article of dress (linen not included) 

were a pair of dreadnought trousers; a blue jacket, formerly 

admired upon the Thames at Richmond; no stockings; and one slipper.



Of the outrageous antics performed by that ship next morning; which 

made bed a practical joke, and getting up, by any process short of 

falling out, an impossibility; I say nothing.  But anything like 

the utter dreariness and desolation that met my eyes when I 

literally 'tumbled up' on deck at noon, I never saw.  Ocean and sky 

were all of one dull, heavy, uniform, lead colour.  There was no 

extent of prospect even over the dreary waste that lay around us, 

for the sea ran high, and the horizon encompassed us like a large 

black hoop.  Viewed from the air, or some tall bluff on shore, it 

would have been imposing and stupendous, no doubt; but seen from 

the wet and rolling decks, it only impressed one giddily and 

painfully.  In the gale of last night the life-boat had been 

crushed by one blow of the sea like a walnut-shell; and there it 

hung dangling in the air:  a mere faggot of crazy boards.  The 

planking of the paddle-boxes had been torn sheer away.  The wheels 

were exposed and bare; and they whirled and dashed their spray 

about the decks at random.  Chimney, white with crusted salt; 

topmasts struck; storm-sails set; rigging all knotted, tangled, 

wet, and drooping:  a gloomier picture it would be hard to look 

upon.



I was now comfortably established by courtesy in the ladies' cabin, 

where, besides ourselves, there were only four other passengers.  

First, the little Scotch lady before mentioned, on her way to join 

her husband at New York, who had settled there three years before.  

Secondly and thirdly, an honest young Yorkshireman, connected with 

some American house; domiciled in that same city, and carrying 

thither his beautiful young wife to whom he had been married but a 

fortnight, and who was the fairest specimen of a comely English 

country girl I have ever seen.  Fourthy, fifthly, and lastly, 

another couple:  newly married too, if one might judge from the 

endearments they frequently interchanged:  of whom I know no more 

than that they were rather a mysterious, run-away kind of couple; 

that the lady had great personal attractions also; and that the 

gentleman carried more guns with him than Robinson Crusoe, wore a 

shooting-coat, and had two great dogs on board.  On further 

consideration, I remember that he tried hot roast pig and bottled 

ale as a cure for sea-sickness; and that he took these remedies 

(usually in bed) day after day, with astonishing perseverance.  I 

may add, for the information of the curious, that they decidedly 

failed.



The weather continuing obstinately and almost unprecedentedly bad, 

we usually straggled into this cabin, more or less faint and 

miserable, about an hour before noon, and lay down on the sofas to 

recover; during which interval, the captain would look in to 

communicate the state of the wind, the moral certainty of its 

changing to-morrow (the weather is always going to improve to-

morrow, at sea), the vessel's rate of sailing, and so forth.  

Observations there were none to tell us of, for there was no sun to 

take them by.  But a description of one day will serve for all the 

rest.  Here it is.



The captain being gone, we compose ourselves to read, if the place 

be light enough; and if not, we doze and talk alternately.  At one, 

a bell rings, and the stewardess comes down with a steaming dish of 

baked potatoes, and another of roasted apples; and plates of pig's 

face, cold ham, salt beef; or perhaps a smoking mess of rare hot 

collops.  We fall to upon these dainties; eat as much as we can (we 

have great appetites now); and are as long as possible about it.  

If the fire will burn (it WILL sometimes) we are pretty cheerful.  

If it won't, we all remark to each other that it's very cold, rub 

our hands, cover ourselves with coats and cloaks, and lie down 

again to doze, talk, and read (provided as aforesaid), until 

dinner-time.  At five, another bell rings, and the stewardess 

reappears with another dish of potatoes - boiled this time - and 

store of hot meat of various kinds:  not forgetting the roast pig, 

to be taken medicinally.  We sit down at table again (rather more 

cheerfully than before); prolong the meal with a rather mouldy 

dessert of apples, grapes, and oranges; and drink our wine and 

brandy-and-water.  The bottles and glasses are still upon the 

table, and the oranges and so forth are rolling about according to 

their fancy and the ship's way, when the doctor comes down, by 

special nightly invitation, to join our evening rubber:  

immediately on whose arrival we make a party at whist, and as it is 

a rough night and the cards will not lie on the cloth, we put the 

tricks in our pockets as we take them.  At whist we remain with 

exemplary gravity (deducting a short time for tea and toast) until 

eleven o'clock, or thereabouts; when the captain comes down again, 

in a sou'-wester hat tied under his chin, and a pilot-coat:  making 

the ground wet where he stands.  By this time the card-playing is 

over, and the bottles and glasses are again upon the table; and 

after an hour's pleasant conversation about the ship, the 

passengers, and things in general, the captain (who never goes to 

bed, and is never out of humour) turns up his coat collar for the 

deck again; shakes hands all round; and goes laughing out into the 

weather as merrily as to a birthday party.



As to daily news, there is no dearth of that commodity.  This 

passenger is reported to have lost fourteen pounds at Vingt-et-un 

in the saloon yesterday; and that passenger drinks his bottle of 

champagne every day, and how he does it (being only a clerk), 

nobody knows.  The head engineer has distinctly said that there 

never was such times - meaning weather - and four good hands are 

ill, and have given in, dead beat.  Several berths are full of 

water, and all the cabins are leaky.  The ship's cook, secretly 

swigging damaged whiskey, has been found drunk; and has been played 

upon by the fire-engine until quite sober.  All the stewards have 

fallen down-stairs at various dinner-times, and go about with 

plasters in various places.  The baker is ill, and so is the 

pastry-cook.  A new man, horribly indisposed, has been required to 

fill the place of the latter officer; and has been propped and 

jammed up with empty casks in a little house upon deck, and 

commanded to roll out pie-crust, which he protests (being highly 

bilious) it is death to him to look at.  News!  A dozen murders on 

shore would lack the interest of these slight incidents at sea.



Divided between our rubber and such topics as these, we were 

running (as we thought) into Halifax Harbour, on the fifteenth 

night, with little wind and a bright moon - indeed, we had made the 

Light at its outer entrance, and put the pilot in charge - when 

suddenly the ship struck upon a bank of mud.  An immediate rush on 

deck took place of course; the sides were crowded in an instant; 

and for a few minutes we were in as lively a state of confusion as 

the greatest lover of disorder would desire to see.  The 

passengers, and guns, and water-casks, and other heavy matters, 

being all huddled together aft, however, to lighten her in the 

head, she was soon got off; and after some driving on towards an 

uncomfortable line of objects (whose vicinity had been announced 

very early in the disaster by a loud cry of 'Breakers a-head!') and 

much backing of paddles, and heaving of the lead into a constantly 

decreasing depth of water, we dropped anchor in a strange 

outlandish-looking nook which nobody on board could recognise, 

although there was land all about us, and so close that we could 

plainly see the waving branches of the trees.



It was strange enough, in the silence of midnight, and the dead 

stillness that seemed to be created by the sudden and unexpected 

stoppage of the engine which had been clanking and blasting in our 

ears incessantly for so many days, to watch the look of blank 

astonishment expressed in every face:  beginning with the officers, 

tracing it through all the passengers, and descending to the very 

stokers and furnacemen, who emerged from below, one by one, and 

clustered together in a smoky group about the hatchway of the 

engine-room, comparing notes in whispers.  After throwing up a few 

rockets and firing signal guns in the hope of being hailed from the 

land, or at least of seeing a light - but without any other sight 

or sound presenting itself - it was determined to send a boat on 

shore.  It was amusing to observe how very kind some of the 

passengers were, in volunteering to go ashore in this same boat:  

for the general good, of course:  not by any means because they 

thought the ship in an unsafe position, or contemplated the 

possibility of her heeling over in case the tide were running out.  

Nor was it less amusing to remark how desperately unpopular the 

poor pilot became in one short minute.  He had had his passage out 

from Liverpool, and during the whole voyage had been quite a 

notorious character, as a teller of anecdotes and cracker of jokes.  

Yet here were the very men who had laughed the loudest at his 

jests, now flourishing their fists in his face, loading him with 

imprecations, and defying him to his teeth as a villain!



The boat soon shoved off, with a lantern and sundry blue lights on 

board; and in less than an hour returned; the officer in command 

bringing with him a tolerably tall young tree, which he had plucked 

up by the roots, to satisfy certain distrustful passengers whose 

minds misgave them that they were to be imposed upon and 

shipwrecked, and who would on no other terms believe that he had 

been ashore, or had done anything but fraudulently row a little way 

into the mist, specially to deceive them and compass their deaths.  

Our captain had foreseen from the first that we must be in a place 

called the Eastern passage; and so we were.  It was about the last 

place in the world in which we had any business or reason to be, 

but a sudden fog, and some error on the pilot's part, were the 

cause.  We were surrounded by banks, and rocks, and shoals of all 

kinds, but had happily drifted, it seemed, upon the only safe speck 

that was to be found thereabouts.  Eased by this report, and by the 

assurance that the tide was past the ebb, we turned in at three 

o'clock in the morning.



I was dressing about half-past nine next day, when the noise above 

hurried me on deck.  When I had left it overnight, it was dark, 

foggy, and damp, and there were bleak hills all round us.  Now, we 

were gliding down a smooth, broad stream, at the rate of eleven 

miles an hour:  our colours flying gaily; our crew rigged out in 

their smartest clothes; our officers in uniform again; the sun 

shining as on a brilliant April day in England; the land stretched 

out on either side, streaked with light patches of snow; white 

wooden houses; people at their doors; telegraphs working; flags 

hoisted; wharfs appearing; ships; quays crowded with people; 

distant noises; shouts; men and boys running down steep places 

towards the pier:  all more bright and gay and fresh to our unused 

eyes than words can paint them.  We came to a wharf, paved with 

uplifted faces; got alongside, and were made fast, after some 

shouting and straining of cables; darted, a score of us along the 

gangway, almost as soon as it was thrust out to meet us, and before 

it had reached the ship - and leaped upon the firm glad earth 

again!



I suppose this Halifax would have appeared an Elysium, though it 

had been a curiosity of ugly dulness.  But I carried away with me a 

most pleasant impression of the town and its inhabitants, and have 

preserved it to this hour.  Nor was it without regret that I came 

home, without having found an opportunity of returning thither, and 

once more shaking hands with the friends I made that day.



It happened to be the opening of the Legislative Council and 

General Assembly, at which ceremonial the forms observed on the 

commencement of a new Session of Parliament in England were so 

closely copied, and so gravely presented on a small scale, that it 

was like looking at Westminster through the wrong end of a 

telescope.  The governor, as her Majesty's representative, 

delivered what may be called the Speech from the Throne.  He said 

what he had to say manfully and well.  The military band outside 

the building struck up "God save the Queen" with great vigour 

before his Excellency had quite finished; the people shouted; the 

in's rubbed their hands; the out's shook their heads; the 

Government party said there never was such a good speech; the 

Opposition declared there never was such a bad one; the Speaker and 

members of the House of Assembly withdrew from the bar to say a 

great deal among themselves and do a little:  and, in short, 

everything went on, and promised to go on, just as it does at home 

upon the like occasions.



The town is built on the side of a hill, the highest point being 

commanded by a strong fortress, not yet quite finished.  Several 

streets of good breadth and appearance extend from its summit to 

the water-side, and are intersected by cross streets running 

parallel with the river.  The houses are chiefly of wood.  The 

market is abundantly supplied; and provisions are exceedingly 

cheap.  The weather being unusually mild at that time for the 

season of the year, there was no sleighing:  but there were plenty 

of those vehicles in yards and by-places, and some of them, from 

the gorgeous quality of their decorations, might have 'gone on' 

without alteration as triumphal cars in a melodrama at Astley's.  

The day was uncommonly fine; the air bracing and healthful; the 

whole aspect of the town cheerful, thriving, and industrious.



We lay there seven hours, to deliver and exchange the mails.  At 

length, having collected all our bags and all our passengers 

(including two or three choice spirits, who, having indulged too 

freely in oysters and champagne, were found lying insensible on 

their backs in unfrequented streets), the engines were again put in 

motion, and we stood off for Boston.



Encountering squally weather again in the Bay of Fundy, we tumbled 

and rolled about as usual all that night and all next day.  On the 

next afternoon, that is to say, on Saturday, the twenty-second of 

January, an American pilot-boat came alongside, and soon afterwards 

the Britannia steam-packet, from Liverpool, eighteen days out, was 

telegraphed at Boston.



The indescribable interest with which I strained my eyes, as the 

first patches of American soil peeped like molehills from the green 

sea, and followed them, as they swelled, by slow and almost 

imperceptible degrees, into a continuous line of coast, can hardly 

be exaggerated.  A sharp keen wind blew dead against us; a hard 

frost prevailed on shore; and the cold was most severe.  Yet the 

air was so intensely clear, and dry, and bright, that the 

temperature was not only endurable, but delicious.



How I remained on deck, staring about me, until we came alongside 

the dock, and how, though I had had as many eyes as Argus, I should 

have had them all wide open, and all employed on new objects - are 

topics which I will not prolong this chapter to discuss.  Neither 

will I more than hint at my foreigner-like mistake in supposing 

that a party of most active persons, who scrambled on board at the 

peril of their lives as we approached the wharf, were newsmen, 

answering to that industrious class at home; whereas, despite the 

leathern wallets of news slung about the necks of some, and the 

broad sheets in the hands of all, they were Editors, who boarded 

ships in person (as one gentleman in a worsted comforter informed 

me), 'because they liked the excitement of it.'  Suffice it in this 

place to say, that one of these invaders, with a ready courtesy for 

which I thank him here most gratefully, went on before to order 

rooms at the hotel; and that when I followed, as I soon did, I 

found myself rolling through the long passages with an involuntary 

imitation of the gait of Mr. T. P. Cooke, in a new nautical 

melodrama.



'Dinner, if you please,' said I to the waiter.



'When?' said the waiter.



'As quick as possible,' said I.



'Right away?' said the waiter.



After a moment's hesitation, I answered 'No,' at hazard.



'NOT right away?' cried the waiter, with an amount of surprise that 

made me start.



I looked at him doubtfully, and returned, 'No; I would rather have 

it in this private room.  I like it very much.'



At this, I really thought the waiter must have gone out of his 

mind:  as I believe he would have done, but for the interposition 

of another man, who whispered in his ear, 'Directly.'



'Well! and that's a fact!' said the waiter, looking helplessly at 

me:  'Right away.'



I saw now that 'Right away' and 'Directly' were one and the same 

thing.  So I reversed my previous answer, and sat down to dinner in 

ten minutes afterwards; and a capital dinner it was.



The hotel (a very excellent one) is called the Tremont House.  It 

has more galleries, colonnades, piazzas, and passages than I can 

remember, or the reader would believe.

