


CHAPTER IV - AN AMERICAN RAILROAD.  LOWELL AND ITS FACTORY SYSTEM



BEFORE leaving Boston, I devoted one day to an excursion to Lowell.  

I assign a separate chapter to this visit; not because I am about 

to describe it at any great length, but because I remember it as a 

thing by itself, and am desirous that my readers should do the 

same.



I made acquaintance with an American railroad, on this occasion, 

for the first time.  As these works are pretty much alike all 

through the States, their general characteristics are easily 

described.



There are no first and second class carriages as with us; but there 

is a gentleman's car and a ladies' car:  the main distinction 

between which is that in the first, everybody smokes; and in the 

second, nobody does.  As a black man never travels with a white 

one, there is also a negro car; which is a great, blundering, 

clumsy chest, such as Gulliver put to sea in, from the kingdom of 

Brobdingnag.  There is a great deal of jolting, a great deal of 

noise, a great deal of wall, not much window, a locomotive engine, 

a shriek, and a bell.



The cars are like shabby omnibuses, but larger:  holding thirty, 

forty, fifty, people.  The seats, instead of stretching from end to 

end, are placed crosswise.  Each seat holds two persons.  There is 

a long row of them on each side of the caravan, a narrow passage up 

the middle, and a door at both ends.  In the centre of the carriage 

there is usually a stove, fed with charcoal or anthracite coal; 

which is for the most part red-hot.  It is insufferably close; and 

you see the hot air fluttering between yourself and any other 

object you may happen to look at, like the ghost of smoke.



In the ladies' car, there are a great many gentlemen who have 

ladies with them.  There are also a great many ladies who have 

nobody with them:  for any lady may travel alone, from one end of 

the United States to the other, and be certain of the most 

courteous and considerate treatment everywhere.  The conductor or 

check-taker, or guard, or whatever he may be, wears no uniform.  He 

walks up and down the car, and in and out of it, as his fancy 

dictates; leans against the door with his hands in his pockets and 

stares at you, if you chance to be a stranger; or enters into 

conversation with the passengers about him.  A great many 

newspapers are pulled out, and a few of them are read.  Everybody 

talks to you, or to anybody else who hits his fancy.  If you are an 

Englishman, he expects that that railroad is pretty much like an 

English railroad.  If you say 'No,' he says 'Yes?' 

(interrogatively), and asks in what respect they differ.  You 

enumerate the heads of difference, one by one, and he says 'Yes?' 

(still interrogatively) to each.  Then he guesses that you don't 

travel faster in England; and on your replying that you do, says 

'Yes?' again (still interrogatively), and it is quite evident, 

don't believe it.  After a long pause he remarks, partly to you, 

and partly to the knob on the top of his stick, that 'Yankees are 

reckoned to be considerable of a go-ahead people too;' upon which 

YOU say 'Yes,' and then HE says 'Yes' again (affirmatively this 

time); and upon your looking out of window, tells you that behind 

that hill, and some three miles from the next station, there is a 

clever town in a smart lo-ca-tion, where he expects you have 

concluded to stop.  Your answer in the negative naturally leads to 

more questions in reference to your intended route (always 

pronounced rout); and wherever you are going, you invariably learn 

that you can't get there without immense difficulty and danger, and 

that all the great sights are somewhere else.



If a lady take a fancy to any male passenger's seat, the gentleman 

who accompanies her gives him notice of the fact, and he 

immediately vacates it with great politeness.  Politics are much 

discussed, so are banks, so is cotton.  Quiet people avoid the 

question of the Presidency, for there will be a new election in 

three years and a half, and party feeling runs very high:  the 

great constitutional feature of this institution being, that 

directly the acrimony of the last election is over, the acrimony of 

the next one begins; which is an unspeakable comfort to all strong 

politicians and true lovers of their country:  that is to say, to 

ninety-nine men and boys out of every ninety-nine and a quarter.



Except when a branch road joins the main one, there is seldom more 

than one track of rails; so that the road is very narrow, and the 

view, where there is a deep cutting, by no means extensive.  When 

there is not, the character of the scenery is always the same.  

Mile after mile of stunted trees:  some hewn down by the axe, some 

blown down by the wind, some half fallen and resting on their 

neighbours, many mere logs half hidden in the swamp, others 

mouldered away to spongy chips.  The very soil of the earth is made 

up of minute fragments such as these; each pool of stagnant water 

has its crust of vegetable rottenness; on every side there are the 

boughs, and trunks, and stumps of trees, in every possible stage of 

decay, decomposition, and neglect.  Now you emerge for a few brief 

minutes on an open country, glittering with some bright lake or 

pool, broad as many an English river, but so small here that it 

scarcely has a name; now catch hasty glimpses of a distant town, 

with its clean white houses and their cool piazzas, its prim New 

England church and school-house; when whir-r-r-r! almost before you 

have seen them, comes the same dark screen:  the stunted trees, the 

stumps, the logs, the stagnant water - all so like the last that 

you seem to have been transported back again by magic.



The train calls at stations in the woods, where the wild 

impossibility of anybody having the smallest reason to get out, is 

only to be equalled by the apparently desperate hopelessness of 

there being anybody to get in.  It rushes across the turnpike road, 

where there is no gate, no policeman, no signal:  nothing but a 

rough wooden arch, on which is painted 'WHEN THE BELL RINGS, LOOK 

OUT FOR THE LOCOMOTIVE.'  On it whirls headlong, dives through the 

woods again, emerges in the light, clatters over frail arches, 

rumbles upon the heavy ground, shoots beneath a wooden bridge which 

intercepts the light for a second like a wink, suddenly awakens all 

the slumbering echoes in the main street of a large town, and 

dashes on haphazard, pell-mell, neck-or-nothing, down the middle of 

the road.  There - with mechanics working at their trades, and 

people leaning from their doors and windows, and boys flying kites 

and playing marbles, and men smoking, and women talking, and 

children crawling, and pigs burrowing, and unaccustomed horses 

plunging and rearing, close to the very rails - there - on, on, on 

- tears the mad dragon of an engine with its train of cars; 

scattering in all directions a shower of burning sparks from its 

wood fire; screeching, hissing, yelling, panting; until at last the 

thirsty monster stops beneath a covered way to drink, the people 

cluster round, and you have time to breathe again.



I was met at the station at Lowell by a gentleman intimately 

connected with the management of the factories there; and gladly 

putting myself under his guidance, drove off at once to that 

quarter of the town in which the works, the object of my visit, 

were situated.  Although only just of age - for if my recollection 

serve me, it has been a manufacturing town barely one-and-twenty 

years - Lowell is a large, populous, thriving place.  Those 

indications of its youth which first attract the eye, give it a 

quaintness and oddity of character which, to a visitor from the old 

country, is amusing enough.  It was a very dirty winter's day, and 

nothing in the whole town looked old to me, except the mud, which 

in some parts was almost knee-deep, and might have been deposited 

there, on the subsiding of the waters after the Deluge.  In one 

place, there was a new wooden church, which, having no steeple, and 

being yet unpainted, looked like an enormous packing-case without 

any direction upon it.  In another there was a large hotel, whose 

walls and colonnades were so crisp, and thin, and slight, that it 

had exactly the appearance of being built with cards.  I was 

careful not to draw my breath as we passed, and trembled when I saw 

a workman come out upon the roof, lest with one thoughtless stamp 

of his foot he should crush the structure beneath him, and bring it 

rattling down.  The very river that moves the machinery in the 

mills (for they are all worked by water power), seems to acquire a 

new character from the fresh buildings of bright red brick and 

painted wood among which it takes its course; and to be as light-

headed, thoughtless, and brisk a young river, in its murmurings and 

tumblings, as one would desire to see.  One would swear that every 

'Bakery,' 'Grocery,' and 'Bookbindery,' and other kind of store, 

took its shutters down for the first time, and started in business 

yesterday.  The golden pestles and mortars fixed as signs upon the 

sun-blind frames outside the Druggists',  appear to have been just 

turned out of the United States' Mint; and when I saw a baby of 

some week or ten days old in a woman's arms at a street corner, I 

found myself unconsciously wondering where it came from:  never 

supposing for an instant that it could have been born in such a 

young town as that.



There are several factories in Lowell, each of which belongs to 

what we should term a Company of Proprietors, but what they call in 

America a Corporation.  I went over several of these; such as a 

woollen factory, a carpet factory, and a cotton factory:  examined 

them in every part; and saw them in their ordinary working aspect, 

with no preparation of any kind, or departure from their ordinary 

everyday proceedings.  I may add that I am well acquainted with our 

manufacturing towns in England, and have visited many mills in 

Manchester and elsewhere in the same manner.



I happened to arrive at the first factory just as the dinner hour 

was over, and the girls were returning to their work; indeed the 

stairs of the mill were thronged with them as I ascended.  They 

were all well dressed, but not to my thinking above their 

condition; for I like to see the humbler classes of society careful 

of their dress and appearance, and even, if they please, decorated 

with such little trinkets as come within the compass of their 

means.  Supposing it confined within reasonable limits, I would 

always encourage this kind of pride, as a worthy element of self-

respect, in any person I employed; and should no more be deterred 

from doing so, because some wretched female referred her fall to a 

love of dress, than I would allow my construction of the real 

intent and meaning of the Sabbath to be influenced by any warning 

to the well-disposed, founded on his backslidings on that 

particular day, which might emanate from the rather doubtful 

authority of a murderer in Newgate.



These girls, as I have said, were all well dressed:  and that 

phrase necessarily includes extreme cleanliness.  They had 

serviceable bonnets, good warm cloaks, and shawls; and were not 

above clogs and pattens.  Moreover, there were places in the mill 

in which they could deposit these things without injury; and there 

were conveniences for washing.  They were healthy in appearance, 

many of them remarkably so, and had the manners and deportment of 

young women:  not of degraded brutes of burden.  If I had seen in 

one of those mills (but I did not, though I looked for something of 

this kind with a sharp eye), the most lisping, mincing, affected, 

and ridiculous young creature that my imagination could suggest, I 

should have thought of the careless, moping, slatternly, degraded, 

dull reverse (I HAVE seen that), and should have been still well 

pleased to look upon her.



The rooms in which they worked, were as well ordered as themselves.  

In the windows of some, there were green plants, which were trained 

to shade the glass; in all, there was as much fresh air, 

cleanliness, and comfort, as the nature of the occupation would 

possibly admit of.  Out of so large a number of females, many of 

whom were only then just verging upon womanhood, it may be 

reasonably supposed that some were delicate and fragile in 

appearance:  no doubt there were.  But I solemnly declare, that 

from all the crowd I saw in the different factories that day, I 

cannot recall or separate one young face that gave me a painful 

impression; not one young girl whom, assuming it to be a matter of 

necessity that she should gain her daily bread by the labour of her 

hands, I would have removed from those works if I had had the 

power.



They reside in various boarding-houses near at hand.  The owners of 

the mills are particularly careful to allow no persons to enter 

upon the possession of these houses, whose characters have not 

undergone the most searching and thorough inquiry.  Any complaint 

that is made against them, by the boarders, or by any one else, is 

fully investigated; and if good ground of complaint be shown to 

exist against them, they are removed, and their occupation is 

handed over to some more deserving person.  There are a few 

children employed in these factories, but not many.  The laws of 

the State forbid their working more than nine months in the year, 

and require that they be educated during the other three.  For this 

purpose there are schools in Lowell; and there are churches and 

chapels of various persuasions, in which the young women may 

observe that form of worship in which they have been educated.



At some distance from the factories, and on the highest and 

pleasantest ground in the neighbourhood, stands their hospital, or 

boarding-house for the sick:  it is the best house in those parts, 

and was built by an eminent merchant for his own residence.  Like 

that institution at Boston, which I have before described, it is 

not parcelled out into wards, but is divided into convenient 

chambers, each of which has all the comforts of a very comfortable 

home.  The principal medical attendant resides under the same roof; 

and were the patients members of his own family, they could not be 

better cared for, or attended with greater gentleness and 

consideration.  The weekly charge in this establishment for each 

female patient is three dollars, or twelve shillings English; but 

no girl employed by any of the corporations is ever excluded for 

want of the means of payment.  That they do not very often want the 

means, may be gathered from the fact, that in July, 1841, no fewer 

than nine hundred and seventy-eight of these girls were depositors 

in the Lowell Savings Bank:  the amount of whose joint savings was 

estimated at one hundred thousand dollars, or twenty thousand 

English pounds.



I am now going to state three facts, which will startle a large 

class of readers on this side of the Atlantic, very much.



Firstly, there is a joint-stock piano in a great many of the 

boarding-houses.  Secondly, nearly all these young ladies subscribe 

to circulating libraries.  Thirdly, they have got up among 

themselves a periodical called THE LOWELL OFFERING, 'A repository 

of original articles, written exclusively by females actively 

employed in the mills,' - which is duly printed, published, and 

sold; and whereof I brought away from Lowell four hundred good 

solid pages, which I have read from beginning to end.



The large class of readers, startled by these facts, will exclaim, 

with one voice, 'How very preposterous!'  On my deferentially 

inquiring why, they will answer, 'These things are above their 

station.'  In reply to that objection, I would beg to ask what 

their station is.



It is their station to work.  And they DO work.  They labour in 

these mills, upon an average, twelve hours a day, which is 

unquestionably work, and pretty tight work too.  Perhaps it is 

above their station to indulge in such amusements, on any terms.  

Are we quite sure that we in England have not formed our ideas of 

the 'station' of working people, from accustoming ourselves to the 

contemplation of that class as they are, and not as they might be?  

I think that if we examine our own feelings, we shall find that the 

pianos, and the circulating libraries, and even the Lowell 

Offering, startle us by their novelty, and not by their bearing 

upon any abstract question of right or wrong.



For myself, I know no station in which, the occupation of to-day 

cheerfully done and the occupation of to-morrow cheerfully looked 

to, any one of these pursuits is not most humanising and laudable.  

I know no station which is rendered more endurable to the person in 

it, or more safe to the person out of it, by having ignorance for 

its associate.  I know no station which has a right to monopolise 

the means of mutual instruction, improvement, and rational 

entertainment; or which has ever continued to be a station very 

long, after seeking to do so.



Of the merits of the Lowell Offering as a literary production, I 

will only observe, putting entirely out of sight the fact of the 

articles having been written by these girls after the arduous 

labours of the day, that it will compare advantageously with a 

great many English Annuals.  It is pleasant to find that many of 

its Tales are of the Mills and of those who work in them; that they 

inculcate habits of self-denial and contentment, and teach good 

doctrines of enlarged benevolence.  A strong feeling for the 

beauties of nature, as displayed in the solitudes the writers have 

left at home, breathes through its pages like wholesome village 

air; and though a circulating library is a favourable school for 

the study of such topics, it has very scant allusion to fine 

clothes, fine marriages, fine houses, or fine life.  Some persons 

might object to the papers being signed occasionally with rather 

fine names, but this is an American fashion.  One of the provinces 

of the state legislature of Massachusetts is to alter ugly names 

into pretty ones, as the children improve upon the tastes of their 

parents.  These changes costing little or nothing, scores of Mary 

Annes are solemnly converted into Bevelinas every session.



It is said that on the occasion of a visit from General Jackson or 

General Harrison to this town (I forget which, but it is not to the 

purpose), he walked through three miles and a half of these young 

ladies all dressed out with parasols and silk stockings.  But as I 

am not aware that any worse consequence ensued, than a sudden 

looking-up of all the parasols and silk stockings in the market; 

and perhaps the bankruptcy of some speculative New Englander who 

bought them all up at any price, in expectation of a demand that 

never came; I set no great store by the circumstance.



In this brief account of Lowell, and inadequate expression of the 

gratification it yielded me, and cannot fail to afford to any 

foreigner to whom the condition of such people at home is a subject 

of interest and anxious speculation, I have carefully abstained 

from drawing a comparison between these factories and those of our 

own land.  Many of the circumstances whose strong influence has 

been at work for years in our manufacturing towns have not arisen 

here; and there is no manufacturing population in Lowell, so to 

speak:  for these girls (often the daughters of small farmers) come 

from other States, remain a few years in the mills, and then go 

home for good.



The contrast would be a strong one, for it would be between the 

Good and Evil, the living light and deepest shadow.  I abstain from 

it, because I deem it just to do so.  But I only the more earnestly 

adjure all those whose eyes may rest on these pages, to pause and 

reflect upon the difference between this town and those great 

haunts of desperate misery:  to call to mind, if they can in the 

midst of party strife and squabble, the efforts that must be made 

to purge them of their suffering and danger:  and last, and 

foremost, to remember how the precious Time is rushing by.



I returned at night by the same railroad and in the same kind of 

car.  One of the passengers being exceedingly anxious to expound at 

great length to my companion (not to me, of course) the true 

principles on which books of travel in America should be written by 

Englishmen, I feigned to fall asleep.  But glancing all the way out 

at window from the corners of my eyes, I found abundance of 

entertainment for the rest of the ride in watching the effects of 

the wood fire, which had been invisible in the morning but were now 

brought out in full relief by the darkness:  for we were travelling 

in a whirlwind of bright sparks, which showered about us like a 

storm of fiery snow.

