


CHAPTER XV - IN CANADA; TORONTO; KINGSTON; MONTREAL; QUEBEC; ST. 

JOHN'S.  IN THE UNITED STATES AGAIN; LEBANON; THE SHAKER VILLAGE; 

WEST POINT



I wish to abstain from instituting any comparison, or drawing any 

parallel whatever, between the social features of the United States 

and those of the British Possessions in Canada.  For this reason, I 

shall confine myself to a very brief account of our journeyings in 

the latter territory.



But before I leave Niagara, I must advert to one disgusting 

circumstance which can hardly have escaped the observation of any 

decent traveller who has visited the Falls.



On Table Rock, there is a cottage belonging to a Guide, where 

little relics of the place are sold, and where visitors register 

their names in a book kept for the purpose.  On the wall of the 

room in which a great many of these volumes are preserved, the 

following request is posted:  'Visitors will please not copy nor 

extract the remarks and poetical effusions from the registers and 

albums kept here.'



But for this intimation, I should have let them lie upon the tables 

on which they were strewn with careful negligence, like books in a 

drawing-room:  being quite satisfied with the stupendous silliness 

of certain stanzas with an anti-climax at the end of each, which 

were framed and hung up on the wall.  Curious, however, after 

reading this announcement, to see what kind of morsels were so 

carefully preserved, I turned a few leaves, and found them scrawled 

all over with the vilest and the filthiest ribaldry that ever human 

hogs delighted in.



It is humiliating enough to know that there are among men brutes so 

obscene and worthless, that they can delight in laying their 

miserable profanations upon the very steps of Nature's greatest 

altar.  But that these should be hoarded up for the delight of 

their fellow-swine, and kept in a public place where any eyes may 

see them, is a disgrace to the English language in which they are 

written (though I hope few of these entries have been made by 

Englishmen), and a reproach to the English side, on which they are 

preserved.



The quarters of our soldiers at Niagara, are finely and airily 

situated.  Some of them are large detached houses on the plain 

above the Falls, which were originally designed for hotels; and in 

the evening time, when the women and children were leaning over the 

balconies watching the men as they played at ball and other games 

upon the grass before the door, they often presented a little 

picture of cheerfulness and animation which made it quite a 

pleasure to pass that way.



At any garrisoned point where the line of demarcation between one 

country and another is so very narrow as at Niagara, desertion from 

the ranks can scarcely fail to be of frequent occurrence:  and it 

may be reasonably supposed that when the soldiers entertain the 

wildest and maddest hopes of the fortune and independence that 

await them on the other side, the impulse to play traitor, which 

such a place suggests to dishonest minds, is not weakened.  But it 

very rarely happens that the men who do desert, are happy or 

contented afterwards; and many instances have been known in which 

they have confessed their grievous disappointment, and their 

earnest desire to return to their old service if they could but be 

assured of pardon, or lenient treatment.  Many of their comrades, 

notwithstanding, do the like, from time to time; and instances of 

loss of life in the effort to cross the river with this object, are 

far from being uncommon.  Several men were drowned in the attempt 

to swim across, not long ago; and one, who had the madness to trust 

himself upon a table as a raft, was swept down to the whirlpool, 

where his mangled body eddied round and round some days.



I am inclined to think that the noise of the Falls is very much 

exaggerated; and this will appear the more probable when the depth 

of the great basin in which the water is received, is taken into 

account.  At no time during our stay there, was the wind at all 

high or boisterous, but we never heard them, three miles off, even 

at the very quiet time of sunset, though we often tried.



Queenston, at which place the steamboats start for Toronto (or I 

should rather say at which place they call, for their wharf is at 

Lewiston, on the opposite shore), is situated in a delicious 

valley, through which the Niagara river, in colour a very deep 

green, pursues its course.  It is approached by a road that takes 

its winding way among the heights by which the town is sheltered; 

and seen from this point is extremely beautiful and picturesque.  

On the most conspicuous of these heights stood a monument erected 

by the Provincial Legislature in memory of General Brock, who was 

slain in a battle with the American forces, after having won the 

victory.  Some vagabond, supposed to be a fellow of the name of 

Lett, who is now, or who lately was, in prison as a felon, blew up 

this monument two years ago, and it is now a melancholy ruin, with 

a long fragment of iron railing hanging dejectedly from its top, 

and waving to and fro like a wild ivy branch or broken vine stem.  

It is of much higher importance than it may seem, that this statue 

should be repaired at the public cost, as it ought to have been 

long ago.  Firstly, because it is beneath the dignity of England to 

allow a memorial raised in honour of one of her defenders, to 

remain in this condition, on the very spot where he died.  

Secondly, because the sight of it in its present state, and the 

recollection of the unpunished outrage which brought it to this 

pass, is not very likely to soothe down border feelings among 

English subjects here, or compose their border quarrels and 

dislikes.



I was standing on the wharf at this place, watching the passengers 

embarking in a steamboat which preceded that whose coming we 

awaited, and participating in the anxiety with which a sergeant's 

wife was collecting her few goods together - keeping one distracted 

eye hard upon the porters, who were hurrying them on board, and the 

other on a hoopless washing-tub for which, as being the most 

utterly worthless of all her movables, she seemed to entertain 

particular affection - when three or four soldiers with a recruit 

came up and went on board.



The recruit was a likely young fellow enough, strongly built and 

well made, but by no means sober:  indeed he had all the air of a 

man who had been more or less drunk for some days.  He carried a 

small bundle over his shoulder, slung at the end of a walking-

stick, and had a short pipe in his mouth.  He was as dusty and 

dirty as recruits usually are, and his shoes betokened that he had 

travelled on foot some distance, but he was in a very jocose state, 

and shook hands with this soldier, and clapped that one on the 

back, and talked and laughed continually, like a roaring idle dog 

as he was.



The soldiers rather laughed at this blade than with him:  seeming 

to say, as they stood straightening their canes in their hands, and 

looking coolly at him over their glazed stocks, 'Go on, my boy, 

while you may! you'll know better by-and-by:' when suddenly the 

novice, who had been backing towards the gangway in his noisy 

merriment, fell overboard before their eyes, and splashed heavily 

down into the river between the vessel and the dock.



I never saw such a good thing as the change that came over these 

soldiers in an instant.  Almost before the man was down, their 

professional manner, their stiffness and constraint, were gone, and 

they were filled with the most violent energy.  In less time than 

is required to tell it, they had him out again, feet first, with 

the tails of his coat flapping over his eyes, everything about him 

hanging the wrong way, and the water streaming off at every thread 

in his threadbare dress.  But the moment they set him upright and 

found that he was none the worse, they were soldiers again, looking 

over their glazed stocks more composedly than ever.



The half-sobered recruit glanced round for a moment, as if his 

first impulse were to express some gratitude for his preservation, 

but seeing them with this air of total unconcern, and having his 

wet pipe presented to him with an oath by the soldier who had been 

by far the most anxious of the party, he stuck it in his mouth, 

thrust his hands into his moist pockets, and without even shaking 

the water off his clothes, walked on board whistling; not to say as 

if nothing had happened, but as if he had meant to do it, and it 

had been a perfect success.



Our steamboat came up directly this had left the wharf, and soon 

bore us to the mouth of the Niagara; where the stars and stripes of 

America flutter on one side and the Union Jack of England on the 

other:  and so narrow is the space between them that the sentinels 

in either fort can often hear the watchword of the other country 

given.  Thence we emerged on Lake Ontario, an inland sea; and by 

half-past six o'clock were at Toronto.



The country round this town being very flat, is bare of scenic 

interest; but the town itself is full of life and motion, bustle, 

business, and improvement.  The streets are well paved, and lighted 

with gas; the houses are large and good; the shops excellent.  Many 

of them have a display of goods in their windows, such as may be 

seen in thriving county towns in England; and there are some which 

would do no discredit to the metropolis itself.  There is a good 

stone prison here; and there are, besides, a handsome church, a 

court-house, public offices, many commodious private residences, 

and a government observatory for noting and recording the magnetic 

variations.  In the College of Upper Canada, which is one of the 

public establishments of the city, a sound education in every 

department of polite learning can be had, at a very moderate 

expense:  the annual charge for the instruction of each pupil, not 

exceeding nine pounds sterling.  It has pretty good endowments in 

the way of land, and is a valuable and useful institution.



The first stone of a new college had been laid but a few days 

before, by the Governor General.  It will be a handsome, spacious 

edifice, approached by a long avenue, which is already planted and 

made available as a public walk.  The town is well adapted for 

wholesome exercise at all seasons, for the footways in the 

thoroughfares which lie beyond the principal street, are planked 

like floors, and kept in very good and clean repair.



It is a matter of deep regret that political differences should 

have run high in this place, and led to most discreditable and 

disgraceful results.  It is not long since guns were discharged 

from a window in this town at the successful candidates in an 

election, and the coachman of one of them was actually shot in the 

body, though not dangerously wounded.  But one man was killed on 

the same occasion; and from the very window whence he received his 

death, the very flag which shielded his murderer (not only in the 

commission of his crime, but from its consequences), was displayed 

again on the occasion of the public ceremony performed by the 

Governor General, to which I have just adverted.  Of all the 

colours in the rainbow, there is but one which could be so 

employed:  I need not say that flag was orange.



The time of leaving Toronto for Kingston is noon.  By eight o'clock 

next morning, the traveller is at the end of his journey, which is 

performed by steamboat upon Lake Ontario, calling at Port Hope and 

Coburg, the latter a cheerful, thriving little town.  Vast 

quantities of flour form the chief item in the freight of these 

vessels.  We had no fewer than one thousand and eighty barrels on 

board, between Coburg and Kingston.



The latter place, which is now the seat of government in Canada, is 

a very poor town, rendered still poorer in the appearance of its 

market-place by the ravages of a recent fire.  Indeed, it may be 

said of Kingston, that one half of it appears to be burnt down, and 

the other half not to be built up.  The Government House is neither 

elegant nor commodious, yet it is almost the only house of any 

importance in the neighbourhood.



There is an admirable jail here, well and wisely governed, and 

excellently regulated, in every respect.  The men were employed as 

shoemakers, ropemakers, blacksmiths, tailors, carpenters, and 

stonecutters; and in building a new prison, which was pretty far 

advanced towards completion.  The female prisoners were occupied in 

needlework.  Among them was a beautiful girl of twenty, who had 

been there nearly three years.  She acted as bearer of secret 

despatches for the self-styled Patriots on Navy Island, during the 

Canadian Insurrection:  sometimes dressing as a girl, and carrying 

them in her stays; sometimes attiring herself as a boy, and 

secreting them in the lining of her hat.  In the latter character 

she always rode as a boy would, which was nothing to her, for she 

could govern any horse that any man could ride, and could drive 

four-in-hand with the best whip in those parts.  Setting forth on 

one of her patriotic missions, she appropriated to herself the 

first horse she could lay her hands on; and this offence had 

brought her where I saw her.  She had quite a lovely face, though, 

as the reader may suppose from this sketch of her history, there 

was a lurking devil in her bright eye, which looked out pretty 

sharply from between her prison bars.



There is a bomb-proof fort here of great strength, which occupies a 

bold position, and is capable, doubtless, of doing good service; 

though the town is much too close upon the frontier to be long 

held, I should imagine, for its present purpose in troubled times.  

There is also a small navy-yard, where a couple of Government 

steamboats were building, and getting on vigorously.



We left Kingston for Montreal on the tenth of May, at half-past 

nine in the morning, and proceeded in a steamboat down the St. 

Lawrence river.  The beauty of this noble stream at almost any 

point, but especially in the commencement of this journey when it 

winds its way among the thousand Islands, can hardly be imagined.  

The number and constant successions of these islands, all green and 

richly wooded; their fluctuating sizes, some so large that for half 

an hour together one among them will appear as the opposite bank of 

the river, and some so small that they are mere dimples on its 

broad bosom; their infinite variety of shapes; and the numberless 

combinations of beautiful forms which the trees growing on them 

present:  all form a picture fraught with uncommon interest and 

pleasure.



In the afternoon we shot down some rapids where the river boiled 

and bubbled strangely, and where the force and headlong violence of 

the current were tremendous.  At seven o'clock we reached 

Dickenson's Landing, whence travellers proceed for two or three 

hours by stage-coach:  the navigation of the river being rendered 

so dangerous and difficult in the interval, by rapids, that 

steamboats do not make the passage.  The number and length of those 

PORTAGES, over which the roads are bad, and the travelling slow, 

render the way between the towns of Montreal and Kingston, somewhat 

tedious.



Our course lay over a wide, uninclosed tract of country at a little 

distance from the river-side, whence the bright warning lights on 

the dangerous parts of the St. Lawrence shone vividly.  The night 

was dark and raw, and the way dreary enough.  It was nearly ten 

o'clock when we reached the wharf where the next steamboat lay; and 

went on board, and to bed.



She lay there all night, and started as soon as it was day.  The 

morning was ushered in by a violent thunderstorm, and was very wet, 

but gradually improved and brightened up.  Going on deck after 

breakfast, I was amazed to see floating down with the stream, a 

most gigantic raft, with some thirty or forty wooden houses upon 

it, and at least as many flag-masts, so that it looked like a 

nautical street.  I saw many of these rafts afterwards, but never 

one so large.  All the timber, or 'lumber,' as it is called in 

America, which is brought down the St. Lawrence, is floated down in 

this manner.  When the raft reaches its place of destination, it is 

broken up; the materials are sold; and the boatmen return for more.



At eight we landed again, and travelled by a stage-coach for four 

hours through a pleasant and well-cultivated country, perfectly 

French in every respect:  in the appearance of the cottages; the 

air, language, and dress of the peasantry; the sign-boards on the 

shops and taverns:  and the Virgin's shrines, and crosses, by the 

wayside.  Nearly every common labourer and boy, though he had no 

shoes to his feet, wore round his waist a sash of some bright 

colour:  generally red:  and the women, who were working in the 

fields and gardens, and doing all kinds of husbandry, wore, one and 

all, great flat straw hats with most capacious brims.  There were 

Catholic Priests and Sisters of Charity in the village streets; and 

images of the Saviour at the corners of cross-roads, and in other 

public places.



At noon we went on board another steamboat, and reached the village 

of Lachine, nine miles from Montreal, by three o'clock.  There, we 

left the river, and went on by land.



Montreal is pleasantly situated on the margin of the St. Lawrence, 

and is backed by some bold heights, about which there are charming 

rides and drives.  The streets are generally narrow and irregular, 

as in most French towns of any age; but in the more modern parts of 

the city, they are wide and airy.  They display a great variety of 

very good shops; and both in the town and suburbs there are many 

excellent private dwellings.  The granite quays are remarkable for 

their beauty, solidity, and extent.



There is a very large Catholic cathedral here, recently erected 

with two tall spires, of which one is yet unfinished.  In the open 

space in front of this edifice, stands a solitary, grim-looking, 

square brick tower, which has a quaint and remarkable appearance, 

and which the wiseacres of the place have consequently determined 

to pull down immediately.  The Government House is very superior to 

that at Kingston, and the town is full of life and bustle.  In one 

of the suburbs is a plank road - not footpath - five or six miles 

long, and a famous road it is too.  All the rides in the vicinity 

were made doubly interesting by the bursting out of spring, which 

is here so rapid, that it is but a day's leap from barren winter, 

to the blooming youth of summer.



The steamboats to Quebec perform the journey in the night; that is 

to say, they leave Montreal at six in the evening, and arrive at 

Quebec at six next morning.  We made this excursion during our stay 

in Montreal (which exceeded a fortnight), and were charmed by its 

interest and beauty.



The impression made upon the visitor by this Gibraltar of America:  

its giddy heights; its citadel suspended, as it were, in the air; 

its picturesque steep streets and frowning gateways; and the 

splendid views which burst upon the eye at every turn:  is at once 

unique and lasting.



It is a place not to be forgotten or mixed up in the mind with 

other places, or altered for a moment in the crowd of scenes a 

traveller can recall.  Apart from the realities of this most 

picturesque city, there are associations clustering about it which 

would make a desert rich in interest.  The dangerous precipice 

along whose rocky front, Wolfe and his brave companions climbed to 

glory; the Plains of Abraham, where he received his mortal wound; 

the fortress so chivalrously defended by Montcalm; and his 

soldier's grave, dug for him while yet alive, by the bursting of a 

shell; are not the least among them, or among the gallant incidents 

of history.  That is a noble Monument too, and worthy of two great 

nations, which perpetuates the memory of both brave generals, and 

on which their names are jointly written.



The city is rich in public institutions and in Catholic churches 

and charities, but it is mainly in the prospect from the site of 

the Old Government House, and from the Citadel, that its surpassing 

beauty lies.  The exquisite expanse of country, rich in field and 

forest, mountain-height and water, which lies stretched out before 

the view, with miles of Canadian villages, glancing in long white 

streaks, like veins along the landscape; the motley crowd of 

gables, roofs, and chimney tops in the old hilly town immediately 

at hand; the beautiful St. Lawrence sparkling and flashing in the 

sunlight; and the tiny ships below the rock from which you gaze, 

whose distant rigging looks like spiders' webs against the light, 

while casks and barrels on their decks dwindle into toys, and busy 

mariners become so many puppets; all this, framed by a sunken 

window in the fortress and looked at from the shadowed room within, 

forms one of the brightest and most enchanting pictures that the 

eye can rest upon.



In the spring of the year, vast numbers of emigrants who have newly 

arrived from England or from Ireland, pass between Quebec and 

Montreal on their way to the backwoods and new settlements of 

Canada.  If it be an entertaining lounge (as I very often found it) 

to take a morning stroll upon the quay at Montreal, and see them 

grouped in hundreds on the public wharfs about their chests and 

boxes, it is matter of deep interest to be their fellow-passenger 

on one of these steamboats, and mingling with the concourse, see 

and hear them unobserved.



The vessel in which we returned from Quebec to Montreal was crowded 

with them, and at night they spread their beds between decks (those 

who had beds, at least), and slept so close and thick about our 

cabin door, that the passage to and fro was quite blocked up.  They 

were nearly all English; from Gloucestershire the greater part; and 

had had a long winter-passage out; but it was wonderful to see how 

clean the children had been kept, and how untiring in their love 

and self-denial all the poor parents were.



Cant as we may, and as we shall to the end of all things, it is 

very much harder for the poor to be virtuous than it is for the 

rich; and the good that is in them, shines the brighter for it.  In 

many a noble mansion lives a man, the best of husbands and of 

fathers, whose private worth in both capacities is justly lauded to 

the skies.  But bring him here, upon this crowded deck.  Strip from 

his fair young wife her silken dress and jewels, unbind her braided 

hair, stamp early wrinkles on her brow, pinch her pale cheek with 

care and much privation, array her faded form in coarsely patched 

attire, let there be nothing but his love to set her forth or deck 

her out, and you shall put it to the proof indeed.  So change his 

station in the world, that he shall see in those young things who 

climb about his knee:  not records of his wealth and name:  but 

little wrestlers with him for his daily bread; so many poachers on 

his scanty meal; so many units to divide his every sum of comfort, 

and farther to reduce its small amount.  In lieu of the endearments 

of childhood in its sweetest aspect, heap upon him all its pains 

and wants, its sicknesses and ills, its fretfulness, caprice, and 

querulous endurance:  let its prattle be, not of engaging infant 

fancies, but of cold, and thirst, and hunger:  and if his fatherly 

affection outlive all this, and he be patient, watchful, tender; 

careful of his children's lives, and mindful always of their joys 

and sorrows; then send him back to Parliament, and Pulpit, and to 

Quarter Sessions, and when he hears fine talk of the depravity of 

those who live from hand to mouth, and labour hard to do it, let 

him speak up, as one who knows, and tell those holders forth that 

they, by parallel with such a class, should be High Angels in their 

daily lives, and lay but humble siege to Heaven at last.



Which of us shall say what he would be, if such realities, with 

small relief or change all through his days, were his!  Looking 

round upon these people:  far from home, houseless, indigent, 

wandering, weary with travel and hard living:  and seeing how 

patiently they nursed and tended their young children:  how they 

consulted ever their wants first, then half supplied their own; 

what gentle ministers of hope and faith the women were; how the men 

profited by their example; and how very, very seldom even a 

moment's petulance or harsh complaint broke out among them:  I felt 

a stronger love and honour of my kind come glowing on my heart, and 

wished to God there had been many Atheists in the better part of 

human nature there, to read this simple lesson in the book of Life.



* * * * * *



We left Montreal for New York again, on the thirtieth of May, 

crossing to La Prairie, on the opposite shore of the St. Lawrence, 

in a steamboat; we then took the railroad to St. John's, which is 

on the brink of Lake Champlain.  Our last greeting in Canada was 

from the English officers in the pleasant barracks at that place (a 

class of gentlemen who had made every hour of our visit memorable 

by their hospitality and friendship); and with 'Rule Britannia' 

sounding in our ears, soon left it far behind.



But Canada has held, and always will retain, a foremost place in my 

remembrance.  Few Englishmen are prepared to find it what it is.  

Advancing quietly; old differences settling down, and being fast 

forgotten; public feeling and private enterprise alike in a sound 

and wholesome state; nothing of flush or fever in its system, but 

health and vigour throbbing in its steady pulse:  it is full of 

hope and promise.  To me - who had been accustomed to think of it 

as something left behind in the strides of advancing society, as 

something neglected and forgotten, slumbering and wasting in its 

sleep - the demand for labour and the rates of wages; the busy 

quays of Montreal; the vessels taking in their cargoes, and 

discharging them; the amount of shipping in the different ports; 

the commerce, roads, and public works, all made TO LAST; the 

respectability and character of the public journals; and the amount 

of rational comfort and happiness which honest industry may earn:  

were very great surprises.  The steamboats on the lakes, in their 

conveniences, cleanliness, and safety; in the gentlemanly character 

and bearing of their captains; and in the politeness and perfect 

comfort of their social regulations; are unsurpassed even by the 

famous Scotch vessels, deservedly so much esteemed at home.  The 

inns are usually bad; because the custom of boarding at hotels is 

not so general here as in the States, and the British officers, who 

form a large portion of the society of every town, live chiefly at 

the regimental messes:  but in every other respect, the traveller 

in Canada will find as good provision for his comfort as in any 

place I know.



There is one American boat - the vessel which carried us on Lake 

Champlain, from St. John's to Whitehall - which I praise very 

highly, but no more than it deserves, when I say that it is 

superior even to that in which we went from Queenston to Toronto, 

or to that in which we travelled from the latter place to Kingston, 

or I have no doubt I may add to any other in the world.  This 

steamboat, which is called the Burlington, is a perfectly exquisite 

achievement of neatness, elegance, and order.  The decks are 

drawing-rooms; the cabins are boudoirs, choicely furnished and 

adorned with prints, pictures, and musical instruments; every nook 

and corner in the vessel is a perfect curiosity of graceful comfort 

and beautiful contrivance.  Captain Sherman, her commander, to 

whose ingenuity and excellent taste these results are solely 

attributable, has bravely and worthily distinguished himself on 

more than one trying occasion:  not least among them, in having the 

moral courage to carry British troops, at a time (during the 

Canadian rebellion) when no other conveyance was open to them.  He 

and his vessel are held in universal respect, both by his own 

countrymen and ours; and no man ever enjoyed the popular esteem, 

who, in his sphere of action, won and wore it better than this 

gentleman.



By means of this floating palace we were soon in the United States 

again, and called that evening at Burlington; a pretty town, where 

we lay an hour or so.  We reached Whitehall, where we were to 

disembark, at six next morning; and might have done so earlier, but 

that these steamboats lie by for some hours in the night, in 

consequence of the lake becoming very narrow at that part of the 

journey, and difficult of navigation in the dark.  Its width is so 

contracted at one point, indeed, that they are obliged to warp 

round by means of a rope.



After breakfasting at Whitehall, we took the stage-coach for 

Albany:  a large and busy town, where we arrived between five and 

six o'clock that afternoon; after a very hot day's journey, for we 

were now in the height of summer again.  At seven we started for 

New York on board a great North River steamboat, which was so 

crowded with passengers that the upper deck was like the box lobby 

of a theatre between the pieces, and the lower one like Tottenham 

Court Road on a Saturday night.  But we slept soundly, 

notwithstanding, and soon after five o'clock next morning reached 

New York.



Tarrying here, only that day and night, to recruit after our late 

fatigues, we started off once more upon our last journey in 

America.  We had yet five days to spare before embarking for 

England, and I had a great desire to see 'the Shaker Village,' 

which is peopled by a religious sect from whom it takes its name.



To this end, we went up the North River again, as far as the town 

of Hudson, and there hired an extra to carry us to Lebanon, thirty 

miles distant:  and of course another and a different Lebanon from 

that village where I slept on the night of the Prairie trip.



The country through which the road meandered, was rich and 

beautiful; the weather very fine; and for many miles the Kaatskill 

mountains, where Rip Van Winkle and the ghostly Dutchmen played at 

ninepins one memorable gusty afternoon, towered in the blue 

distance, like stately clouds.  At one point, as we ascended a 

steep hill, athwart whose base a railroad, yet constructing, took 

its course, we came upon an Irish colony.  With means at hand of 

building decent cabins, it was wonderful to see how clumsy, rough, 

and wretched, its hovels were.  The best were poor protection from 

the weather the worst let in the wind and rain through wide 

breaches in the roofs of sodden grass, and in the walls of mud; 

some had neither door nor window; some had nearly fallen down, and 

were imperfectly propped up by stakes and poles; all were ruinous 

and filthy.  Hideously ugly old women and very buxom young ones, 

pigs, dogs, men, children, babies, pots, kettles, dung-hills, vile 

refuse, rank straw, and standing water, all wallowing together in 

an inseparable heap, composed the furniture of every dark and dirty 

hut.



Between nine and ten o'clock at night, we arrived at Lebanon which 

is renowned for its warm baths, and for a great hotel, well 

adapted, I have no doubt, to the gregarious taste of those seekers 

after health or pleasure who repair here, but inexpressibly 

comfortless to me.  We were shown into an immense apartment, 

lighted by two dim candles, called the drawing-room:  from which 

there was a descent by a flight of steps, to another vast desert, 

called the dining-room:  our bed-chambers were among certain long 

rows of little white-washed cells, which opened from either side of 

a dreary passage; and were so like rooms in a prison that I half 

expected to be locked up when I went to bed, and listened 

involuntarily for the turning of the key on the outside.  There 

need be baths somewhere in the neighbourhood, for the other washing 

arrangements were on as limited a scale as I ever saw, even in 

America:  indeed, these bedrooms were so very bare of even such 

common luxuries as chairs, that I should say they were not provided 

with enough of anything, but that I bethink myself of our having 

been most bountifully bitten all night.



The house is very pleasantly situated, however, and we had a good 

breakfast.  That done, we went to visit our place of destination, 

which was some two miles off, and the way to which was soon 

indicated by a finger-post, whereon was painted, 'To the Shaker 

Village.'



As we rode along, we passed a party of Shakers, who were at work 

upon the road; who wore the broadest of all broad-brimmed hats; and 

were in all visible respects such very wooden men, that I felt 

about as much sympathy for them, and as much interest in them, as 

if they had been so many figure-heads of ships.  Presently we came 

to the beginning of the village, and alighting at the door of a 

house where the Shaker manufactures are sold, and which is the 

headquarters of the elders, requested permission to see the Shaker 

worship.



Pending the conveyance of this request to some person in authority, 

we walked into a grim room, where several grim hats were hanging on 

grim pegs, and the time was grimly told by a grim clock which 

uttered every tick with a kind of struggle, as if it broke the grim 

silence reluctantly, and under protest.  Ranged against the wall 

were six or eight stiff, high-backed chairs, and they partook so 

strongly of the general grimness that one would much rather have 

sat on the floor than incurred the smallest obligation to any of 

them.



Presently, there stalked into this apartment, a grim old Shaker, 

with eyes as hard, and dull, and cold, as the great round metal 

buttons on his coat and waistcoat; a sort of calm goblin.  Being 

informed of our desire, he produced a newspaper wherein the body of 

elders, whereof he was a member, had advertised but a few days 

before, that in consequence of certain unseemly interruptions which 

their worship had received from strangers, their chapel was closed 

to the public for the space of one year.



As nothing was to be urged in opposition to this reasonable 

arrangement, we requested leave to make some trifling purchases of 

Shaker goods; which was grimly conceded.  We accordingly repaired 

to a store in the same house and on the opposite side of the 

passage, where the stock was presided over by something alive in a 

russet case, which the elder said was a woman; and which I suppose 

WAS a woman, though I should not have suspected it.



On the opposite side of the road was their place of worship:  a 

cool, clean edifice of wood, with large windows and green blinds:  

like a spacious summer-house.  As there was no getting into this 

place, and nothing was to be done but walk up and down, and look at 

it and the other buildings in the village (which were chiefly of 

wood, painted a dark red like English barns, and composed of many 

stories like English factories), I have nothing to communicate to 

the reader, beyond the scanty results I gleaned the while our 

purchases were making,



These people are called Shakers from their peculiar form of 

adoration, which consists of a dance, performed by the men and 

women of all ages, who arrange themselves for that purpose in 

opposite parties:  the men first divesting themselves of their hats 

and coats, which they gravely hang against the wall before they 

begin; and tying a ribbon round their shirt-sleeves, as though they 

were going to be bled.  They accompany themselves with a droning, 

humming noise, and dance until they are quite exhausted, 

alternately advancing and retiring in a preposterous sort of trot.  

The effect is said to be unspeakably absurd:  and if I may judge 

from a print of this ceremony which I have in my possession; and 

which I am informed by those who have visited the chapel, is 

perfectly accurate; it must be infinitely grotesque.



They are governed by a woman, and her rule is understood to be 

absolute, though she has the assistance of a council of elders.  

She lives, it is said, in strict seclusion, in certain rooms above 

the chapel, and is never shown to profane eyes.  If she at all 

resemble the lady who presided over the store, it is a great 

charity to keep her as close as possible, and I cannot too strongly 

express my perfect concurrence in this benevolent proceeding.



All the possessions and revenues of the settlement are thrown into 

a common stock, which is managed by the elders.  As they have made 

converts among people who were well to do in the world, and are 

frugal and thrifty, it is understood that this fund prospers:  the 

more especially as they have made large purchases of land.  Nor is 

this at Lebanon the only Shaker settlement:  there are, I think, at 

least, three others.



They are good farmers, and all their produce is eagerly purchased 

and highly esteemed.  'Shaker seeds,' 'Shaker herbs,' and 'Shaker 

distilled waters,' are commonly announced for sale in the shops of 

towns and cities.  They are good breeders of cattle, and are kind 

and merciful to the brute creation.  Consequently, Shaker beasts 

seldom fail to find a ready market.



They eat and drink together, after the Spartan model, at a great 

public table.  There is no union of the sexes, and every Shaker, 

male and female, is devoted to a life of celibacy.  Rumour has been 

busy upon this theme, but here again I must refer to the lady of 

the store, and say, that if many of the sister Shakers resemble 

her, I treat all such slander as bearing on its face the strongest 

marks of wild improbability.  But that they take as proselytes, 

persons so young that they cannot know their own minds, and cannot 

possess much strength of resolution in this or any other respect, I 

can assert from my own observation of the extreme juvenility of 

certain youthful Shakers whom I saw at work among the party on the 

road.



They are said to be good drivers of bargains, but to be honest and 

just in their transactions, and even in horse-dealing to resist 

those thievish tendencies which would seem, for some undiscovered 

reason, to be almost inseparable from that branch of traffic.  In 

all matters they hold their own course quietly, live in their 

gloomy, silent commonwealth, and show little desire to interfere 

with other people.



This is well enough, but nevertheless I cannot, I confess, incline 

towards the Shakers; view them with much favour, or extend towards 

them any very lenient construction.  I so abhor, and from my soul 

detest that bad spirit, no matter by what class or sect it may be 

entertained, which would strip life of its healthful graces, rob 

youth of its innocent pleasures, pluck from maturity and age their 

pleasant ornaments, and make existence but a narrow path towards 

the grave:  that odious spirit which, if it could have had full 

scope and sway upon the earth, must have blasted and made barren 

the imaginations of the greatest men, and left them, in their power 

of raising up enduring images before their fellow-creatures yet 

unborn, no better than the beasts:  that, in these very broad-

brimmed hats and very sombre coats - in stiff-necked, solemn-

visaged piety, in short, no matter what its garb, whether it have 

cropped hair as in a Shaker village, or long nails as in a Hindoo 

temple - I recognise the worst among the enemies of Heaven and 

Earth, who turn the water at the marriage feasts of this poor 

world, not into wine, but gall.  And if there must be people vowed 

to crush the harmless fancies and the love of innocent delights and 

gaieties, which are a part of human nature:  as much a part of it 

as any other love or hope that is our common portion:  let them, 

for me, stand openly revealed among the ribald and licentious; the 

very idiots know that THEY are not on the Immortal road, and will 

despise them, and avoid them readily.



Leaving the Shaker village with a hearty dislike of the old 

Shakers, and a hearty pity for the young ones:  tempered by the 

strong probability of their running away as they grow older and 

wiser, which they not uncommonly do:  we returned to Lebanon, and 

so to Hudson, by the way we had come upon the previous day.  There, 

we took the steamboat down the North River towards New York, but 

stopped, some four hours' journey short of it, at West Point, where 

we remained that night, and all next day, and next night too.



In this beautiful place:  the fairest among the fair and lovely 

Highlands of the North River:  shut in by deep green heights and 

ruined forts, and looking down upon the distant town of Newburgh, 

along a glittering path of sunlit water, with here and there a 

skiff, whose white sail often bends on some new tack as sudden 

flaws of wind come down upon her from the gullies in the hills:  

hemmed in, besides, all round with memories of Washington, and 

events of the revolutionary war:  is the Military School of 

America.



It could not stand on more appropriate ground, and any ground more 

beautiful can hardly be.  The course of education is severe, but 

well devised, and manly.  Through June, July, and August, the young 

men encamp upon the spacious plain whereon the college stands; and 

all the year their military exercises are performed there, daily.  

The term of study at this institution, which the State requires 

from all cadets, is four years; but, whether it be from the rigid 

nature of the discipline, or the national impatience of restraint, 

or both causes combined, not more than half the number who begin 

their studies here, ever remain to finish them.



The number of cadets being about equal to that of the members of 

Congress, one is sent here from every Congressional district:  its 

member influencing the selection.  Commissions in the service are 

distributed on the same principle.  The dwellings of the various 

Professors are beautifully situated; and there is a most excellent 

hotel for strangers, though it has the two drawbacks of being a 

total abstinence house (wines and spirits being forbidden to the 

students), and of serving the public meals at rather uncomfortable 

hours:  to wit, breakfast at seven, dinner at one, and supper at 

sunset.



The beauty and freshness of this calm retreat, in the very dawn and 

greenness of summer - it was then the beginning of June - were 

exquisite indeed.  Leaving it upon the sixth, and returning to New 

York, to embark for England on the succeeding day, I was glad to 

think that among the last memorable beauties which had glided past 

us, and softened in the bright perspective, were those whose 

pictures, traced by no common hand, are fresh in most men's minds; 

not easily to grow old, or fade beneath the dust of Time:  the 

Kaatskill Mountains, Sleepy Hollow, and the Tappaan Zee.
