


CHAPTER III - BOSTON


IN all the public establishments of America, the utmost courtesy 

prevails.  Most of our Departments are susceptible of considerable 

improvement in this respect, but the Custom-house above all others 

would do well to take example from the United States and render 

itself somewhat less odious and offensive to foreigners.  The 

servile rapacity of the French officials is sufficiently 

contemptible; but there is a surly boorish incivility about our 

men, alike disgusting to all persons who fall into their hands, and 

discreditable to the nation that keeps such ill-conditioned curs 

snarling about its gates.



When I landed in America, I could not help being strongly impressed 

with the contrast their Custom-house presented, and the attention, 

politeness and good humour with which its officers discharged their 

duty.



As we did not land at Boston, in consequence of some detention at 

the wharf, until after dark, I received my first impressions of the 

city in walking down to the Custom-house on the morning after our 

arrival, which was Sunday.  I am afraid to say, by the way, how 

many offers of pews and seats in church for that morning were made 

to us, by formal note of invitation, before we had half finished 

our first dinner in America, but if I may be allowed to make a 

moderate guess, without going into nicer calculation, I should say 

that at least as many sittings were proffered us, as would have 

accommodated a score or two of grown-up families.  The number of 

creeds and forms of religion to which the pleasure of our company 

was requested, was in very fair proportion.



Not being able, in the absence of any change of clothes, to go to 

church that day, we were compelled to decline these kindnesses, one 

and all; and I was reluctantly obliged to forego the delight of 

hearing Dr. Channing, who happened to preach that morning for the 

first time in a very long interval.  I mention the name of this 

distinguished and accomplished man (with whom I soon afterwards had 

the pleasure of becoming personally acquainted), that I may have 

the gratification of recording my humble tribute of admiration and 

respect for his high abilities and character; and for the bold 

philanthropy with which he has ever opposed himself to that most 

hideous blot and foul disgrace - Slavery.



To return to Boston.  When I got into the streets upon this Sunday 

morning, the air was so clear, the houses were so bright and gay:  

the signboards were painted in such gaudy colours; the gilded 

letters were so very golden; the bricks were so very red, the stone 

was so very white, the blinds and area railings were so very green, 

the knobs and plates upon the street doors so marvellously bright 

and twinkling; and all so slight and unsubstantial in appearance - 

that every thoroughfare in the city looked exactly like a scene in 

a pantomime.  It rarely happens in the business streets that a 

tradesman, if I may venture to call anybody a tradesman, where 

everybody is a merchant, resides above his store; so that many 

occupations are often carried on in one house, and the whole front 

is covered with boards and inscriptions.  As I walked along, I kept 

glancing up at these boards, confidently expecting to see a few of 

them change into something; and I never turned a corner suddenly 

without looking out for the clown and pantaloon, who, I had no 

doubt, were hiding in a doorway or behind some pillar close at 

hand.  As to Harlequin and Columbine, I discovered immediately that 

they lodged (they are always looking after lodgings in a pantomime) 

at a very small clockmaker's one story high, near the hotel; which, 

in addition to various symbols and devices, almost covering the 

whole front, had a great dial hanging out - to be jumped through, 

of course.



The suburbs are, if possible, even more unsubstantial-looking than 

the city.  The white wooden houses (so white that it makes one wink 

to look at them), with their green jalousie blinds, are so 

sprinkled and dropped about in all directions, without seeming to 

have any root at all in the ground; and the small churches and 

chapels are so prim, and bright, and highly varnished; that I 

almost believed the whole affair could be taken up piecemeal like a 

child's toy, and crammed into a little box.



The city is a beautiful one, and cannot fail, I should imagine, to 

impress all strangers very favourably.  The private dwelling-houses 

are, for the most part, large and elegant; the shops extremely 

good; and the public buildings handsome.  The State House is built 

upon the summit of a hill, which rises gradually at first, and 

afterwards by a steep ascent, almost from the water's edge.  In 

front is a green enclosure, called the Common.  The site is 

beautiful:  and from the top there is a charming panoramic view of 

the whole town and neighbourhood.  In addition to a variety of 

commodious offices, it contains two handsome chambers; in one the 

House of Representatives of the State hold their meetings:  in the 

other, the Senate.  Such proceedings as I saw here, were conducted 

with perfect gravity and decorum; and were certainly calculated to 

inspire attention and respect.



There is no doubt that much of the intellectual refinement and 

superiority of Boston, is referable to the quiet influence of the 

University of Cambridge, which is within three or four miles of the 

city.  The resident professors at that university are gentlemen of 

learning and varied attainments; and are, without one exception 

that I can call to mind, men who would shed a grace upon, and do 

honour to, any society in the civilised world.  Many of the 

resident gentry in Boston and its neighbourhood, and I think I am 

not mistaken in adding, a large majority of those who are attached 

to the liberal professions there, have been educated at this same 

school.  Whatever the defects of American universities may be, they 

disseminate no prejudices; rear no bigots; dig up the buried ashes 

of no old superstitions; never interpose between the people and 

their improvement; exclude no man because of his religious 

opinions; above all, in their whole course of study and 

instruction, recognise a world, and a broad one too, lying beyond 

the college walls.



It was a source of inexpressible pleasure to me to observe the 

almost imperceptible, but not less certain effect, wrought by this 

institution among the small community of Boston; and to note at 

every turn the humanising tastes and desires it has engendered; the 

affectionate friendships to which it has given rise; the amount of 

vanity and prejudice it has dispelled.  The golden calf they 

worship at Boston is a pigmy compared with the giant effigies set 

up in other parts of that vast counting-house which lies beyond the 

Atlantic; and the almighty dollar sinks into something 

comparatively insignificant, amidst a whole Pantheon of better 

gods.



Above all, I sincerely believe that the public institutions and 

charities of this capital of Massachusetts are as nearly perfect, 

as the most considerate wisdom, benevolence, and humanity, can make 

them.  I never in my life was more affected by the contemplation of 

happiness, under circumstances of privation and bereavement, than 

in my visits to these establishments.



It is a great and pleasant feature of all such institutions in 

America, that they are either supported by the State or assisted by 

the State; or (in the event of their not needing its helping hand) 

that they act in concert with it, and are emphatically the 

people's.  I cannot but think, with a view to the principle and its 

tendency to elevate or depress the character of the industrious 

classes, that a Public Charity is immeasurably better than a 

Private Foundation, no matter how munificently the latter may be 

endowed.  In our own country, where it has not, until within these 

later days, been a very popular fashion with governments to display 

any extraordinary regard for the great mass of the people or to 

recognise their existence as improvable creatures, private 

charities, unexampled in the history of the earth, have arisen, to 

do an incalculable amount of good among the destitute and 

afflicted.  But the government of the country, having neither act 

nor part in them, is not in the receipt of any portion of the 

gratitude they inspire; and, offering very little shelter or relief 

beyond that which is to be found in the workhouse and the jail, has 

come, not unnaturally, to be looked upon by the poor rather as a 

stern master, quick to correct and punish, than a kind protector, 

merciful and vigilant in their hour of need.



The maxim that out of evil cometh good, is strongly illustrated by 

these establishments at home; as the records of the Prerogative 

Office in Doctors' Commons can abundantly prove.  Some immensely 

rich old gentleman or lady, surrounded by needy relatives, makes, 

upon a low average, a will a-week.  The old gentleman or lady, 

never very remarkable in the best of times for good temper, is full 

of aches and pains from head to foot; full of fancies and caprices; 

full of spleen, distrust, suspicion, and dislike.  To cancel old 

wills, and invent new ones, is at last the sole business of such a 

testator's existence; and relations and friends (some of whom have 

been bred up distinctly to inherit a large share of the property, 

and have been, from their cradles, specially disqualified from 

devoting themselves to any useful pursuit, on that account) are so 

often and so unexpectedly and summarily cut off, and reinstated, 

and cut off again, that the whole family, down to the remotest 

cousin, is kept in a perpetual fever.  At length it becomes plain 

that the old lady or gentleman has not long to live; and the 

plainer this becomes, the more clearly the old lady or gentleman 

perceives that everybody is in a conspiracy against their poor old 

dying relative; wherefore the old lady or gentleman makes another 

last will - positively the last this time - conceals the same in a 

china teapot, and expires next day.  Then it turns out, that the 

whole of the real and personal estate is divided between half-a-

dozen charities; and that the dead and gone testator has in pure 

spite helped to do a great deal of good, at the cost of an immense 

amount of evil passion and misery.



The Perkins Institution and Massachusetts Asylum for the Blind, at 

Boston, is superintended by a body of trustees who make an annual 

report to the corporation.  The indigent blind of that state are 

admitted gratuitously.  Those from the adjoining state of 

Connecticut, or from the states of Maine, Vermont, or New 

Hampshire, are admitted by a warrant from the state to which they 

respectively belong; or, failing that, must find security among 

their friends, for the payment of about twenty pounds English for 

their first year's board and instruction, and ten for the second.  

'After the first year,' say the trustees, 'an account current will 

be opened with each pupil; he will be charged with the actual cost 

of his board, which will not exceed two dollars per week;' a trifle 

more than eight shillings English; 'and he will be credited with 

the amount paid for him by the state, or by his friends; also with 

his earnings over and above the cost of the stock which he uses; so 

that all his earnings over one dollar per week will be his own.  By 

the third year it will be known whether his earnings will more than 

pay the actual cost of his board; if they should, he will have it 

at his option to remain and receive his earnings, or not.  Those 

who prove unable to earn their own livelihood will not be retained; 

as it is not desirable to convert the establishment into an alms-

house, or to retain any but working bees in the hive.  Those who by 

physical or mental imbecility are disqualified from work, are 

thereby disqualified from being members of an industrious 

community; and they can be better provided for in establishments 

fitted for the infirm.'



I went to see this place one very fine winter morning:  an Italian 

sky above, and the air so clear and bright on every side, that even 

my eyes, which are none of the best, could follow the minute lines 

and scraps of tracery in distant buildings.  Like most other public 

institutions in America, of the same class, it stands a mile or two 

without the town, in a cheerful healthy spot; and is an airy, 

spacious, handsome edifice.  It is built upon a height, commanding 

the harbour.  When I paused for a moment at the door, and marked 

how fresh and free the whole scene was - what sparkling bubbles 

glanced upon the waves, and welled up every moment to the surface, 

as though the world below, like that above, were radiant with the 

bright day, and gushing over in its fulness of light:  when I gazed 

from sail to sail away upon a ship at sea, a tiny speck of shining 

white, the only cloud upon the still, deep, distant blue - and, 

turning, saw a blind boy with his sightless face addressed that 

way, as though he too had some sense within him of the glorious 

distance:  I felt a kind of sorrow that the place should be so very 

light, and a strange wish that for his sake it were darker.  It was 

but momentary, of course, and a mere fancy, but I felt it keenly 

for all that.



The children were at their daily tasks in different rooms, except a 

few who were already dismissed, and were at play.  Here, as in many 

institutions, no uniform is worn; and I was very glad of it, for 

two reasons.  Firstly, because I am sure that nothing but senseless 

custom and want of thought would reconcile us to the liveries and 

badges we are so fond of at home.  Secondly, because the absence of 

these things presents each child to the visitor in his or her own 

proper character, with its individuality unimpaired; not lost in a 

dull, ugly, monotonous repetition of the same unmeaning garb:  

which is really an important consideration.  The wisdom of 

encouraging a little harmless pride in personal appearance even 

among the blind, or the whimsical absurdity of considering charity 

and leather breeches inseparable companions, as we do, requires no 

comment.



Good order, cleanliness, and comfort, pervaded every corner of the 

building.  The various classes, who were gathered round their 

teachers, answered the questions put to them with readiness and 

intelligence, and in a spirit of cheerful contest for precedence 

which pleased me very much.  Those who were at play, were gleesome 

and noisy as other children.  More spiritual and affectionate 

friendships appeared to exist among them, than would be found among 

other young persons suffering under no deprivation; but this I 

expected and was prepared to find.  It is a part of the great 

scheme of Heaven's merciful consideration for the afflicted.



In a portion of the building, set apart for that purpose, are work-

shops for blind persons whose education is finished, and who have 

acquired a trade, but who cannot pursue it in an ordinary 

manufactory because of their deprivation.  Several people were at 

work here; making brushes, mattresses, and so forth; and the 

cheerfulness, industry, and good order discernible in every other 

part of the building, extended to this department also.



On the ringing of a bell, the pupils all repaired, without any 

guide or leader, to a spacious music-hall, where they took their 

seats in an orchestra erected for that purpose, and listened with 

manifest delight to a voluntary on the organ, played by one of 

themselves.  At its conclusion, the performer, a boy of nineteen or 

twenty, gave place to a girl; and to her accompaniment they all 

sang a hymn, and afterwards a sort of chorus.  It was very sad to 

look upon and hear them, happy though their condition 

unquestionably was; and I saw that one blind girl, who (being for 

the time deprived of the use of her limbs, by illness) sat close 

beside me with her face towards them, wept silently the while she 

listened.



It is strange to watch the faces of the blind, and see how free 

they are from all concealment of what is passing in their thoughts; 

observing which, a man with eyes may blush to contemplate the mask 

he wears.  Allowing for one shade of anxious expression which is 

never absent from their countenances, and the like of which we may 

readily detect in our own faces if we try to feel our way in the 

dark, every idea, as it rises within them, is expressed with the 

lightning's speed and nature's truth.  If the company at a rout, or 

drawing-room at court, could only for one time be as unconscious of 

the eyes upon them as blind men and women are, what secrets would 

come out, and what a worker of hypocrisy this sight, the loss of 

which we so much pity, would appear to be!



The thought occurred to me as I sat down in another room, before a 

girl, blind, deaf, and dumb; destitute of smell; and nearly so of 

taste:  before a fair young creature with every human faculty, and 

hope, and power of goodness and affection, inclosed within her 

delicate frame, and but one outward sense - the sense of touch.  

There she was, before me; built up, as it were, in a marble cell, 

impervious to any ray of light, or particle of sound; with her poor 

white hand peeping through a chink in the wall, beckoning to some 

good man for help, that an Immortal soul might be awakened.



Long before I looked upon her, the help had come.  Her face was 

radiant with intelligence and pleasure.  Her hair, braided by her 

own hands, was bound about a head, whose intellectual capacity and 

development were beautifully expressed in its graceful outline, and 

its broad open brow; her dress, arranged by herself, was a pattern 

of neatness and simplicity; the work she had knitted, lay beside 

her; her writing-book was on the desk she leaned upon. - From the 

mournful ruin of such bereavement, there had slowly risen up this 

gentle, tender, guileless, grateful-hearted being.



Like other inmates of that house, she had a green ribbon bound 

round her eyelids.  A doll she had dressed lay near upon the 

ground.  I took it up, and saw that she had made a green fillet 

such as she wore herself, and fastened it about its mimic eyes.



She was seated in a little enclosure, made by school-desks and 

forms, writing her daily journal.  But soon finishing this pursuit, 

she engaged in an animated conversation with a teacher who sat 

beside her.  This was a favourite mistress with the poor pupil.  If 

she could see the face of her fair instructress, she would not love 

her less, I am sure.



I have extracted a few disjointed fragments of her history, from an 

account, written by that one man who has made her what she is.  It 

is a very beautiful and touching narrative; and I wish I could 

present it entire.



Her name is Laura Bridgman.  'She was born in Hanover, New 

Hampshire, on the twenty-first of December, 1829.  She is described 

as having been a very sprightly and pretty infant, with bright blue 

eyes.  She was, however, so puny and feeble until she was a year 

and a half old, that her parents hardly hoped to rear her.  She was 

subject to severe fits, which seemed to rack her frame almost 

beyond her power of endurance:  and life was held by the feeblest 

tenure:  but when a year and a half old, she seemed to rally; the 

dangerous symptoms subsided; and at twenty months old, she was 

perfectly well.



'Then her mental powers, hitherto stinted in their growth, rapidly 

developed themselves; and during the four months of health which 

she enjoyed, she appears (making due allowance for a fond mother's 

account) to have displayed a considerable degree of intelligence.



'But suddenly she sickened again; her disease raged with great 

violence during five weeks, when her eyes and ears were inflamed, 

suppurated, and their contents were discharged.  But though sight 

and hearing were gone for ever, the poor child's sufferings were 

not ended.  The fever raged during seven weeks; for five months she 

was kept in bed in a darkened room; it was a year before she could 

walk unsupported, and two years before she could sit up all day.  

It was now observed that her sense of smell was almost entirely 

destroyed; and, consequently, that her taste was much blunted.



'It was not until four years of age that the poor child's bodily 

health seemed restored, and she was able to enter upon her 

apprenticeship of life and the world.



'But what a situation was hers!  The darkness and the silence of 

the tomb were around her:  no mother's smile called forth her 

answering smile, no father's voice taught her to imitate his 

sounds:- they, brothers and sisters, were but forms of matter which 

resisted her touch, but which differed not from the furniture of 

the house, save in warmth, and in the power of locomotion; and not 

even in these respects from the dog and the cat.



'But the immortal spirit which had been implanted within her could 

not die, nor be maimed nor mutilated; and though most of its 

avenues of communication with the world were cut off, it began to 

manifest itself through the others.  As soon as she could walk, she 

began to explore the room, and then the house; she became familiar 

with the form, density, weight, and heat, of every article she 

could lay her hands upon.  She followed her mother, and felt her 

hands and arms, as she was occupied about the house; and her 

disposition to imitate, led her to repeat everything herself.  She 

even learned to sew a little, and to knit.'



The reader will scarcely need to be told, however, that the 

opportunities of communicating with her, were very, very limited; 

and that the moral effects of her wretched state soon began to 

appear.  Those who cannot be enlightened by reason, can only be 

controlled by force; and this, coupled with her great privations, 

must soon have reduced her to a worse condition than that of the 

beasts that perish, but for timely and unhoped-for aid.



'At this time, I was so fortunate as to hear of the child, and 

immediately hastened to Hanover to see her.  I found her with a 

well-formed figure; a strongly-marked, nervous-sanguine 

temperament; a large and beautifully-shaped head; and the whole 

system in healthy action.  The parents were easily induced to 

consent to her coming to Boston, and on the 4th of October, 1837, 

they brought her to the Institution.



'For a while, she was much bewildered; and after waiting about two 

weeks, until she became acquainted with her new locality, and 

somewhat familiar with the inmates, the attempt was made to give 

her knowledge of arbitrary signs, by which she could interchange 

thoughts with others.



'There was one of two ways to be adopted:  either to go on to build 

up a language of signs on the basis of the natural language which 

she had already commenced herself, or to teach her the purely 

arbitrary language in common use:  that is, to give her a sign for 

every individual thing, or to give her a knowledge of letters by 

combination of which she might express her idea of the existence, 

and the mode and condition of existence, of any thing.  The former 

would have been easy, but very ineffectual; the latter seemed very 

difficult, but, if accomplished, very effectual.  I determined 

therefore to try the latter.



'The first experiments were made by taking articles in common use, 

such as knives, forks, spoons, keys, &c., and pasting upon them 

labels with their names printed in raised letters.  These she felt 

very carefully, and soon, of course, distinguished that the crooked 

lines SPOON, differed as much from the crooked lines KEY, as the 

spoon differed from the key in form.



'Then small detached labels, with the same words printed upon them, 

were put into her hands; and she soon observed that they were 

similar to the ones pasted on the articles.'  She showed her 

perception of this similarity by laying the label KEY upon the key, 

and the label SPOON upon the spoon.  She was encouraged here by the 

natural sign of approbation, patting on the head.



'The same process was then repeated with all the articles which she 

could handle; and she very easily learned to place the proper 

labels upon them.  It was evident, however, that the only 

intellectual exercise was that of imitation and memory.  She 

recollected that the label BOOK was placed upon a book, and she 

repeated the process first from imitation, next from memory, with 

only the motive of love of approbation, but apparently without the 

intellectual perception of any relation between the things.



'After a while, instead of labels, the individual letters were 

given to her on detached bits of paper:  they were arranged side by 

side so as to spell BOOK, KEY, &c.; then they were mixed up in a 

heap and a sign was made for her to arrange them herself so as to 

express the words BOOK, KEY, &c.; and she did so.



'Hitherto, the process had been mechanical, and the success about 

as great as teaching a very knowing dog a variety of tricks.  The 

poor child had sat in mute amazement, and patiently imitated 

everything her teacher did; but now the truth began to flash upon 

her:  her intellect began to work:  she perceived that here was a 

way by which she could herself make up a sign of anything that was 

in her own mind, and show it to another mind; and at once her 

countenance lighted up with a human expression:  it was no longer a 

dog, or parrot:  it was an immortal spirit, eagerly seizing upon a 

new link of union with other spirits!  I could almost fix upon the 

moment when this truth dawned upon her mind, and spread its light 

to her countenance; I saw that the great obstacle was overcome; and 

that henceforward nothing but patient and persevering, but plain 

and straightforward, efforts were to be used.



'The result thus far, is quickly related, and easily conceived; but 

not so was the process; for many weeks of apparently unprofitable 

labour were passed before it was effected.



'When it was said above that a sign was made, it was intended to 

say, that the action was performed by her teacher, she feeling his 

hands, and then imitating the motion.



'The next step was to procure a set of metal types, with the 

different letters of the alphabet cast upon their ends; also a 

board, in which were square holes, into which holes she could set 

the types; so that the letters on their ends could alone be felt 

above the surface.



'Then, on any article being handed to her, for instance, a pencil, 

or a watch, she would select the component letters, and arrange 

them on her board, and read them with apparent pleasure.



'She was exercised for several weeks in this way, until her 

vocabulary became extensive; and then the important step was taken 

of teaching her how to represent the different letters by the 

position of her fingers, instead of the cumbrous apparatus of the 

board and types.  She accomplished this speedily and easily, for 

her intellect had begun to work in aid of her teacher, and her 

progress was rapid.



'This was the period, about three months after she had commenced, 

that the first report of her case was made, in which it was stated 

that "she has just learned the manual alphabet, as used by the deaf 

mutes, and it is a subject of delight and wonder to see how 

rapidly, correctly, and eagerly, she goes on with her labours.  Her 

teacher gives her a new object, for instance, a pencil, first lets 

her examine it, and get an idea of its use, then teaches her how to 

spell it by making the signs for the letters with her own fingers:  

the child grasps her hand, and feels her fingers, as the different 

letters are formed; she turns her head a little on one side like a 

person listening closely; her lips are apart; she seems scarcely to 

breathe; and her countenance, at first anxious, gradually changes 

to a smile, as she comprehends the lesson.  She then holds up her 

tiny fingers, and spells the word in the manual alphabet; next, she 

takes her types and arranges her letters; and last, to make sure 

that she is right, she takes the whole of the types composing the 

word, and places them upon or in contact with the pencil, or 

whatever the object may be."



'The whole of the succeeding year was passed in gratifying her 

eager inquiries for the names of every object which she could 

possibly handle; in exercising her in the use of the manual 

alphabet; in extending in every possible way her knowledge of the 

physical relations of things; and in proper care of her health.



'At the end of the year a report of her case was made, from which 

the following is an extract.



'"It has been ascertained beyond the possibility of doubt, that she 

cannot see a ray of light, cannot hear the least sound, and never 

exercises her sense of smell, if she have any.  Thus her mind 

dwells in darkness and stillness, as profound as that of a closed 

tomb at midnight.  Of beautiful sights, and sweet sounds, and 

pleasant odours, she has no conception; nevertheless, she seems as 

happy and playful as a bird or a lamb; and the employment of her 

intellectual faculties, or the acquirement of a new idea, gives her 

a vivid pleasure, which is plainly marked in her expressive 

features.  She never seems to repine, but has all the buoyancy and 

gaiety of childhood.  She is fond of fun and frolic, and when 

playing with the rest of the children, her shrill laugh sounds 

loudest of the group.



'"When left alone, she seems very happy if she have her knitting or 

sewing, and will busy herself for hours; if she have no occupation, 

she evidently amuses herself by imaginary dialogues, or by 

recalling past impressions; she counts with her fingers, or spells 

out names of things which she has recently learned, in the manual 

alphabet of the deaf mutes.  In this lonely self-communion she 

seems to reason, reflect, and argue; if she spell a word wrong with 

the fingers of her right hand, she instantly strikes it with her 

left, as her teacher does, in sign of disapprobation; if right, 

then she pats herself upon the head, and looks pleased.  She 

sometimes purposely spells a word wrong with the left hand, looks 

roguish for a moment and laughs, and then with the right hand 

strikes the left, as if to correct it.



'"During the year she has attained great dexterity in the use of 

the manual alphabet of the deaf mutes; and she spells out the words 

and sentences which she knows, so fast and so deftly, that only 

those accustomed to this language can follow with the eye the rapid 

motions of her fingers.



'"But wonderful as is the rapidity with which she writes her 

thoughts upon the air, still more so is the ease and accuracy with 

which she reads the words thus written by another; grasping their 

hands in hers, and following every movement of their fingers, as 

letter after letter conveys their meaning to her mind.  It is in 

this way that she converses with her blind playmates, and nothing 

can more forcibly show the power of mind in forcing matter to its 

purpose than a meeting between them.  For if great talent and skill 

are necessary for two pantomimes to paint their thoughts and 

feelings by the movements of the body, and the expression of the 

countenance, how much greater the difficulty when darkness shrouds 

them both, and the one can hear no sound.



'"When Laura is walking through a passage-way, with her hands 

spread before her, she knows instantly every one she meets, and 

passes them with a sign of recognition:  but if it be a girl of her 

own age, and especially if it be one of her favourites, there is 

instantly a bright smile of recognition, a twining of arms, a 

grasping of hands, and a swift telegraphing upon the tiny fingers; 

whose rapid evolutions convey the thoughts and feelings from the 

outposts of one mind to those of the other.  There are questions 

and answers, exchanges of joy or sorrow, there are kissings and 

partings, just as between little children with all their senses."



'During this year, and six months after she had left home, her 

mother came to visit her, and the scene of their meeting was an 

interesting one.



'The mother stood some time, gazing with overflowing eyes upon her 

unfortunate child, who, all unconscious of her presence, was 

playing about the room.  Presently Laura ran against her, and at 

once began feeling her hands, examining her dress, and trying to 

find out if she knew her; but not succeeding in this, she turned 

away as from a stranger, and the poor woman could not conceal the 

pang she felt, at finding that her beloved child did not know her.



'She then gave Laura a string of beads which she used to wear at 

home, which were recognised by the child at once, who, with much 

joy, put them around her neck, and sought me eagerly to say she 

understood the string was from her home.



'The mother now sought to caress her, but poor Laura repelled her, 

preferring to be with her acquaintances.



'Another article from home was now given her, and she began to look 

much interested; she examined the stranger much closer, and gave me 

to understand that she knew she came from Hanover; she even endured 

her caresses, but would leave her with indifference at the 

slightest signal.  The distress of the mother was now painful to 

behold; for, although she had feared that she should not be 

recognised, the painful reality of being treated with cold 

indifference by a darling child, was too much for woman's nature to 

bear.



'After a while, on the mother taking hold of her again, a vague 

idea seemed to flit across Laura's mind, that this could not be a 

stranger; she therefore felt her hands very eagerly, while her 

countenance assumed an expression of intense interest; she became 

very pale; and then suddenly red; hope seemed struggling with doubt 

and anxiety, and never were contending emotions more strongly 

painted upon the human face:  at this moment of painful 

uncertainty, the mother drew her close to her side, and kissed her 

fondly, when at once the truth flashed upon the child, and all 

mistrust and anxiety disappeared from her face, as with an 

expression of exceeding joy she eagerly nestled to the bosom of her 

parent, and yielded herself to her fond embraces.



'After this, the beads were all unheeded; the playthings which were 

offered to her were utterly disregarded; her playmates, for whom 

but a moment before she gladly left the stranger, now vainly strove 

to pull her from her mother; and though she yielded her usual 

instantaneous obedience to my signal to follow me, it was evidently 

with painful reluctance.  She clung close to me, as if bewildered 

and fearful; and when, after a moment, I took her to her mother, 

she sprang to her arms, and clung to her with eager joy.



'The subsequent parting between them, showed alike the affection, 

the intelligence, and the resolution of the child.



'Laura accompanied her mother to the door, clinging close to her 

all the way, until they arrived at the threshold, where she paused, 

and felt around, to ascertain who was near her.  Perceiving the 

matron, of whom she is very fond, she grasped her with one hand, 

holding on convulsively to her mother with the other; and thus she 

stood for a moment:  then she dropped her mother's hand; put her 

handkerchief to her eyes; and turning round, clung sobbing to the 

matron; while her mother departed, with emotions as deep as those 

of her child.



* * * * * *



'It has been remarked in former reports, that she can distinguish 

different degrees of intellect in others, and that she soon 

regarded, almost with contempt, a new-comer, when, after a few 

days, she discovered her weakness of mind.  This unamiable part of 

her character has been more strongly developed during the past 

year.



'She chooses for her friends and companions, those children who are 

intelligent, and can talk best with her; and she evidently dislikes 

to be with those who are deficient in intellect, unless, indeed, 

she can make them serve her purposes, which she is evidently 

inclined to do.  She takes advantage of them, and makes them wait 

upon her, in a manner that she knows she could not exact of others; 

and in various ways shows her Saxon blood.



'She is fond of having other children noticed and caressed by the 

teachers, and those whom she respects; but this must not be carried 

too far, or she becomes jealous.  She wants to have her share, 

which, if not the lion's, is the greater part; and if she does not 

get it, she says, "MY MOTHER WILL LOVE ME."



'Her tendency to imitation is so strong, that it leads her to 

actions which must be entirely incomprehensible to her, and which 

can give her no other pleasure than the gratification of an 

internal faculty.  She has been known to sit for half an hour, 

holding a book before her sightless eyes, and moving her lips, as 

she has observed seeing people do when reading.



'She one day pretended that her doll was sick; and went through all 

the motions of tending it, and giving it medicine; she then put it 

carefully to bed, and placed a bottle of hot water to its feet, 

laughing all the time most heartily.  When I came home, she 

insisted upon my going to see it, and feel its pulse; and when I 

told her to put a blister on its back, she seemed to enjoy it 

amazingly, and almost screamed with delight.



'Her social feelings, and her affections, are very strong; and when 

she is sitting at work, or at her studies, by the side of one of 

her little friends, she will break off from her task every few 

moments, to hug and kiss them with an earnestness and warmth that 

is touching to behold.



'When left alone, she occupies and apparently amuses herself, and 

seems quite contented; and so strong seems to be the natural 

tendency of thought to put on the garb of language, that she often 

soliloquizes in the FINGER LANGUAGE, slow and tedious as it is.  

But it is only when alone, that she is quiet:  for if she becomes 

sensible of the presence of any one near her, she is restless until 

she can sit close beside them, hold their hand, and converse with 

them by signs.



'In her intellectual character it is pleasing to observe an 

insatiable thirst for knowledge, and a quick perception of the 

relations of things.  In her moral character, it is beautiful to 

behold her continual gladness, her keen enjoyment of existence, her 

expansive love, her unhesitating confidence, her sympathy with 

suffering, her conscientiousness, truthfulness, and hopefulness.'



Such are a few fragments from the simple but most interesting and 

instructive history of Laura Bridgman.  The name of her great 

benefactor and friend, who writes it, is Dr. Howe.  There are not 

many persons, I hope and believe, who, after reading these 

passages, can ever hear that name with indifference.



A further account has been published by Dr. Howe, since the report 

from which I have just quoted.  It describes her rapid mental 

growth and improvement during twelve months more, and brings her 

little history down to the end of last year.  It is very 

remarkable, that as we dream in words, and carry on imaginary 

conversations, in which we speak both for ourselves and for the 

shadows who appear to us in those visions of the night, so she, 

having no words, uses her finger alphabet in her sleep.  And it has 

been ascertained that when her slumber is broken, and is much 

disturbed by dreams, she expresses her thoughts in an irregular and 

confused manner on her fingers:  just as we should murmur and 

mutter them indistinctly, in the like circumstances.



I turned over the leaves of her Diary, and found it written in a 

fair legible square hand, and expressed in terms which were quite 

intelligible without any explanation.  On my saying that I should 

like to see her write again, the teacher who sat beside her, bade 

her, in their language, sign her name upon a slip of paper, twice 

or thrice.  In doing so, I observed that she kept her left hand 

always touching, and following up, her right, in which, of course, 

she held the pen.  No line was indicated by any contrivance, but 

she wrote straight and freely.



She had, until now, been quite unconscious of the presence of 

visitors; but, having her hand placed in that of the gentleman who 

accompanied me, she immediately expressed his name upon her 

teacher's palm.  Indeed her sense of touch is now so exquisite, 

that having been acquainted with a person once, she can recognise 

him or her after almost any interval.  This gentleman had been in 

her company, I believe, but very seldom, and certainly had not seen 

her for many months.  My hand she rejected at once, as she does 

that of any man who is a stranger to her.  But she retained my 

wife's with evident pleasure, kissed her, and examed her dress with 

a girl's curiosity and interest.



She was merry and cheerful, and showed much innocent playfulness in 

her intercourse with her teacher.  Her delight on recognising a 

favourite playfellow and companion - herself a blind girl - who 

silently, and with an equal enjoyment of the coming surprise, took 

a seat beside her, was beautiful to witness.  It elicited from her 

at first, as other slight circumstances did twice or thrice during 

my visit, an uncouth noise which was rather painful to hear.  But 

of her teacher touching her lips, she immediately desisted, and 

embraced her laughingly and affectionately.



I had previously been into another chamber, where a number of blind 

boys were swinging, and climbing, and engaged in various sports.  

They all clamoured, as we entered, to the assistant-master, who 

accompanied us, 'Look at me, Mr. Hart!  Please, Mr. Hart, look at 

me!' evincing, I thought, even in this, an anxiety peculiar to 

their condition, that their little feats of agility should be SEEN.  

Among them was a small laughing fellow, who stood aloof, 

entertaining himself with a gymnastic exercise for bringing the 

arms and chest into play; which he enjoyed mightily; especially 

when, in thrusting out his right arm, he brought it into contact 

with another boy.  Like Laura Bridgman, this young child was deaf, 

and dumb, and blind.



Dr. Howe's account of this pupil's first instruction is so very 

striking, and so intimately connected with Laura herself, that I 

cannot refrain from a short extract.  I may premise that the poor 

boy's name is Oliver Caswell; that he is thirteen years of age; and 

that he was in full possession of all his faculties, until three 

years and four months old.  He was then attacked by scarlet fever; 

in four weeks became deaf; in a few weeks more, blind; in six 

months, dumb.  He showed his anxious sense of this last 

deprivation, by often feeling the lips of other persons when they 

were talking, and then putting his hand upon his own, as if to 

assure himself that he had them in the right position.



'His thirst for knowledge,' says Dr. Howe, 'proclaimed itself as 

soon as he entered the house, by his eager examination of 

everything he could feel or smell in his new location.  For 

instance, treading upon the register of a furnace, he instantly 

stooped down, and began to feel it, and soon discovered the way in 

which the upper plate moved upon the lower one; but this was not 

enough for him, so lying down upon his face, he applied his tongue 

first to one, then to the other, and seemed to discover that they 

were of different kinds of metal.




'His signs were expressive:  and the strictly natural language, 

laughing, crying, sighing, kissing, embracing, &c., was perfect.



'Some of the analogical signs which (guided by his faculty of 

imitation) he had contrived, were comprehensible; such as the 

waving motion of his hand for the motion of a boat, the circular 

one for a wheel, &c.



'The first object was to break up the use of these signs and to 

substitute for them the use of purely arbitrary ones.



'Profiting by the experience I had gained in the other cases, I 

omitted several steps of the process before employed, and commenced 

at once with the finger language.  Taking, therefore, several 

articles having short names, such as key, cup, mug, &c., and with 

Laura for an auxiliary, I sat down, and taking his hand, placed it 

upon one of them, and then with my own, made the letters KEY.  He 

felt my hands eagerly with both of his, and on my repeating the 

process, he evidently tried to imitate the motions of my fingers.  

In a few minutes he contrived to feel the motions of my fingers 

with one hand, and holding out the other he tried to imitate them, 

laughing most heartily when he succeeded.  Laura was by, interested 

even to agitation; and the two presented a singular sight:  her 

face was flushed and anxious, and her fingers twining in among ours 

so closely as to follow every motion, but so slightly as not to 

embarrass them; while Oliver stood attentive, his head a little 

aside, his face turned up, his left hand grasping mine, and his 

right held out:  at every motion of my fingers his countenance 

betokened keen attention; there was an expression of anxiety as he 

tried to imitate the motions; then a smile came stealing out as he 

thought he could do so, and spread into a joyous laugh the moment 

he succeeded, and felt me pat his head, and Laura clap him heartily 

upon the back, and jump up and down in her joy.



'He learned more than a half-dozen letters in half an hour, and 

seemed delighted with his success, at least in gaining approbation.  

His attention then began to flag, and I commenced playing with him.  

It was evident that in all this he had merely been imitating the 

motions of my fingers, and placing his hand upon the key, cup, &c., 

as part of the process, without any perception of the relation 

between the sign and the object.



'When he was tired with play I took him back to the table, and he 

was quite ready to begin again his process of imitation.  He soon 

learned to make the letters for KEY, PEN, PIN; and by having the 

object repeatedly placed in his hand, he at last perceived the 

relation I wished to establish between them.  This was evident, 

because, when I made the letters PIN, or PEN, or CUP, he would 

select the article.



'The perception of this relation was not accompanied by that 

radiant flash of intelligence, and that glow of joy, which marked 

the delightful moment when Laura first perceived it.  I then placed 

all the articles on the table, and going away a little distance 

with the children, placed Oliver's fingers in the positions to 

spell KEY, on which Laura went and brought the article:  the little 

fellow seemed much amused by this, and looked very attentive and 

smiling.  I then caused him to make the letters BREAD, and in an 

instant Laura went and brought him a piece:  he smelled at it; put 

it to his lips; cocked up his head with a most knowing look; seemed 

to reflect a moment; and then laughed outright, as much as to say, 

"Aha!  I understand now how something may be made out of this."



'It was now clear that he had the capacity and inclination to 

learn, that he was a proper subject for instruction, and needed 

only persevering attention.  I therefore put him in the hands of an 

intelligent teacher, nothing doubting of his rapid progress.'



Well may this gentleman call that a delightful moment, in which 

some distant promise of her present state first gleamed upon the 

darkened mind of Laura Bridgman.  Throughout his life, the 

recollection of that moment will be to him a source of pure, 

unfading happiness; nor will it shine less brightly on the evening 

of his days of Noble Usefulness.



The affection which exists between these two - the master and the 

pupil - is as far removed from all ordinary care and regard, as the 

circumstances in which it has had its growth, are apart from the 

common occurrences of life.  He is occupied now, in devising means 

of imparting to her, higher knowledge; and of conveying to her some 

adequate idea of the Great Creator of that universe in which, dark 

and silent and scentless though it be to her, she has such deep 

delight and glad enjoyment.



Ye who have eyes and see not, and have ears and hear not; ye who 

are as the hypocrites of sad countenances, and disfigure your faces 

that ye may seem unto men to fast; learn healthy cheerfulness, and 

mild contentment, from the deaf, and dumb, and blind!  Self-elected 

saints with gloomy brows, this sightless, earless, voiceless child 

may teach you lessons you will do well to follow.  Let that poor 

hand of hers lie gently on your hearts; for there may be something 

in its healing touch akin to that of the Great Master whose 

precepts you misconstrue, whose lessons you pervert, of whose 

charity and sympathy with all the world, not one among you in his 

daily practice knows as much as many of the worst among those 

fallen sinners, to whom you are liberal in nothing but the 

preachment of perdition!



As I rose to quit the room, a pretty little child of one of the 

attendants came running in to greet its father.  For the moment, a 

child with eyes, among the sightless crowd, impressed me almost as 

painfully as the blind boy in the porch had done, two hours ago.  

Ah! how much brighter and more deeply blue, glowing and rich though 

it had been before, was the scene without, contrasting with the 

darkness of so many youthful lives within!



* * * * * *



At SOUTH BOSTON, as it is called, in a situation excellently 

adapted for the purpose, several charitable institutions are 

clustered together.  One of these, is the State Hospital for the 

insane; admirably conducted on those enlightened principles of 

conciliation and kindness, which twenty years ago would have been 

worse than heretical, and which have been acted upon with so much 

success in our own pauper Asylum at Hanwell.  'Evince a desire to 

show some confidence, and repose some trust, even in mad people,' 

said the resident physician, as we walked along the galleries, his 

patients flocking round us unrestrained.  Of those who deny or 

doubt the wisdom of this maxim after witnessing its effects, if 

there be such people still alive, I can only say that I hope I may 

never be summoned as a Juryman on a Commission of Lunacy whereof 

they are the subjects; for I should certainly find them out of 

their senses, on such evidence alone.



Each ward in this institution is shaped like a long gallery or 

hall, with the dormitories of the patients opening from it on 

either hand.  Here they work, read, play at skittles, and other 

games; and when the weather does not admit of their taking exercise 

out of doors, pass the day together.  In one of these rooms, 

seated, calmly, and quite as a matter of course, among a throng of 

mad-women, black and white, were the physician's wife and another 

lady, with a couple of children.  These ladies were graceful and 

handsome; and it was not difficult to perceive at a glance that 

even their presence there, had a highly beneficial influence on the 

patients who were grouped about them.



Leaning her head against the chimney-piece, with a great assumption 

of dignity and refinement of manner, sat an elderly female, in as 

many scraps of finery as Madge Wildfire herself.  Her head in 

particular was so strewn with scraps of gauze and cotton and bits 

of paper, and had so many queer odds and ends stuck all about it, 

that it looked like a bird's-nest.  She was radiant with imaginary 

jewels; wore a rich pair of undoubted gold spectacles; and 

gracefully dropped upon her lap, as we approached, a very old 

greasy newspaper, in which I dare say she had been reading an 

account of her own presentation at some Foreign Court.



I have been thus particular in describing her, because she will 

serve to exemplify the physician's manner of acquiring and 

retaining the confidence of his patients.



'This,' he said aloud, taking me by the hand, and advancing to the 

fantastic figure with great politeness - not raising her suspicions 

by the slightest look or whisper, or any kind of aside, to me:  

'This lady is the hostess of this mansion, sir.  It belongs to her.  

Nobody else has anything whatever to do with it.  It is a large 

establishment, as you see, and requires a great number of 

attendants.  She lives, you observe, in the very first style.  She 

is kind enough to receive my visits, and to permit my wife and 

family to reside here; for which it is hardly necessary to say, we 

are much indebted to her.  She is exceedingly courteous, you 

perceive,' on this hint she bowed condescendingly, 'and will permit 

me to have the pleasure of introducing you:  a gentleman from 

England, Ma'am:  newly arrived from England, after a very 

tempestuous passage:  Mr. Dickens, - the lady of the house!'



We exchanged the most dignified salutations with profound gravity 

and respect, and so went on.  The rest of the madwomen seemed to 

understand the joke perfectly (not only in this case, but in all 

the others, except their own), and be highly amused by it.  The 

nature of their several kinds of insanity was made known to me in 

the same way, and we left each of them in high good humour.  Not 

only is a thorough confidence established, by those means, between 

the physician and patient, in respect of the nature and extent of 

their hallucinations, but it is easy to understand that 

opportunities are afforded for seizing any moment of reason, to 

startle them by placing their own delusion before them in its most 

incongruous and ridiculous light.



Every patient in this asylum sits down to dinner every day with a 

knife and fork; and in the midst of them sits the gentleman, whose 

manner of dealing with his charges, I have just described.  At 

every meal, moral influence alone restrains the more violent among 

them from cutting the throats of the rest; but the effect of that 

influence is reduced to an absolute certainty, and is found, even 

as a means of restraint, to say nothing of it as a means of cure, a 

hundred times more efficacious than all the strait-waistcoats, 

fetters, and handcuffs, that ignorance, prejudice, and cruelty have 

manufactured since the creation of the world.



In the labour department, every patient is as freely trusted with 

the tools of his trade as if he were a sane man.  In the garden, 

and on the farm, they work with spades, rakes, and hoes.  For 

amusement, they walk, run, fish, paint, read, and ride out to take 

the air in carriages provided for the purpose.  They have among 

themselves a sewing society to make clothes for the poor, which 

holds meetings, passes resolutions, never comes to fisty-cuffs or 

bowie-knives as sane assemblies have been known to do elsewhere; 

and conducts all its proceedings with the greatest decorum.  The 

irritability, which would otherwise be expended on their own flesh, 

clothes, and furniture, is dissipated in these pursuits.  They are 

cheerful, tranquil, and healthy.



Once a week they have a ball, in which the Doctor and his family, 

with all the nurses and attendants, take an active part.  Dances 

and marches are performed alternately, to the enlivening strains of 

a piano; and now and then some gentleman or lady (whose proficiency 

has been previously ascertained) obliges the company with a song:  

nor does it ever degenerate, at a tender crisis, into a screech or 

howl; wherein, I must confess, I should have thought the danger 

lay.  At an early hour they all meet together for these festive 

purposes; at eight o'clock refreshments are served; and at nine 

they separate.



Immense politeness and good breeding are observed throughout.  They 

all take their tone from the Doctor; and he moves a very 

Chesterfield among the company.  Like other assemblies, these 

entertainments afford a fruitful topic of conversation among the 

ladies for some days; and the gentlemen are so anxious to shine on 

these occasions, that they have been sometimes found 'practising 

their steps' in private, to cut a more distinguished figure in the 

dance.



It is obvious that one great feature of this system, is the 

inculcation and encouragement, even among such unhappy persons, of 

a decent self-respect.  Something of the same spirit pervades all 

the Institutions at South Boston.



There is the House of Industry.  In that branch of it, which is 

devoted to the reception of old or otherwise helpless paupers, 

these words are painted on the walls:  'WORTHY OF NOTICE.  SELF-

GOVERNMENT, QUIETUDE, AND PEACE, ARE BLESSINGS.'  It is not assumed 

and taken for granted that being there they must be evil-disposed 

and wicked people, before whose vicious eyes it is necessary to 

flourish threats and harsh restraints.  They are met at the very 

threshold with this mild appeal.  All within-doors is very plain 

and simple, as it ought to be, but arranged with a view to peace 

and comfort.  It costs no more than any other plan of arrangement, 

but it speaks an amount of consideration for those who are reduced 

to seek a shelter there, which puts them at once upon their 

gratitude and good behaviour.  Instead of being parcelled out in 

great, long, rambling wards, where a certain amount of weazen life 

may mope, and pine, and shiver, all day long, the building is 

divided into separate rooms, each with its share of light and air.  

In these, the better kind of paupers live.  They have a motive for 

exertion and becoming pride, in the desire to make these little 

chambers comfortable and decent.



I do not remember one but it was clean and neat, and had its plant 

or two upon the window-sill, or row of crockery upon the shelf, or 

small display of coloured prints upon the whitewashed wall, or, 

perhaps, its wooden clock behind the door.



The orphans and young children are in an adjoining building 

separate from this, but a part of the same Institution.  Some are 

such little creatures, that the stairs are of Lilliputian 

measurement, fitted to their tiny strides.  The same consideration 

for their years and weakness is expressed in their very seats, 

which are perfect curiosities, and look like articles of furniture 

for a pauper doll's-house.  I can imagine the glee of our Poor Law 

Commissioners at the notion of these seats having arms and backs; 

but small spines being of older date than their occupation of the 

Board-room at Somerset House, I thought even this provision very 

merciful and kind.



Here again, I was greatly pleased with the inscriptions on the 

wall, which were scraps of plain morality, easily remembered and 

understood:  such as 'Love one another' - 'God remembers the 

smallest creature in his creation:' and straightforward advice of 

that nature.  The books and tasks of these smallest of scholars, 

were adapted, in the same judicious manner, to their childish 

powers.  When we had examined these lessons, four morsels of girls 

(of whom one was blind) sang a little song, about the merry month 

of May, which I thought (being extremely dismal) would have suited 

an English November better.  That done, we went to see their 

sleeping-rooms on the floor above, in which the arrangements were 

no less excellent and gentle than those we had seen below.  And 

after observing that the teachers were of a class and character 

well suited to the spirit of the place, I took leave of the infants 

with a lighter heart than ever I have taken leave of pauper infants 

yet.



Connected with the House of Industry, there is also an Hospital, 

which was in the best order, and had, I am glad to say, many beds 

unoccupied.  It had one fault, however, which is common to all 

American interiors:  the presence of the eternal, accursed, 

suffocating, red-hot demon of a stove, whose breath would blight 

the purest air under Heaven.



There are two establishments for boys in this same neighbourhood.  

One is called the Boylston school, and is an asylum for neglected 

and indigent boys who have committed no crime, but who in the 

ordinary course of things would very soon be purged of that 

distinction if they were not taken from the hungry streets and sent 

here.  The other is a House of Reformation for Juvenile Offenders.  

They are both under the same roof, but the two classes of boys 

never come in contact.



The Boylston boys, as may be readily supposed, have very much the 

advantage of the others in point of personal appearance.  They were 

in their school-room when I came upon them, and answered correctly, 

without book, such questions as where was England; how far was it; 

what was its population; its capital city; its form of government; 

and so forth.  They sang a song too, about a farmer sowing his 

seed:  with corresponding action at such parts as ''tis thus he 

sows,' 'he turns him round,' 'he claps his hands;' which gave it 

greater interest for them, and accustomed them to act together, in 

an orderly manner.  They appeared exceedingly well-taught, and not 

better taught than fed; for a more chubby-looking full-waistcoated 

set of boys, I never saw.



The juvenile offenders had not such pleasant faces by a great deal, 

and in this establishment there were many boys of colour.  I saw 

them first at their work (basket-making, and the manufacture of 

palm-leaf hats), afterwards in their school, where they sang a 

chorus in praise of Liberty:  an odd, and, one would think, rather 

aggravating, theme for prisoners.  These boys are divided into four 

classes, each denoted by a numeral, worn on a badge upon the arm.  

On the arrival of a new-comer, he is put into the fourth or lowest 

class, and left, by good behaviour, to work his way up into the 

first.  The design and object of this Institution is to reclaim the 

youthful criminal by firm but kind and judicious treatment; to make 

his prison a place of purification and improvement, not of 

demoralisation and corruption; to impress upon him that there is 

but one path, and that one sober industry, which can ever lead him 

to happiness; to teach him how it may be trodden, if his footsteps 

have never yet been led that way; and to lure him back to it if 

they have strayed:  in a word, to snatch him from destruction, and 

restore him to society a penitent and useful member.  The 

importance of such an establishment, in every point of view, and 

with reference to every consideration of humanity and social 

policy, requires no comment.



One other establishment closes the catalogue.  It is the House of 

Correction for the State, in which silence is strictly maintained, 

but where the prisoners have the comfort and mental relief of 

seeing each other, and of working together.  This is the improved 

system of Prison Discipline which we have imported into England, 

and which has been in successful operation among us for some years 

past.



America, as a new and not over-populated country, has in all her 

prisons, the one great advantage, of being enabled to find useful 

and profitable work for the inmates; whereas, with us, the 

prejudice against prison labour is naturally very strong, and 

almost insurmountable, when honest men who have not offended 

against the laws are frequently doomed to seek employment in vain.  

Even in the United States, the principle of bringing convict labour 

and free labour into a competition which must obviously be to the 

disadvantage of the latter, has already found many opponents, whose 

number is not likely to diminish with access of years.



For this very reason though, our best prisons would seem at the 

first glance to be better conducted than those of America.  The 

treadmill is conducted with little or no noise; five hundred men 

may pick oakum in the same room, without a sound; and both kinds of 

labour admit of such keen and vigilant superintendence, as will 

render even a word of personal communication amongst the prisoners 

almost impossible.  On the other hand, the noise of the loom, the 

forge, the carpenter's hammer, or the stonemason's saw, greatly 

favour those opportunities of intercourse - hurried and brief no 

doubt, but opportunities still - which these several kinds of work, 

by rendering it necessary for men to be employed very near to each 

other, and often side by side, without any barrier or partition 

between them, in their very nature present.  A visitor, too, 

requires to reason and reflect a little, before the sight of a 

number of men engaged in ordinary labour, such as he is accustomed 

to out of doors, will impress him half as strongly as the 

contemplation of the same persons in the same place and garb would, 

if they were occupied in some task, marked and degraded everywhere 

as belonging only to felons in jails.  In an American state prison 

or house of correction, I found it difficult at first to persuade 

myself that I was really in a jail:  a place of ignominious 

punishment and endurance.  And to this hour I very much question 

whether the humane boast that it is not like one, has its root in 

the true wisdom or philosophy of the matter.



I hope I may not be misunderstood on this subject, for it is one in 

which I take a strong and deep interest.  I incline as little to 

the sickly feeling which makes every canting lie or maudlin speech 

of a notorious criminal a subject of newspaper report and general 

sympathy, as I do to those good old customs of the good old times 

which made England, even so recently as in the reign of the Third 

King George, in respect of her criminal code and her prison 

regulations, one of the most bloody-minded and barbarous countries 

on the earth.  If I thought it would do any good to the rising 

generation, I would cheerfully give my consent to the disinterment 

of the bones of any genteel highwayman (the more genteel, the more 

cheerfully), and to their exposure, piecemeal, on any sign-post, 

gate, or gibbet, that might be deemed a good elevation for the 

purpose.  My reason is as well convinced that these gentry were as 

utterly worthless and debauched villains, as it is that the laws 

and jails hardened them in their evil courses, or that their 

wonderful escapes were effected by the prison-turnkeys who, in 

those admirable days, had always been felons themselves, and were, 

to the last, their bosom-friends and pot-companions.  At the same 

time I know, as all men do or should, that the subject of Prison 

Discipline is one of the highest importance to any community; and 

that in her sweeping reform and bright example to other countries 

on this head, America has shown great wisdom, great benevolence, 

and exalted policy.  In contrasting her system with that which we 

have modelled upon it, I merely seek to show that with all its 

drawbacks, ours has some advantages of its own.



The House of Correction which has led to these remarks, is not 

walled, like other prisons, but is palisaded round about with tall 

rough stakes, something after the manner of an enclosure for 

keeping elephants in, as we see it represented in Eastern prints 

and pictures.  The prisoners wear a parti-coloured dress; and those 

who are sentenced to hard labour, work at nail-making, or stone-

cutting.  When I was there, the latter class of labourers were 

employed upon the stone for a new custom-house in course of 

erection at Boston.  They appeared to shape it skilfully and with 

expedition, though there were very few among them (if any) who had 

not acquired the art within the prison gates.



The women, all in one large room, were employed in making light 

clothing, for New Orleans and the Southern States.  They did their 

work in silence like the men; and like them were over-looked by the 

person contracting for their labour, or by some agent of his 

appointment.  In addition to this, they are every moment liable to 

be visited by the prison officers appointed for that purpose.



The arrangements for cooking, washing of clothes, and so forth, are 

much upon the plan of those I have seen at home.  Their mode of 

bestowing the prisoners at night (which is of general adoption) 

differs from ours, and is both simple and effective.  In the centre 

of a lofty area, lighted by windows in the four walls, are five 

tiers of cells, one above the other; each tier having before it a 

light iron gallery, attainable by stairs of the same construction 

and material:  excepting the lower one, which is on the ground.  

Behind these, back to back with them and facing the opposite wall, 

are five corresponding rows of cells, accessible by similar means:  

so that supposing the prisoners locked up in their cells, an 

officer stationed on the ground, with his back to the wall, has 

half their number under his eye at once; the remaining half being 

equally under the observation of another officer on the opposite 

side; and all in one great apartment.  Unless this watch be 

corrupted or sleeping on his post, it is impossible for a man to 

escape; for even in the event of his forcing the iron door of his 

cell without noise (which is exceedingly improbable), the moment he 

appears outside, and steps into that one of the five galleries on 

which it is situated, he must be plainly and fully visible to the 

officer below.  Each of these cells holds a small truckle bed, in 

which one prisoner sleeps; never more.  It is small, of course; and 

the door being not solid, but grated, and without blind or curtain, 

the prisoner within is at all times exposed to the observation and 

inspection of any guard who may pass along that tier at any hour or 

minute of the night.  Every day, the prisoners receive their 

dinner, singly, through a trap in the kitchen wall; and each man 

carries his to his sleeping cell to eat it, where he is locked up, 

alone, for that purpose, one hour.  The whole of this arrangement 

struck me as being admirable; and I hope that the next new prison 

we erect in England may be built on this plan.



I was given to understand that in this prison no swords or fire-

arms, or even cudgels, are kept; nor is it probable that, so long 

as its present excellent management continues, any weapon, 

offensive or defensive, will ever be required within its bounds.



Such are the Institutions at South Boston!  In all of them, the 

unfortunate or degenerate citizens of the State are carefully 

instructed in their duties both to God and man; are surrounded by 

all reasonable means of comfort and happiness that their condition 

will admit of; are appealed to, as members of the great human 

family, however afflicted, indigent, or fallen; are ruled by the 

strong Heart, and not by the strong (though immeasurably weaker) 

Hand.  I have described them at some length; firstly, because their 

worth demanded it; and secondly, because I mean to take them for a 

model, and to content myself with saying of others we may come to, 

whose design and purpose are the same, that in this or that respect 

they practically fail, or differ.



I wish by this account of them, imperfect in its execution, but in 

its just intention, honest, I could hope to convey to my readers 

one-hundredth part of the gratification, the sights I have 

described, afforded me.



* * * * * *



To an Englishman, accustomed to the paraphernalia of Westminster 

Hall, an American Court of Law is as odd a sight as, I suppose, an 

English Court of Law would be to an American.  Except in the 

Supreme Court at Washington (where the judges wear a plain black 

robe), there is no such thing as a wig or gown connected with the 

administration of justice.  The gentlemen of the bar being 

barristers and attorneys too (for there is no division of those 

functions as in England) are no more removed from their clients 

than attorneys in our Court for the Relief of Insolvent Debtors 

are, from theirs.  The jury are quite at home, and make themselves 

as comfortable as circumstances will permit.  The witness is so 

little elevated above, or put aloof from, the crowd in the court, 

that a stranger entering during a pause in the proceedings would 

find it difficult to pick him out from the rest.  And if it chanced 

to be a criminal trial, his eyes, in nine cases out of ten, would 

wander to the dock in search of the prisoner, in vain; for that 

gentleman would most likely be lounging among the most 

distinguished ornaments of the legal profession, whispering 

suggestions in his counsel's ear, or making a toothpick out of an 

old quill with his penknife.



I could not but notice these differences, when I visited the courts 

at Boston.  I was much surprised at first, too, to observe that the 

counsel who interrogated the witness under examination at the time, 

did so SITTING.  But seeing that he was also occupied in writing 

down the answers, and remembering that he was alone and had no 

'junior,' I quickly consoled myself with the reflection that law 

was not quite so expensive an article here, as at home; and that 

the absence of sundry formalities which we regard as indispensable, 

had doubtless a very favourable influence upon the bill of costs.



In every Court, ample and commodious provision is made for the 

accommodation of the citizens.  This is the case all through 

America.  In every Public Institution, the right of the people to 

attend, and to have an interest in the proceedings, is most fully 

and distinctly recognised.  There are no grim door-keepers to dole 

out their tardy civility by the sixpenny-worth; nor is there, I 

sincerely believe, any insolence of office of any kind.  Nothing 

national is exhibited for money; and no public officer is a 

showman.  We have begun of late years to imitate this good example.  

I hope we shall continue to do so; and that in the fulness of time, 

even deans and chapters may be converted.



In the civil court an action was trying, for damages sustained in 

some accident upon a railway.  The witnesses had been examined, and 

counsel was addressing the jury.  The learned gentleman (like a few 

of his English brethren) was desperately long-winded, and had a 

remarkable capacity of saying the same thing over and over again.  

His great theme was 'Warren the ENGINE driver,' whom he pressed 

into the service of every sentence he uttered.  I listened to him 

for about a quarter of an hour; and, coming out of court at the 

expiration of that time, without the faintest ray of enlightenment 

as to the merits of the case, felt as if I were at home again.



In the prisoner's cell, waiting to be examined by the magistrate on 

a charge of theft, was a boy.  This lad, instead of being committed 

to a common jail, would be sent to the asylum at South Boston, and 

there taught a trade; and in the course of time he would be bound 

apprentice to some respectable master.  Thus, his detection in this 

offence, instead of being the prelude to a life of infamy and a 

miserable death, would lead, there was a reasonable hope, to his 

being reclaimed from vice, and becoming a worthy member of society.



I am by no means a wholesale admirer of our legal solemnities, many 

of which impress me as being exceedingly ludicrous.  Strange as it 

may seem too, there is undoubtedly a degree of protection in the 

wig and gown - a dismissal of individual responsibility in dressing 

for the part - which encourages that insolent bearing and language, 

and that gross perversion of the office of a pleader for The Truth, 

so frequent in our courts of law.  Still, I cannot help doubting 

whether America, in her desire to shake off the absurdities and 

abuses of the old system, may not have gone too far into the 

opposite extreme; and whether it is not desirable, especially in 

the small community of a city like this, where each man knows the 

other, to surround the administration of justice with some 

artificial barriers against the 'Hail fellow, well met' deportment 

of everyday life.  All the aid it can have in the very high 

character and ability of the Bench, not only here but elsewhere, it 

has, and well deserves to have; but it may need something more:  

not to impress the thoughtful and the well-informed, but the 

ignorant and heedless; a class which includes some prisoners and 

many witnesses.  These institutions were established, no doubt, 

upon the principle that those who had so large a share in making 

the laws, would certainly respect them.  But experience has proved 

this hope to be fallacious; for no men know better than the judges 

of America, that on the occasion of any great popular excitement 

the law is powerless, and cannot, for the time, assert its own 

supremacy.



The tone of society in Boston is one of perfect politeness, 

courtesy, and good breeding.  The ladies are unquestionably very 

beautiful - in face:  but there I am compelled to stop.  Their 

education is much as with us; neither better nor worse.  I had 

heard some very marvellous stories in this respect; but not 

believing them, was not disappointed.  Blue ladies there are, in 

Boston; but like philosophers of that colour and sex in most other 

latitudes, they rather desire to be thought superior than to be so.  

Evangelical ladies there are, likewise, whose attachment to the 

forms of religion, and horror of theatrical entertainments, are 

most exemplary.  Ladies who have a passion for attending lectures 

are to be found among all classes and all conditions.  In the kind 

of provincial life which prevails in cities such as this, the 

Pulpit has great influence.  The peculiar province of the Pulpit in 

New England (always excepting the Unitarian Ministry) would appear 

to be the denouncement of all innocent and rational amusements.  

The church, the chapel, and the lecture-room, are the only means of 

excitement excepted; and to the church, the chapel, and the 

lecture-room, the ladies resort in crowds.



Wherever religion is resorted to, as a strong drink, and as an 

escape from the dull monotonous round of home, those of its 

ministers who pepper the highest will be the surest to please.  

They who strew the Eternal Path with the greatest amount of 

brimstone, and who most ruthlessly tread down the flowers and 

leaves that grow by the wayside, will be voted the most righteous; 

and they who enlarge with the greatest pertinacity on the 

difficulty of getting into heaven, will be considered by all true 

believers certain of going there:  though it would be hard to say 

by what process of reasoning this conclusion is arrived at.  It is 

so at home, and it is so abroad.  With regard to the other means of 

excitement, the Lecture, it has at least the merit of being always 

new.  One lecture treads so quickly on the heels of another, that 

none are remembered; and the course of this month may be safely 

repeated next, with its charm of novelty unbroken, and its interest 

unabated.



The fruits of the earth have their growth in corruption.  Out of 

the rottenness of these things, there has sprung up in Boston a 

sect of philosophers known as Transcendentalists.  On inquiring 

what this appellation might be supposed to signify, I was given to 

understand that whatever was unintelligible would be certainly 

transcendental.  Not deriving much comfort from this elucidation, I 

pursued the inquiry still further, and found that the 

Transcendentalists are followers of my friend Mr. Carlyle, or I 

should rather say, of a follower of his, Mr. Ralph Waldo Emerson.  

This gentleman has written a volume of Essays, in which, among much 

that is dreamy and fanciful (if he will pardon me for saying so), 

there is much more that is true and manly, honest and bold.  

Transcendentalism has its occasional vagaries (what school has 

not?), but it has good healthful qualities in spite of them; not 

least among the number a hearty disgust of Cant, and an aptitude to 

detect her in all the million varieties of her everlasting 

wardrobe.  And therefore if I were a Bostonian, I think I would be 

a Transcendentalist.



The only preacher I heard in Boston was Mr. Taylor, who addresses 

himself peculiarly to seamen, and who was once a mariner himself.  

I found his chapel down among the shipping, in one of the narrow, 

old, water-side streets, with a gay blue flag waving freely from 

its roof.  In the gallery opposite to the pulpit were a little 

choir of male and female singers, a violoncello, and a violin.  The 

preacher already sat in the pulpit, which was raised on pillars, 

and ornamented behind him with painted drapery of a lively and 

somewhat theatrical appearance.  He looked a weather-beaten hard-

featured man, of about six or eight and fifty; with deep lines 

graven as it were into his face, dark hair, and a stern, keen eye.  

Yet the general character of his countenance was pleasant and 

agreeable.  The service commenced with a hymn, to which succeeded 

an extemporary prayer.  It had the fault of frequent repetition, 

incidental to all such prayers; but it was plain and comprehensive 

in its doctrines, and breathed a tone of general sympathy and 

charity, which is not so commonly a characteristic of this form of 

address to the Deity as it might be.  That done he opened his 

discourse, taking for his text a passage from the Song of Solomon, 

laid upon the desk before the commencement of the service by some 

unknown member of the congregation:  'Who is this coming up from 

the wilderness, leaning on the arm of her beloved!'



He handled his text in all kinds of ways, and twisted it into all 

manner of shapes; but always ingeniously, and with a rude 

eloquence, well adapted to the comprehension of his hearers.  

Indeed if I be not mistaken, he studied their sympathies and 

understandings much more than the display of his own powers.  His 

imagery was all drawn from the sea, and from the incidents of a 

seaman's life; and was often remarkably good.  He spoke to them of 

'that glorious man, Lord Nelson,' and of Collingwood; and drew 

nothing in, as the saying is, by the head and shoulders, but 

brought it to bear upon his purpose, naturally, and with a sharp 

mind to its effect.  Sometimes, when much excited with his subject, 

he had an odd way - compounded of John Bunyan, and Balfour of 

Burley - of taking his great quarto Bible under his arm and pacing 

up and down the pulpit with it; looking steadily down, meantime, 

into the midst of the congregation.  Thus, when he applied his text 

to the first assemblage of his hearers, and pictured the wonder of 

the church at their presumption in forming a congregation among 

themselves, he stopped short with his Bible under his arm in the 

manner I have described, and pursued his discourse after this 

manner:



'Who are these - who are they - who are these fellows? where do 

they come from?  Where are they going to? - Come from!  What's the 

answer?' - leaning out of the pulpit, and pointing downward with 

his right hand:  'From below!' - starting back again, and looking 

at the sailors before him:  'From below, my brethren.  From under 

the hatches of sin, battened down above you by the evil one.  

That's where you came from!' - a walk up and down the pulpit:  'and 

where are you going' - stopping abruptly:  'where are you going?  

Aloft!' - very softly, and pointing upward:  'Aloft!' - louder:  

'aloft!' - louder still:  'That's where you are going - with a fair 

wind, - all taut and trim, steering direct for Heaven in its glory, 

where there are no storms or foul weather, and where the wicked 

cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest.' - Another walk:  

'That's where you're going to, my friends.  That's it.  That's the 

place.  That's the port.  That's the haven.  It's a blessed harbour 

- still water there, in all changes of the winds and tides; no 

driving ashore upon the rocks, or slipping your cables and running 

out to sea, there:  Peace - Peace - Peace - all peace!' - Another 

walk, and patting the Bible under his left arm:  'What!  These 

fellows are coming from the wilderness, are they?  Yes.  From the 

dreary, blighted wilderness of Iniquity, whose only crop is Death.  

But do they lean upon anything - do they lean upon nothing, these 

poor seamen?' - Three raps upon the Bible:  'Oh yes. - Yes. - They 

lean upon the arm of their Beloved' - three more raps:  'upon the 

arm of their Beloved' - three more, and a walk:  'Pilot, guiding-

star, and compass, all in one, to all hands - here it is' - three 

more:  'Here it is.  They can do their seaman's duty manfully, and 

be easy in their minds in the utmost peril and danger, with this' - 

two more:  'They can come, even these poor fellows can come, from 

the wilderness leaning on the arm of their Beloved, and go up - up 

- up!' - raising his hand higher, and higher, at every repetition 

of the word, so that he stood with it at last stretched above his 

head, regarding them in a strange, rapt manner, and pressing the 

book triumphantly to his breast, until he gradually subsided into 

some other portion of his discourse.



I have cited this, rather as an instance of the preacher's 

eccentricities than his merits, though taken in connection with his 

look and manner, and the character of his audience, even this was 

striking.  It is possible, however, that my favourable impression 

of him may have been greatly influenced and strengthened, firstly, 

by his impressing upon his hearers that the true observance of 

religion was not inconsistent with a cheerful deportment and an 

exact discharge of the duties of their station, which, indeed, it 

scrupulously required of them; and secondly, by his cautioning them 

not to set up any monopoly in Paradise and its mercies.  I never 

heard these two points so wisely touched (if indeed I have ever 

heard them touched at all), by any preacher of that kind before.



Having passed the time I spent in Boston, in making myself 

acquainted with these things, in settling the course I should take 

in my future travels, and in mixing constantly with its society, I 

am not aware that I have any occasion to prolong this chapter.  

Such of its social customs as I have not mentioned, however, may be 

told in a very few words.



The usual dinner-hour is two o'clock.  A dinner party takes place 

at five; and at an evening party, they seldom sup later than 

eleven; so that it goes hard but one gets home, even from a rout, 

by midnight.  I never could find out any difference between a party 

at Boston and a party in London, saving that at the former place 

all assemblies are held at more rational hours; that the 

conversation may possibly be a little louder and more cheerful; and 

a guest is usually expected to ascend to the very top of the house 

to take his cloak off; that he is certain to see, at every dinner, 

an unusual amount of poultry on the table; and at every supper, at 

least two mighty bowls of hot stewed oysters, in any one of which a 

half-grown Duke of Clarence might be smothered easily.



There are two theatres in Boston, of good size and construction, 

but sadly in want of patronage.  The few ladies who resort to them, 

sit, as of right, in the front rows of the boxes.



The bar is a large room with a stone floor, and there people stand 

and smoke, and lounge about, all the evening:  dropping in and out 

as the humour takes them.  There too the stranger is initiated into 

the mysteries of Gin-sling, Cock-tail, Sangaree, Mint Julep, 

Sherry-cobbler, Timber Doodle, and other rare drinks.  The house is 

full of boarders, both married and single, many of whom sleep upon 

the premises, and contract by the week for their board and lodging:  

the charge for which diminishes as they go nearer the sky to roost.  

A public table is laid in a very handsome hall for breakfast, and 

for dinner, and for supper.  The party sitting down together to 

these meals will vary in number from one to two hundred:  sometimes 

more.  The advent of each of these epochs in the day is proclaimed 

by an awful gong, which shakes the very window-frames as it 

reverberates through the house, and horribly disturbs nervous 

foreigners.  There is an ordinary for ladies, and an ordinary for 

gentlemen.



In our private room the cloth could not, for any earthly 

consideration, have been laid for dinner without a huge glass dish 

of cranberries in the middle of the table; and breakfast would have 

been no breakfast unless the principal dish were a deformed beef-

steak with a great flat bone in the centre, swimming in hot butter, 

and sprinkled with the very blackest of all possible pepper.  Our 

bedroom was spacious and airy, but (like every bedroom on this side 

of the Atlantic) very bare of furniture, having no curtains to the 

French bedstead or to the window.  It had one unusual luxury, 

however, in the shape of a wardrobe of painted wood, something 

smaller than an English watch-box; or if this comparison should be 

insufficient to convey a just idea of its dimensions, they may be 

estimated from the fact of my having lived for fourteen days and 

nights in the firm belief that it was a shower-bath.

