


CHAPTER XVI - THE PASSAGE HOME



I NEVER had so much interest before, and very likely I shall never 

have so much interest again, in the state of the wind, as on the 

long-looked-for morning of Tuesday the Seventh of June.  Some 

nautical authority had told me a day or two previous, 'anything 

with west in it, will do;' so when I darted out of bed at daylight, 

and throwing up the window, was saluted by a lively breeze from the 

north-west which had sprung up in the night, it came upon me so 

freshly, rustling with so many happy associations, that I conceived 

upon the spot a special regard for all airs blowing from that 

quarter of the compass, which I shall cherish, I dare say, until my 

own wind has breathed its last frail puff, and withdrawn itself for 

ever from the mortal calendar.



The pilot had not been slow to take advantage of this favourable 

weather, and the ship which yesterday had been in such a crowded 

dock that she might have retired from trade for good and all, for 

any chance she seemed to have of going to sea, was now full sixteen 

miles away.  A gallant sight she was, when we, fast gaining on her 

in a steamboat, saw her in the distance riding at anchor:  her tall 

masts pointing up in graceful lines against the sky, and every rope 

and spar expressed in delicate and thread-like outline:  gallant, 

too, when, we being all aboard, the anchor came up to the sturdy 

chorus 'Cheerily men, oh cheerily!' and she followed proudly in the 

towing steamboat's wake:  but bravest and most gallant of all, when 

the tow-rope being cast adrift, the canvas fluttered from her 

masts, and spreading her white wings she soared away upon her free 

and solitary course.



In the after cabin we were only fifteen passengers in all, and the 

greater part were from Canada, where some of us had known each 

other.  The night was rough and squally, so were the next two days, 

but they flew by quickly, and we were soon as cheerful and snug a 

party, with an honest, manly-hearted captain at our head, as ever 

came to the resolution of being mutually agreeable, on land or 

water.



We breakfasted at eight, lunched at twelve, dined at three, and 

took our tea at half-past seven.  We had abundance of amusements, 

and dinner was not the least among them:  firstly, for its own 

sake; secondly, because of its extraordinary length:  its duration, 

inclusive of all the long pauses between the courses, being seldom 

less than two hours and a half; which was a subject of never-

failing entertainment.  By way of beguiling the tediousness of 

these banquets, a select association was formed at the lower end of 

the table, below the mast, to whose distinguished president modesty 

forbids me to make any further allusion, which, being a very 

hilarious and jovial institution, was (prejudice apart) in high 

favour with the rest of the community, and particularly with a 

black steward, who lived for three weeks in a broad grin at the 

marvellous humour of these incorporated worthies.



Then, we had chess for those who played it, whist, cribbage, books, 

backgammon, and shovelboard.  In all weathers, fair or foul, calm 

or windy, we were every one on deck, walking up and down in pairs, 

lying in the boats, leaning over the side, or chatting in a lazy 

group together.  We had no lack of music, for one played the 

accordion, another the violin, and another (who usually began at 

six o'clock A.M.) the key-bugle:  the combined effect of which 

instruments, when they all played different tunes in differents 

parts of the ship, at the same time, and within hearing of each 

other, as they sometimes did (everybody being intensely satisfied 

with his own performance), was sublimely hideous.



When all these means of entertainment failed, a sail would heave in 

sight:  looming, perhaps, the very spirit of a ship, in the misty 

distance, or passing us so close that through our glasses we could 

see the people on her decks, and easily make out her name, and 

whither she was bound.  For hours together we could watch the 

dolphins and porpoises as they rolled and leaped and dived around 

the vessel; or those small creatures ever on the wing, the Mother 

Carey's chickens, which had borne us company from New York bay, and 

for a whole fortnight fluttered about the vessel's stern.  For some 

days we had a dead calm, or very light winds, during which the crew 

amused themselves with fishing, and hooked an unlucky dolphin, who 

expired, in all his rainbow colours, on the deck:  an event of such 

importance in our barren calendar, that afterwards we dated from 

the dolphin, and made the day on which he died, an era.



Besides all this, when we were five or six days out, there began to 

be much talk of icebergs, of which wandering islands an unusual 

number had been seen by the vessels that had come into New York a 

day or two before we left that port, and of whose dangerous 

neighbourhood we were warned by the sudden coldness of the weather, 

and the sinking of the mercury in the barometer.  While these 

tokens lasted, a double look-out was kept, and many dismal tales 

were whispered after dark, of ships that had struck upon the ice 

and gone down in the night; but the wind obliging us to hold a 

southward course, we saw none of them, and the weather soon grew 

bright and warm again.



The observation every day at noon, and the subsequent working of 

the vessel's course, was, as may be supposed, a feature in our 

lives of paramount importance; nor were there wanting (as there 

never are) sagacious doubters of the captain's calculations, who, 

so soon as his back was turned, would, in the absence of compasses, 

measure the chart with bits of string, and ends of pocket-

handkerchiefs, and points of snuffers, and clearly prove him to be 

wrong by an odd thousand miles or so.  It was very edifying to see 

these unbelievers shake their heads and frown, and hear them hold 

forth strongly upon navigation:  not that they knew anything about 

it, but that they always mistrusted the captain in calm weather, or 

when the wind was adverse.  Indeed, the mercury itself is not so 

variable as this class of passengers, whom you will see, when the 

ship is going nobly through the water, quite pale with admiration, 

swearing that the captain beats all captains ever known, and even 

hinting at subscriptions for a piece of plate; and who, next 

morning, when the breeze has lulled, and all the sails hang useless 

in the idle air, shake their despondent heads again, and say, with 

screwed-up lips, they hope that captain is a sailor - but they 

shrewdly doubt him.



It even became an occupation in the calm, to wonder when the wind 

WOULD spring up in the favourable quarter, where, it was clearly 

shown by all the rules and precedents, it ought to have sprung up 

long ago.  The first mate, who whistled for it zealously, was much 

respected for his perseverance, and was regarded even by the 

unbelievers as a first-rate sailor.  Many gloomy looks would be 

cast upward through the cabin skylights at the flapping sails while 

dinner was in progress; and some, growing bold in ruefulness, 

predicted that we should land about the middle of July.  There are 

always on board ship, a Sanguine One, and a Despondent One.  The 

latter character carried it hollow at this period of the voyage, 

and triumphed over the Sanguine One at every meal, by inquiring 

where he supposed the Great Western (which left New York a week 

after us) was NOW:  and where he supposed the 'Cunard' steam-packet 

was NOW:  and what he thought of sailing vessels, as compared with 

steamships NOW:  and so beset his life with pestilent attacks of 

that kind, that he too was obliged to affect despondency, for very 

peace and quietude.



These were additions to the list of entertaining incidents, but 

there was still another source of interest.  We carried in the 

steerage nearly a hundred passengers:  a little world of poverty:  

and as we came to know individuals among them by sight, from 

looking down upon the deck where they took the air in the daytime, 

and cooked their food, and very often ate it too, we became curious 

to know their histories, and with what expectations they had gone 

out to America, and on what errands they were going home, and what 

their circumstances were.  The information we got on these heads 

from the carpenter, who had charge of these people, was often of 

the strangest kind.  Some of them had been in America but three 

days, some but three months, and some had gone out in the last 

voyage of that very ship in which they were now returning home.  

Others had sold their clothes to raise the passage-money, and had 

hardly rags to cover them; others had no food, and lived upon the 

charity of the rest:  and one man, it was discovered nearly at the 

end of the voyage, not before - for he kept his secret close, and 

did not court compassion - had had no sustenance whatever but the 

bones and scraps of fat he took from the plates used in the after-

cabin dinner, when they were put out to be washed.



The whole system of shipping and conveying these unfortunate 

persons, is one that stands in need of thorough revision.  If any 

class deserve to be protected and assisted by the Government, it is 

that class who are banished from their native land in search of the 

bare means of subsistence.  All that could be done for these poor 

people by the great compassion and humanity of the captain and 

officers was done, but they require much more.  The law is bound, 

at least upon the English side, to see that too many of them are 

not put on board one ship:  and that their accommodations are 

decent:  not demoralising, and profligate.  It is bound, too, in 

common humanity, to declare that no man shall be taken on board 

without his stock of provisions being previously inspected by some 

proper officer, and pronounced moderately sufficient for his 

support upon the voyage.  It is bound to provide, or to require 

that there be provided, a medical attendant; whereas in these ships 

there are none, though sickness of adults, and deaths of children, 

on the passage, are matters of the very commonest occurrence.  

Above all it is the duty of any Government, be it monarchy or 

republic, to interpose and put an end to that system by which a 

firm of traders in emigrants purchase of the owners the whole 

'tween-decks of a ship, and send on board as many wretched people 

as they can lay hold of, on any terms they can get, without the 

smallest reference to the conveniences of the steerage, the number 

of berths, the slightest separation of the sexes, or anything but 

their own immediate profit.  Nor is even this the worst of the 

vicious system:  for, certain crimping agents of these houses, who 

have a percentage on all the passengers they inveigle, are 

constantly travelling about those districts where poverty and 

discontent are rife, and tempting the credulous into more misery, 

by holding out monstrous inducements to emigration which can never 

be realised.



The history of every family we had on board was pretty much the 

same.  After hoarding up, and borrowing, and begging, and selling 

everything to pay the passage, they had gone out to New York, 

expecting to find its streets paved with gold; and had found them 

paved with very hard and very real stones.  Enterprise was dull; 

labourers were not wanted; jobs of work were to be got, but the 

payment was not.  They were coming back, even poorer than they 

went.  One of them was carrying an open letter from a young English 

artisan, who had been in New York a fortnight, to a friend near 

Manchester, whom he strongly urged to follow him.  One of the 

officers brought it to me as a curiosity.  'This is the country, 

Jem,' said the writer.  'I like America.  There is no despotism 

here; that's the great thing.  Employment of all sorts is going a-

begging, and wages are capital.  You have only to choose a trade, 

Jem, and be it.  I haven't made choice of one yet, but I shall 

soon.  AT PRESENT I HAVEN'T QUITE MADE UP MY MIND WHETHER TO BE A 

CARPENTER - OR A TAILOR.'



There was yet another kind of passenger, and but one more, who, in 

the calm and the light winds, was a constant theme of conversation 

and observation among us.  This was an English sailor, a smart, 

thorough-built, English man-of-war's-man from his hat to his shoes, 

who was serving in the American navy, and having got leave of 

absence was on his way home to see his friends.  When he presented 

himself to take and pay for his passage, it had been suggested to 

him that being an able seaman he might as well work it and save the 

money, but this piece of advice he very indignantly rejected:  

saying, 'He'd be damned but for once he'd go aboard ship, as a 

gentleman.'  Accordingly, they took his money, but he no sooner 

came aboard, than he stowed his kit in the forecastle, arranged to 

mess with the crew, and the very first time the hands were turned 

up, went aloft like a cat, before anybody.  And all through the 

passage there he was, first at the braces, outermost on the yards, 

perpetually lending a hand everywhere, but always with a sober 

dignity in his manner, and a sober grin on his face, which plainly 

said, 'I do it as a gentleman.  For my own pleasure, mind you!'



At length and at last, the promised wind came up in right good 

earnest, and away we went before it, with every stitch of canvas 

set, slashing through the water nobly.  There was a grandeur in the 

motion of the splendid ship, as overshadowed by her mass of sails, 

she rode at a furious pace upon the waves, which filled one with an 

indescribable sense of pride and exultation.  As she plunged into a 

foaming valley, how I loved to see the green waves, bordered deep 

with white, come rushing on astern, to buoy her upward at their 

pleasure, and curl about her as she stooped again, but always own 

her for their haughty mistress still!  On, on we flew, with 

changing lights upon the water, being now in the blessed region of 

fleecy skies; a bright sun lighting us by day, and a bright moon by 

night; the vane pointing directly homeward, alike the truthful 

index to the favouring wind and to our cheerful hearts; until at 

sunrise, one fair Monday morning - the twenty-seventh of June, I 

shall not easily forget the day - there lay before us, old Cape 

Clear, God bless it, showing, in the mist of early morning, like a 

cloud:  the brightest and most welcome cloud, to us, that ever hid 

the face of Heaven's fallen sister - Home.



Dim speck as it was in the wide prospect, it made the sunrise a 

more cheerful sight, and gave to it that sort of human interest 

which it seems to want at sea.  There, as elsewhere, the return of 

day is inseparable from some sense of renewed hope and gladness; 

but the light shining on the dreary waste of water, and showing it 

in all its vast extent of loneliness, presents a solemn spectacle, 

which even night, veiling it in darkness and uncertainty, does not 

surpass.  The rising of the moon is more in keeping with the 

solitary ocean; and has an air of melancholy grandeur, which in its 

soft and gentle influence, seems to comfort while it saddens.  I 

recollect when I was a very young child having a fancy that the 

reflection of the moon in water was a path to Heaven, trodden by 

the spirits of good people on their way to God; and this old 

feeling often came over me again, when I watched it on a tranquil 

night at sea.



The wind was very light on this same Monday morning, but it was 

still in the right quarter, and so, by slow degrees, we left Cape 

Clear behind, and sailed along within sight of the coast of 

Ireland.  And how merry we all were, and how loyal to the George 

Washington, and how full of mutual congratulations, and how 

venturesome in predicting the exact hour at which we should arrive 

at Liverpool, may be easily imagined and readily understood.  Also, 

how heartily we drank the captain's health that day at dinner; and 

how restless we became about packing up:  and how two or three of 

the most sanguine spirits rejected the idea of going to bed at all 

that night as something it was not worth while to do, so near the 

shore, but went nevertheless, and slept soundly; and how to be so 

near our journey's end, was like a pleasant dream, from which one 

feared to wake.



The friendly breeze freshened again next day, and on we went once 

more before it gallantly:  descrying now and then an English ship 

going homeward under shortened sail, while we, with every inch of 

canvas crowded on, dashed gaily past, and left her far behind.  

Towards evening, the weather turned hazy, with a drizzling rain; 

and soon became so thick, that we sailed, as it were, in a cloud.  

Still we swept onward like a phantom ship, and many an eager eye 

glanced up to where the Look-out on the mast kept watch for 

Holyhead.



At length his long-expected cry was heard, and at the same moment 

there shone out from the haze and mist ahead, a gleaming light, 

which presently was gone, and soon returned, and soon was gone 

again.  Whenever it came back, the eyes of all on board, brightened 

and sparkled like itself:  and there we all stood, watching this 

revolving light upon the rock at Holyhead, and praising it for its 

brightness and its friendly warning, and lauding it, in short, 

above all other signal lights that ever were displayed, until it 

once more glimmered faintly in the distance, far behind us.



Then, it was time to fire a gun, for a pilot; and almost before its 

smoke had cleared away, a little boat with a light at her masthead 

came bearing down upon us, through the darkness, swiftly.  And 

presently, our sails being backed, she ran alongside; and the 

hoarse pilot, wrapped and muffled in pea-coats and shawls to the 

very bridge of his weather-ploughed-up nose, stood bodily among us 

on the deck.  And I think if that pilot had wanted to borrow fifty 

pounds for an indefinite period on no security, we should have 

engaged to lend it to him, among us, before his boat had dropped 

astern, or (which is the same thing) before every scrap of news in 

the paper he brought with him had become the common property of all 

on board.



We turned in pretty late that night, and turned out pretty early 

next morning.  By six o'clock we clustered on the deck, prepared to 

go ashore; and looked upon the spires, and roofs, and smoke, of 

Liverpool.  By eight we all sat down in one of its Hotels, to eat 

and drink together for the last time.  And by nine we had shaken 

hands all round, and broken up our social company for ever.



The country, by the railroad, seemed, as we rattled through it, 

like a luxuriant garden.  The beauty of the fields (so small they 

looked!), the hedge-rows, and the trees; the pretty cottages, the 

beds of flowers, the old churchyards, the antique houses, and every 

well-known object; the exquisite delights of that one journey, 

crowding in the short compass of a summer's day, the joy of many 

years, with the winding up with Home and all that makes it dear; no 

tongue can tell, or pen of mine describe.

