


CHAPTER VIII - WASHINGTON.  THE LEGISLATURE.  AND THE PRESIDENT'S 

HOUSE



WE left Philadelphia by steamboat, at six o'clock one very cold 

morning, and turned our faces towards Washington.



In the course of this day's journey, as on subsequent occasions, we 

encountered some Englishmen (small farmers, perhaps, or country 

publicans at home) who were settled in America, and were travelling 

on their own affairs.  Of all grades and kinds of men that jostle 

one in the public conveyances of the States, these are often the 

most intolerable and the most insufferable companions.  United to 

every disagreeable characteristic that the worst kind of American 

travellers possess, these countrymen of ours display an amount of 

insolent conceit and cool assumption of superiority, quite 

monstrous to behold.  In the coarse familiarity of their approach, 

and the effrontery of their inquisitiveness (which they are in 

great haste to assert, as if they panted to revenge themselves upon 

the decent old restraints of home), they surpass any native 

specimens that came within my range of observation:  and I often 

grew so patriotic when I saw and heard them, that I would 

cheerfully have submitted to a reasonable fine, if I could have 

given any other country in the whole world, the honour of claiming 

them for its children.



As Washington may be called the head-quarters of tobacco-tinctured 

saliva, the time is come when I must confess, without any disguise, 

that the prevalence of those two odious practices of chewing and 

expectorating began about this time to be anything but agreeable, 

and soon became most offensive and sickening.  In all the public 

places of America, this filthy custom is recognised.  In the courts 

of law, the judge has his spittoon, the crier his, the witness his, 

and the prisoner his; while the jurymen and spectators are provided 

for, as so many men who in the course of nature must desire to spit 

incessantly.  In the hospitals, the students of medicine are 

requested, by notices upon the wall, to eject their tobacco juice 

into the boxes provided for that purpose, and not to discolour the 

stairs.  In public buildings, visitors are implored, through the 

same agency, to squirt the essence of their quids, or 'plugs,' as I 

have heard them called by gentlemen learned in this kind of 

sweetmeat, into the national spittoons, and not about the bases of 

the marble columns.  But in some parts, this custom is inseparably 

mixed up with every meal and morning call, and with all the 

transactions of social life.  The stranger, who follows in the 

track I took myself, will find it in its full bloom and glory, 

luxuriant in all its alarming recklessness, at Washington.  And let 

him not persuade himself (as I once did, to my shame) that previous 

tourists have exaggerated its extent.  The thing itself is an 

exaggeration of nastiness, which cannot be outdone.



On board this steamboat, there were two young gentlemen, with 

shirt-collars reversed as usual, and armed with very big walking-

sticks; who planted two seats in the middle of the deck, at a 

distance of some four paces apart; took out their tobacco-boxes; 

and sat down opposite each other, to chew.  In less than a quarter 

of an hour's time, these hopeful youths had shed about them on the 

clean boards, a copious shower of yellow rain; clearing, by that 

means, a kind of magic circle, within whose limits no intruders 

dared to come, and which they never failed to refresh and re-

refresh before a spot was dry.  This being before breakfast, rather 

disposed me, I confess, to nausea; but looking attentively at one 

of the expectorators, I plainly saw that he was young in chewing, 

and felt inwardly uneasy, himself.  A glow of delight came over me 

at this discovery; and as I marked his face turn paler and paler, 

and saw the ball of tobacco in his left cheek, quiver with his 

suppressed agony, while yet he spat, and chewed, and spat again, in 

emulation of his older friend, I could have fallen on his neck and 

implored him to go on for hours.



We all sat down to a comfortable breakfast in the cabin below, 

where there was no more hurry or confusion than at such a meal in 

England, and where there was certainly greater politeness exhibited 

than at most of our stage-coach banquets.  At about nine o'clock we 

arrived at the railroad station, and went on by the cars.  At noon 

we turned out again, to cross a wide river in another steamboat; 

landed at a continuation of the railroad on the opposite shore; and 

went on by other cars; in which, in the course of the next hour or 

so, we crossed by wooden bridges, each a mile in length, two 

creeks, called respectively Great and Little Gunpowder.  The water 

in both was blackened with flights of canvas-backed ducks, which 

are most delicious eating, and abound hereabouts at that season of 

the year.



These bridges are of wood, have no parapet, and are only just wide 

enough for the passage of the trains; which, in the event of the 

smallest accident, wound inevitably be plunged into the river.  

They are startling contrivances, and are most agreeable when 

passed.



We stopped to dine at Baltimore, and being now in Maryland, were 

waited on, for the first time, by slaves.  The sensation of 

exacting any service from human creatures who are bought and sold, 

and being, for the time, a party as it were to their condition, is 

not an enviable one.  The institution exists, perhaps, in its least 

repulsive and most mitigated form in such a town as this; but it IS 

slavery; and though I was, with respect to it, an innocent man, its 

presence filled me with a sense of shame and self-reproach.



After dinner, we went down to the railroad again, and took our 

seats in the cars for Washington.  Being rather early, those men 

and boys who happened to have nothing particular to do, and were 

curious in foreigners, came (according to custom) round the 

carriage in which I sat; let down all the windows; thrust in their 

heads and shoulders; hooked themselves on conveniently, by their 

elbows; and fell to comparing notes on the subject of my personal 

appearance, with as much indifference as if I were a stuffed 

figure.  I never gained so much uncompromising information with 

reference to my own nose and eyes, and various impressions wrought 

by my mouth and chin on different minds, and how my head looks when 

it is viewed from behind, as on these occasions.  Some gentlemen 

were only satisfied by exercising their sense of touch; and the 

boys (who are surprisingly precocious in America) were seldom 

satisfied, even by that, but would return to the charge over and 

over again.  Many a budding president has walked into my room with 

his cap on his head and his hands in his pockets, and stared at me 

for two whole hours:  occasionally refreshing himself with a tweak 

of his nose, or a draught from the water-jug; or by walking to the 

windows and inviting other boys in the street below, to come up and 

do likewise:  crying, 'Here he is!'  'Come on!'  'Bring all your 

brothers!' with other hospitable entreaties of that nature.



We reached Washington at about half-past six that evening, and had 

upon the way a beautiful view of the Capitol, which is a fine 

building of the Corinthian order, placed upon a noble and 

commanding eminence.  Arrived at the hotel; I saw no more of the 

place that night; being very tired, and glad to get to bed.



Breakfast over next morning, I walk about the streets for an hour 

or two, and, coming home, throw up the window in the front and 

back, and look out.  Here is Washington, fresh in my mind and under 

my eye.



Take the worst parts of the City Road and Pentonville, or the 

straggling outskirts of Paris, where the houses are smallest, 

preserving all their oddities, but especially the small shops and 

dwellings, occupied in Pentonville (but not in Washington) by 

furniture-brokers, keepers of poor eating-houses, and fanciers of 

birds.  Burn the whole down; build it up again in wood and plaster; 

widen it a little; throw in part of St. John's Wood; put green 

blinds outside all the private houses, with a red curtain and a 

white one in every window; plough up all the roads; plant a great 

deal of coarse turf in every place where it ought NOT to be; erect 

three handsome buildings in stone and marble, anywhere, but the 

more entirely out of everybody's way the better; call one the Post 

Office; one the Patent Office, and one the Treasury; make it 

scorching hot in the morning, and freezing cold in the afternoon, 

with an occasional tornado of wind and dust; leave a brick-field 

without the bricks, in all central places where a street may 

naturally be expected:  and that's Washington.



The hotel in which we live, is a long row of small houses fronting 

on the street, and opening at the back upon a common yard, in which 

hangs a great triangle.  Whenever a servant is wanted, somebody 

beats on this triangle from one stroke up to seven, according to 

the number of the house in which his presence is required; and as 

all the servants are always being wanted, and none of them ever 

come, this enlivening engine is in full performance the whole day 

through.  Clothes are drying in the same yard; female slaves, with 

cotton handkerchiefs twisted round their heads are running to and 

fro on the hotel business; black waiters cross and recross with 

dishes in their hands; two great dogs are playing upon a mound of 

loose bricks in the centre of the little square; a pig is turning 

up his stomach to the sun, and grunting 'that's comfortable!'; and 

neither the men, nor the women, nor the dogs, nor the pig, nor any 

created creature, takes the smallest notice of the triangle, which 

is tingling madly all the time.



I walk to the front window, and look across the road upon a long, 

straggling row of houses, one story high, terminating, nearly 

opposite, but a little to the left, in a melancholy piece of waste 

ground with frowzy grass, which looks like a small piece of country 

that has taken to drinking, and has quite lost itself.  Standing 

anyhow and all wrong, upon this open space, like something meteoric 

that has fallen down from the moon, is an odd, lop-sided, one-eyed 

kind of wooden building, that looks like a church, with a flag-

staff as long as itself sticking out of a steeple something larger 

than a tea-chest.  Under the window is a small stand of coaches, 

whose slave-drivers are sunning themselves on the steps of our 

door, and talking idly together.  The three most obtrusive houses 

near at hand are the three meanest.  On one - a shop, which never 

has anything in the window, and never has the door open - is 

painted in large characters, 'THE CITY LUNCH.'  At another, which 

looks like a backway to somewhere else, but is an independent 

building in itself, oysters are procurable in every style.  At the 

third, which is a very, very little tailor's shop, pants are fixed 

to order; or in other words, pantaloons are made to measure.  And 

that is our street in Washington.



It is sometimes called the City of Magnificent Distances, but it 

might with greater propriety be termed the City of Magnificent 

Intentions; for it is only on taking a bird's-eye view of it from 

the top of the Capitol, that one can at all comprehend the vast 

designs of its projector, an aspiring Frenchman.  Spacious avenues, 

that begin in nothing, and lead nowhere; streets, mile-long, that 

only want houses, roads and inhabitants; public buildings that need 

but a public to be complete; and ornaments of great thoroughfares, 

which only lack great thoroughfares to ornament - are its leading 

features.  One might fancy the season over, and most of the houses 

gone out of town for ever with their masters.  To the admirers of 

cities it is a Barmecide Feast:  a pleasant field for the 

imagination to rove in; a monument raised to a deceased project, 

with not even a legible inscription to record its departed 

greatness.



Such as it is, it is likely to remain.  It was originally chosen 

for the seat of Government, as a means of averting the conflicting 

jealousies and interests of the different States; and very 

probably, too, as being remote from mobs:  a consideration not to 

be slighted, even in America.  It has no trade or commerce of its 

own:  having little or no population beyond the President and his 

establishment; the members of the legislature who reside there 

during the session; the Government clerks and officers employed in 

the various departments; the keepers of the hotels and boarding-

houses; and the tradesmen who supply their tables.  It is very 

unhealthy.  Few people would live in Washington, I take it, who 

were not obliged to reside there; and the tides of emigration and 

speculation, those rapid and regardless currents, are little likely 

to flow at any time towards such dull and sluggish water.



The principal features of the Capitol, are, of course, the two 

houses of Assembly.  But there is, besides, in the centre of the 

building, a fine rotunda, ninety-six feet in diameter, and ninety-

six high, whose circular wall is divided into compartments, 

ornamented by historical pictures.  Four of these have for their 

subjects prominent events in the revolutionary struggle.  They were 

painted by Colonel Trumbull, himself a member of Washington's staff 

at the time of their occurrence; from which circumstance they 

derive a peculiar interest of their own.  In this same hall Mr. 

Greenough's large statue of Washington has been lately placed.  It 

has great merits of course, but it struck me as being rather 

strained and violent for its subject.  I could wish, however, to 

have seen it in a better light than it can ever be viewed in, where 

it stands.



There is a very pleasant and commodious library in the Capitol; and 

from a balcony in front, the bird's-eye view, of which I have just 

spoken, may be had, together with a beautiful prospect of the 

adjacent country.  In one of the ornamented portions of the 

building, there is a figure of Justice; whereunto the Guide Book 

says, 'the artist at first contemplated giving more of nudity, but 

he was warned that the public sentiment in this country would not 

admit of it, and in his caution he has gone, perhaps, into the 

opposite extreme.'  Poor Justice! she has been made to wear much 

stranger garments in America than those she pines in, in the 

Capitol.  Let us hope that she has changed her dress-maker since 

they were fashioned, and that the public sentiment of the country 

did not cut out the clothes she hides her lovely figure in, just 

now.



The House of Representatives is a beautiful and spacious hall, of 

semicircular shape, supported by handsome pillars.  One part of the 

gallery is appropriated to the ladies, and there they sit in front 

rows, and come in, and go out, as at a play or concert.  The chair 

is canopied, and raised considerably above the floor of the House; 

and every member has an easy chair and a writing desk to himself:  

which is denounced by some people out of doors as a most 

unfortunate and injudicious arrangement, tending to long sittings 

and prosaic speeches.  It is an elegant chamber to look at, but a 

singularly bad one for all purposes of hearing.  The Senate, which 

is smaller, is free from this objection, and is exceedingly well 

adapted to the uses for which it is designed.  The sittings, I need 

hardly add, take place in the day; and the parliamentary forms are 

modelled on those of the old country.



I was sometimes asked, in my progress through other places, whether 

I had not been very much impressed by the HEADS of the lawmakers at 

Washington; meaning not their chiefs and leaders, but literally 

their individual and personal heads, whereon their hair grew, and 

whereby the phrenological character of each legislator was 

expressed:  and I almost as often struck my questioner dumb with 

indignant consternation by answering 'No, that I didn't remember 

being at all overcome.'  As I must, at whatever hazard, repeat the 

avowal here, I will follow it up by relating my impressions on this 

subject in as few words as possible.



In the first place - it may be from some imperfect development of 

my organ of veneration - I do not remember having ever fainted 

away, or having even been moved to tears of joyful pride, at sight 

of any legislative body.  I have borne the House of Commons like a 

man, and have yielded to no weakness, but slumber, in the House of 

Lords.  I have seen elections for borough and county, and have 

never been impelled (no matter which party won) to damage my hat by 

throwing it up into the air in triumph, or to crack my voice by 

shouting forth any reference to our Glorious Constitution, to the 

noble purity of our independent voters, or, the unimpeachable 

integrity of our independent members.  Having withstood such strong 

attacks upon my fortitude, it is possible that I may be of a cold 

and insensible temperament, amounting to iciness, in such matters; 

and therefore my impressions of the live pillars of the Capitol at 

Washington must be received with such grains of allowance as this 

free confession may seem to demand.



Did I see in this public body an assemblage of men, bound together 

in the sacred names of Liberty and Freedom, and so asserting the 

chaste dignity of those twin goddesses, in all their discussions, 

as to exalt at once the Eternal Principles to which their names are 

given, and their own character and the character of their 

countrymen, in the admiring eyes of the whole world?



It was but a week, since an aged, grey-haired man, a lasting honour 

to the land that gave him birth, who has done good service to his 

country, as his forefathers did, and who will be remembered scores 

upon scores of years after the worms bred in its corruption, are 

but so many grains of dust - it was but a week, since this old man 

had stood for days upon his trial before this very body, charged 

with having dared to assert the infamy of that traffic, which has 

for its accursed merchandise men and women, and their unborn 

children.  Yes.  And publicly exhibited in the same city all the 

while; gilded, framed and glazed hung up for general admiration; 

shown to strangers not with shame, but pride; its face not turned 

towards the wall, itself not taken down and burned; is the 

Unanimous Declaration of the Thirteen United States of America, 

which solemnly declares that All Men are created Equal; and are 

endowed by their Creator with the Inalienable Rights of Life, 

Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness!



It was not a month, since this same body had sat calmly by, and 

heard a man, one of themselves, with oaths which beggars in their 

drink reject, threaten to cut another's throat from ear to ear.  

There he sat, among them; not crushed by the general feeling of the 

assembly, but as good a man as any.



There was but a week to come, and another of that body, for doing 

his duty to those who sent him there; for claiming in a Republic 

the Liberty and Freedom of expressing their sentiments, and making 

known their prayer; would be tried, found guilty, and have strong 

censure passed upon him by the rest.  His was a grave offence 

indeed; for years before, he had risen up and said, 'A gang of male 

and female slaves for sale, warranted to breed like cattle, linked 

to each other by iron fetters, are passing now along the open 

street beneath the windows of your Temple of Equality!  Look!'  But 

there are many kinds of hunters engaged in the Pursuit of 

Happiness, and they go variously armed.  It is the Inalienable 

Right of some among them, to take the field after THEIR Happiness 

equipped with cat and cartwhip, stocks, and iron collar, and to 

shout their view halloa! (always in praise of Liberty) to the music 

of clanking chains and bloody stripes.



Where sat the many legislators of coarse threats; of words and 

blows such as coalheavers deal upon each other, when they forget 

their breeding?  On every side.  Every session had its anecdotes of 

that kind, and the actors were all there.



Did I recognise in this assembly, a body of men, who, applying 

themselves in a new world to correct some of the falsehoods and 

vices of the old, purified the avenues to Public Life, paved the 

dirty ways to Place and Power, debated and made laws for the Common 

Good, and had no party but their Country?



I saw in them, the wheels that move the meanest perversion of 

virtuous Political Machinery that the worst tools ever wrought.  

Despicable trickery at elections; under-handed tamperings with 

public officers; cowardly attacks upon opponents, with scurrilous 

newspapers for shields, and hired pens for daggers; shameful 

trucklings to mercenary knaves, whose claim to be considered, is, 

that every day and week they sow new crops of ruin with their venal 

types, which are the dragon's teeth of yore, in everything but 

sharpness; aidings and abettings of every bad inclination in the 

popular mind, and artful suppressions of all its good influences:  

such things as these, and in a word, Dishonest Faction in its most 

depraved and most unblushing form, stared out from every corner of 

the crowded hall.



Did I see among them, the intelligence and refinement:  the true, 

honest, patriotic heart of America?  Here and there, were drops of 

its blood and life, but they scarcely coloured the stream of 

desperate adventurers which sets that way for profit and for pay.  

It is the game of these men, and of their profligate organs, to 

make the strife of politics so fierce and brutal, and so 

destructive of all self-respect in worthy men, that sensitive and 

delicate-minded persons shall be kept aloof, and they, and such as 

they, be left to battle out their selfish views unchecked.  And 

thus this lowest of all scrambling fights goes on, and they who in 

other countries would, from their intelligence and station, most 

aspire to make the laws, do here recoil the farthest from that 

degradation.



That there are, among the representatives of the people in both 

Houses, and among all parties, some men of high character and great 

abilities, I need not say.  The foremost among those politicians 

who are known in Europe, have been already described, and I see no 

reason to depart from the rule I have laid down for my guidance, of 

abstaining from all mention of individuals.  It will be sufficient 

to add, that to the most favourable accounts that have been written 

of them, I more than fully and most heartily subscribe; and that 

personal intercourse and free communication have bred within me, 

not the result predicted in the very doubtful proverb, but 

increased admiration and respect.  They are striking men to look 

at, hard to deceive, prompt to act, lions in energy, Crichtons in 

varied accomplishments, Indians in fire of eye and gesture, 

Americans in strong and generous impulse; and they as well 

represent the honour and wisdom of their country at home, as the 

distinguished gentleman who is now its Minister at the British 

Court sustains its highest character abroad.



I visited both houses nearly every day, during my stay in 

Washington.  On my initiatory visit to the House of 

Representatives, they divided against a decision of the chair; but 

the chair won.  The second time I went, the member who was 

speaking, being interrupted by a laugh, mimicked it, as one child 

would in quarrelling with another, and added, 'that he would make 

honourable gentlemen opposite, sing out a little more on the other 

side of their mouths presently.'  But interruptions are rare; the 

speaker being usually heard in silence.  There are more quarrels 

than with us, and more threatenings than gentlemen are accustomed 

to exchange in any civilised society of which we have record:  but 

farm-yard imitations have not as yet been imported from the 

Parliament of the United Kingdom.  The feature in oratory which 

appears to be the most practised, and most relished, is the 

constant repetition of the same idea or shadow of an idea in fresh 

words; and the inquiry out of doors is not, 'What did he say?' but, 

'How long did he speak?'  These, however, are but enlargements of a 

principle which prevails elsewhere.



The Senate is a dignified and decorous body, and its proceedings 

are conducted with much gravity and order.  Both houses are 

handsomely carpeted; but the state to which these carpets are 

reduced by the universal disregard of the spittoon with which every 

honourable member is accommodated, and the extraordinary 

improvements on the pattern which are squirted and dabbled upon it 

in every direction, do not admit of being described.  I will merely 

observe, that I strongly recommend all strangers not to look at the 

floor; and if they happen to drop anything, though it be their 

purse, not to pick it up with an ungloved hand on any account.



It is somewhat remarkable too, at first, to say the least, to see 

so many honourable members with swelled faces; and it is scarcely 

less remarkable to discover that this appearance is caused by the 

quantity of tobacco they contrive to stow within the hollow of the 

cheek.  It is strange enough too, to see an honourable gentleman 

leaning back in his tilted chair with his legs on the desk before 

him, shaping a convenient 'plug' with his penknife, and when it is 

quite ready for use, shooting the old one from his mouth, as from a 

pop-gun, and clapping the new one in its place.



I was surprised to observe that even steady old chewers of great 

experience, are not always good marksmen, which has rather inclined 

me to doubt that general proficiency with the rifle, of which we 

have heard so much in England.  Several gentlemen called upon me 

who, in the course of conversation, frequently missed the spittoon 

at five paces; and one (but he was certainly short-sighted) mistook 

the closed sash for the open window, at three.  On another 

occasion, when I dined out, and was sitting with two ladies and 

some gentlemen round a fire before dinner, one of the company fell 

short of the fireplace, six distinct times.  I am disposed to 

think, however, that this was occasioned by his not aiming at that 

object; as there was a white marble hearth before the fender, which 

was more convenient, and may have suited his purpose better.



The Patent Office at Washington, furnishes an extraordinary example 

of American enterprise and ingenuity; for the immense number of 

models it contains are the accumulated inventions of only five 

years; the whole of the previous collection having been destroyed 

by fire.  The elegant structure in which they are arranged is one 

of design rather than execution, for there is but one side erected 

out of four, though the works are stopped.  The Post Office is a 

very compact and very beautiful building.  In one of the 

departments, among a collection of rare and curious articles, are 

deposited the presents which have been made from time to time to 

the American ambassadors at foreign courts by the various 

potentates to whom they were the accredited agents of the Republic; 

gifts which by the law they are not permitted to retain.  I confess 

that I looked upon this as a very painful exhibition, and one by no 

means flattering to the national standard of honesty and honour.  

That can scarcely be a high state of moral feeling which imagines a 

gentleman of repute and station, likely to be corrupted, in the 

discharge of his duty, by the present of a snuff-box, or a richly-

mounted sword, or an Eastern shawl; and surely the Nation who 

reposes confidence in her appointed servants, is likely to be 

better served, than she who makes them the subject of such very 

mean and paltry suspicions.



At George Town, in the suburbs, there is a Jesuit College; 

delightfully situated, and, so far as I had an opportunity of 

seeing, well managed.  Many persons who are not members of the 

Romish Church, avail themselves, I believe, of these institutions, 

and of the advantageous opportunities they afford for the education 

of their children.  The heights of this neighbourhood, above the 

Potomac River, are very picturesque:  and are free, I should 

conceive, from some of the insalubrities of Washington.  The air, 

at that elevation, was quite cool and refreshing, when in the city 

it was burning hot.



The President's mansion is more like an English club-house, both 

within and without, than any other kind of establishment with which 

I can compare it.  The ornamental ground about it has been laid out 

in garden walks; they are pretty, and agreeable to the eye; though 

they have that uncomfortable air of having been made yesterday, 

which is far from favourable to the display of such beauties.



My first visit to this house was on the morning after my arrival, 

when I was carried thither by an official gentleman, who was so 

kind as to charge himself with my presentation to the President.



We entered a large hall, and having twice or thrice rung a bell 

which nobody answered, walked without further ceremony through the 

rooms on the ground floor, as divers other gentlemen (mostly with 

their hats on, and their hands in their pockets) were doing very 

leisurely.  Some of these had ladies with them, to whom they were 

showing the premises; others were lounging on the chairs and sofas; 

others, in a perfect state of exhaustion from listlessness, were 

yawning drearily.  The greater portion of this assemblage were 

rather asserting their supremacy than doing anything else, as they 

had no particular business there, that anybody knew of.  A few were 

closely eyeing the movables, as if to make quite sure that the 

President (who was far from popular) had not made away with any of 

the furniture, or sold the fixtures for his private benefit.



After glancing at these loungers; who were scattered over a pretty 

drawing-room, opening upon a terrace which commanded a beautiful 

prospect of the river and the adjacent country; and who were 

sauntering, too, about a larger state-room called the Eastern 

Drawing-room; we went up-stairs into another chamber, where were 

certain visitors, waiting for audiences.  At sight of my conductor, 

a black in plain clothes and yellow slippers who was gliding 

noiselessly about, and whispering messages in the ears of the more 

impatient, made a sign of recognition, and glided off to announce 

him.



We had previously looked into another chamber fitted all round with 

a great, bare, wooden desk or counter, whereon lay files of 

newspapers, to which sundry gentlemen were referring.  But there 

were no such means of beguiling the time in this apartment, which 

was as unpromising and tiresome as any waiting-room in one of our 

public establishments, or any physician's dining-room during his 

hours of consultation at home.



There were some fifteen or twenty persons in the room.  One, a 

tall, wiry, muscular old man, from the west; sunburnt and swarthy; 

with a brown white hat on his knees, and a giant umbrella resting 

between his legs; who sat bolt upright in his chair, frowning 

steadily at the carpet, and twitching the hard lines about his 

mouth, as if he had made up his mind 'to fix' the President on what 

he had to say, and wouldn't bate him a grain.  Another, a Kentucky 

farmer, six-feet-six in height, with his hat on, and his hands 

under his coat-tails, who leaned against the wall and kicked the 

floor with his heel, as though he had Time's head under his shoe, 

and were literally 'killing' him.  A third, an oval-faced, bilious-

looking man, with sleek black hair cropped close, and whiskers and 

beard shaved down to blue dots, who sucked the head of a thick 

stick, and from time to time took it out of his mouth, to see how 

it was getting on.  A fourth did nothing but whistle.  A fifth did 

nothing but spit.  And indeed all these gentlemen were so very 

persevering and energetic in this latter particular, and bestowed 

their favours so abundantly upon the carpet, that I take it for 

granted the Presidential housemaids have high wages, or, to speak 

more genteelly, an ample amount of 'compensation:' which is the 

American word for salary, in the case of all public servants.



We had not waited in this room many minutes, before the black 

messenger returned, and conducted us into another of smaller 

dimensions, where, at a business-like table covered with papers, 

sat the President himself.  He looked somewhat worn and anxious, 

and well he might; being at war with everybody - but the expression 

of his face was mild and pleasant, and his manner was remarkably 

unaffected, gentlemanly, and agreeable.  I thought that in his 

whole carriage and demeanour, he became his station singularly 

well.



Being advised that the sensible etiquette of the republican court 

admitted of a traveller, like myself, declining, without any 

impropriety, an invitation to dinner, which did not reach me until 

I had concluded my arrangements for leaving Washington some days 

before that to which it referred, I only returned to this house 

once.  It was on the occasion of one of those general assemblies 

which are held on certain nights, between the hours of nine and 

twelve o'clock, and are called, rather oddly, Levees.



I went, with my wife, at about ten.  There was a pretty dense crowd 

of carriages and people in the court-yard, and so far as I could 

make out, there were no very clear regulations for the taking up or 

setting down of company.  There were certainly no policemen to 

soothe startled horses, either by sawing at their bridles or 

flourishing truncheons in their eyes; and I am ready to make oath 

that no inoffensive persons were knocked violently on the head, or 

poked acutely in their backs or stomachs; or brought to a 

standstill by any such gentle means, and then taken into custody 

for not moving on.  But there was no confusion or disorder.  Our 

carriage reached the porch in its turn, without any blustering, 

swearing, shouting, backing, or other disturbance:  and we 

dismounted with as much ease and comfort as though we had been 

escorted by the whole Metropolitan Force from A to Z inclusive.



The suite of rooms on the ground-floor were lighted up, and a 

military band was playing in the hall.  In the smaller drawing-

room, the centre of a circle of company, were the President and his 

daughter-in-law, who acted as the lady of the mansion; and a very 

interesting, graceful, and accomplished lady too.  One gentleman 

who stood among this group, appeared to take upon himself the 

functions of a master of the ceremonies.  I saw no other officers 

or attendants, and none were needed.



The great drawing-room, which I have already mentioned, and the 

other chambers on the ground-floor, were crowded to excess.  The 

company was not, in our sense of the term, select, for it 

comprehended persons of very many grades and classes; nor was there 

any great display of costly attire:  indeed, some of the costumes 

may have been, for aught I know, grotesque enough.  But the decorum 

and propriety of behaviour which prevailed, were unbroken by any 

rude or disagreeable incident; and every man, even among the 

miscellaneous crowd in the hall who were admitted without any 

orders or tickets to look on, appeared to feel that he was a part 

of the Institution, and was responsible for its preserving a 

becoming character, and appearing to the best advantage.



That these visitors, too, whatever their station, were not without 

some refinement of taste and appreciation of intellectual gifts, 

and gratitude to those men who, by the peaceful exercise of great 

abilities, shed new charms and associations upon the homes of their 

countrymen, and elevate their character in other lands, was most 

earnestly testified by their reception of Washington Irving, my 

dear friend, who had recently been appointed Minister at the court 

of Spain, and who was among them that night, in his new character, 

for the first and last time before going abroad.  I sincerely 

believe that in all the madness of American politics, few public 

men would have been so earnestly, devotedly, and affectionately 

caressed, as this most charming writer:  and I have seldom 

respected a public assembly more, than I did this eager throng, 

when I saw them turning with one mind from noisy orators and 

officers of state, and flocking with a generous and honest impulse 

round the man of quiet pursuits:  proud in his promotion as 

reflecting back upon their country:  and grateful to him with their 

whole hearts for the store of graceful fancies he had poured out 

among them.  Long may he dispense such treasures with unsparing 

hand; and long may they remember him as worthily!



* * * * * *



The term we had assigned for the duration of our stay in Washington 

was now at an end, and we were to begin to travel; for the railroad 

distances we had traversed yet, in journeying among these older 

towns, are on that great continent looked upon as nothing.



I had at first intended going South - to Charleston.  But when I 

came to consider the length of time which this journey would 

occupy, and the premature heat of the season, which even at 

Washington had been often very trying; and weighed moreover, in my 

own mind, the pain of living in the constant contemplation of 

slavery, against the more than doubtful chances of my ever seeing 

it, in the time I had to spare, stripped of the disguises in which 

it would certainly be dressed, and so adding any item to the host 

of facts already heaped together on the subject; I began to listen 

to old whisperings which had often been present to me at home in 

England, when I little thought of ever being here; and to dream 

again of cities growing up, like palaces in fairy tales, among the 

wilds and forests of the west.



The advice I received in most quarters when I began to yield to my 

desire of travelling towards that point of the compass was, 

according to custom, sufficiently cheerless:  my companion being 

threatened with more perils, dangers, and discomforts, than I can 

remember or would catalogue if I could; but of which it will be 

sufficient to remark that blowings-up in steamboats and breakings-

down in coaches were among the least.  But, having a western route 

sketched out for me by the best and kindest authority to which I 

could have resorted, and putting no great faith in these 

discouragements, I soon determined on my plan of action.



This was to travel south, only to Richmond in Virginia; and then to 

turn, and shape our course for the Far West; whither I beseech the 

reader's company, in a new chapter.
