



CHAPTER I - GOING AWAY



I SHALL never forget the one-fourth serious and three-fourths 

comical astonishment, with which, on the morning of the third of 

January eighteen-hundred-and-forty-two, I opened the door of, and 

put my head into, a 'state-room' on board the Britannia steam-

packet, twelve hundred tons burthen per register, bound for Halifax 

and Boston, and carrying Her Majesty's mails.



That this state-room had been specially engaged for 'Charles 

Dickens, Esquire, and Lady,' was rendered sufficiently clear even 

to my scared intellect by a very small manuscript, announcing the 

fact, which was pinned on a very flat quilt, covering a very thin 

mattress, spread like a surgical plaster on a most inaccessible 

shelf.  But that this was the state-room concerning which Charles 

Dickens, Esquire, and Lady, had held daily and nightly conferences 

for at least four months preceding:  that this could by any 

possibility be that small snug chamber of the imagination, which 

Charles Dickens, Esquire, with the spirit of prophecy strong upon 

him, had always foretold would contain at least one little sofa, 

and which his lady, with a modest yet most magnificent sense of its 

limited dimensions, had from the first opined would not hold more 

than two enormous portmanteaus in some odd corner out of sight 

(portmanteaus which could now no more be got in at the door, not to 

say stowed away, than a giraffe could be persuaded or forced into a 

flower-pot):  that this utterly impracticable, thoroughly hopeless, 

and profoundly preposterous box, had the remotest reference to, or 

connection with, those chaste and pretty, not to say gorgeous 

little bowers, sketched by a masterly hand, in the highly varnished 

lithographic plan hanging up in the agent's counting-house in the 

city of London:  that this room of state, in short, could be 

anything but a pleasant fiction and cheerful jest of the captain's, 

invented and put in practice for the better relish and enjoyment of 

the real state-room presently to be disclosed:- these were truths 

which I really could not, for the moment, bring my mind at all to 

bear upon or comprehend.  And I sat down upon a kind of horsehair 

slab, or perch, of which there were two within; and looked, without 

any expression of countenance whatever, at some friends who had 

come on board with us, and who were crushing their faces into all 

manner of shapes by endeavouring to squeeze them through the small 

doorway.



We had experienced a pretty smart shock before coming below, which, 

but that we were the most sanguine people living, might have 

prepared us for the worst.  The imaginative artist to whom I have 

already made allusion, has depicted in the same great work, a 

chamber of almost interminable perspective, furnished, as Mr. 

Robins would say, in a style of more than Eastern splendour, and 

filled (but not inconveniently so) with groups of ladies and 

gentlemen, in the very highest state of enjoyment and vivacity.  

Before descending into the bowels of the ship, we had passed from 

the deck into a long narrow apartment, not unlike a gigantic hearse 

with windows in the sides; having at the upper end a melancholy 

stove, at which three or four chilly stewards were warming their 

hands; while on either side, extending down its whole dreary 

length, was a long, long table, over each of which a rack, fixed to 

the low roof, and stuck full of drinking-glasses and cruet-stands, 

hinted dismally at rolling seas and heavy weather.  I had not at 

that time seen the ideal presentment of this chamber which has 

since gratified me so much, but I observed that one of our friends 

who had made the arrangements for our voyage, turned pale on 

entering, retreated on the friend behind him., smote his forehead 

involuntarily, and said below his breath, 'Impossible! it cannot 

be!' or words to that effect.  He recovered himself however by a 

great effort, and after a preparatory cough or two, cried, with a 

ghastly smile which is still before me, looking at the same time 

round the walls, 'Ha! the breakfast-room, steward - eh?'  We all 

foresaw what the answer must be:  we knew the agony he suffered.  

He had often spoken of THE SALOON; had taken in and lived upon the 

pictorial idea; had usually given us to understand, at home, that 

to form a just conception of it, it would be necessary to multiply 

the size and furniture of an ordinary drawing-room by seven, and 

then fall short of the reality.  When the man in reply avowed the 

truth; the blunt, remorseless, naked truth; 'This is the saloon, 

sir' - he actually reeled beneath the blow.



In persons who were so soon to part, and interpose between their 

else daily communication the formidable barrier of many thousand 

miles of stormy space, and who were for that reason anxious to cast 

no other cloud, not even the passing shadow of a moment's 

disappointment or discomfiture, upon the short interval of happy 

companionship that yet remained to them - in persons so situated, 

the natural transition from these first surprises was obviously 

into peals of hearty laughter, and I can report that I, for one, 

being still seated upon the slab or perch before mentioned, roared 

outright until the vessel rang again.  Thus, in less than two 

minutes after coming upon it for the first time, we all by common 

consent agreed that this state-room was the pleasantest and most 

facetious and capital contrivance possible; and that to have had it 

one inch larger, would have been quite a disagreeable and 

deplorable state of things.  And with this; and with showing how, - 

by very nearly closing the door, and twining in and out like 

serpents, and by counting the little washing slab as standing-room, 

- we could manage to insinuate four people into it, all at one 

time; and entreating each other to observe how very airy it was (in 

dock), and how there was a beautiful port-hole which could be kept 

open all day (weather permitting), and how there was quite a large 

bull's-eye just over the looking-glass which would render shaving a 

perfectly easy and delightful process (when the ship didn't roll 

too much); we arrived, at last, at the unanimous conclusion that it 

was rather spacious than otherwise:  though I do verily believe 

that, deducting the two berths, one above the other, than which 

nothing smaller for sleeping in was ever made except coffins, it 

was no bigger than one of those hackney cabriolets which have the 

door behind, and shoot their fares out, like sacks of coals, upon 

the pavement.



Having settled this point to the perfect satisfaction of all 

parties, concerned and unconcerned, we sat down round the fire in 

the ladies' cabin - just to try the effect.  It was rather dark, 

certainly; but somebody said, 'of course it would be light, at 

sea,' a proposition to which we all assented; echoing 'of course, 

of course;' though it would be exceedingly difficult to say why we 

thought so.  I remember, too, when we had discovered and exhausted 

another topic of consolation in the circumstance of this ladies' 

cabin adjoining our state-room, and the consequently immense 

feasibility of sitting there at all times and seasons, and had 

fallen into a momentary silence, leaning our faces on our hands and 

looking at the fire, one of our party said, with the solemn air of 

a man who had made a discovery, 'What a relish mulled claret will 

have down here!' which appeared to strike us all most forcibly; as 

though there were something spicy and high-flavoured in cabins, 

which essentially improved that composition, and rendered it quite 

incapable of perfection anywhere else.



There was a stewardess, too, actively engaged in producing clean 

sheets and table-cloths from the very entrails of the sofas, and 

from unexpected lockers, of such artful mechanism, that it made 

one's head ache to see them opened one after another, and rendered 

it quite a distracting circumstance to follow her proceedings, and 

to find that every nook and corner and individual piece of 

furniture was something else besides what it pretended to be, and 

was a mere trap and deception and place of secret stowage, whose 

ostensible purpose was its least useful one.



God bless that stewardess for her piously fraudulent account of 

January voyages!  God bless her for her clear recollection of the 

companion passage of last year, when nobody was ill, and everybody 

dancing from morning to night, and it was 'a run' of twelve days, 

and a piece of the purest frolic, and delight, and jollity!  All 

happiness be with her for her bright face and her pleasant Scotch 

tongue, which had sounds of old Home in it for my fellow-traveller; 

and for her predictions of fair winds and fine weather (all wrong, 

or I shouldn't be half so fond of her); and for the ten thousand 

small fragments of genuine womanly tact, by which, without piecing 

them elaborately together, and patching them up into shape and form 

and case and pointed application, she nevertheless did plainly show 

that all young mothers on one side of the Atlantic were near and 

close at hand to their little children left upon the other; and 

that what seemed to the uninitiated a serious journey, was, to 

those who were in the secret, a mere frolic, to be sung about and 

whistled at!  Light be her heart, and gay her merry eyes, for 

years!



The state-room had grown pretty fast; but by this time it had 

expanded into something quite bulky, and almost boasted a bay-

window to view the sea from.  So we went upon deck again in high 

spirits; and there, everything was in such a state of bustle and 

active preparation, that the blood quickened its pace, and whirled 

through one's veins on that clear frosty morning with involuntary 

mirthfulness.  For every gallant ship was riding slowly up and 

down, and every little boat was splashing noisily in the water; and 

knots of people stood upon the wharf, gazing with a kind of 'dread 

delight' on the far-famed fast American steamer; and one party of 

men were 'taking in the milk,' or, in other words, getting the cow 

on board; and another were filling the icehouses to the very throat 

with fresh provisions; with butchers'-meat and garden-stuff, pale 

sucking-pigs, calves' heads in scores, beef, veal, and pork, and 

poultry out of all proportion; and others were coiling ropes and 

busy with oakum yarns; and others were lowering heavy packages into 

the hold; and the purser's head was barely visible as it loomed in 

a state, of exquisite perplexity from the midst of a vast pile of 

passengers' luggage; and there seemed to be nothing going on 

anywhere, or uppermost in the mind of anybody, but preparations for 

this mighty voyage.  This, with the bright cold sun, the bracing 

air, the crisply-curling water, the thin white crust of morning ice 

upon the decks which crackled with a sharp and cheerful sound 

beneath the lightest tread, was irresistible.  And when, again upon 

the shore, we turned and saw from the vessel's mast her name 

signalled in flags of joyous colours, and fluttering by their side 

the beautiful American banner with its stars and stripes, - the 

long three thousand miles and more, and, longer still, the six 

whole months of absence, so dwindled and faded, that the ship had 

gone out and come home again, and it was broad spring already in 

the Coburg Dock at Liverpool.



I have not inquired among my medical acquaintance, whether Turtle, 

and cold Punch, with Hock, Champagne, and Claret, and all the 

slight et cetera usually included in an unlimited order for a good 

dinner - especially when it is left to the liberal construction of 

my faultless friend, Mr. Radley, of the Adelphi Hotel - are 

peculiarly calculated to suffer a sea-change; or whether a plain 

mutton-chop, and a glass or two of sherry, would be less likely of 

conversion into foreign and disconcerting material.  My own opinion 

is, that whether one is discreet or indiscreet in these 

particulars, on the eve of a sea-voyage, is a matter of little 

consequence; and that, to use a common phrase, 'it comes to very 

much the same thing in the end.'  Be this as it may, I know that 

the dinner of that day was undeniably perfect; that it comprehended 

all these items, and a great many more; and that we all did ample 

justice to it.  And I know too, that, bating a certain tacit 

avoidance of any allusion to to-morrow; such as may be supposed to 

prevail between delicate-minded turnkeys, and a sensitive prisoner 

who is to be hanged next morning; we got on very well, and, all 

things considered, were merry enough.



When the morning - THE morning - came, and we met at breakfast, it 

was curious to see how eager we all were to prevent a moment's 

pause in the conversation, and how astoundingly gay everybody was:  

the forced spirits of each member of the little party having as 

much likeness to his natural mirth, as hot-house peas at five 

guineas the quart, resemble in flavour the growth of the dews, and 

air, and rain of Heaven.  But as one o'clock, the hour for going 

aboard, drew near, this volubility dwindled away by little and 

little, despite the most persevering efforts to the contrary, until 

at last, the matter being now quite desperate, we threw off all 

disguise; openly speculated upon where we should be this time to-

morrow, this time next day, and so forth; and entrusted a vast 

number of messages to those who intended returning to town that 

night, which were to be delivered at home and elsewhere without 

fail, within the very shortest possible space of time after the 

arrival of the railway train at Euston Square.  And commissions and 

remembrances do so crowd upon one at such a time, that we were 

still busied with this employment when we found ourselves fused, as 

it were, into a dense conglomeration of passengers and passengers' 

friends and passengers' luggage, all jumbled together on the deck 

of a small steamboat, and panting and snorting off to the packet, 

which had worked out of dock yesterday afternoon and was now lying 

at her moorings in the river.



And there she is! all eyes are turned to where she lies, dimly 

discernible through the gathering fog of the early winter 

afternoon; every finger is pointed in the same direction; and 

murmurs of interest and admiration - as 'How beautiful she looks!' 

'How trim she is!' - are heard on every side.  Even the lazy 

gentleman with his hat on one side and his hands in his pockets, 

who has dispensed so much consolation by inquiring with a yawn of 

another gentleman whether he is 'going across' - as if it were a 

ferry - even he condescends to look that way, and nod his head, as 

who should say, 'No mistake about THAT:' and not even the sage Lord 

Burleigh in his nod, included half so much as this lazy gentleman 

of might who has made the passage (as everybody on board has found 

out already; it's impossible to say how) thirteen times without a 

single accident!  There is another passenger very much wrapped-up, 

who has been frowned down by the rest, and morally trampled upon 

and crushed, for presuming to inquire with a timid interest how 

long it is since the poor President went down.  He is standing 

close to the lazy gentleman, and says with a faint smile that he 

believes She is a very strong Ship; to which the lazy gentleman, 

looking first in his questioner's eye and then very hard in the 

wind's, answers unexpectedly and ominously, that She need be.  Upon 

this the lazy gentleman instantly falls very low in the popular 

estimation, and the passengers, with looks of defiance, whisper to 

each other that he is an ass, and an impostor, and clearly don't 

know anything at all about it.



But we are made fast alongside the packet, whose huge red funnel is 

smoking bravely, giving rich promise of serious intentions.  


Packing-cases, portmanteaus, carpet-bags, and boxes, are already 

passed from hand to hand, and hauled on board with breathless 

rapidity.  The officers, smartly dressed, are at the gangway 

handing the passengers up the side, and hurrying the men.  In five 

minutes' time, the little steamer is utterly deserted, and the 

packet is beset and over-run by its late freight, who instantly 

pervade the whole ship, and are to be met with by the dozen in 

every nook and corner:  swarming down below with their own baggage, 

and stumbling over other people's; disposing themselves comfortably 

in wrong cabins, and creating a most horrible confusion by having 

to turn out again; madly bent upon opening locked doors, and on 

forcing a passage into all kinds of out-of-the-way places where 

there is no thoroughfare; sending wild stewards, with elfin hair, 

to and fro upon the breezy decks on unintelligible errands, 

impossible of execution:  and in short, creating the most 

extraordinary and bewildering tumult.  In the midst of all this, 

the lazy gentleman, who seems to have no luggage of any kind - not 

so much as a friend, even - lounges up and down the hurricane deck, 

coolly puffing a cigar; and, as this unconcerned demeanour again 

exalts him in the opinion of those who have leisure to observe his 

proceedings, every time he looks up at the masts, or down at the 

decks, or over the side, they look there too, as wondering whether 

he sees anything wrong anywhere, and hoping that, in case he 

should, he will have the goodness to mention it.



What have we here?  The captain's boat! and yonder the captain 

himself.  Now, by all our hopes and wishes, the very man he ought 

to be!  A well-made, tight-built, dapper little fellow; with a 

ruddy face, which is a letter of invitation to shake him by both 

hands at once; and with a clear, blue honest eye, that it does one 

good to see one's sparkling image in.  'Ring the bell!'  'Ding, 

ding, ding!' the very bell is in a hurry.  'Now for the shore - 

who's for the shore?' - 'These gentlemen, I am sorry to say.'  They 

are away, and never said, Good b'ye.  Ah now they wave it from the 

little boat.  'Good b'ye! Good b'ye!'  Three cheers from them; 

three more from us; three more from them:  and they are gone.



To and fro, to and fro, to and fro again a hundred times!  This 

waiting for the latest mail-bags is worse than all.  If we could 

have gone off in the midst of that last burst, we should have 

started triumphantly:  but to lie here, two hours and more in the 

damp fog, neither staying at home nor going abroad, is letting one 

gradually down into the very depths of dulness and low spirits.  A 

speck in the mist, at last!  That's something.  It is the boat we 

wait for!  That's more to the purpose.  The captain appears on the 

paddle-box with his speaking trumpet; the officers take their 

stations; all hands are on the alert; the flagging hopes of the 

passengers revive; the cooks pause in their savoury work, and look 

out with faces full of interest.  The boat comes alongside; the 

bags are dragged in anyhow, and flung down for the moment anywhere.  

Three cheers more:  and as the first one rings upon our ears, the 

vessel throbs like a strong giant that has just received the breath 

of life; the two great wheels turn fiercely round for the first 

time; and the noble ship, with wind and tide astern, breaks proudly 

through the lashed and roaming water.
