


CHAPTER IX - A NIGHT STEAMER ON THE POTOMAC RIVER.  VIRGINIA ROAD, 

AND A BLACK DRIVER.  RICHMOND.  BALTIMORE.  THE HARRISBURG MAIL, 

AND A GLIMPSE OF THE CITY.  A CANAL BOAT




WE were to proceed in the first instance by steamboat; and as it is 

usual to sleep on board, in consequence of the starting-hour being 

four o'clock in the morning, we went down to where she lay, at that 

very uncomfortable time for such expeditions when slippers are most 

valuable, and a familiar bed, in the perspective of an hour or two, 

looks uncommonly pleasant.



It is ten o'clock at night:  say half-past ten:  moonlight, warm, 

and dull enough.  The steamer (not unlike a child's Noah's ark in 

form, with the machinery on the top of the roof) is riding lazily 

up and down, and bumping clumsily against the wooden pier, as the 

ripple of the river trifles with its unwieldy carcase.  The wharf 

is some distance from the city.  There is nobody down here; and one 

or two dull lamps upon the steamer's decks are the only signs of 

life remaining, when our coach has driven away.  As soon as our 

footsteps are heard upon the planks, a fat negress, particularly 

favoured by nature in respect of bustle, emerges from some dark 

stairs, and marshals my wife towards the ladies' cabin, to which 

retreat she goes, followed by a mighty bale of cloaks and great-

coats.  I valiantly resolve not to go to bed at all, but to walk up 

and down the pier till morning.



I begin my promenade - thinking of all kinds of distant things and 

persons, and of nothing near - and pace up and down for half-an-

hour.  Then I go on board again; and getting into the light of one 

of the lamps, look at my watch and think it must have stopped; and 

wonder what has become of the faithful secretary whom I brought 

along with me from Boston.  He is supping with our late landlord (a 

Field Marshal, at least, no doubt) in honour of our departure, and 

may be two hours longer.  I walk again, but it gets duller and 

duller:  the moon goes down:  next June seems farther off in the 

dark, and the echoes of my footsteps make me nervous.  It has 

turned cold too; and walking up and down without my companion in 

such lonely circumstances, is but poor amusement.  So I break my 

staunch resolution, and think it may be, perhaps, as well to go to 

bed.



I go on board again; open the door of the gentlemen's cabin and 

walk in.  Somehow or other - from its being so quiet, I suppose - I 

have taken it into my head that there is nobody there.  To my 

horror and amazement it is full of sleepers in every stage, shape, 

attitude, and variety of slumber:  in the berths, on the chairs, on 

the floors, on the tables, and particularly round the stove, my 

detested enemy.  I take another step forward, and slip on the 

shining face of a black steward, who lies rolled in a blanket on 

the floor.  He jumps up, grins, half in pain and half in 

hospitality; whispers my own name in my ear; and groping among the 

sleepers, leads me to my berth.  Standing beside it, I count these 

slumbering passengers, and get past forty.  There is no use in 

going further, so I begin to undress.  As the chairs are all 

occupied, and there is nothing else to put my clothes on, I deposit 

them upon the ground:  not without soiling my hands, for it is in 

the same condition as the carpets in the Capitol, and from the same 

cause.  Having but partially undressed, I clamber on my shelf, and 

hold the curtain open for a few minutes while I look round on all 

my fellow-travellers again.  That done, I let it fall on them, and 

on the world:  turn round:  and go to sleep.



I wake, of course, when we get under weigh, for there is a good 

deal of noise.  The day is then just breaking.  Everybody wakes at 

the same time.  Some are self-possessed directly, and some are much 

perplexed to make out where they are until they have rubbed their 

eyes, and leaning on one elbow, looked about them.  Some yawn, some 

groan, nearly all spit, and a few get up.  I am among the risers:  

for it is easy to feel, without going into the fresh air, that the 

atmosphere of the cabin is vile in the last degree.  I huddle on my 

clothes, go down into the fore-cabin, get shaved by the barber, and 

wash myself.  The washing and dressing apparatus for the passengers 

generally, consists of two jack-towels, three small wooden basins, 

a keg of water and a ladle to serve it out with, six square inches 

of looking-glass, two ditto ditto of yellow soap, a comb and brush 

for the head, and nothing for the teeth.  Everybody uses the comb 

and brush, except myself.  Everybody stares to see me using my own; 

and two or three gentlemen are strongly disposed to banter me on my 

prejudices, but don't.  When I have made my toilet, I go upon the 

hurricane-deck, and set in for two hours of hard walking up and 

down.  The sun is rising brilliantly; we are passing Mount Vernon, 

where Washington lies buried; the river is wide and rapid; and its 

banks are beautiful.  All the glory and splendour of the day are 

coming on, and growing brighter every minute.



At eight o'clock, we breakfast in the cabin where I passed the 

night, but the windows and doors are all thrown open, and now it is 

fresh enough.  There is no hurry or greediness apparent in the 

despatch of the meal.  It is longer than a travelling breakfast 

with us; more orderly, and more polite.



Soon after nine o'clock we come to Potomac Creek, where we are to 

land; and then comes the oddest part of the journey.  Seven stage-

coaches are preparing to carry us on.  Some of them are ready, some 

of them are not ready.  Some of the drivers are blacks, some 

whites.  There are four horses to each coach, and all the horses, 

harnessed or unharnessed, are there.  The passengers are getting 

out of the steamboat, and into the coaches; the luggage is being 

transferred in noisy wheelbarrows; the horses are frightened, and 

impatient to start; the black drivers are chattering to them like 

so many monkeys; and the white ones whooping like so many drovers:  

for the main thing to be done in all kinds of hostlering here, is 

to make as much noise as possible.  The coaches are something like 

the French coaches, but not nearly so good.  In lieu of springs, 

they are hung on bands of the strongest leather.  There is very 

little choice or difference between them; and they may be likened 

to the car portion of the swings at an English fair, roofed, put 

upon axle-trees and wheels, and curtained with painted canvas.  

They are covered with mud from the roof to the wheel-tire, and have 

never been cleaned since they were first built.



The tickets we have received on board the steamboat are marked No. 

1, so we belong to coach No. 1.  I throw my coat on the box, and 

hoist my wife and her maid into the inside.  It has only one step, 

and that being about a yard from the ground, is usually approached 

by a chair:  when there is no chair, ladies trust in Providence.  

The coach holds nine inside, having a seat across from door to 

door, where we in England put our legs:  so that there is only one 

feat more difficult in the performance than getting in, and that 

is, getting out again.  There is only one outside passenger, and he 

sits upon the box.  As I am that one, I climb up; and while they 

are strapping the luggage on the roof, and heaping it into a kind 

of tray behind, have a good opportunity of looking at the driver.



He is a negro - very black indeed.  He is dressed in a coarse 

pepper-and-salt suit excessively patched and darned (particularly 

at the knees), grey stockings, enormous unblacked high-low shoes, 

and very short trousers.  He has two odd gloves:  one of parti-

coloured worsted, and one of leather.  He has a very short whip, 

broken in the middle and bandaged up with string.  And yet he wears 

a low-crowned, broad-brimmed, black hat:  faintly shadowing forth a 

kind of insane imitation of an English coachman!  But somebody in 

authority cries 'Go ahead!' as I am making these observations.  The 

mail takes the lead in a four-horse waggon, and all the coaches 

follow in procession:  headed by No. 1.



By the way, whenever an Englishman would cry 'All right!' an 

American cries 'Go ahead!' which is somewhat expressive of the 

national character of the two countries.



The first half-mile of the road is over bridges made of loose 

planks laid across two parallel poles, which tilt up as the wheels 

roll over them; and IN the river.  The river has a clayey bottom 

and is full of holes, so that half a horse is constantly 

disappearing unexpectedly, and can't be found again for some time.



But we get past even this, and come to the road itself, which is a 

series of alternate swamps and gravel-pits.  A tremendous place is 

close before us, the black driver rolls his eyes, screws his mouth 

up very round, and looks straight between the two leaders, as if he 

were saying to himself, 'We have done this often before, but NOW I 

think we shall have a crash.'  He takes a rein in each hand; jerks 

and pulls at both; and dances on the splashboard with both feet 

(keeping his seat, of course) like the late lamented Ducrow on two 

of his fiery coursers.  We come to the spot, sink down in the mire 

nearly to the coach windows, tilt on one side at an angle of forty-

five degrees, and stick there.  The insides scream dismally; the 

coach stops; the horses flounder; all the other six coaches stop; 

and their four-and-twenty horses flounder likewise:  but merely for 

company, and in sympathy with ours.  Then the following 

circumstances occur.



BLACK DRIVER (to the horses).  'Hi!'



Nothing happens.  Insides scream again.



BLACK DRIVER (to the horses).  'Ho!'



Horses plunge, and splash the black driver.



GENTLEMAN INSIDE (looking out).  'Why, what on airth -



Gentleman receives a variety of splashes and draws his head in 

again, without finishing his question or waiting for an answer.



BLACK DRIVER (still to the horses).  'Jiddy!  Jiddy!'



Horses pull violently, drag the coach out of the hole, and draw it 

up a bank; so steep, that the black driver's legs fly up into the 

air, and he goes back among the luggage on the roof.  But he 

immediately recovers himself, and cries (still to the horses),



'Pill!'



No effect.  On the contrary, the coach begins to roll back upon No. 

2, which rolls back upon No. 3, which rolls back upon No. 4, and so 

on, until No. 7 is heard to curse and swear, nearly a quarter of a 

mile behind.



BLACK DRIVER (louder than before).  'Pill!'



Horses make another struggle to get up the bank, and again the 

coach rolls backward.



BLACK DRIVER (louder than before).  'Pe-e-e-ill!'



Horses make a desperate struggle.



BLACK DRIVER (recovering spirits).  'Hi, Jiddy, Jiddy, Pill!'



Horses make another effort.



BLACK DRIVER (with great vigour).  'Ally Loo!  Hi.  Jiddy, Jiddy.  

Pill.  Ally Loo!'



Horses almost do it.



BLACK DRIVER (with his eyes starting out of his head).  'Lee, den.  

Lee, dere.  Hi.  Jiddy, Jiddy.  Pill.  Ally Loo.  Lee-e-e-e-e!'



They run up the bank, and go down again on the other side at a 

fearful pace.  It is impossible to stop them, and at the bottom 

there is a deep hollow, full of water.  The coach rolls 

frightfully.  The insides scream.  The mud and water fly about us.  

The black driver dances like a madman.  Suddenly we are all right 

by some extraordinary means, and stop to breathe.



A black friend of the black driver is sitting on a fence.  The 

black driver recognises him by twirling his head round and round 

like a harlequin, rolling his eyes, shrugging his shoulders, and 

grinning from ear to ear.  He stops short, turns to me, and says:



'We shall get you through sa, like a fiddle, and hope a please you 

when we get you through sa.  Old 'ooman at home sa:' chuckling very 

much.  'Outside gentleman sa, he often remember old 'ooman at home 

sa,' grinning again.



'Ay ay, we'll take care of the old woman.  Don't be afraid.'



The black driver grins again, but there is another hole, and beyond 

that, another bank, close before us.  So he stops short:  cries (to 

the horses again) 'Easy.  Easy den.  Ease.  Steady.  Hi.  Jiddy.  

Pill.  Ally.  Loo,' but never 'Lee!' until we are reduced to the 

very last extremity, and are in the midst of difficulties, 

extrication from which appears to be all but impossible.



And so we do the ten miles or thereabouts in two hours and a half; 

breaking no bones, though bruising a great many; and in short 

getting through the distance, 'like a fiddle.'



This singular kind of coaching terminates at Fredericksburgh, 

whence there is a railway to Richmond.  The tract of country 

through which it takes its course was once productive; but the soil 

has been exhausted by the system of employing a great amount of 

slave labour in forcing crops, without strengthening the land:  and 

it is now little better than a sandy desert overgrown with trees.  

Dreary and uninteresting as its aspect is, I was glad to the heart 

to find anything on which one of the curses of this horrible 

institution has fallen; and had greater pleasure in contemplating 

the withered ground, than the richest and most thriving cultivation 

in the same place could possibly have afforded me.



In this district, as in all others where slavery sits brooding, (I 

have frequently heard this admitted, even by those who are its 

warmest advocates:) there is an air of ruin and decay abroad, which 

is inseparable from the system.  The barns and outhouses are 

mouldering away; the sheds are patched and half roofless; the log 

cabins (built in Virginia with external chimneys made of clay or 

wood) are squalid in the last degree.  There is no look of decent 

comfort anywhere.  The miserable stations by the railway side, the 

great wild wood-yards, whence the engine is supplied with fuel; the 

negro children rolling on the ground before the cabin doors, with 

dogs and pigs; the biped beasts of burden slinking past:  gloom and 

dejection are upon them all.



In the negro car belonging to the train in which we made this 

journey, were a mother and her children who had just been 

purchased; the husband and father being left behind with their old 

owner.  The children cried the whole way, and the mother was 

misery's picture.  The champion of Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit 

of Happiness, who had bought them, rode in the same train; and, 

every time we stopped, got down to see that they were safe.  The 

black in Sinbad's Travels with one eye in the middle of his 

forehead which shone like a burning coal, was nature's aristocrat 

compared with this white gentleman.



It was between six and seven o'clock in the evening, when we drove 

to the hotel:  in front of which, and on the top of the broad 

flight of steps leading to the door, two or three citizens were 

balancing themselves on rocking-chairs, and smoking cigars.  We 

found it a very large and elegant establishment, and were as well 

entertained as travellers need desire to be.  The climate being a 

thirsty one, there was never, at any hour of the day, a scarcity of 

loungers in the spacious bar, or a cessation of the mixing of cool 

liquors:  but they were a merrier people here, and had musical 

instruments playing to them o' nights, which it was a treat to hear 

again.



The next day, and the next, we rode and walked about the town, 

which is delightfully situated on eight hills, overhanging James 

River; a sparkling stream, studded here and there with bright 

islands, or brawling over broken rocks.  Although it was yet but 

the middle of March, the weather in this southern temperature was 

extremely warm; the peech-trees and magnolias were in full bloom; 

and the trees were green.  In a low ground among the hills, is a 

valley known as 'Bloody Run,' from a terrible conflict with the 

Indians which once occurred there.  It is a good place for such a 

struggle, and, like every other spot I saw associated with any 

legend of that wild people now so rapidly fading from the earth, 

interested me very much.



The city is the seat of the local parliament of Virginia; and in 

its shady legislative halls, some orators were drowsily holding 

forth to the hot noon day.  By dint of constant repetition, 

however, these constitutional sights had very little more interest 

for me than so many parochial vestries; and I was glad to exchange 

this one for a lounge in a well-arranged public library of some ten 

thousand volumes, and a visit to a tobacco manufactory, where the 

workmen are all slaves.



I saw in this place the whole process of picking, rolling, 

pressing, drying, packing in casks, and branding.  All the tobacco 

thus dealt with, was in course of manufacture for chewing; and one 

would have supposed there was enough in that one storehouse to have 

filled even the comprehensive jaws of America.  In this form, the 

weed looks like the oil-cake on which we fatten cattle; and even 

without reference to its consequences, is sufficiently uninviting.



Many of the workmen appeared to be strong men, and it is hardly 

necessary to add that they were all labouring quietly, then.  After 

two o'clock in the day, they are allowed to sing, a certain number 

at a time.  The hour striking while I was there, some twenty sang a 

hymn in parts, and sang it by no means ill; pursuing their work 

meanwhile.  A bell rang as I was about to leave, and they all 

poured forth into a building on the opposite side of the street to 

dinner.  I said several times that I should like to see them at 

their meal; but as the gentleman to whom I mentioned this desire 

appeared to be suddenly taken rather deaf, I did not pursue the 

request.  Of their appearance I shall have something to say, 

presently.



On the following day, I visited a plantation or farm, of about 

twelve hundred acres, on the opposite bank of the river.  Here 

again, although I went down with the owner of the estate, to 'the 

quarter,' as that part of it in which the slaves live is called, I 

was not invited to enter into any of their huts.  All I saw of 

them, was, that they were very crazy, wretched cabins, near to 

which groups of half-naked children basked in the sun, or wallowed 

on the dusty ground.  But I believe that this gentleman is a 

considerate and excellent master, who inherited his fifty slaves, 

and is neither a buyer nor a seller of human stock; and I am sure, 

from my own observation and conviction, that he is a kind-hearted, 

worthy man.



The planter's house was an airy, rustic dwelling, that brought 

Defoe's description of such places strongly to my recollection.  

The day was very warm, but the blinds being all closed, and the 

windows and doors set wide open, a shady coolness rustled through 

the rooms, which was exquisitely refreshing after the glare and 

heat without.  Before the windows was an open piazza, where, in 

what they call the hot weather - whatever that may be - they sling 

hammocks, and drink and doze luxuriously.  I do not know how their 

cool rejections may taste within the hammocks, but, having 

experience, I can report that, out of them, the mounds of ices and 

the bowls of mint-julep and sherry-cobbler they make in these 

latitudes, are refreshments never to be thought of afterwards, in 

summer, by those who would preserve contented minds.



There are two bridges across the river:  one belongs to the 

railroad, and the other, which is a very crazy affair, is the 

private property of some old lady in the neighbourhood, who levies 

tolls upon the townspeople.  Crossing this bridge, on my way back, 

I saw a notice painted on the gate, cautioning all persons to drive 

slowly:  under a penalty, if the offender were a white man, of five 

dollars; if a negro, fifteen stripes.



The same decay and gloom that overhang the way by which it is 

approached, hover above the town of Richmond.  There are pretty 

villas and cheerful houses in its streets, and Nature smiles upon 

the country round; but jostling its handsome residences, like 

slavery itself going hand in hand with many lofty virtues, are 

deplorable tenements, fences unrepaired, walls crumbling into 

ruinous heaps.  Hinting gloomily at things below the surface, 

these, and many other tokens of the same description, force 

themselves upon the notice, and are remembered with depressing 

influence, when livelier features are forgotten.



To those who are happily unaccustomed to them, the countenances in 

the streets and labouring-places, too, are shocking.  All men who 

know that there are laws against instructing slaves, of which the 

pains and penalties greatly exceed in their amount the fines 

imposed on those who maim and torture them, must be prepared to 

find their faces very low in the scale of intellectual expression.  

But the darkness - not of skin, but mind - which meets the 

stranger's eye at every turn; the brutalizing and blotting out of 

all fairer characters traced by Nature's hand; immeasurably outdo 

his worst belief.  That travelled creation of the great satirist's 

brain, who fresh from living among horses, peered from a high 

casement down upon his own kind with trembling horror, was scarcely 

more repelled and daunted by the sight, than those who look upon 

some of these faces for the first time must surely be.



I left the last of them behind me in the person of a wretched 

drudge, who, after running to and fro all day till midnight, and 

moping in his stealthy winks of sleep upon the stairs 

betweenwhiles, was washing the dark passages at four o'clock in the 

morning; and went upon my way with a grateful heart that I was not 

doomed to live where slavery was, and had never had my senses 

blunted to its wrongs and horrors in a slave-rocked cradle.



It had been my intention to proceed by James River and Chesapeake 

Bay to Baltimore; but one of the steamboats being absent from her 

station through some accident, and the means of conveyance being 

consequently rendered uncertain, we returned to Washington by the 

way we had come (there were two constables on board the steamboat, 

in pursuit of runaway slaves), and halting there again for one 

night, went on to Baltimore next afternoon.



The most comfortable of all the hotels of which I had any 

experience in the United States, and they were not a few, is 

Barnum's, in that city:  where the English traveller will find 

curtains to his bed, for the first and probably the last time in 

America (this is a disinterested remark, for I never use them); and 

where he will be likely to have enough water for washing himself, 

which is not at all a common case.



This capital of the state of Maryland is a bustling, busy town, 

with a great deal of traffic of various kinds, and in particular of 

water commerce.  That portion of the town which it most favours is 

none of the cleanest, it is true; but the upper part is of a very 

different character, and has many agreeable streets and public 

buildings.  The Washington Monument, which is a handsome pillar 

with a statue on its summit; the Medical College; and the Battle 

Monument in memory of an engagement with the British at North 

Point; are the most conspicuous among them.



There is a very good prison in this city, and the State 

Penitentiary is also among its institutions.  In this latter 

establishment there were two curious cases.



One was that of a young man, who had been tried for the murder of 

his father.  The evidence was entirely circumstantial, and was very 

conflicting and doubtful; nor was it possible to assign any motive 

which could have tempted him to the commission of so tremendous a 

crime.  He had been tried twice; and on the second occasion the 

jury felt so much hesitation in convicting him, that they found a 

verdict of manslaughter, or murder in the second degree; which it 

could not possibly be, as there had, beyond all doubt, been no 

quarrel or provocation, and if he were guilty at all, he was 

unquestionably guilty of murder in its broadest and worst 

signification.



The remarkable feature in the case was, that if the unfortunate 

deceased were not really murdered by this own son of his, he must 

have been murdered by his own brother.  The evidence lay in a most 

remarkable manner, between those two.  On all the suspicious 

points, the dead man's brother was the witness:  all the 

explanations for the prisoner (some of them extremely plausible) 

went, by construction and inference, to inculcate him as plotting 

to fix the guilt upon his nephew.  It must have been one of them:  

and the jury had to decide between two sets of suspicions, almost 

equally unnatural, unaccountable, and strange.



The other case, was that of a man who once went to a certain 

distiller's and stole a copper measure containing a quantity of 

liquor.  He was pursued and taken with the property in his 

possession, and was sentenced to two years' imprisonment.  On 

coming out of the jail, at the expiration of that term, he went 

back to the same distiller's, and stole the same copper measure 

containing the same quantity of liquor.  There was not the 

slightest reason to suppose that the man wished to return to 

prison:  indeed everything, but the commission of the offence, made 

directly against that assumption.  There are only two ways of 

accounting for this extraordinary proceeding.  One is, that after 

undergoing so much for this copper measure he conceived he had 

established a sort of claim and right to it.  The other that, by 

dint of long thinking about, it had become a monomania with him, 

and had acquired a fascination which he found it impossible to 

resist; swelling from an Earthly Copper Gallon into an Ethereal 

Golden Vat.



After remaining here a couple of days I bound myself to a rigid 

adherence to the plan I had laid down so recently, and resolved to 

set forward on our western journey without any more delay.  

Accordingly, having reduced the luggage within the smallest 

possible compass (by sending back to New York, to be afterwards 

forwarded to us in Canada, so much of it as was not absolutely 

wanted); and having procured the necessary credentials to banking-

houses on the way; and having moreover looked for two evenings at 

the setting sun, with as well-defined an idea of the country before 

us as if we had been going to travel into the very centre of that 

planet; we left Baltimore by another railway at half-past eight in 

the morning, and reached the town of York, some sixty miles off, by 

the early dinner-time of the Hotel which was the starting-place of 

the four-horse coach, wherein we were to proceed to Harrisburg.



This conveyance, the box of which I was fortunate enough to secure, 

had come down to meet us at the railroad station, and was as muddy 

and cumbersome as usual.  As more passengers were waiting for us at 

the inn-door, the coachman observed under his breath, in the usual 

self-communicative voice, looking the while at his mouldy harness 

as if it were to that he was addressing himself,



'I expect we shall want THE BIG coach.'



I could not help wondering within myself what the size of this big 

coach might be, and how many persons it might be designed to hold; 

for the vehicle which was too small for our purpose was something 

larger than two English heavy night coaches, and might have been 

the twin-brother of a French Diligence.  My speculations were 

speedily set at rest, however, for as soon as we had dined, there 

came rumbling up the street, shaking its sides like a corpulent 

giant, a kind of barge on wheels.  After much blundering and 

backing, it stopped at the door:  rolling heavily from side to side 

when its other motion had ceased, as if it had taken cold in its 

damp stable, and between that, and the having been required in its 

dropsical old age to move at any faster pace than a walk, were 

distressed by shortness of wind.



'If here ain't the Harrisburg mail at last, and dreadful bright and 

smart to look at too,' cried an elderly gentleman in some 

excitement, 'darn my mother!'



I don't know what the sensation of being darned may be, or whether 

a man's mother has a keener relish or disrelish of the process than 

anybody else; but if the endurance of this mysterious ceremony by 

the old lady in question had depended on the accuracy of her son's 

vision in respect to the abstract brightness and smartness of the 

Harrisburg mail, she would certainly have undergone its infliction.  

However, they booked twelve people inside; and the luggage 

(including such trifles as a large rocking-chair, and a good-sized 

dining-table) being at length made fast upon the roof, we started 

off in great state.



At the door of another hotel, there was another passenger to be 

taken up.



'Any room, sir?' cries the new passenger to the coachman.



'Well, there's room enough,' replies the coachman, without getting 

down, or even looking at him.



'There an't no room at all, sir,' bawls a gentleman inside.  Which 

another gentleman (also inside) confirms, by predicting that the 

attempt to introduce any more passengers 'won't fit nohow.'



The new passenger, without any expression of anxiety, looks into 

the coach, and then looks up at the coachman:  'Now, how do you 

mean to fix it?' says he, after a pause:  'for I MUST go.'



The coachman employs himself in twisting the lash of his whip into 

a knot, and takes no more notice of the question:  clearly 

signifying that it is anybody's business but his, and that the 

passengers would do well to fix it, among themselves.  In this 

state of things, matters seem to be approximating to a fix of 

another kind, when another inside passenger in a corner, who is 

nearly suffocated, cries faintly, 'I'll get out.'



This is no matter of relief or self-congratulation to the driver, 

for his immovable philosophy is perfectly undisturbed by anything 

that happens in the coach.  Of all things in the world, the coach 

would seem to be the very last upon his mind.  The exchange is 

made, however, and then the passenger who has given up his seat 

makes a third upon the box, seating himself in what he calls the 

middle; that is, with half his person on my legs, and the other 

half on the driver's.



'Go a-head, cap'en,' cries the colonel, who directs.



'Go-lang!' cries the cap'en to his company, the horses, and away we 

go.



We took up at a rural bar-room, after we had gone a few miles, an 

intoxicated gentleman who climbed upon the roof among the luggage, 

and subsequently slipping off without hurting himself, was seen in 

the distant perspective reeling back to the grog-shop where we had 

found him.  We also parted with more of our freight at different 

times, so that when we came to change horses, I was again alone 

outside.



The coachmen always change with the horses, and are usually as 

dirty as the coach.  The first was dressed like a very shabby 

English baker; the second like a Russian peasant:  for he wore a 

loose purple camlet robe, with a fur collar, tied round his waist 

with a parti-coloured worsted sash; grey trousers; light blue 

gloves:  and a cap of bearskin.  It had by this time come on to 

rain very heavily, and there was a cold damp mist besides, which 

penetrated to the skin.  I was glad to take advantage of a stoppage 

and get down to stretch my legs, shake the water off my great-coat, 

and swallow the usual anti-temperance recipe for keeping out the 

cold.



When I mounted to my seat again, I observed a new parcel lying on 

the coach roof, which I took to be a rather large fiddle in a brown 

bag.  In the course of a few miles, however, I discovered that it 

had a glazed cap at one end and a pair of muddy shoes at the other 

and further observation demonstrated it to be a small boy in a 

snuff-coloured coat, with his arms quite pinioned to his sides, by 

deep forcing into his pockets.  He was, I presume, a relative or 

friend of the coachman's, as he lay a-top of the luggage with his 

face towards the rain; and except when a change of position brought 

his shoes in contact with my hat, he appeared to be asleep.  At 

last, on some occasion of our stopping, this thing slowly upreared 

itself to the height of three feet six, and fixing its eyes on me, 

observed in piping accents, with a complaisant yawn, half quenched 

in an obliging air of friendly patronage, 'Well now, stranger, I 

guess you find this a'most like an English arternoon, hey?'



The scenery, which had been tame enough at first, was, for the last 

ten or twelve miles, beautiful.  Our road wound through the 

pleasant valley of the Susquehanna; the river, dotted with 

innumerable green islands, lay upon our right; and on the left, a 

steep ascent, craggy with broken rock, and dark with pine trees.  

The mist, wreathing itself into a hundred fantastic shapes, moved 

solemnly upon the water; and the gloom of evening gave to all an 

air of mystery and silence which greatly enhanced its natural 

interest.



We crossed this river by a wooden bridge, roofed and covered in on 

all sides, and nearly a mile in length.  It was profoundly dark; 

perplexed, with great beams, crossing and recrossing it at every 

possible angle; and through the broad chinks and crevices in the 

floor, the rapid river gleamed, far down below, like a legion of 

eyes.  We had no lamps; and as the horses stumbled and floundered 

through this place, towards the distant speck of dying light, it 

seemed interminable.  I really could not at first persuade myself 

as we rumbled heavily on, filling the bridge with hollow noises, 

and I held down my head to save it from the rafters above, but that 

I was in a painful dream; for I have often dreamed of toiling 

through such places, and as often argued, even at the time, 'this 

cannot be reality.'



At length, however, we emerged upon the streets of Harrisburg, 

whose feeble lights, reflected dismally from the wet ground, did 

not shine out upon a very cheerful city.  We were soon established 

in a snug hotel, which though smaller and far less splendid than 

many we put up at, it raised above them all in my remembrance, by 

having for its landlord the most obliging, considerate, and 

gentlemanly person I ever had to deal with.



As we were not to proceed upon our journey until the afternoon, I 

walked out, after breakfast the next morning, to look about me; and 

was duly shown a model prison on the solitary system, just erected, 

and as yet without an inmate; the trunk of an old tree to which 

Harris, the first settler here (afterwards buried under it), was 

tied by hostile Indians, with his funeral pile about him, when he 

was saved by the timely appearance of a friendly party on the 

opposite shore of the river; the local legislature (for there was 

another of those bodies here again, in full debate); and the other 

curiosities of the town.



I was very much interested in looking over a number of treaties 

made from time to time with the poor Indians, signed by the 

different chiefs at the period of their ratification, and preserved 

in the office of the Secretary to the Commonwealth.  These 

signatures, traced of course by their own hands, are rough drawings 

of the creatures or weapons they were called after.  Thus, the 

Great Turtle makes a crooked pen-and-ink outline of a great turtle; 

the Buffalo sketches a buffalo; the War Hatchet sets a rough image 

of that weapon for his mark.  So with the Arrow, the Fish, the 

Scalp, the Big Canoe, and all of them.



I could not but think - as I looked at these feeble and tremulous 

productions of hands which could draw the longest arrow to the head 

in a stout elk-horn bow, or split a bead or feather with a rifle-

ball - of Crabbe's musings over the Parish Register, and the 

irregular scratches made with a pen, by men who would plough a 

lengthy furrow straight from end to end.  Nor could I help 

bestowing many sorrowful thoughts upon the simple warriors whose 

hands and hearts were set there, in all truth and honesty; and who 

only learned in course of time from white men how to break their 

faith, and quibble out of forms and bonds.  I wonder, too, how many 

times the credulous Big Turtle, or trusting Little Hatchet, had put 

his mark to treaties which were falsely read to him; and had signed 

away, he knew not what, until it went and cast him loose upon the 

new possessors of the land, a savage indeed.



Our host announced, before our early dinner, that some members of 

the legislative body proposed to do us the honour of calling.  He 

had kindly yielded up to us his wife's own little parlour, and when 

I begged that he would show them in, I saw him look with painful 

apprehension at its pretty carpet; though, being otherwise occupied 

at the time, the cause of his uneasiness did not occur to me.



It certainly would have been more pleasant to all parties 

concerned, and would not, I think, have compromised their 

independence in any material degree, if some of these gentlemen had 

not only yielded to the prejudice in favour of spittoons, but had 

abandoned themselves, for the moment, even to the conventional 

absurdity of pocket-handkerchiefs.



It still continued to rain heavily, and when we went down to the 

Canal Boat (for that was the mode of conveyance by which we were to 

proceed) after dinner, the weather was as unpromising and 

obstinately wet as one would desire to see.  Nor was the sight of 

this canal boat, in which we were to spend three or four days, by 

any means a cheerful one; as it involved some uneasy speculations 

concerning the disposal of the passengers at night, and opened a 

wide field of inquiry touching the other domestic arrangements of 

the establishment, which was sufficiently disconcerting.



However, there it was - a barge with a little house in it, viewed 

from the outside; and a caravan at a fair, viewed from within:  the 

gentlemen being accommodated, as the spectators usually are, in one 

of those locomotive museums of penny wonders; and the ladies being 

partitioned off by a red curtain, after the manner of the dwarfs 

and giants in the same establishments, whose private lives are 

passed in rather close exclusiveness.



We sat here, looking silently at the row of little tables, which 

extended down both sides of the cabin, and listening to the rain as 

it dripped and pattered on the boat, and plashed with a dismal 

merriment in the water, until the arrival of the railway train, for 

whose final contribution to our stock of passengers, our departure 

was alone deferred.  It brought a great many boxes, which were 

bumped and tossed upon the roof, almost as painfully as if they had 

been deposited on one's own head, without the intervention of a 

porter's knot; and several damp gentlemen, whose clothes, on their 

drawing round the stove, began to steam again.  No doubt it would 

have been a thought more comfortable if the driving rain, which now 

poured down more soakingly than ever, had admitted of a window 

being opened, or if our number had been something less than thirty; 

but there was scarcely time to think as much, when a train of three 

horses was attached to the tow-rope, the boy upon the leader 

smacked his whip, the rudder creaked and groaned complainingly, and 

we had begun our journey.
