


	PREFACE TO THE FIRST CHEAP EDITION OF "AMERICAN NOTES"



IT is nearly eight years since this book was first published.  I 

present it, unaltered, in the Cheap Edition; and such of my 

opinions as it expresses, are quite unaltered too.



My readers have opportunities of judging for themselves whether the 

influences and tendencies which I distrust in America, have any 

existence not in my imagination.  They can examine for themselves 

whether there has been anything in the public career of that 

country during these past eight years, or whether there is anything 

in its present position, at home or abroad, which suggests that 

those influences and tendencies really do exist.  As they find the 

fact, they will judge me.  If they discern any evidences of wrong-

going in any direction that I have indicated, they will acknowledge 

that I had reason in what I wrote.  If they discern no such thing, 

they will consider me altogether mistaken.



Prejudiced, I never have been otherwise than in favour of the 

United States.  No visitor can ever have set foot on those shores, 

with a stronger faith in the Republic than I had, when I landed in 

America.



I purposely abstain from extending these observations to any 

length.  I have nothing to defend, or to explain away.  The truth 

is the truth; and neither childish absurdities, nor unscrupulous 

contradictions, can make it otherwise.  The earth would still move 

round the sun, though the whole Catholic Church said No.



I have many friends in America, and feel a grateful interest in the 

country.  To represent me as viewing it with ill-nature, animosity, 

or partisanship, is merely to do a very foolish thing, which is 

always a very easy one; and which I have disregarded for eight 

years, and could disregard for eighty more.



LONDON, JUNE 22, 1850.

