




                          CHAPTER 14



    Passion, and passion in its profoundest, is not a thing

demanding a palatial stage whereon to play its part. Down among the

groundlings, among the beggars and rakers of the garbage, profound

passion is enacted. And the circumstances that provoke it, however

trivial or mean, are no measure of its power. In the present

instance the stage is a scrubbed gun deck, and one of the external

provocations a man-of-war's-man's spilled soup.

    Now when the Master-at-arms noticed whence came that greasy

fluid streaming before his feet, he must have taken it- to some extent

wilfully, perhaps- not for the mere accident it assuredly was, but for

the sly escape of a spontaneous feeling on Billy's part more or less

answering to the antipathy on his own. In effect a foolish

demonstration he must have thought, and very harmless, like the futile

kick of a heifer, which yet were the heifer a shod stallion, would not

be so harmless. Even so was it that into the gall of Claggart's envy

he infused the vitriol of his contempt. But the incident confirmed

to him certain tell-tale reports purveyed to his ear by Squeak, one of

his more cunning Corporals, a grizzled little man, so nicknamed by the

sailors on account of his squeaky voice, and sharp visage ferreting

about the dark corners of the lower decks after interlopers,

satirically suggesting to them the idea of a rat in a cellar.

    From his Chief's employing him as an implicit tool in laying

little traps for the worriment of the Foretopman- for it was from

the Master-at-arms that the petty persecutions heretofore adverted

to had proceeded- the Corporal having naturally enough concluded

that his master could have no love for the sailor, made it his

business, faithful understrapper that he was, to foment the ill

blood by perverting to his Chief certain innocent frolics of the

goodnatured Foretopman, besides inventing for his mouth sundry

contumelious epithets he claimed to have overheard him let fall. The

Master-at-arms never suspected the veracity of these reports, more

especially as to the epithets, for he well knew how secretly unpopular

may become a master-at-arms, at least a master-at-arms of those days

zealous in his function, and how the blue-jackets shoot at him in

private their raillery and wit; the nickname by which he goes among

them (Jimmy Legs) implying under the form of merriment their cherished

disrespect and dislike.

    But in view of the greediness of hate for patrolmen, it hardly

needed a purveyor to feed Claggart's passion. An uncommon prudence

is habitual with the subtler depravity, for it has everything to hide.

And in case of an injury but suspected, its secretiveness

voluntarily cuts it off from enlightenment or disillusion; and, not

unreluctantly, action is taken upon surmise as upon certainty. And the

retaliation is apt to be in monstrous disproportion to the supposed

offence; for when in anybody was revenge in its exactions aught else

but an inordinate usurer? But how with Claggart's conscience? For

though consciences are unlike as foreheads, every intelligence, not

excluding the Scriptural devils who "believe and tremble," has one.

But Claggart's conscience being but the lawyer to his will, made ogres

of trifles, probably arguing that the motive imputed to Billy in

spilling the soup just when he did, together with the epithets

alleged, these, if nothing more, made a strong case against him;

nay, justified animosity into a sort of retributive righteousness. The

Pharisee is the Guy Fawkes prowling in the hid chambers underlying the

Claggarts. And they can really form no conception of an unreciprocated

malice. Probably, the Master-at-arms' clandestine persecution of Billy

was started to try the temper of the man; but it had not developed any

quality in him that enmity could make official use of or even

pervert into plausible self-justification; so that the occurrence at

the mess, petty if it were, was a welcome one to that peculiar

conscience assigned to be the private mentor of Claggart. And, for the

rest, not improbably it put him upon new experiments.

