




                          CHAPTER 15



    Not many days after the last incident narrated, something befell

Billy Budd that more gravelled him than aught that had previously

occurred.

    It was a warm night for the latitude; and the Foretopman, whose

watch at the time was properly below, was dozing on the uppermost deck

whither he had ascended from his hot hammock, one of hundreds

suspended so closely wedged together over a lower gun deck that

there was little or no swing to them. He lay as in the shadow of a

hill-side, stretched under the lee of the booms, a piled ridge of

spare spars amidships between fore-mast and mainmast and among which

the ship's largest boat, the launch, was stowed. Alongside of three

other slumberers from below, he lay near that end of the booms which

approaches the fore-mast; his station aloft on duty as a foretopman

being just over the deckstation of the forecastlemen, entitling him

according to usage to make himself more or less at home in that

neighbourhood.

    Presently he was stirred into semi-consciousness by somebody,

who must have previously sounded the sleep of the others, touching his

shoulder, and then as the Foretopman raised his head, breathing into

his ear in a quick whisper, "Slip into the lee forechains, Billy;

there is something in the wind. Don't speak. Quick, I will meet you

there"; and disappeared.

    Now Billy like sundry other essentially good-natured ones had some

of the weaknesses inseparable from essential good-nature; and among

these was a reluctance, almost an incapacity of plumply saying no to

an abrupt proposition not obviously absurd, on the face of it, nor

obviously unfriendly, nor iniquitous. And being of warm blood he had

not the phlegm tacitly to negative any proposition by unresponsive

inaction. Like his sense of fear, his apprehension as to aught outside

of the honest and natural was seldom very quick. Besides, upon the

present occasion, the drowse from his sleep still hung upon him.

    However it was, he mechanically rose, and sleepily wondering

what could be in the wind, betook himself to the designated place, a

narrow platform, one of six, outside of the high bulwarks and screened

by the great dead-eyes and multiple columned lanyards of the shrouds

and back-stays; and, in a great war-ship of that time, of dimensions

commensurate with the hull's magnitude; a tarry balcony, in short,

overhanging the sea, and so secluded that one mariner of the

Indomitable, a non-conformist old tar of a serious turn, made it

even in daytime his private oratory.

    In this retired nook the stranger soon joined Billy Budd. There

was no moon as yet; a haze obscured the star-light. He could not

distinctly see the stranger's face. Yet from something in the

outline and carriage, Billy took him to be, and correctly, one of

the afterguard.

    "Hist! Billy," said the man in the same quick cautionary whisper

as before; "You were impressed, weren't you? Well, so was I"; and he

paused, as to mark the effect. But Billy, not knowing exactly what

to make of this, said nothing. Then the other: "We are not the only

impressed ones, Billy. There's a gang of us.- Couldn't you- help- at a

pinch?"

    "What do you mean?" demanded Billy, here thoroughly shaking off

his drowse.

    "Hist, hist!" the hurried whisper now growing husky, "see here";

and the man held up two small objects faintly twinkling in the

nightlight; "see, they are yours, Billy, if you'll only-"

    But Billy broke in, and in his resentful eagerness to deliver

himself his vocal infirmity somewhat intruded: "D-D-Damme, I don't

know what you are d-d-driving at, or what you mean, but you had better

g-g-go where you belong!" For the moment the fellow, as confounded,

did not stir; and Billy springing to his feet, said, "If you d-don't

start I'll t-t-toss you back over the r-rail!" There was no

mistaking this and the mysterious emissary decamped disappearing in

the direction of the main-mast in the shadow of the booms.

    "Hallo, what's the matter?" here came growling from a

forecastleman awakened from his deck-doze by Billy's raised voice. And

as the Foretopman reappeared and was recognized by him; "Ah, Beauty,

is it you? Well, something must have been the matter for you

st-st-stuttered."

    "O," rejoined Billy, now mastering the impediment; "I found an

afterguardsman in our part of the ship here and I bid him be off where

he belongs."

    "And is that all you did about it, Foretopman?" gruffly demanded

another, an irascible old fellow of brick-colored visage and hair, and

who was known to his associate forecastlemen as Red Pepper; "Such

sneaks I should like to marry to the gunner's daughter!" by that

expression meaning that he would like to subject them to

disciplinary castigation over a gun.

    However, Billy's rendering of the matter satisfactorily

accounted to these inquirers for the brief commotion, since of all the

sections of a ship's company, the forecastlemen, veterans for the most

part and bigoted in their sea-prejudices, are the most jealous in

resenting territorial encroachments, especially on the part of any

of the afterguard, of whom they have but a sorry opinion, chiefly

landsmen, never going aloft except to reef or furl the mainsail and in

no wise competent to handle a marlinspike or turn in a dead-eye, say.

