




                          CHAPTER 10



    The next day an incident served to confirm Billy Budd in his

incredulity as to the Dansker's strange summing-up of the case

submitted. The ship at noon, going large before the wind, was

rolling on her course, and he, below at dinner and engaged in some

sportful talk with the members of his mess, chanced in a sudden

lurch to spill the entire contents of his soup-pan upon the new

scrubbed deck. Claggart, the Master-at-arms, official rattan in

hand, happened to be passing along the battery in a bay of which the

mess was lodged, and the greasy liquid streamed just across his

path. Stepping over it, he was proceeding on his way without

comment, since the matter was nothing to take notice of under the

circumstances, when he happened to observe who it was that had done

the spilling. His countenance changed. Pausing, he was about to

ejaculate something hasty at the sailor, but checked himself, and

pointing down to the streaming soup, playfully tapped him from

behind with his rattan, saying in a low musical voice peculiar to

him at times, "Handsomely done, my lad! And handsome is as handsome

did it too!" And with that passed on. Not noted by Billy, as not

coming within his view, was the involuntary smile, or rather

grimace, that accompanied Claggart's equivocal words. Aridly it drew

down the thin corners of his shapely mouth. But everybody taking his

remark as meant for humourous, and at which therefore as coming from a

superior they were bound to laugh "with counterfeited glee," acted

accordingly; and Billy tickled, it may be, by the allusion to his

being the handsome sailor, merrily joined in; then addressing his

messmates exclaimed, "There now, who says that Jimmy Legs is down on

me!" "And who said he was, Beauty?" demanded one Donald with some

surprise. Whereat the Foretopman looked a little foolish, recalling

that it was only one person, Board-her-in-the-smoke, who had suggested

what to him was the smoky idea that this Master-at-arms was in any

peculiar way hostile to him. Meantime that functionary, resuming his

path, must have momentarily worn some expression less guarded than

that of the bitter smile, and usurping the face from the heart, some

distorting expression perhaps; for a drummer-boy heedlessly frolicking

along from the opposite direction and chancing to come into light

collision with his person was strangely disconcerted by his aspect.

Nor was the impression lessened when the official, impulsively

giving him a sharp cut with the rattan, vehemently exclaimed, "Look

where you go!"

