




                          CHAPTER 19



    After the mysterious interview in the fore-chains- the one so

abruptly ended there by Billy- nothing especially german to the

story occurred until the events now about to be narrated.

    Elsewhere it has been said that in the lack of frigates (of course

better sailers than line-of-battle ships) in the English squadron up

the Straits at that period, the Indomitable was occasionally

employed not only as an available substitute for a scout, but at times

on detached service of more important kind. This was not alone because

of her sailing qualities, not common in a ship of her rate, but

quite as much, probably, that the character of her commander, it was

thought, specially adapted him for any duty where under unforeseen

difficulties a prompt initiative might have to be taken in some matter

demanding knowledge and ability in addition to those qualities implied

in good seamanship. It was on an expedition of the latter sort, a

somewhat distant one, and when the Indomitable was almost at her

furthest remove from the fleet, that in the latter part of an

afternoon-watch she unexpectedly came in sight of a ship of the enemy.

It proved to be a frigate. The latter perceiving thro' the glass

that the weight of men and metal would be heavily against her,

invoking her light heels, crowded sail to get away. After a chase

urged almost against hope and lasting until about the middle of the

first dog-watch, she signally succeeded in effecting her escape.

    Not long after the pursuit had been given up, and ere the

excitement incident thereto had altogether waned away, the

Master-at-arms, ascending from his cavernous sphere, made his

appearance cap in hand by the main-mast, respectfully waiting the

notice of Captain Vere then solitary walking the weather-side of the

quarterdeck, doubtless somewhat chafed at the failure of the

pursuit. The spot where Claggart stood was the place allotted to men

of lesser grades seeking some more particular interview either with

the officer-of-the-deck or the Captain himself. But from the latter it

was not often that a sailor or petty-officer of those days would

seek a hearing; only some exceptional cause, would, according to

established custom, have warranted that.

    Presently, just as the Commander absorbed in his reflections was

on the point of turning aft in his promenade, he became sensible of

Claggart's presence, and saw the doffed cap held in deferential

expectancy. Here be it said that Captain Vere's personal knowledge

of this petty-officer had only begun at the time of the ship's last

sailing from home, Claggart then for the first, in transfer from a

ship detained for repairs, supplying on board the Indomitable the

place of a previous master-at-arms disabled and ashore.

    No sooner did the Commander observe who it was that

deferentially stood awaiting his notice, than a peculiar expression

came over him. It was not unlike that which uncontrollably will flit

across the countenance of one at unawares encountering a person who,

though known to him indeed, has hardly been long enough known for

thorough knowledge, but something in whose aspect nevertheless now for

the first provokes a vaguely repellent distaste. But coming to a

stand, and resuming much of his wonted official manner, save that a

sort of impatience lurked in the intonation of the opening word, he

said, "Well? what is it, Master-at-arms?"

    With the air of a subordinate grieved at the necessity of being

a messenger of ill tidings, and while conscientiously determined to be

frank, yet equally resolved upon shunning overstatement, Claggart,

at this invitation or rather summons to disburthen, spoke up. What

he said, conveyed in the language of no uneducated man, was to the

effect following, if not altogether in these words, namely, that

during the chase and preparations for the possible encounter he had

seen enough to convince him that at least one sailor aboard was a

dangerous character in a ship mustering some who not only had taken

a guilty part in the late serious troubles, but others also who,

like the man in question, had entered His Majesty's service under

another form than enlistment.

    At this point Captain Vere with some impatience interrupted him:

"Be direct, man; say impressed men."

    Claggart made a gesture of subservience, and proceeded.

    Quite lately he (Claggart) had begun to suspect that on the gun

decks some sort of movement prompted by the sailor in question was

covertly going on, but he had not thought himself warranted in

reporting the suspicion so long as it remained indistinct. But from

what he had that afternoon observed in the man referred to, the

suspicion of something clandestine going on had advanced to a point

less removed from certainty. He deeply felt, he added, the serious

responsibility assumed in making a report involving such possible

consequences to the individual mainly concerned, besides tending to

augment those natural anxieties which every naval commander must

feel in view of extraordinary outbreaks so recent as those which, he

sorrowfully said it, it needed not to name.

    Now at the first broaching of the matter Captain Vere, taken by

surprise, could not wholly dissemble his disquietude. But as

Claggart went on, the former's aspect changed into restiveness under

something in the witness' manner in giving his testimony. However,

he refrained from interrupting him. And Claggart, continuing,

concluded with this: "God forbid, Your Honor, that the Indomitable's

should be the experience of the-"

    "Never mind that!" here peremptorily broke in the superior, his

face altering with anger, instinctively divining the ship that the

other was about to name, one in which the Nore Mutiny had assumed a

singularly tragical character that for a time jeopardized the life

of its commander. Under the circumstances he was indignant at the

purposed allusion. When the commissioned officers themselves were on

all occasions very heedful how they referred to the recent events, for

a petty-officer unnecessarily to allude to them in the presence of his

Captain, this struck him as a most immodest presumption. Besides, to

his quick sense of self-respect, it even looked under the

circumstances something like an attempt to alarm him. Nor at first was

he without some surprise that one who so far as he had hitherto come

under his notice had shown considerable tact in his function should in

this particular evince such lack of it.

    But these thoughts and kindred dubious ones flitting across his

mind were suddenly replaced by an intuitional surmise which, though as

yet obscure in form, served practically to affect his reception of the

ill tidings. Certain it is, that long versed in everything

pertaining to the complicated gun-deck life, which like every other

form of life, has its secret mines and dubious side, the side

popularly disclaimed, Captain Vere did not permit himself to be unduly

disturbed by the general tenor of his subordinate's report.

Furthermore, if in view of recent events prompt action should be taken

at the first palpable sign of recurring insubordination, for all that,

not judicious would it be, he thought, to keep the idea of lingering

disaffection alive by undue forwardness in crediting an informer, even

if his own subordinate, and charged among other things with police

surveillance of the crew. This feeling would not perhaps have so

prevailed with him were it not that upon a prior occasion the

patriotic zeal officially evinced by Claggart had somewhat irritated

him as appearing rather supersensible and strained. Furthermore,

something even in the official's self-possessed and somewhat

ostentatious manner in making his specifications strangely reminded

him of a bandsman, a perjurous witness in a capital case before a

courtmartial ashore of which when a lieutenant, he, Captain Vere,

had been a member.

    Now the peremptory check given to Claggart in the matter of the

arrested allusion was quickly followed up by this: "You say that there

is at least one dangerous man aboard. Name him."

    "William Budd. A foretopman, Your Honor-"

    "William Budd," repeated Captain Vere with unfeigned astonishment;

"and mean you the man that Lieutenant Ratcliff took from the

merchantman not very long ago- the young fellow who seems to be so

popular with the men- Billy, the 'Handsome Sailor,' as they call him?"

    "The same, Your Honor; but for all his youth and good looks, a

deep one. Not for nothing does he insinuate himself into the good will

of his shipmates, since at the least all hands will at a pinch say a

good word for him at all hazards. Did Lieutenant Ratcliff happen to

tell Your Honor of that adroit fling of Budd's, jumping up in the

cutter's bow under the merchantman's stern when he was being taken

off? It is even masqued by that sort of good-humoured air that at

heart he resents his impressment. You have but noted his fair cheek. A

man-trap may be under his ruddy-tipped daisies."

    Now the Handsome Sailor, as a signal figure among the crew, had

naturally enough attracted the Captain's attention from the first.

Tho' in general not very demonstrative to his officers, he had

congratulated Lieutenant Ratcliff upon his good fortune in lighting on

such a fine specimen of the genus homo, who in the nude might have

posed for a statue of young Adam before the Fall.

    As to Billy's adieu to the ship Rights-of-Man, which the

boarding lieutenant had indeed reported to him, but in a deferential

way more as a good story than aught else, Captain Vere, tho'

mistakenly understanding it as a satiric sally, had but thought so

much the better of the impressed man for it; as a military sailor,

admiring the spirit that could take an arbitrary enlistment so merrily

and sensibly. The Foretopman's conduct, too, so far as it had fallen

under the Captain's notice, had confirmed the first happy augury,

while the new recruit's qualities as a sailor-man seemed to be such

that he had thought of recommending him to the executive officer for

promotion to a place that would more frequently bring him under his

own observation, namely, the captaincy of the mizzentop, replacing

there in the starboard watch a man not so young whom partly for that

reason he deemed less fitted for the post. Be it parenthesized here

that since the mizzentopmen having not to handle such breadths of

heavy canvas as the lower sails on the main-mast and fore-mast, a

young man if of the right stuff not only seems best adapted to duty

there, but in fact is generally selected for the captaincy of that

top, and the company under him are light hands and often but

striplings. In sum, Captain Vere had from the beginning deemed Billy

Budd to be what in the naval parlance of the time was called a "King's

bargain," that is to say, for His Britannic Majesty's Navy a capital

investment at small outlay or none at all.

    After a brief pause during which the reminiscences above mentioned

passed vividly through his mind and he weighed the import of

Claggart's last suggestion conveyed in the phrase "man-trap under

his daisies," and the more he weighed it the less reliance he felt

in the informer's good faith, suddenly he turned upon him and in a low

voice: "Do you come to me, Master-at-arms, with so foggy a tale? As to

Budd, cite me an act or spoken word of his confirmatory of what you in

general charge against him. Stay," drawing nearer to him, "heed what

you speak. Just now, and in a case like this, there is a

yard-arm-end for the false-witness."

    "Ah, Your Honor!" sighed Claggart, mildly shaking his shapely head

as in sad deprecation of such unmerited severity of tone. Then,

bridling- erecting himself as in virtuous self-assertion, he

circumstantially alleged certain words and acts, which collectively,

if credited, led to presumptions mortally inculpating Budd. And for

some of these averments, he added, substantiating proof was not far.

    With gray eyes impatient and distrustful essaying to fathom to the

bottom Claggart's calm violet ones, Captain Vere again heard him

out; then for the moment stood ruminating. The mood he evinced,

Claggart- himself for the time liberated from the other's scrutiny-

steadily regarded with a look difficult to render,- a look curious

of the operation of his tactics, a look such as might have been that

of the spokesman of the envious children of Jacob deceptively imposing

upon the troubled patriarch the blood-dyed coat of young Joseph.

    Though something exceptional in the moral quality of Captain

Vere made him, in earnest encounter with a fellow-man, a veritable

touch-stone of that man's essential nature, yet now as to Claggart and

what was really going on in him, his feeling partook less of

intuitional conviction than of strong suspicion clogged by strange

dubieties. The perplexity he evinced proceeded less from aught

touching the man informed against- as Claggart doubtless opined-

than from considerations how best to act in regard to the informer. At

first indeed he was naturally for summoning that substantiation of his

allegations which Claggart said was at hand. But such a proceeding

would result in the matter at once getting abroad, which in the

present stage of it, he thought, might undesirably affect the ship's

company. If Claggart was a false witness,- that closed the affair. And

therefore before trying the accusation, he would first practically

test the accuser; and he thought this could be done in a quiet

undemonstrative way.

    The measure he determined upon involved a shifting of the scene, a

transfer to a place less exposed to observation than the broad

quarter-deck. For although the few gun-room officers there at the time

had, in due observance of naval etiquette, withdrawn to leeward the

moment Captain Vere had begun his promenade on the deck's

weather-side; and tho' during the colloquy with Claggart they of

course ventured not to diminish the distance; and though throughout

the interview Captain Vere's voice was far from high, and Claggart's

silvery and low; and the wind in the cordage and the wash of the sea

helped the more to put them beyond earshot; nevertheless, the

interview's continuance already had attracted observation from some

topmen aloft and other sailors in the waist or further forward.

    Having determined upon his measures, Captain Vere forthwith took

action. Abruptly turning to Claggart he asked, "Master-at-arms, is

it now Budd's watch aloft?"

    "No, Your Honor." Whereupon, "Mr. Wilkes!" summoning the nearest

midshipman, "tell Albert to come to me." Albert was the Captain's

hammock-boy, a sort of sea-valet in whose discretion and fidelity

his master had much confidence. The lad appeared. "You know Budd the

Foretopman?"

    "I do, Sir."

    "Go find him. It is his watch off. Manage to tell him out of

earshot that he is wanted aft. Contrive it that he speaks to nobody.

Keep him in talk yourself. And not till you get well aft here, not

till then let him know that the place where he is wanted is my

cabin. You understand. Go.- Master-at-arms, show yourself on the decks

below, and when you think it time for Albert to be coming with his

man, stand by quietly to follow the sailor in."

