




                          CHAPTER 30



    Some few weeks after the execution, among other matters under

the head of News from the Mediterranean, there appeared in a naval

chronicle of the time, an authorized weekly publication, an account of

the affair. It was doubtless for the most part written in good

faith, tho' the medium, partly rumor, through which the facts must

have reached the writer, served to deflect and in part falsify them.

The account was as follows:-

    "On the tenth of the last month a deplorable occurrence took place

on board H.M.S. Indomitable. John Claggart, the ship's Master-at-arms,

discovering that some sort of plot was incipient among an inferior

section of the ship's company, and that the ringleader was one William

Budd; he, Claggart, in the act of arraigning the man before the

Captain was vindictively stabbed to the heart by the suddenly drawn

sheath-knife of Budd.

    "The deed and the implement employed, sufficiently suggest that

tho' mustered into the service under an English name the assassin

was no Englishman, but one of those aliens adopting English

cognomens whom the present extraordinary necessities of the Service

have caused to be admitted into it in considerable numbers.

    "The enormity of the crime and the extreme depravity of the

criminal, appear the greater in view of the character of the victim, a

middle-aged man respectable and discreet, belonging to that official

grade, the petty-officers, upon whom, as none know better than the

commissioned gentlemen, the efficiency of His Majesty's Navy so

largely depends. His function was a responsible one, at once onerous &

thankless, and his fidelity in it the greater because of his strong

patriotic impulse. In this instance as in so many other instances in

these days, the character of this unfortunate man signally refutes, if

refutation were needed, that peevish saying attributed to the late Dr.

Johnson, that patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel.

    "The criminal paid the penalty of his crime. The promptitude of

the punishment has proved salutary. Nothing amiss is now apprehended

aboard H.M.S. Indomitable."

    The above, appearing in a publication now long ago superannuated

and forgotten, is all that hitherto has stood in human record to

attest what manner of men respectively were John Claggart and Billy Budd.
