




                          CHAPTER 3



    At the time of Billy Budd's arbitrary enlistment into the

Indomitable that ship was on her way to join the Mediterranean

fleet. No long time elapsed before the 'unction was effected. As one

of that fleet the seventy-four participated in its movements, tho'

at times, on account of her superior sailing qualities, in the absence

of frigates, despatched on separate duty as a scout and at times on

less temporary service. But with all this the story has little

concernment, restricted as it is to the inner life of one particular

ship and the career of an individual sailor.

    It was the summer of 1797. In the April of that year had

occurred the commotion at Spithead followed in May by a second and yet

more serious outbreak in the fleet at the Nore. The latter is known,

and without exaggeration in the epithet, as the Great Mutiny. It was

indeed a demonstration more menacing to England than the

contemporary manifestoes and conquering and proselyting armies of

the French Directory.

    To the British Empire the Nore Mutiny was what a strike in the

fire-brigade would be to London threatened by general arson. In a

crisis when the kingdom might well have anticipated the famous

signal that some years later published along the naval line of

battle what it was that upon occasion England expected of

Englishmen; that was the time when at the mast-heads of the

three-deckers and seventy-fours moored in her own roadstead- a

fleet, the right arm of a Power then all but the sole free

conservative one of the Old World- the blue-jackets, to be numbered by

thousands, ran up with huzzas the British colors with the union and

cross wiped out; by that cancellation transmuting the flag of

founded law and freedom defined, into the enemy's red meteor of

unbridled and unbounded revolt. Reasonable discontent growing out of

practical grievances in the fleet had been ignited into irrational

combustion, as by live cinders blown across the Channel from France in

flames.

    The event converted into irony for a time those spirited strains

of Dibdin- as a song-writer no mean auxiliary to the English

Government at the European conjuncture- strains celebrating, among

other things, the patriotic devotion of the British tar:



           "And as for my life, 'tis the King's!"



    Such an episode in the Island's grand naval story her naval

historians naturally abridge; one of them (G.P.R. James) candidly

acknowledging that fain would he pass it over did not "impartiality

forbid fastidiousness." And yet his mention is less a narration than a

reference, having to do hardly at all with details. Nor are these

readily to be found in the libraries. Like some other events in

every age befalling states everywhere, including America, the Great

Mutiny was of such character that national pride along with views of

policy would fain shade it off into the historical background. Such

events can not be ignored, but there is a considerate way of

historically treating them. If a well-constituted individual

refrains from blazoning aught amiss or calamitous in his family, a

nation in the like circumstance may without reproach be equally

discreet.

    Though after parleyings between Government and the ringleaders,

and concessions by the former as to some glaring abuses, the first

uprising- that at Spithead- with difficulty was put down, or matters

for the time pacified; yet at the Nore the unforeseen renewal of

insurrection on a yet larger scale, and emphasized in the

conferences that ensued by demands deemed by the authorities not

only inadmissible but aggressively insolent, indicated- if the Red

Flag did not sufficiently do so- what was the spirit animating the

men. Final suppression, however, there was; but only made possible

perhaps by the unswerving loyalty of the marine corps and voluntary

resumption of loyalty among influential sections of the crews.

    To some extent the Nore Mutiny may be regarded as analogous to the

distempering irruption of contagious fever in a frame constitutionally

sound, and which anon throws it off.

    At all events, of these thousands of mutineers were some of the

tars who not so very long afterwards- whether wholly prompted

thereto by patriotism, or pugnacious instinct, or by both,- helped

to win a coronet for Nelson at the Nile, and the naval crown of crowns

for him at Trafalgar. To the mutineers those battles, and especially

Trafalgar, were a plenary absolution and a grand one: For all that

goes to make up scenic naval display, heroic magnificence in arms,

those battles, especially Trafalgar, stand unmatched in human annals.
