




                          CHAPTER 25



    In a seventy-four of the old order the deck known as the upper gun

deck was the one covered over by the spar-deck which last though not

without its armament was for the most part exposed to the weather.

In general it was at all hours free from hammocks; those of the crew

swinging on the lower gun deck, and berth-deck, the latter being not

only a dormitory but also the place for the stowing of the sailors'

bags, and on both sides lined with the large chests or movable

pantries of the many messes of the men.

    On the starboard side of the Indomitable's upper gun deck,

behold Billy Budd under sentry, lying prone in irons, in one of the

bays formed by the regular spacing of the guns comprising the

batteries on either side. All these pieces were of the heavier calibre

of that period. Mounted on lumbering wooden carriages they were

hampered with cumbersome harness of breechen and strong side-tackles

for running them out. Guns and carriages, together with the long

rammers and shorter lintstocks lodged in loops overhead- all these, as

customary, were painted black; and the heavy hempen breechens,

tarred to the same tint, wore the like livery of the undertakers. In

contrast with the funereal hue of these surroundings the prone

sailor's exterior apparel, white jumper and white duck trousers,

each more or less soiled, dimly glimmered in the obscure light of

the bay like a patch of discolored snow in early April lingering at

some upland cave's black mouth. In effect he is already in his

shroud or the garments that shall serve him in lieu of one. Over

him, but scarce illuminating him, two battle-lanterns swing from two

massive beams of the deck above. Fed with the oil supplied by the

war-contractors (whose gains, honest or otherwise, are in every land

an anticipated portion of the harvest of death), with flickering

splashes of dirty yellow light they pollute the pale moonshine all but

ineffectually struggling in obstructed flecks thro' the open ports

from which the tompioned cannon protrude. Other lanterns at

intervals serve but to bring out somewhat the obscurer bays which,

like small confessionals or side-chapels in a cathedral, branch from

the long dim-vistaed broad aisle between the two batteries of that

covered tier.

    Such was the deck where now lay the Handsome Sailor. Through the

rose-tan of his complexion, no pallor could have shown. It would

have taken days of sequestration from the winds and the sun to have

brought about the effacement of that. But the skeleton in the

cheekbone at the point of its angle was just beginning delicately to

be defined under the warm-tinted skin. In fervid hearts

self-contained, some brief experiences devour our human tissue as

secret fire in a ship's hold consumes cotton in the bale.

    But now lying between the two guns, as nipped in the vice of fate,

Billy's agony, mainly proceeding from a generous young heart's

virgin experience of the diabolical incarnate and effective in some

men- the tension of that agony was over now. It survived not the

something healing in the closeted interview with Captain Vere. Without

movement, he lay as in a trance. That adolescent expression previously

noted as his, taking on something akin to the look of a slumbering

child in the cradle when the warm hearth-glow of the still chamber

at night plays on the dimples that at whiles mysteriously form in

the cheek, silently coming and going there. For now and then in the

gyved one's trance a serene happy light born of some wandering

reminiscence or dream would diffuse itself over his face, and then

wane away only anew to return.

    The Chaplain coming to see him and finding him thus, and

perceiving no sign that he was conscious of his presence,

attentively regarded him for a space, then slipping aside, withdrew

for the time, peradventure feeling that even he the minister of

Christ, tho' receiving his stipend from Mars, had no consolation to

proffer which could result in a peace transcending that which he

beheld. But in the small hours he came again. And the prisoner, now

awake to his surroundings, noticed his approach, and civilly, all

but cheerfully, welcomed him. But it was to little purpose that in the

interview following the good man sought to bring Billy Budd to some

godly understanding that he must die, and at dawn. True, Billy himself

freely referred to his death as a thing close at hand; but it was

something in the way that children will refer to death in general, who

yet among their other sports will play a funeral with hearse and

mourners.

    Not that like children Billy was incapable of conceiving what

death really is. No, but he was wholly without irrational fear of

it, a fear more prevalent in highly civilized communities than those

so-called barbarous ones which in all respects stand nearer to

unadulterate Nature. And, as elsewhere said, a barbarian Billy

radically was; as much so, for all the costume, as his countrymen

the British captives, living trophies, made to march in the Roman

triumph of Germanicus. Quite as much so as those later barbarians,

young men probably, and picked specimens among the earlier British

converts to Christianity, at least nominally such, and taken to Rome

(as to-day converts from lesser isles of the sea may be taken to

London), of whom the Pope of that time, admiring the strangeness of

their personal beauty so unlike the Italian stamp, their clear ruddy

complexion and curled flaxen locks, exclaimed, "Angles-" (meaning

English the modern derivative) "Angles do you call them? And is it

because they look so like angels?" Had it been later in time one would

think that the Pope had in mind Fra Angelico's seraphs some of whom,

plucking apples in gardens of the Hesperides, have the faint

rose-bud complexion of the more beautiful English girls.

    If in vain the good Chaplain sought to impress the young barbarian

with ideas of death akin to those conveyed in the skull, dial, and

cross-bones on old tombstones; equally futile to all appearance were

his efforts to bring home to him the thought of salvation and a

Saviour. Billy listened, but less out of awe or reverence perhaps than

from a certain natural politeness; doubtless at bottom regarding all

that in much the same way that most mariners of his class take any

discourse abstract or out of the common tone of the work-a-day

world. And this sailor-way of taking clerical discourse is not

wholly unlike the way in which the pioneer of Christianity full of

transcendent miracles was received long ago on tropic isles by any

superior savage so called- a Tahitian say of Captain Cook's time or

shortly after that time. Out of natural courtesy he received, but

did not appropriate. It was like a gift placed in the palm of an

outreached hand upon which the fingers do not close.

    But the Indomitable's Chaplain was a discreet man possessing the

good sense of a good heart. So he insisted not in his vocation here.

At the instance of Captain Vere, a lieutenant had apprised him of

pretty much everything as to Billy; and since he felt that innocence

was even a better thing than religion wherewith to go to Judgement, he

reluctantly withdrew; but in his emotion not without first

performing an act strange enough in an Englishman, and under the

circumstances yet more so in any regular priest. Stooping over, he

kissed on the fair cheek his fellow-man, a felon in martial law, one

who though on the confines of death he felt he could never convert

to a dogma; nor for all that did he fear for his future.

    Marvel not that having been made acquainted with the young

sailor's essential innocence (an irruption of heretic thought hard

to suppress) the worthy man lifted not a finger to avert the doom of

such a martyr to martial discipline. So to do would not only have been

as idle as invoking the desert, but would also have been an

audacious transgression of the bounds of his function, one as

exactly prescribed to him by military law as that of the boatswain

or any other naval officer. Bluntly put, a chaplain is the minister of

the Prince of Peace serving in the host of the God of War- Mars. As

such, he is as incongruous as a musket would be on the altar at

Christmas. Why then is he there? Because he indirectly subserves the

purpose attested by the cannon; because too he lends the sanction of

the religion of the meek to that which practically is the abrogation

of everything but brute Force.

