




                          CHAPTER 24



    Of a series of incidents within a brief term rapidly following

each other, the adequate narration may take up a term less brief,

especially if explanation or comment here and there seem requisite

to the better understanding of such incidents. Between the entrance

into the cabin of him who never left it alive, and him who when he did

leave it left it as one condemned to die; between this and the

closeted interview just given, less than an hour and a half had

elapsed. It was an interval long enough however to awaken speculations

among no few of the ship's company as to what it was that could be

detaining in the cabin the Master-at-arms and the sailor; for a

rumor that both of them had been seen to enter it and neither of

them had been seen to emerge, this rumor had got abroad upon the gun

decks and in the tops; the people of a great war-ship being in one

respect like villagers taking microscopic note of every outward

movement or non-movement going on. When therefore in weather not at

all tempestuous all hands were called in the second dog-watch, a

summons under such circumstances not usual in those hours, the crew

were not wholly unprepared for some announcement extraordinary, one

having connection too with the continued absence of the two men from

their wonted haunts.

    There was a moderate sea at the time; and the moon, newly risen

and near to being at its full, silvered the white spar-deck wherever

not blotted by the clear-cut shadows horizontally thrown of fixtures

and moving men. On either side of the quarter-deck, the marine guard

under arms was drawn up; and Captain Vere standing in his place

surrounded by all the ward-room officers, addressed his men. In so

doing his manner showed neither more nor less than that properly

pertaining to his supreme position aboard his own ship. In clear terms

and concise he told them what had taken place in the cabin; that the

Master-at-arms was dead; that he who had killed him had been already

tried by a summary court and condemned to death; and that the

execution would take place in the early morning watch. The word mutiny

was not named in what he said. He refrained too from making the

occasion an opportunity for any preachment as to the maintenance of

discipline, thinking perhaps that under existing circumstances in

the navy the consequence of violating discipline should be made to

speak for itself.

    Their Captain's announcement was listened to by the throng of

standing sailors in a dumbness like that of a seated congregation of

believers in hell listening to the clergyman's announcement of his

Calvinistic text.

    At the close, however, a confused murmur went up. It began to wax.

All but instantly, then, at a sign, it was pierced and suppressed by

shrill whistles of the Boatswain and his Mates piping down one watch.

    To be prepared for burial Claggart's body was delivered to certain

petty-officers of his mess. And here, not to clog the sequel with

lateral matters, it may be added that at a suitable hour, the

Master-at-arms was committed to the sea with every funeral honor

properly belonging to his naval grade.

    In this proceeding as in every public one growing out of the

tragedy, strict adherence to usage was observed. Nor in any point

could it have been at all deviated from, either with respect to

Claggart or Billy Budd, without begetting undesirable speculations

in the ship's company, sailors, and more particularly

men-of-war's-men, being of all men the greatest sticklers for usage.

    For similar cause, all communication between Captain Vere and

the condemned one ended with the closeted interview already given, the

latter being now surrendered to the ordinary routine preliminary to

the end. This transfer under guard from the Captain's quarters was

effected without unusual precautions- at least no visible ones.

    If possible, not to let the men so much as surmise that their

officers anticipate aught amiss from them is the tacit rule in a

military ship. And the more that some sort of trouble should really be

apprehended the more do the officers keep that apprehension to

themselves; tho' not the less unostentatious vigilance may be

augmented.

    In the present instance the sentry placed over the prisoner had

strict orders to let no one have communication with him but the

Chaplain. And certain unobtrusive measures were taken absolutely to

insure this point.
