




                          CHAPTER 2



    Though our new-made foretopman was well received in the top and on

the gun decks, hardly here was he that cynosure he had previously been

among those minor ship's companies of the merchant marine, with

which companies only had he hitherto consorted.

    He was young; and despite his all but fully developed frame, in

aspect looked even younger than he really was, owing to a lingering

adolescent expression in the as yet smooth face, all but feminine in

purity of natural complexion, but where, thanks to his seagoing, the

lily was quite suppressed and the rose had some ado visibly to flush

through the tan.

    To one essentially such a novice in the complexities of factitious

life, the abrupt transition from his former and simpler sphere to

the ampler and more knowing world of a great war-ship; this might well

have abashed him had there been any conceit or vanity in his

composition. Among her miscellaneous multitude, the Indomitable

mustered several individuals who, however inferior in grade, were of

no common natural stamp, sailors more signally susceptive of that

air which continuous martial discipline and repeated presence in

battle can in some degree impart even to the average man. As the

Handsome Sailor, Billy Budd's position aboard the seventy-four was

something analogous to that of a rustic beauty transplanted from the

provinces and brought into competition with the highborn dames of

the court. But this change of circumstances he scarce noted. As little

did he observe that something about him provoked an ambiguous smile in

one or two harder faces among the blue-jackets. Nor less unaware was

he of the peculiar favorable effect his person and demeanour had

upon the more intelligent gentlemen of the quarter-deck. Nor could

this well have been otherwise. Cast in a mould peculiar to the

finest physical examples of those Englishmen in whom the Saxon

strain would seem not at all to partake of any Norman or other

admixture, he showed in face that humane look of reposeful good nature

which the Greek sculptor in some instances gave to his heroic strong

man, Hercules. But this again was subtly modified by another and

pervasive quality. The ear, small and shapely, the arch of the foot,

the curve in mouth and nostril, even the indurated hand dyed to the

orange-tawny of the toucan's bill, a hand telling alike of the

halyards and tar-bucket; but, above all, something in the mobile

expression, and every chance attitude and movement, something

suggestive of a mother eminently favored by Love and the Graces; all

this strangely indicated a lineage in direct contradiction to his lot.

The mysteriousness here became less mysterious through a

matter-of-fact elicited when Billy, at the capstan, was being formally

mustered into the service. Asked by the officer, a small brisk

little gentleman, as it chanced among other questions, his place of

birth, he replied, "Please, Sir, I don't know."

    "Don't know where you were born?- Who was your father?"

    "God knows, Sir."

    Struck by the straightforward simplicity of these replies, the

officer next asked, "Do you know anything about your beginning?"

    "No, Sir. But I have heard that I was found in a pretty

silklined basket hanging one morning from the knocker of a good

man's door in Bristol."

    "Found say you? Well," throwing back his head and looking up and

down the new recruit; "Well, it turns out to have been a pretty good

find. Hope they'll find some more like you, my man; the fleet sadly

needs them."

    Yes, Billy Budd was a foundling, a presumable by-blow, and,

evidently, no ignoble one. Noble descent was as evident in him as in a

blood horse.

    For the rest, with little or no sharpness of faculty or any

trace of the wisdom of the serpent, nor yet quite a dove, he possessed

that kind and degree of intelligence going along with the

unconventional rectitude of a sound human creature, one to whom not

yet has been proffered the questionable apple of knowledge. He was

illiterate; he could not read, but he could sing, and like the

illiterate nightingale was sometimes the composer of his own song.

    Of self-consciousness he seemed to have little or none, or about

as much as we may reasonably impute to a dog of Saint Bernard's breed.

    Habitually living with the elements and knowing little more of the

land than as a beach, or, rather, that portion of the terraqueous

globe providentially set apart for dance-houses, doxies and

tapsters, in short what sailors call a "fiddlers'-green," his simple

nature remained unsophisticated by those moral obliquities which are

not in every case incompatible with that manufacturable thing known as

respectability. But are sailors, frequenters of "fiddlers'-greens,"

without vices? No; but less often than with landsmen do their vices,

so called, partake of crookedness of heart, seeming less to proceed

from viciousness than exuberance of vitality after long constraint;

frank manifestations in accordance with natural law. By his original

constitution aided by the cooperating influences of his lot, Billy

in many respects was little more than a sort of upright barbarian,

much such perhaps as Adam presumably might have been ere the urbane

Serpent wriggled himself into his company.

    And here be it submitted that apparently going to corroborate

the doctrine of man's fall, a doctrine now popularly ignored, it is

observable that where certain virtues pristine and unadulterate

peculiarly characterize anybody in the external uniform of

civilization, they will upon scrutiny seem not to be derived from

custom or convention, but rather to be out of keeping with these, as

if indeed exceptionally transmitted from a period prior to Cain's city

and citified man. The character marked by such qualities has to an

unvitiated taste an untampered-with flavor like that of berries, while

the man thoroughly civilized, even in a fair specimen of the breed,

has to the same moral palate a questionable smack as of a compounded

wine. To any stray inheritor of these primitive qualities found,

like Caspar Hauser, wandering dazed in any Christian capital of our

time, the good-natured poet's famous invocation, near two thousand

years ago, of the good rustic out of his latitude in the Rome of the

Cesars, still appropriately holds:-



        "Honest and poor, faithful in word and thought,

        What has thee, Fabian, to the city brought?"



    Though our Handsome Sailor had as much of masculine beauty as

one can expect anywhere to see; nevertheless, like the beautiful woman

in one of Hawthorne's minor tales, there was just one thing amiss in

him. No visible blemish, indeed, as with the lady; no, but an

occasional liability to a vocal defect. Though in the hour of

elemental uproar or peril he was everything that a sailor should be,

yet under sudden provocation of strong heart-feeling, his voice

otherwise singularly musical, as if expressive of the harmony

within, was apt to develop an organic hesitancy, in fact, more or less

of a stutter or even worse. In this particular Billy was a striking

instance that the arch interferer, the envious marplot of Eden,

still has more or less to do with every human consignment to this

planet of earth. In every case, one way or another he is sure to

slip in his little card, as much as to remind us- I too have a hand

here.

    The avowal of such an imperfection in the Handsome Sailor should

be evidence not alone that he is not presented as a conventional hero,

but also that the story in which he is the main figure is no romance.
