




                          CHAPTER 9



    Life in the fore-top well agreed with Billy Budd. There, when

not actually engaged on the yards yet higher aloft, the topmen, who as

such had been picked out for youth and activity, constituted an aerial

club lounging at ease against the smaller stun'sails rolled up into

cushions, spinning yarns like the lazy gods, and frequently amused

with what was going on in the busy world of the decks below. No wonder

then that a young fellow of Billy's disposition was well content in

such society. Giving no cause of offence to anybody, he was always

alert at a call. So in the merchant service it had been with him.

But now such a punctiliousness in duty was shown that his topmates

would sometimes good-naturedly laugh at him for it. This heightened

alacrity had its cause, namely, the impression made upon him by the

first formal gangway-punishment he had ever witnessed, which befell

the day following his impressment. It had been incurred by a little

fellow, young, a novice, an afterguardsman absent from his assigned

post when the ship was being put about; a dereliction resulting in a

rather serious hitch to that manoeuvre, one demanding instantaneous

promptitude in letting go and making fast. When Billy saw the

culprit's naked back under the scourge gridironed with red welts,

and worse; when he marked the dire expression on the liberated man's

face as with his woolen shirt flung over him by the executioner he

rushed forward from the spot to bury himself in the crowd, Billy was

horrified. He resolved that never through remissness would he make

himself liable to such a visitation or do or omit aught that might

merit even verbal reproof. What then was his surprise and concern when

ultimately he found himself getting into petty trouble occasionally

about such matters as the stowage of his bag or something amiss in his

hammock, matters under the police oversight of the ship's-corporals of

the lower decks, and which brought down on him a vague threat from one

of them.

    So heedful in all things as he was, how could this be? He could

not understand it, and it more than vexed him. When he spoke to his

young topmates about it they were either lightly incredulous or

found something comical in his unconcealed anxiety. "Is it your bag,

Billy?" said one. "Well, sew yourself up in it, bully boy, and then

you'll be sure to know if anybody meddles with it."

    Now there was a veteran aboard who because his years began to

disqualify him for more active work had been recently assigned duty as

mainmastman in his watch, looking to the gear belayed at the rail

roundabout that great spar near the deck. At off-times the

Foretopman had picked up some acquaintance with him, and now in his

trouble it occurred to him that he might be the sort of person to go

to for wise counsel. He was an old Dansker long anglicized in the

service, of few words, many wrinkles and some honorable scars. His

wizened face, time-tinted and weather-stained to the complexion of

an antique parchment, was here and there peppered blue by the chance

explosion of a gun-cartridge in action. He was an Agamemnon-man;

some two years prior to the time of this story having served under

Nelson, when but Sir Horatio, in that ship immortal in naval memory,

and which, dismantled and in part broken up to her bare ribs, is

seen a grand skeleton in Haydon's etching. As one of a

boarding-party from the Agamemnon he had received a cut slantwise

along one temple and cheek, leaving a long scar like a streak of

dawn's light falling athwart the dark visage. It was on account of

that scar and the affair in which it was known that he had received

it, as well as from his blue-peppered complexion, that the Dansker

went among the Indomitable's crew by the name of

"Board-her-in-the-smoke."

    Now the first time that his small weazel-eyes happened to light on

Billy Budd, a certain grim internal merriment set all his ancient

wrinkles into antic play. Was it that his eccentric unsentimental

old sapience, primitive in its kind, saw or thought it saw something

which, in contrast with the war-ship's environment, looked oddly

incongruous in the Handsome Sailor? But after slyly studying him at

intervals, the old Merlin's equivocal merriment was modified; for

now when the twain would meet, it would start in his face a quizzing

sort of look, but it would be but momentary and sometimes replaced

by an expression of speculative query as to what might eventually

befall a nature like that, dropped into a world not without some

man-traps and against whose subtleties simple courage, lacking

experience and address and without any touch of defensive ugliness, is

of little avail; and where such innocence as man is capable of does

yet in a moral emergency not always sharpen the faculties or enlighten

the will.

    However it was, the Dansker in his ascetic way rather took to

Billy. Nor was this only because of a certain philosophic interest

in such a character. There was another cause. While the old man's

eccentricities, sometimes bordering on the ursine, repelled the

juniors, Billy, undeterred thereby, revering him as a salt hero, would

make advances, never passing the old Agamemnon-man without a

salutation marked by that respect which is seldom lost on the aged

however crabbed at times or whatever their station in life.

    There was a vein of dry humor, or what not, in the mast-man;

and, whether in freak of patriarchal irony touching Billy's youth

and athletic frame, or for some other and more recondite reason,

from the first in addressing him he always substituted Baby for Billy.

The Dansker in fact being the originator of the name by which the

Foretopman eventually became known aboard ship.

    Well then, in his mysterious little difficulty, going in quest

of the wrinkled one, Billy found him off duty in a dog-watch

ruminating by himself, seated on a shot-box of the upper gun deck, now

and then surveying with a somewhat cynical regard certain of the

more swaggering promenaders there. Billy recounted his trouble,

again wondering how it all happened. The salt seer attentively

listened, accompanying the Foretopman's recital with queer

twitchings of his wrinkles and problematical little sparkles of his

small ferret eyes. Making an end of his story, the Foretopman asked,

"And now, Dansker, do tell me what you think of it."

    The old man, shoving up the front of his tarpaulin and

deliberately rubbing the long slant scar at the point where it entered

the thin hair, laconically said, "Baby Budd, Jimmy Legs" (meaning

the Master-at-arms) "is down on you."

    "Jimmy Legs!" ejaculated Billy, his welkin eyes expanding; "what

for? Why he calls me the sweet and pleasant fellow, they tell me."

    "Does he so?" grinned the grizzled one; then said, "Ay, Baby

Lad, a sweet voice has Jimmy Legs."

    "No, not always. But to me he has. I seldom pass him but there

comes a pleasant word."

    "And that's because he's down upon you, Baby Budd."

    Such reiteration along with the manner of it, incomprehensible

to a novice, disturbed Billy almost as much as the mystery for which

he had sought explanation. Something less unpleasingly oracular he

tried to extract; but the old sea-Chiron, thinking perhaps that for

the nonce he had sufficiently instructed his young Achilles, pursed

his lips, gathered all his wrinkles together and would commit

himself to nothing further.

    Years, and those experiences which befall certain shrewder men

subordinated life-long to the will of superiors, all this had

developed in the Dansker the pithy guarded cynicism that was his

leading characteristic.

