




                          CHAPTER 16



    This incident sorely puzzled Billy Budd. It was an entirely new

experience; the first time in his life that he had ever been

personally approached in underhand intriguing fashion. Prior to this

encounter he had known nothing of the afterguardsman, the two men

being stationed wide apart, one forward and aloft during his watch,

the other on deck and aft.

    What could it mean? And could they really be guineas, those two

glittering objects the interloper had held up to his eyes? Where could

the fellow get guineas? Why even spare buttons are not so plentiful at

sea. The more he turned the matter over, the more he was

non-plussed, and made uneasy and discomforted. In his disgustful

recoil from an overture which tho' he but ill comprehended he

instinctively knew must involve evil of some sort, Billy Budd was like

a young horse fresh from the pasture suddenly inhaling a vile whiff

from some chemical factory, and by repeated snortings tries to get

it out of his nostrils and lungs. This frame of mind barred all desire

of holding further parley with the fellow, even were it but for the

purpose of gaining some enlightenment as to his design in

approaching him. And yet he was not without natural curiosity to see

how such a visitor in the dark would look in broad day.

    He espied him the following afternoon, in his first dog-watch,

below, one of the smokers on that forward part of the upper gun deck

allotted to the pipe. He recognized him by his general cut and

build, more than by his round freckled face and glassy eyes of pale

blue, veiled with lashes all but white. And yet Billy was a bit

uncertain whether indeed it were he- yonder chap about his own age

chatting and laughing in free-hearted way, leaning against a gun; a

genial young fellow enough to look at, and something of a rattlebrain,

to all appearance. Rather chubby too for a sailor, even an

afterguardsman. In short the last man in the world, one would think,

to be overburthened with thoughts, especially those perilous

thoughts that must needs belong to a conspirator in any serious

project, or even to the underling of such a conspirator.

    Altho' Billy was not aware of it, the fellow, with a sidelong

watchful glance had perceived Billy first, and then noting that

Billy was looking at him, thereupon nodded a familiar sort of friendly

recognition as to an old acquaintance, without interrupting the talk

he was engaged in with the group of smokers. A day or two

afterwards, chancing in the evening promenade on a gun deck to pass

Billy, he offered a flying word of good-fellowship, as it were,

which by its unexpectedness, and equivocalness under the circumstances

so embarrassed Billy that he knew not how to respond to it, and let it

go unnoticed.

    Billy was now left more at a loss than before. The ineffectual

speculation into which he was led was so disturbingly alien to him,

that he did his best to smother it. It never entered his mind that

here was a matter which from its extreme questionableness, it was

his duty as a loyal blue-jacket to report in the proper quarter.

And, probably, had such a step been suggested to him, he would have

been deterred from taking it by the thought, one of

novice-magnanimity, that it would savor overmuch of the dirty work

of a telltale. He kept the thing to himself. Yet upon one occasion, he

could not forbear a little disburthening himself to the old Dansker,

tempted thereto perhaps by the influence of a balmy night when the

ship lay becalmed; the twain, silent for the most part, sitting

together on deck, their heads propped against the bulwarks. But it was

only a partial and anonymous account that Billy gave, the unfounded

scruples above referred to preventing full disclosure to anybody. Upon

hearing Billy's version, the sage Dansker seemed to divine more than

he was told; and after a little meditation during which his wrinkles

were pursed as into a point, quite effacing for the time that quizzing

expression his face sometimes wore,"Didn't I say so, Baby Budd?"

    "Say what?" demanded Billy.

    "Why, Jimmy Legs is down on you."

    "And what," rejoined Billy in amazement, "has Jimmy Legs to do

with that cracked afterguardsman?"

    "Ho, it was an afterguardsman then. A cat's-paw, a cat's-paw!"

And with that exclamation, which, whether it had reference to a

light puff of air just then coming over the calm sea, or subtler

relation to the afterguardsman there is no telling, the old Merlin

gave a twisting wrench with his black teeth at his plug of tobacco,

vouchsafing no reply to Billy's impetuous question, tho' now repeated,

for it was his wont to relapse into grim silence when interrogated

in skeptical sort as to any of his sententious oracles, not always

very clear ones, rather partaking of that obscurity which invests most

Delphic deliverances from any quarter.

    Long experience had very likely brought this old man to that

bitter prudence which never interferes in aught and never gives

advice.
