




                          CHAPTER 4

    Concerning "The greatest sailor since our world began."

                                                         Tennyson



    In this matter of writing, resolve as one may to keep to the

main road, some by-paths have an enticement not readily to be

withstood. I am going to err into such a by-path. If the reader will

keep me company I shall be glad. At the least we can promise ourselves

that pleasure which is wickedly said to be in sinning, for a

literary sin the divergence will be.

    Very likely it is no new remark that the inventions of our time

have at last brought about a change in sea-warfare in degree

corresponding to the revolution in all warfare effected by the

original introduction from China into Europe of gunpowder. The first

European fire-arm, a clumsy contrivance, was, as is well known,

scouted by no few of the knights as a base implement, good enough

peradventure for weavers too craven to stand up crossing steel with

steel in frank fight. But as ashore, knightly valor, tho' shorn of its

blazonry, did not cease with the knights, neither on the seas,

though nowadays in encounters there a certain kind of displayed

gallantry be fallen out of date as hardly applicable under changed

circumstances, did the nobler qualities of such naval magnates as

Don John of Austria, Doria, Van Tromp, Jean Bart, the long line of

British Admirals and the American Decaturs of 1812 become obsolete

with their wooden walls.

    Nevertheless, to anybody who can hold the Present at its worth

without being inappreciative of the Past, it may be forgiven, if to

such an one the solitary old hulk at Portsmouth, Nelson's Victory,

seems to float there, not alone as the decaying monument of a fame

incorruptible, but also as a poetic reproach, softened by its

picturesqueness, to the Monitors and yet mightier hulls of the

European ironclads. And this not altogether because such craft are

unsightly, unavoidably lacking the symmetry and grand lines of the old

battle-ships, but equally for other reasons.

    There are some, perhaps, who while not altogether inaccessible

to that poetic reproach just alluded to, may yet on behalf of the

new order, be disposed to parry it; and this to the extent of

iconoclasm, if need be. For example, prompted by the sight of the star

inserted in the Victory's quarter-deck designating the spot where

the Great Sailor fell, these martial utilitarians may suggest

considerations implying that Nelson's ornate publication of his person

in battle was not only unnecessary, but not military, nay, savored

of foolhardiness and vanity. They may add, too, that at Trafalgar it

was in effect nothing less than a challenge to death; and death

came; and that but for his bravado the victorious Admiral might

possibly have survived the battle; and so, instead of having his

sagacious dying injunctions overruled by his immediate successor in

command, he himself, when the contest was decided, might have

brought his shattered fleet to anchor, a proceeding which might have

averted the deplorable loss of life by shipwreck in the elemental

tempest that followed the martial one.

    Well, should we set aside the more disputable point whether for

various reasons it was possible to anchor the fleet, then plausibly

enough the Benthamites of war may urge the above.

    But the might-have-been is but boggy ground to build on. And,

certainly, in foresight as to the larger issue of an encounter, and

anxious preparations for it- buoying the deadly way and mapping it

out, as at Copenhagen- few commanders have been so painstakingly

circumspect as this same reckless declarer of his person in fight.

    Personal prudence even when dictated by quite other than selfish

considerations surely is no special virtue in a military man; while an

excessive love of glory, impassioning a less burning impulse, the

honest sense of duty, is the first. If the name Wellington is not so

much of a trumpet to the blood as the simpler name Nelson, the

reason for this may perhaps be inferred from the above. Alfred in

his funeral ode on the victor of Waterloo ventures not to call him the

greatest soldier of all time, tho' in the same ode he invokes Nelson

as "the greatest sailor since our world began."

    At Trafalgar, Nelson, on the brink of opening the fight, sat

down and wrote his last brief will and testament. If under the

presentiment of the most magnificent of all victories to be crowned by

his own glorious death, a sort of priestly motive led him to dress his

person in the jewelled vouchers of his own shining deeds; if thus to

have adorned himself for the altar and the sacrifice were indeed

vainglory, then affectation and fustian is each more heroic line in

the great epics and dramas, since in such lines the poet but

embodies in verse those exaltations of sentiment that a nature like

Nelson, the opportunity being given, vitalizes into acts.

