




                          CHAPTER 28



    The silence at the moment of execution and for a moment or two

continuing thereafter, a silence but emphasized by the regular wash of

the sea against the hull or the flutter of a sail caused by the

helmsman's eyes being tempted astray, this emphasized silence was

gradually disturbed by a sound not easily to be verbally rendered.

Whoever has heard the freshet-wave of a torrent suddenly swelled by

pouring showers in tropical mountains, showers not shared by the

plain; whoever has heard the first muffled murmur of its sloping

advance through precipitous woods, may form some conception of the

sound now heard. The seeming remoteness of its source was because of

its murmurous indistinctness since it came from close-by, even from

the men massed on the ship's open deck. Being inarticulate, it was

dubious in significance further than it seemed to indicate some

capricious revulsion of thought or feeling such as mobs ashore are

liable to, in the present instance possibly implying a sullen

revocation on the men's part of their involuntary echoing of Billy's

benediction. But ere the murmur had time to wax into clamour it was

met by a strategic command, the more telling that it came with

abrupt unexpectedness.

    "Pipe down the starboard watch, Boatswain, and see that they go."

    Shrill as the shriek of the sea-hawk the whistles of the Boatswain

and his Mates pierced that ominous low sound, dissipating it; and

yielding to the mechanism of discipline, the throng was thinned by one

half. For the remainder most of them were set to temporary employments

connected with trimming the yards and so forth, business readily to be

got up to serve occasion by any officer-of-the-deck.

    Now each proceeding that follows a mortal sentence pronounced at

sea by a drum-head court is characterised by promptitude not

perceptibly merging into hurry, tho' bordering that. The hammock,

the one which had been Billy's bed when alive, having already been

ballasted with shot and otherwise prepared to serve for his canvas

coffin, the last offices of the sea-undertakers, the Sail-Maker's

Mates, were now speedily completed. When everything was in readiness a

second call for all hands made necessary by the strategic movement

before mentioned was sounded and now to witness burial.

    The details of this closing formality it needs not to give. But

when the tilted plank let slide its freight into the sea, a second

strange human murmur was heard, blended now with another

inarticulate sound proceeding from certain larger sea-fowl, whose

attention having been attracted by the peculiar commotion in the water

resulting from the heavy sloped dive of the shotted hammock into the

sea, flew screaming to the spot. So near the hull did they come,

that the stridor or bony creak of their gaunt double-jointed pinions

was audible. As the ship under light airs passed on, leaving the

burial-spot astern, they still kept circling it low down with the

moving shadow of their outstretched wings and the croaked requiem of

their cries.

    Upon sailors as superstitious as those of the age preceding

ours, men-of-war's-men too who had just beheld the prodigy of repose

in the form suspended in air and now foundering in the deeps; to

such mariners the action of the sea-fowl, tho' dictated by mere animal

greed for prey, was big with no prosaic significance. An uncertain

movement began among them, in which some encroachment was made. It was

tolerated but for a moment. For suddenly the drum beat to quarters,

which familiar sound happening at least twice every day, had upon

the present occasion a signal peremptoriness in it. True martial

discipline long continued superinduces in average man a sort of

impulse of docility whose operation at the official sound of command

much resembles in its promptitude the effect of an instinct.

    The drum-beat dissolved the multitude, distributing most of them

along the batteries of the two covered gun decks. There, as wont,

the guns' crews stood by their respective cannon erect and silent.

In due course the First Officer, sword under arm and standing in his

place on the quarter-deck, formally received the successive reports of

the sworded Lieutenants commanding the sections of batteries below;

the last of which reports being made, the summed report he delivered

with the customary salute to the Commander. All this occupied time,

which in the present case, was the object of beating to quarters at an

hour prior to the customary one. That such variance from usage was

authorized by an officer like Captain Vere, a martinet as some

deemed him, was evidence of the necessity for unusual action implied

in what he deemed to be temporarily the mood of his men. "With

mankind," he would say, "forms, measured forms are everything; and

that is the import couched in the story of Orpheus with his lyre

spell-binding the wild denizens of the wood." And this he once applied

to the disruption of forms going on across the Channel and the

consequences thereof.

    At this unwonted muster at quarters, all proceeded as at the

regular hour. The band on the quarter-deck played a sacred air.

After which the Chaplain went thro' the customary morning service.

That done, the drum beat the retreat, and toned by music and religious

rites subserving the discipline and purpose of war, the men in their

wonted orderly manner, dispersed to the places allotted them when

not at the guns.

    And now it was full day. The fleece of low-hanging vapor had

vanished, licked up by the sun that late had so glorified it. And

the circumambient air in the clearness of its serenity was like smooth

marble in the polished block not yet removed from the

marble-dealer's yard.

