




                          CHAPTER 11



    What was the matter with the Master-at-arms? And, be the matter

what it might, how could it have direct relation to Billy Budd with

whom, prior to the affair of the spilled soup, he had never come

into any special contact, official or otherwise? What indeed could the

trouble have to do with one so little inclined to give offence as

the merchant-ship's peacemaker, even him who in Claggart's own

phrase was "the sweet and pleasant young fellow"? Yes, why should

Jimmy Legs, to borrow the Dansker's expression, be down on the

Handsome Sailor? But, at heart and not for nothing, as the late chance

encounter may indicate to the discerning, down on him, secretly down

on him, he assuredly was.

    Now to invent something touching the more private career of

Claggart, something involving Billy Budd, of which something the

latter should be wholly ignorant, some romantic incident implying that

Claggart's knowledge of the young blue-jacket began at some period

anterior to catching sight of him on board the seventy-four-all

this, not so difficult to do, might avail in a way more or less

interesting to account for whatever of enigma may appear to lurk in

the case. But in fact there was nothing of the sort. And yet the

cause, necessarily to be assumed as the sole one assignable, is in its

very realism as much charged with that prime element of Radcliffian

romance, the mysterious, as any that the ingenuity of the author of

the Mysteries of Udolpho could devise. For what can more partake of

the mysterious than an antipathy spontaneous and profound, such as

is evoked in certain exceptional mortals by the mere aspect of some

other mortal, however harmless he may be, if not called forth by

this very harmlessness itself?

    Now there can exist no irritating juxtaposition of dissimilar

personalities comparable to that which is possible aboard a great

war-ship fully manned and at sea. There, every day among all ranks

almost every man comes into more or less of contact with almost

every other man. Wholly there to avoid even the sight of an

aggravating object one must needs give it Jonah's toss or jump

overboard himself. Imagine how all this might eventually operate on

some peculiar human creature the direct reverse of a saint?

    But for the adequate comprehending of Claggart by a normal nature,

these hints are insufficient. To pass from a normal nature to him

one must cross "the deadly space between." And this is best done by

indirection.

    Long ago an honest scholar my senior, said to me in reference to

one who like himself is now no more, a man so unimpeachably

respectable that against him nothing was ever openly said tho' among

cracked by the tap of a lady's fan. You are aware that I am the

adherent of no organized religion much less of any philosophy built

into a system. Well, for all that, I think that to try and get into

from some source other than what is known as knowledge of the world-

that were hardly possible, at least for me."

human, and knowledge of the world assuredly implies the knowledge of

human nature, and in most of its varieties."

    "Yes, but a superficial knowledge of it, serving ordinary

purposes. But for anything deeper, I am not certain whether to know

the world and to know human nature be not two distinct branches of

knowledge, which while they may coexist in the same heart, yet

either may exist with little or nothing of the other. Nay, in an

average man of the world, his constant rubbing with it blunts that

fine spiritual insight indispensable to the understanding of the

essential in certain exceptional characters, whether evil ones or

good. In a matter of some importance I have seen a girl wind an old

lawyer about her little finger. Nor was it the dotage of senile

love. Nothing of the sort. But he knew law better than he knew the

girl's heart. Coke and Blackstone hardly shed so much light into

obscure spiritual places as the Hebrew prophets. And who were they?

Mostly recluses."

    At the time my inexperience was such that I did not quite see

the drift of all this. It may be that I see it now. And, indeed, if

that lexicon which is based on Holy Writ were any longer popular,

one might with less difficulty define and denominate certain

phenomenal men. As it is, one must turn to some authority not liable

to the charge of being tinctured with the Biblical element.

    In a list of definitions included in the authentic translation

of Plato, a list attributed to him, occurs this: "Natural Depravity: a

depravity according to nature." A definition which tho' savoring of

Calvinism, by no means involves Calvin's dogmas as to total mankind.

Evidently its intent makes it applicable but to individuals. Not

many are the examples of this depravity which the gallows and jail

supply. At any rate for notable instances, since these have no

vulgar alloy of the brute in them, but invariably are dominated by

intellectuality, one must go elsewhere. Civilization, especially if of

the austerer sort, is auspicious to it. It folds itself in the

mantle of respectability. It has its certain negative virtues

serving as silent auxiliaries. It never allows wine to get within

its guard. It is not going too far to say that it is without vices

or small sins. There is a phenomenal pride in it that excludes them

from anything mercenary or avaricious. In short the depravity here

meant partakes nothing of the sordid or sensual. It is serious, but

free from acerbity. Though no flatterer of mankind it never speaks ill

of it.

    But the thing which in eminent instances signalizes so exceptional

a nature is this: though the man's even temper and discreet bearing

would seem to intimate a mind peculiarly subject to the law of reason,

not the less in his heart he would seem to riot in complete

exemption from that law, having apparently little to do with reason

further than to employ it as an ambidexter implement for effecting the

irrational. That is to say: Toward the accomplishment of an aim

which in wantonness of malignity would seem to partake of the

insane, he will direct a cool judgement sagacious and sound.

    These men are true madmen, and of the most dangerous sort, for

their lunacy is not continuous but occasional, evoked by some

special object; it is probably secretive, which is as much to say it

is self-contained, so that when moreover, most active, it is to the

average mind not distinguishable from sanity, and for the reason above

suggested that whatever its aims may be- and the aim is never

declared- the method and the outward proceeding are always perfectly

rational.

    Now something such an one was Claggart, in whom was the mania of

an evil nature, not engendered by vicious training or corrupting books

or licentious living, but born with him and innate, in short "a

depravity according to nature."

