




                          CHAPTER 27

                         A Digression



    When some days afterward in reference to the singularity just

mentioned, the Purser, a rather ruddy rotund person more accurate as

an accountant than profound as a philosopher, said at mess to the

Surgeon, "What testimony to the force lodged in will-power," the

latter- saturnine, spare and tall, one in whom a discreet causticity

went along with a manner less genial than polite, replied, "Your

pardon, Mr. Purser. In a hanging scientifically conducted- and under

special orders I myself directed how Budd's was to be effected- any

movement following the completed suspension and originating in the

body suspended, such movement indicates mechanical spasm in the

muscular system. Hence the absence of that is no more attributable

to will-power as you call it than to horse-power- begging your

pardon."

    "But this muscular spasm you speak of, is not that in a degree

more or less invariable in these cases?"

    "Assuredly so, Mr. Purser."

    "How then, my good sir, do you account for its absence in this

instance?"

    "Mr. Purser, it is clear that your sense of the singularity in

this matter equals not mine. You account for it by what you call

will-power, a term not yet included in the lexicon of science. For

me I do not, with my present knowledge, pretend to account for it at

all. Even should we assume the hypothesis that at the first touch of

the halyards the action of Budd's heart, intensified by

extraordinary emotion at its climax, abruptly stopt- much like a watch

when in carelessly winding it up you strain at the finish, thus

snapping the chain- even under that hypothesis, how account for the

phenomenon that followed?"

    "You admit then that the absence of spasmodic movement was

phenomenal."

    "It was phenomenal, Mr. Purser, in the sense that it was an

appearance the cause of which is not immediately to be assigned."

    "But tell me, my dear Sir," pertinaciously continued the other,

"was the man's death effected by the halter, or was it a species of

euthanasia?"

    "Euthanasia, Mr. Purser, is something like your will-power: I

doubt its authenticity as a scientific term- begging your pardon

again. It is at once imaginative and metaphysical,- in short, Greek.

But," abruptly changing his tone, "there is a case in the sick-bay

that I do not care to leave to my assistants. Beg your pardon, but

excuse me." And rising from the mess he formally withdrew.
