




                          CHAPTER 26



    The night, so luminous on the spar-deck, but otherwise on the

cavernous ones below, levels so like the tiered galleries in a

coal-mine- the luminous night passed away. But, like the prophet in

the chariot disappearing in heaven and dropping his mantle to

Elisha, the withdrawing night transferred its pale robe to the

breaking day. A meek shy light appeared in the East, where stretched a

diaphanous fleece of white furrowed vapor. That light slowly waxed.

Suddenly eight bells was struck aft, responded to by one louder

metallic stroke from forward. It was four o'clock in the morning.

Instantly the silver whistles were heard summoning all hands to

witness punishment. Up through the great hatchways rimmed with racks

of heavy shot, the watch below came pouring, overspreading with the

watch already on deck the space between the main-mast and fore-mast

including that occupied by the capacious launch and the black booms

tiered on either side of it, boat and booms making a summit of

observation for the powder-boys and younger tars. A different group

comprising one watch of topmen leaned over the rail of that

sea-balcony, no small one in a seventy-four, looking down on the crowd

below. Man or boy, none spake but in whisper, and few spake at all.

Captain Vere- as before, the central figure among the assembled

commissioned officers- stood nigh the break of the poop-deck facing

forward. Just below him on the quarter-deck the marines in full

equipment were drawn up much as at the scene of the promulgated

sentence.

    At sea in the old time, the execution by halter of a military

sailor was generally from the fore-yard. In the present instance,

for special reasons the main-yard was assigned. Under an arm of that

lee-yard the prisoner was presently brought up, the Chaplain attending

him. It was noted at the time and remarked upon afterwards, that in

this final scene the good man evinced little or nothing of the

perfunctory. Brief speech indeed he had with the condemned one, but

the genuine Gospel was less on his tongue than in his aspect and

manner towards him. The final preparations personal to the latter

being speedily brought to an end by two boatswain's mates, the

consummation impended. Billy stood facing aft. At the penultimate

moment, his words, his only ones, words wholly unobstructed in the

utterance were these- "God bless Captain Vere!" Syllables so

unanticipated coming from one with the ignominious hemp about his

neck- a conventional felon's benediction directed aft towards the

quarters of honor; syllables too delivered in the clear melody of a

singing-bird on the point of launching from the twig, had a phenomenal

effect, not unenhanced by the rare personal beauty of the young sailor

spiritualized now thro' late experiences so poignantly profound.

    Without volition as it were, as if indeed the ship's populace were

but the vehicles of some vocal current electric, with one voice from

alow and aloft came a resonant sympathetic echo- "God bless Captain

Vere!" And yet at that instant Billy alone must have been in their

hearts, even as he was in their eyes.

    At the pronounced words and the spontaneous echo that voluminously

rebounded them, Captain Vere, either thro' stoic self-control or a

sort of momentary paralysis induced by emotional shock, stood

erectly rigid as a musket in the ship-armorer's rack.

    The hull deliberately recovering from the periodic roll to leeward

was just regaining an even keel, when the last signal, a

preconcerted dumb one, was given. At the same moment it chanced that

the vapory fleece hanging low in the East, was shot thro' with a

soft glory as of the fleece of the Lamb of God seen in mystical

vision, and simultaneously therewith, watched by the wedged mass of

upturned faces, Billy ascended; and, ascending, took the full rose

of the dawn.

    In the pinioned figure, arrived at the yard-end, to the wonder

of all no motion was apparent, none save that created by the ship's

motion, in moderate weather so majestic in a great ship ponderously

cannoned.

