




                          CHAPTER 6



    But on board the seventy-four in which Billy now swung his

hammock, very little in the manner of the men and nothing obvious in

the demeanour of the officers would have suggested to an ordinary

observer that the Great Mutiny was a recent event. In their general

bearing and conduct the commissioned officers of a warship naturally

take their tone from the Commander, that is if he have that ascendancy

of character that ought to be his.

    Captain the Honorable Edward Fairfax Vere, to give his full title,

was a bachelor of forty or thereabouts, a sailor of distinction even

in a time prolific of renowned seamen. Though allied to the higher

nobility, his advancement had not been altogether owing to

influences connected with that circumstance. He had seen much service,

been in various engagements, always acquitting himself as an officer

mindful of the welfare of his men, but never tolerating an

infraction of discipline; thoroughly versed in the science of his

profession, and intrepid to the verge of temerity, though never

injudiciously so. For his gallantry in the West Indian waters as

Flag-Lieutenant under Rodney in that Admiral's crowning victory over

De Grasse, he was made a Post-Captain.

    Ashore in the garb of a civilian, scarce anyone would have taken

him for a sailor, more especially that he never garnished

unprofessional talk with nautical terms, and grave in his bearing,

evinced little appreciation of mere humor. It was not out of keeping

with these traits that on a passage when nothing demanded his

paramount action, he was the most undemonstrative of men. Any landsman

observing this gentleman, not conspicuous by his stature and wearing

no pronounced insignia, emerging from his cabin to the open deck,

and noting the silent deference of the officers retiring to leeward,

might have taken him for the King's guest, a civilian aboard the

King's-ship, some highly honorable discreet envoy on his way to an

important post. But in fact this unobtrusiveness of demeanour may have

proceeded from a certain unaffected modesty of manhood sometimes

accompanying a resolute nature, a modesty evinced at all times not

calling for pronounced action, and which shown in any rank of life

suggests a virtue aristocratic in kind.

    As with some others engaged in various departments of the

world's more heroic activities, Captain Vere, though practical

enough upon occasion, would at times betray a certain dreaminess of

mood. Standing alone on the weather-side of the quarter-deck, one hand

holding by the rigging, he would absently gaze off at the blank sea.

At the presentation to him then of some minor matter interrupting

the current of his thoughts he would show more or less irascibility;

but instantly he would control it.

    In the navy he was popularly known by the appellation- Starry

Vere. How such a designation happened to fall upon one who, whatever

his sterling qualities, was without any brilliant ones was in this

wise: A favorite kinsman, Lord Denton, a free-hearted fellow, had been

the first to meet and congratulate him upon his return to England from

his West Indian cruise; and but the day previous turning over a copy

of Andrew Marvell's poems, had lighted, not for the first time

however, upon the lines entitled Appleton House, the name of one of

the seats of their common ancestor, a hero in the German wars of the

seventeenth century, in which poem occur the lines,



            "This 'tis to have been from the first

            In a domestic heaven nursed,

            Under the discipline severe

            Of Fairfax and the starry Vere."



And so, upon embracing his cousin fresh from Rodney's great victory

wherein he had played so gallant a part, brimming over with just

family pride in the sailor of their house, he exuberantly exclaimed,

"Give ye joy, Ed; give ye joy, my starry Vere!" This got currency, and

the novel prefix serving in familiar parlance readily to distinguish

the Indomitable's Captain from another Vere his senior, a distant

relative, an officer of like rank in the navy, it remained permanently

attached to the surname.
