




                          CHAPTER 7



    In view of the part that the Commander of the Indomitable plays in

scenes shortly to follow, it may be well to fill out that sketch of

his outlined in the previous chapter.

    Aside from his qualities as a sea-officer, Captain Vere was an

exceptional character. Unlike no few of England's renowned sailors,

long and arduous service with signal devotion to it, had not

resulted in absorbing and salting the entire man. He had a marked

leaning toward everything intellectual. He loved books, never going to

sea without a newly replenished library, compact but of the best.

The isolated leisure, in some cases so wearisome, falling at intervals

to commanders even during a war-cruise, never was tedious to Captain

Vere. With nothing of that literary taste which less heeds the thing

conveyed than the vehicle, his bias was toward those books to which

every serious mind of superior order occupying any active post of

authority in the world naturally inclines; books treating of actual

men and events no matter of what era- history, biography and

unconventional writers, who, free from cant and convention, like

Montaigne, honestly and in the spirit of common sense philosophize

upon realities.

    In this line of reading he found confirmation of his own more

reasoned thoughts- confirmation which he had vainly sought in social

converse, so that as touching most fundamental topics, there had got

to be established in him some positive convictions, which he

forefelt would abide in him essentially unmodified so long as his

intelligent part remained unimpaired. In view of the troubled period

in which his lot was cast this was well for him. His settled

convictions were as a dyke against those invading waters of novel

opinion, social, political and otherwise, which carried away as in a

torrent no few minds in those days, minds by nature not inferior to

his own. While other members of that aristocracy to which by birth

he belonged were incensed at the innovators mainly because their

theories were inimical to the privileged classes, not alone Captain

Vere disinterestedly opposed them because they seemed to him incapable

of embodiment in lasting institutions, but at war with the peace of

the world and the true welfare of mankind.

    With minds less stored than his and less earnest, some officers of

his rank, with whom at times he would necessarily consort, found him

lacking in the companionable quality, a dry and bookish gentleman,

as they deemed. Upon any chance withdrawal from their company one

would be apt to say to another, something like this: "Vere is a

noble fellow, Starry Vere. Spite the gazettes, Sir Horatio" (meaning

him with the Lord title) "is at bottom scarce a better seaman or

fighter. But between you and me now, don't you think there is a

queer streak of the pedantic running thro' him? Yes, like the King's

yarn in a coil of navy-rope?"

    Some apparent ground there was for this sort of confidential

criticism; since not only did the Captain's discourse never fall

into the jocosely familiar, but in illustrating of any point

touching the stirring personages and events of the time he would be as

apt to cite some historic character or incident of antiquity as that

he would cite from the moderns. He seemed unmindful of the

circumstance that to his bluff company such remote allusions,

however pertinent they might really be, were altogether alien to men

whose reading was mainly confined to the journals. But considerateness

in such matters is not easy to natures constituted like Captain

Vere's. Their honesty prescribes to them directness, sometimes

far-reaching like that of a migratory fowl that in its flight never

heeds when it crosses a frontier.
