




                          CHAPTER 17



    Yes, despite the Dansker's pithy insistence as to the

Master-at-arms being at the bottom of these strange experiences of

Billy on board the Indomitable, the young sailor was ready to

ascribe them to almost anybody but the man who, to use Billy's own

expression, "always had a pleasant word for him." This is to be

wondered at. Yet not so much to be wondered at. In certain matters,

some sailors even in mature life remain unsophisticated enough. But

a young seafarer of the disposition of our athletic Foretopman, is

much of a child-man. And yet a child's utter innocence is but its

blank ignorance, and the innocence more or less wanes as

intelligence waxes. But in Billy Budd intelligence, such as it was,

had advanced, while yet his simplemindedness remained for the most

part unaffected. Experience is a teacher indeed; yet did Billy's years

make his experience small. Besides, he had none of that intuitive

knowledge of the bad which in natures not good or incompletely so

foreruns experience, and therefore may pertain, as in some instances

it too clearly does pertain, even to youth.

    And what could Billy know of man except of man as a mere sailor?

And the old-fashioned sailor, the veritable man-before-the-mast, the

sailor from boyhood up, he, tho' indeed of the same species as a

landsman, is in some respects singularly distinct from him. The sailor

is frankness, the landsman is finesse. Life is not a game with the

sailor, demanding the long head; no intricate game of chess where

few moves are made in straightforwardness, and ends are attained by

indirection; an oblique, tedious, barren game hardly worth that poor

candle burnt out in playing it.

    Yes, as a class, sailors are in character a juvenile race. Even

their deviations are marked by juvenility. And this more especially

holding true with the sailors of Billy's time. Then, too, certain

things which apply to all sailors, do more pointedly operate, here and

there, upon the junior one. Every sailor, too, is accustomed to obey

orders without debating them; his life afloat is externally ruled

for him; he is not brought into that promiscuous commerce with mankind

where unobstructed free agency on equal terms- equal superficially, at

least- soon teaches one that unless upon occasion he exercise a

distrust keen in proportion to the fairness of the appearance, some

foul turn may be served him. A ruled undemonstrative distrustfulness

is so habitual, not with business-men so much, as with men who know

their kind in less shallow relations than business, namely, certain

men-of-the-world, that they come at last to employ it all but

unconsciously; and some of them would very likely feel real surprise

at being charged with it as one of their general characteristics.

