




                          CHAPTER 23



    It was Captain Vere himself who of his own motion communicated the

finding of the court to the prisoner; for that purpose going to the

compartment where he was in custody and bidding the marine there to

withdraw for the time.

    Beyond the communication of the sentence what took place at this

interview was never known. But in view of the character of the twain

briefly closeted in that state-room, each radically sharing in the

rarer qualities of our nature- so rare indeed as to be all but

incredible to average minds however much cultivated- some

conjectures may be ventured.

    It would have been in consonance with the spirit of Captain Vere

should he on this occasion have concealed nothing from the condemned

one- should he indeed have frankly disclosed to him the part he

himself had played in bringing about the decision, at the same time

revealing his actuating motives. On Billy's side it is not

improbable that such a confession would have been received in much the

same spirit that prompted it. Not without a sort of joy indeed he

might have appreciated the brave opinion of him implied in his

Captain's making such a confidant of him. Nor, as to the sentence

itself could he have been insensible that it was imparted to him as to

one not afraid to die. Even more may have been. Captain Vere in the

end may have developed the passion sometimes latent under an

exterior stoical or indifferent. He was old enough to have been

Billy's father. The austere devotee of military duty, letting

himself melt back into what remains primeval in our formalized

humanity, may in the end have caught Billy to his heart even as

Abraham may have caught young Isaac on the brink of resolutely

offering him up in obedience to the exacting behest. But there is no

telling the sacrament, seldom if in any case revealed to the gadding

world, wherever under circumstances at all akin to those here

attempted to be set forth, two of great Nature's nobler order embrace.

There is privacy at the time, inviolable to the survivor, and holy

oblivion, the sequel to each diviner magnanimity, providentially

covers all at last.

    The first to encounter Captain Vere in act of leaving the

compartment was the senior Lieutenant. The face he beheld, for the

moment one expressive of the agony of the strong, was to that officer,

tho' a man of fifty, a startling revelation. That the condemned one

suffered less than he who mainly had effected the condemnation was

apparently indicated by the former's exclamation in the scene soon

perforce to be touched upon.

