




                          CHAPTER 29



    The symmetry of form attainable in pure fiction can not so readily

be achieved in a narration essentially having less to do with fable

than with fact. Truth uncompromisingly told will always have its

ragged edges; hence the conclusion of such a narration is apt to be

less finished than an architectural finial.

    How it fared with the Handsome Sailor during the year of the Great

Mutiny has been faithfully given. But tho' properly the story ends

with his life, something in way of sequel will not be amiss. Three

brief chapters will suffice.

    In the general re-christening under the Directory of the craft

originally forming the navy of the French monarchy, the St. Louis

line-of-battle ship was named the Atheiste. Such a name, like some

other substituted ones in the Revolutionary fleet, while proclaiming

the infidel audacity of the ruling power was yet, tho' not so intended

to be, the aptest name, if one consider it, ever given to a

war-ship; far more so indeed than the Devastation, the Erebus (the

Hell) and similar names bestowed upon fighting-ships.

    On the return-passage to the English fleet from the detached

cruise during which occurred the events already recorded, the

Indomitable fell in with the Atheiste. An engagement ensued; during

which Captain Vere, in the act of putting his ship alongside the enemy

with a view of throwing his boarders across her bulwarks, was hit by a

musket-ball from a port-hole of the enemy's main cabin. More than

disabled he dropped to the deck and was carried below to the same

cock-pit where some of his men already lay. The senior Lieutenant took

command. Under him the enemy was finally captured and though much

crippled was by rare good fortune successfully taken into Gibraltar,

an English port not very distant from the scene of the fight. There,

Captain Vere with the rest of the wounded was put ashore. He

lingered for some days, but the end came. Unhappily he was cut off too

early for the Nile and Trafalgar. The spirit that spite its

philosophic austerity may yet have indulged in the most secret of

all passions, ambition, never attained to the fulness of fame.

    Not long before death, while lying under the influence of that

magical drug which soothing the physical frame mysteriously operates

on the subtler element in man, he was heard to murmur words

inexplicable to his attendant- "Billy Budd, Billy Budd." That these

were not the accents of remorse, would seem clear from what the

attendant said to the Indomitable's senior officer of marines who,

as the most reluctant to condemn of the members of the drum-head

court, too well knew, tho' here he kept the knowledge to himself,

who Billy Budd was.

