




                          CHAPTER 5



    Yes, the outbreak at the Nore was put down. But not every

grievance was redressed. If the contractors, for example, were no

longer permitted to ply some practices peculiar to their tribe

everywhere, such as providing shoddy cloth, rations not sound, or

false in the measure, not the less impressment, for one thing, went

on. By custom sanctioned for centuries, and judicially maintained by a

Lord Chancellor as late as Mansfield, that mode of manning the

fleet, a mode now fallen into a sort of abeyance but never formally

renounced, it was not practicable to give up in those years. Its

abrogation would have crippled the indispensable fleet, one wholly

under canvas, no steam-power, its innumerable sails and thousands of

cannon, everything in short, worked by muscle alone; a fleet the

more insatiate in demand for men, because then multiplying its ships

of all grades against contingencies present and to come of the

convulsed Continent.

    Discontent foreran the Two Mutinies, and more or less it lurkingly

survived them. Hence it was not unreasonable to apprehend some

return of trouble, sporadic or general. One instance of such

apprehensions: In the same year with this story, Nelson, then

Vice-Admiral Sir Horatio, being with the fleet off the Spanish

coast, was directed by the Admiral in command to shift his pennant

from the Captain to the Theseus; and for this reason: that the

latter ship having newly arrived on the station from home where it had

taken part in the Great Mutiny, danger was apprehended from the temper

of the men; and it was thought that an officer like Nelson was the

one, not indeed to terrorize the crew into base subjection, but to win

them, by force of his mere presence, back to an allegiance if not as

enthusiastic as his own, yet as true. So it was that for a time on

more than one quarter-deck anxiety did exist. At sea precautionary

vigilance was strained against relapse. At short notice an

engagement might come on. When it did, the lieutenants assigned to

batteries felt it incumbent on them, in some instances, to stand

with drawn swords behind the men working the guns.
