




                          CHAPTER 22



    Who in the rainbow can draw the line where the violet tint ends

and the orange tint begins? Distinctly we see the difference of the

colors, but where exactly does the one first blendingly enter into the

other? So with sanity and insanity. In pronounced cases there is no

question about them. But in some supposed cases, in various degrees

supposedly less pronounced, to draw the exact line of demarkation

few will undertake tho' for a fee some professional experts will.

There is nothing namable but that some men will undertake to do it for

pay.

    Whether Captain Vere, as the Surgeon professionally and

privately surmised, was really the sudden victim of any degree of

aberration, one must determine for himself by such light as this

narrative may afford.

    That the unhappy event which has been narrated could not have

happened at a worse juncture was but too true. For it was close on the

heel of the suppressed insurrections, an aftertime very critical to

naval authority, demanding from every English sea-commander two

qualities not readily interfusable- prudence and rigour. Moreover

there was something crucial in the case.

    In the jugglery of circumstances preceding and attending the event

on board the Indomitable, and in the light of that martial code

whereby it was formally to be judged, innocence and guilt

personified in Claggart and Budd in effect changed places. In a

legal view the apparent victim of the tragedy was he who had sought to

victimize a man blameless; and the indisputable deed of the latter,

navally regarded, constituted the most heinous of military crimes. Yet

more. The essential right and wrong involved in the matter, the

clearer that might be, so much the worse for the responsibility of a

loyal sea-commander inasmuch as he was not authorized to determine the

matter on that primitive basis.

    Small wonder then that the Indomitable's Captain, though in

general a man of rapid decision, felt that circumspectness not less

than promptitude was necessary. Until he could decide upon his course,

and in each detail; and not only so, but until the concluding

measure was upon the point of being enacted, he deemed it advisable,

in view of all the circumstances, to guard as much as possible against

publicity. Here he may or may not have erred. Certain it is,

however, that subsequently in the confidential talk of more than one

or two gun-rooms and cabins he was not a little criticized by some

officers, a fact imputed by his friends and vehemently by his

cousin, Jack Denton, to professional jealousy of Starry Vere. Some

imaginative ground for invidious comment there was. The maintenance of

secrecy in the matter, the confining all knowledge of it for a time to

the place where the homicide occurred, the quarter-deck cabin; in

these particulars lurked some resemblance to the policy adopted in

those tragedies of the palace which have occurred more than once in

the capital founded by Peter the Barbarian.

    The case indeed was such that fain would the Indomitable's Captain

have deferred taking any action whatever respecting it further than to

keep the Foretopman a close prisoner till the ship rejoined the

squadron, and then submitting the matter to the judgement of his

Admiral.

    But a true military officer is in one particular like a true monk.

Not with more of self-abnegation will the latter keep his vows of

monastic obedience than the former his vows of allegiance to martial

duty.

    Feeling that unless quick action was taken on it, the deed of

the Foretopman, so soon as it should be known on the gun decks,

would tend to awaken any slumbering embers of the Nore among the crew,

a sense of the urgency of the case overruled in Captain Vere every

other consideration. But tho' a conscientious disciplinarian, he was

no lover of authority for mere authority's sake. Very far was he

from embracing opportunities for monopolizing to himself the perils of

moral responsibility, none at least that could properly be referred to

an official superior, or shared with him by his official equals or

even subordinates. So thinking, he was glad it would not be at

variance with usage to turn the matter over to a summary court of

his own officers, reserving to himself as the one on whom the ultimate

accountability would rest, the right of maintaining a supervision of

it, or formally or informally interposing at need. Accordingly a

drum-head court was summarily convened, he electing the individuals

composing it, the First Lieutenant, the Captain of Marines, and the

Sailing Master.

    In associating an officer of marines with the sea-lieutenants in a

case having to do with a sailor, the Commander perhaps deviated from

general custom. He was prompted thereto by the circumstance that he

took that soldier to be a judicious person, thoughtful, and not

altogether incapable of grappling with a difficult case

unprecedented in his prior experience. Yet even as to him he was not

without some latent misgiving, for withal he was an extremely

goodnatured man, an enjoyer of his dinner, a sound sleeper, and

inclined to obesity, a man who tho' he would always maintain his

manhood in battle might not prove altogether reliable in a moral

dilemma involving aught of the tragic. As to the First Lieutenant

and the Sailing Master, Captain Vere could not but be aware that

though honest natures, of approved gallantry upon occasion, their

intelligence was mostly confined to the matter of active seamanship

and the fighting demands of their profession. The court was held in

the same cabin where the unfortunate affair had taken place. This

cabin, the Commander's, embraced the entire area under the poopdeck.

Aft, and on either side, was a small state-room; the one room

temporarily a jail and the other a dead-house, and a yet smaller

compartment leaving a space between, expanding forward into a goodly

oblong of length coinciding with the ship's beam. A skylight of

moderate dimension was overhead and at each end of the oblong space

were two sashed port-hole windows easily convertible back into

embrasures for short carronades.

    All being quickly in readiness, Billy Budd was arraigned,

Captain Vere necessarily appearing as the sole witness in the case,

and as such, temporarily sinking his rank, though singularly

maintaining it in a matter apparently trivial, namely, that he

testified from the ship's weather-side, with that object having caused

the court to sit on the lee-side. Concisely he narrated all that had

led up to the catastrophe, omitting nothing in Claggart's accusation

and deposing as to the manner in which the prisoner had received it.

At this testimony the three officers glanced with no little surprise

at Billy Budd, the last man they would have suspected either of the

mutinous design alleged by Claggart or the undeniable deed he

himself had done.

    The First Lieutenant, taking judicial primacy and turning toward

the prisoner, said, "Captain Vere has spoken. Is it or is it not as

Captain Vere says?" In response came syllables not so much impeded

in the utterance as might have been anticipated. They were these:

"Captain Vere tells the truth. It is just as Captain Vere says, but it

is not as the Master-at-arms said. I have eaten the King's bread and I

am true to the King."

    "I believe you, my man," said the witness, his voice indicating

a suppressed emotion not otherwise betrayed.

    "God will bless you for that, Your Honor!" not without

stammering said Billy, and all but broke down. But immediately was

recalled to self-control by another question, to which with the same

emotional difficulty of utterance he said, "No, there was no malice

between us. I never bore malice against the Master-at-arms. I am sorry

that he is dead. I did not mean to kill him. Could I have used my

tongue I would not have struck him. But he foully lied to my face

and in presence of my Captain, and I had to say something, and I could

only say it with a blow, God help me!"

    In the impulsive above-board manner of the frank one, the court

saw confirmed all that was implied in words that just previously had

perplexed them, coming as they did from the testifier to the tragedy

and promptly following Billy's impassioned disclaimer of mutinous

intent- Captain Vere's words, "I believe you, my man."

    Next it was asked of him whether he knew of or suspected aught

savoring of incipient trouble (meaning mutiny, tho' the explicit

term was avoided) going on in any section of the ship's company.

    The reply lingered. This was naturally imputed by the court to the

same vocal embarrassment which had retarded or obstructed previous

answers. But in main it was otherwise here; the question immediately

recalling to Billy's mind the interview with the afterguardsman in the

fore-chains. But an innate repugnance to playing a part at all

approaching that of an informer against one's own shipmates- the

same erring sense of uninstructed honor which had stood in the way

of his reporting the matter at the time though as a loyal

man-of-war-man it was incumbent on him, and failure so to do if

charged against him and proven, would have subjected him to the

heaviest of penalties; this, with the blind feeling now his, that

nothing really was being hatched, prevailed with him. When the

answer came it was a negative.

    "One question more," said the officer of marines now first

speaking and with a troubled earnestness. "You tell us that what the

Master-at-arms said against you was a lie. Now why should he have so

lied, so maliciously lied, since you declare there was no malice

between you?"

    At that question unintentionally touching on a spiritual sphere

wholly obscure to Billy's thoughts, he was nonplussed, evincing a

confusion indeed that some observers, such as can readily be imagined,

would have construed into involuntary evidence of hidden guilt.

Nevertheless he strove some way to answer, but all at once

relinquished the vain endeavor, at the same time turning an

appealing glance towards Captain Vere as deeming him his best helper

and friend. Captain Vere who had been seated for a time rose to his

feet, addressing the interrogator. "The question you put to him

comes naturally enough. But how can he rightly answer it? or anybody

else? unless indeed it be he who lies within there," designating the

compartment where lay the corpse. "But the prone one there will not

rise to our summons. In effect, tho', as it seems to me, the point you

make is hardly material. Quite aside from any conceivable motive

actuating the Master-at-arms, and irrespective of the provocation to

the blow, a martial court must needs in the present case confine its

attention to the blow's consequence, which consequence justly is to be

deemed not otherwise than as the striker's deed."

    This utterance, the full significance of which it was not at all

likely that Billy took in, nevertheless caused him to turn a wistful

interrogative look toward the speaker, a look in its dumb

expressiveness not unlike that which a dog of generous breed might

turn upon his master seeking in his face some elucidation of a

previous gesture ambiguous to the canine intelligence. Nor was the

same utterance without marked effect upon the three officers, more

especially the soldier. Couched in it seemed to them a meaning

unanticipated, involving a prejudgement on the speaker's part. It

served to augment a mental disturbance previously evident enough.

    The soldier once more spoke; in a tone of suggestive dubiety

addressing at once his associates and Captain Vere: "Nobody is

present- none of the ship's company, I mean- who might shed lateral

light, if any is to be had, upon what remains mysterious in this

matter."

    "That is thoughtfully put," said Captain Vere; "I see your

drift. Ay, there is a mystery; but, to use a Scriptural phrase, it

is 'a mystery of iniquity,' a matter for psychologic theologians to

discuss. But what has a military court to do with it? Not to add

that for us any possible investigation of it is cut off by the lasting

tongue-tie of- him- in yonder," again designating the mortuary

stateroom. "The prisoner's deed,- with that alone we have to do."

    To this, and particularly the closing reiteration, the marine

soldier knowing not how aptly to reply, sadly abstained from saying

aught. The First Lieutenant who at the outset had not unnaturally

assumed primacy in the court, now overrulingly instructed by a

glance from Captain Vere, a glance more effective than words,

resumed that primacy. Turning to the prisoner, "Budd," he said, and

scarce in equable tones, "Budd, if you have aught further to say for

yourself, say it now."

    Upon this the young sailor turned another quick glance toward

Captain Vere; then, as taking a hint from that aspect, a hint

confirming his own instinct that silence was now best, replied to

the Lieutenant, "I have said all, Sir."

    The marine- the same who had been the sentinel without the

cabin-door at the time that the Foretopman followed by the

Master-at-arms, entered it- he, standing by the sailor throughout

these judicial proceedings, was now directed to take him back to the

after compartment originally assigned to the prisoner and his

custodian. As the twain disappeared from view, the three officers as

partially liberated from some inward constraint associated with

Billy's mere presence, simultaneously stirred in their seats. They

exchanged looks of troubled indecision, yet feeling that decide they

must and without long delay. As for Captain Vere, he for the time

stood unconsciously with his back toward them, apparently in one of

his absent fits, gazing out from a sashed port-hole to windward upon

the monotonous blank of the twilight sea. But the court's silence

continuing, broken only at moments by brief consultations in low

earnest tones, this seemed to arm him and energize him. Turning, he

to-and-fro paced the cabin athwart; in the returning ascent to

windward, climbing the slant deck in the ship's lee roll; without

knowing it symbolizing thus in his action a mind resolute to

surmount difficulties even if against primitive instincts strong as

the wind and the sea. Presently he came to a stand before the three.

After scanning their faces he stood less as mustering his thoughts for

expression, than as one inly deliberating how best to put them to

well-meaning men not intellectually mature, men with whom it was

necessary to demonstrate certain principles that were axioms to

himself. Similar impatience as to talking is perhaps one reason that

deters some minds from addressing any popular assemblies.

    When speak he did, something both in the substance of what he said

and his manner of saying it, showed the influence of unshared

studies modifying and tempering the practical training of an active

career. This, along with his phraseology, now and then was

suggestive of the grounds whereon rested that imputation of a

certain pedantry socially alleged against him by certain naval men

of wholly practical cast, captains who nevertheless would frankly

concede that His Majesty's Navy mustered no more efficient officer

of their grade than Starry Vere.

    What he said was to this effect: "Hitherto I have been but the

witness, little more; and I should hardly think now to take another

tone, that of your coadjutor, for the time, did I not perceive in

you,- at the crisis too- a troubled hesitancy, proceeding, I doubt

not, from the clash of military duty with moral scruple- scruple

vitalized by compassion. For the compassion, how can I otherwise

than share it? But, mindful of paramount obligations I strive

against scruples that may tend to enervate decision. Not, gentlemen,

that I hide from myself that the case is an exceptional one.

Speculatively regarded, it well might be referred to a jury of

casuists. But for us here acting not as casuists or moralists, it is a

case practical, and under martial law practically to be dealt with.

    "But your scruples: do they move as in a dusk? Challenge them.

Make them advance and declare themselves. Come now: do they import

something like this? If, mindless of palliating circumstances, we

are bound to regard the death of the Master-at-arms as the

prisoner's deed, then does that deed constitute a capital crime

whereof the penalty is a mortal one? But in natural justice is nothing

but the prisoner's overt act to be considered? How can we adjudge to

summary and shameful death a fellow-creature innocent before God,

and whom we feel to be so?- Does that state it aright? You sign sad

assent. Well, I too feel that, the full force of that. It is Nature.

But do these buttons that we wear attest that our allegiance is to

Nature? No, to the King. Though the ocean, which is inviolate Nature

primeval, tho' this be the element where we move and have our being as

sailors, yet as the King's officers lies our duty in a sphere

correspondingly natural? So little is that true, that in receiving our

commissions we in the most important regards ceased to be natural

free-agents. When war is declared are we the commissioned fighters

previously consulted? We fight at command. If our judgements approve

the war, that is but coincidence. So in other particulars. So now. For

suppose condemnation to follow these present proceedings. Would it

be so much we ourselves that would condemn as it would be martial

law operating through us? For that law and the rigour of it, we are

not responsible. Our avowed responsibility is in this: That however

pitilessly that law may operate, we nevertheless adhere to it and

administer it.

    "But the exceptional in the matter moves the hearts within you.

Even so too is mine moved. But let not warm hearts betray heads that

should be cool. Ashore in a criminal case will an upright judge

allow himself off the bench to be waylaid by some tender kinswoman

of the accused seeking to touch him with her tearful plea? Well the

heart here denotes the feminine in man is as that piteous woman, and

hard tho' it be, she must here be ruled out."

    He paused, earnestly studying them for a moment; then resumed.

    "But something in your aspect seems to urge that it is not

solely the heart that moves in you, but also the conscience, the

private conscience. But tell me whether or not, occupying the position

we do, private conscience should not yield to that imperial one

formulated in the code under which alone we officially proceed?"

    Here the three men moved in their seats, less convinced than

agitated by the course of an argument troubling but the more the

spontaneous conflict within.

    Perceiving which, the speaker paused for a moment; then abruptly

changing his tone, went on.

    "To steady us a bit, let us recur to the facts.- In war-time at

sea a man-of-war's-man strikes his superior in grade, and the blow

kills. Apart from its effect, the blow itself is, according to the

Articles of War, a capital crime. Furthermore-"

    "Ay, Sir," emotionally broke in the officer of marines, "in one

sense it was. But surely Budd purposed neither mutiny nor homicide."

    "Surely not, my good man. And before a court less arbitrary and

more merciful than a martial one, that plea would largely extenuate.

At the Last Assizes it shall acquit. But how here? We proceed under

the law of the Mutiny Act. In feature no child can resemble his father

more than that Act resembles in spirit the thing from which it

derives- War. In His Majesty's service- in this ship indeed- there are

Englishmen forced to fight for the King against their will. Against

their conscience, for aught we know. Tho' as their fellow-creatures

some of us may appreciate their position, yet as navy officers, what

reck we of it? Still less recks the enemy. Our impressed men he

would fain cut down in the same swath with our volunteers. As

regards the enemy's naval conscripts, some of whom may even share

our own abhorrence of the regicidal French Directory, it is the same

on our side. War looks but to the frontage, the appearance. And the

Mutiny Act, War's child, takes after the father. Budd's intent or

non-intent is nothing to the purpose.

    "But while, put to it by these anxieties in you which I can not

but respect, I only repeat myself- while thus strangely we prolong

proceedings that should be summary- the enemy may be sighted and an

engagement result. We must do; and one of two things must we do-

condemn or let go."

    "Can we not convict and yet mitigate the penalty?" asked the

junior Lieutenant here speaking, and falteringly, for the first.

    "Lieutenant, were that clearly lawful for us under the

circumstances, consider the consequences of such clemency. The people"

(meaning the ship's company) "have native-sense; most of them are

familiar with our naval usage and tradition; and how would they take

it? Even could you explain to them- which our official position

forbids- they, long moulded by arbitrary discipline have not that kind

of intelligent responsiveness that might qualify them to comprehend

and discriminate. No, to the people the Foretopman's deed, however

it be worded in the announcement, will be plain homicide committed

in a flagrant act of mutiny. What penalty for that should follow, they

know. But it does not follow. Why? they will ruminate. You know what

sailors are. Will they not revert to the recent outbreak at the

Nore? Ay. They know the well-founded alarm- the panic it struck

throughout England. Your clement sentence they would account

pusillanimous. They would think that we flinch, that we are afraid

of them- afraid of practising a lawful rigour singularly demanded at

this juncture lest it should provoke new troubles. What shame to us

such a conjecture on their part, and how deadly to discipline. You see

then, whither, prompted by duty and the law, I steadfastly drive.

But I beseech you, my friends, do not take me amiss. I feel as you

do for this unfortunate boy. But did he know our hearts, I take him to

be of that generous nature that he would feel even for us on whom in

this military necessity so heavy a compulsion is laid."

    With that, crossing the deck he resumed his place by the sashed

port-hole, tacitly leaving the three to come to a decision. On the

cabin's opposite side the troubled court sat silent. Loyal lieges,

plain and practical, though at bottom they dissented from some

points Captain Vere had put to them, they were without the faculty,

hardly had the inclination, to gainsay one whom they felt to be an

earnest man, one too not less their superior in mind than in naval

rank. But it is not improbable that even such of his words as were not

without influence over them, less came home to them than his closing

appeal to their instinct as sea-officers in the forethought he threw

out as to the practical consequences to discipline, considering the

unconfirmed tone of the fleet at the time, should a man-of-war's-man's

violent killing at sea of a superior in grade be allowed to pass for

aught else than a capital crime demanding prompt infliction of the

penalty.

    Not unlikely they were brought to something more or less akin to

that harassed frame of mind which in the year 1842 actuated the

Commander of the U.S. brig-of-war Somers to resolve, under the

so-called Articles of War, Articles modelled upon the English Mutiny

Act, to resolve upon the execution at sea of a midshipman and two

petty-officers as mutineers designing the seizure of the brig. Which

resolution was carried out though in a time of peace and within not

many days' of home. An act vindicated by a naval court of inquiry

subsequently convened ashore. History, and here cited without comment.

True, the circumstances on board the Somers were different from

those on board the Indomitable. But the urgency felt, well-warranted

or otherwise, was much the same.

    Says a writer whom few know, "Forty years after a battle it is

easy for a non-combatant to reason about how it ought to have been

fought. It is another thing personally and under fire to direct the

fighting while involved in the obscuring smoke of it. Much so with

respect to other emergencies involving considerations both practical

and moral, and when it is imperative promptly to act. The greater

the fog the more it imperils the steamer, and speed is put on tho'

at the hazard of running somebody down. Little ween the snug

card-players in the cabin of the responsibilities of the sleepless man

on the bridge."

    In brief, Billy Budd was formally convicted and sentenced to be

hung at the yard-arm in the early morning watch, it being now night.

Otherwise, as is customary in such cases, the sentence would forthwith

have been carried out. In war-time on the field or in the fleet, a

mortal punishment decreed by a drum-head court- on the field sometimes

decreed by but a nod from the General- follows without delay on the

heel of conviction without appeal.
