




                          CHAPTER 13

                   Pale ire, envy and despair



    That Claggart's figure was not amiss, and his face, save the chin,

well moulded, has already been said. Of these favorable points he

seemed not insensible, for he was not only neat but careful in his

dress. But the form of Billy Budd was heroic; and if his face was

without the intellectual look of the pallid Claggart's, not the less

was it lit, like his, from within, though from a different source. The

bonfire in his heart made luminous the rose-tan in his cheek.

    In view of the marked contrast between the persons of the twain,

it is more than probable that when the Master-at-arms in the scene

last given applied to the sailor the proverb Handsome is as handsome

does, he there let escape an ironic inkling, not caught by the young

sailors who heard it, as to what it was that had first moved him

against Billy, namely, his significant personal beauty.

    Now envy and antipathy, passions irreconcilable in reason,

nevertheless in fact may spring conjoined like Chang and Eng in one

birth. Is Envy then such a monster? Well, though many an arraigned

mortal has in hopes of mitigated penalty pleaded guilty to horrible

actions, did ever anybody seriously confess to envy? Something there

is in it universally felt to be more shameful than even felonious

crime. And not only does everybody disown it, but the better sort

are inclined to incredulity when it is in earnest imputed to an

intelligent man. But since its lodgement is in the heart not the

brain, no degree of intellect supplies a guarantee against it. But

Claggart's was no vulgar form of the passion. Nor, as directed

toward Billy Budd, did it partake of that streak of apprehensive

jealousy that marred Saul's visage perturbedly brooding on the

comely young David. Claggart's envy struck deeper. If askance he

eyed the good looks, cheery health and frank enjoyment of young life

in Billy Budd, it was because these went along with a nature that,

as Claggart magnetically felt, had in its simplicity never willed

malice or experienced the reactionary bite of that serpent. To him,

the spirit lodged within Billy, and looking out from his welkin eyes

as from windows, that ineffability it was which made the dimple in his

dyed cheek, suppled his joints, and dancing in his yellow curls made

him preeminently the Handsome Sailor. One person excepted, the

Master-at-arms was perhaps the only man in the ship intellectually

capable of adequately appreciating the moral phenomenon presented in

Billy Budd. And the insight but intensified his passion, which

assuming various secret forms within him, at times assumed that of

cynic disdain- disdain of innocence. To be nothing more than innocent!

Yet in an aesthetic way he saw the charm of it, the courageous

free-and-easy temper of it, and fain would have shared it, but he

despaired of it.

    With no power to annul the elemental evil in him, tho' readily

enough he could hide it; apprehending the good, but powerless to be

it; a nature like Claggart's surcharged with energy as such natures

almost invariably are, what recourse is left to it but to recoil

upon itself and like the scorpion for which the Creator alone is

responsible, act out to the end the part allotted it.
