




                          CHAPTER 18



    But after the little matter at the mess Billy Budd no more found

himself in strange trouble at times about his hammock or his

clothesbag or what not. While, as to that smile that occasionally

sunned him, and the pleasant passing word, these were if not more

frequent, yet if anything, more pronounced than before.

    But for all that, there were certain other demonstrations now.

When Claggart's unobserved glance happened to light on belted Billy

rolling along the upper gun deck in the leisure of the second

dog-watch, exchanging passing broadsides of fun with other young

promenaders in the crowd; that glance would follow the cheerful

sea-Hyperion with a settled meditative and melancholy expression,

his eyes strangely suffused with incipient feverish tears. Then

would Claggart look like the man of sorrows. Yes, and sometimes the

melancholy expression would have in it a touch of soft yearning, as if

Claggart could even have loved Billy but for fate and ban. But this

was an evanescence, and quickly repented of, as it were, by an

immitigable look, pinching and shrivelling the visage into the

momentary semblance of a wrinkled walnut. But sometimes catching sight

in advance of the Foretopman coming in his direction, he would, upon

their nearing, step aside a little to let him pass, dwelling upon

Billy for the moment with the glittering dental satire of a Guise. But

upon any abrupt unforeseen encounter a red light would flash forth

from his eye like a spark from an anvil in a dusk smithy. That quick

fierce light was a strange one, darted from orbs which in repose

were of a color nearest approaching a deeper violet, the softest of

shades.

    Tho' some of these caprices of the pit could not but be observed

by their object, yet were they beyond the construing of such a nature.

And the thews of Billy were hardly compatible with that sort of

sensitive spiritual organisation which in some cases instinctively

conveys to ignorant innocence an admonition of the proximity of the

malign. He thought the Master-at-arms acted in a manner rather queer

at times. That was all. But the occasional frank air and pleasant word

went for what they purported to be, the young sailor never having

heard as yet of the "too fair-spoken man."

    Had the Foretopman been conscious of having done or said

anything to provoke the ill will of the official, it would have been

different with him, and his sight might have been purged if not

sharpened. As it was, innocence was his blinder.

    So was it with him in yet another matter. Two minor officers-

the Armorer and Captain of the Hold, with whom he had never

exchanged a word, his position in the ship not bringing him into

contact with them; these men now for the first began to cast upon

Billy when they chanced to encounter him, that peculiar glance which

evidences that the man from whom it comes has been some way tampered

with and to the prejudice of him upon whom the glance lights. Never

did it occur to Billy as a thing to be noted or a thing suspicious,

tho' he well knew the fact, that the Armorer and Captain of the

Hold, with the ship's-yeoman, apothecary, and others of that grade,

were by naval usage, messmates of the Master-at-arms, men with ears

convenient to his confidential tongue.

    But the general popularity that our Handsome Sailor's manly

forwardness bred upon occasion, and his irresistible good-nature,

indicating no mental superiority tending to excite an invidious

feeling, this good will on the part of most of his shipmates made

him the less to concern himself about such mute aspects toward him

as those whereto allusion has just been made, aspects he could not

fathom as to infer their whole import.

    As to the afterguardsman, tho' Billy for reasons already given

necessarily saw little of him, yet when the two did happen to meet,

invariably came the fellow's off-hand cheerful recognition,

sometimes accompanied by a passing pleasant word or two. Whatever that

equivocal young person's original design may really have been, or

the design of which he might have been the deputy, certain it was from

his manner upon these occasions, that he had wholly dropped it.

    It was as if his precocity of crookedness (and every vulgar

villain is precocious) had for once deceived him, and the man he had

sought to entrap as a simpleton had, through his very simplicity,

ignominiously baffled him.

    But shrewd ones may opine that it was hardly possible for Billy to

refrain from going up to the afterguardsman and bluntly demanding to

know his purpose in the initial interview, so abruptly closed in the

fore-chains. Shrewd ones may also think it but natural in Billy to set

about sounding some of the other impressed men of the ship in order to

discover what basis, if any, there was for the emissary's obscure

suggestions as to plotting disaffection aboard. Yes, the shrewd may so

think. But something more, or rather, something else than mere

shrewdness is perhaps needful for the due understanding of such a

character as Billy Budd's.

    As to Claggart, the monomania in the man- if that indeed it

were- as involuntarily disclosed by starts in the manifestations

detailed, yet in general covered over by his self-contained and

rational demeanour; this, like a subterranean fire was eating its

way deeper and deeper in him. Something decisive must come of it.
