




                          CHAPTER 8



    The lieutenants and other commissioned gentlemen forming Captain

Vere's staff it is not necessary here to particularize, nor needs it

to make any mention of any of the warrant-officers. But among the

petty-officers was one who having much to do with the story, may as

well be forthwith introduced. His portrait I essay, but shall never

hit it. This was John Claggart, the Master-at-arms. But that sea-title

may to landsmen seem somewhat equivocal. Originally, doubtless, that

petty-officer's function was the instruction of the men in the use

of arms, sword or cutlas. But very long ago, owing to the advance in

gunnery making hand-to-hand encounters less frequent and giving to

nitre and sulphur the preeminence over steel, that function ceased;

the Master-at-arms of a great war-ship becoming a sort of Chief of

Police, charged among other matters with the duty of preserving

order on the populous lower gun decks.

    Claggart was a man about five and thirty, somewhat spare and tall,

yet of no ill figure upon the whole. His hand was too small and

shapely to have been accustomed to hard toil. The face was a notable

one; the features all except the chin cleanly cut as those on a

Greek medallion; yet the chin, beardless as Tecumseh's, had

something of strange protuberant heaviness in its make that recalled

the prints of the Rev. Dr. Titus Oates, the historic deponent with the

clerical drawl in the time of Charles II and the fraud of the

alleged Popish Plot. It served Claggart in his office that his eye

could cast a tutoring glance. His brow was of the sort phrenologically

associated with more than average intellect; silken jet curls partly

clustering over it, making a foil to the pallor below, a pallor tinged

with a faint shade of amber akin to the hue of time-tinted marbles

of old. This complexion, singularly contrasting with the red or deeply

bronzed visages of the sailors, and in part the result of his official

seclusion from the sunlight, tho' it was not exactly displeasing,

nevertheless seemed to hint of something defective or abnormal in

the constitution and blood. But his general aspect and manner were

so suggestive of an education and career incongruous with his naval

function that when not actively engaged in it he looked a man of

high quality, social and moral, who for reasons of his own was keeping

incog. Nothing was known of his former life. It might be that he was

an Englishman; and yet there lurked a bit of accent in his speech

suggesting that possibly he was not such by birth, but through

naturalization in early childhood. Among certain grizzled

sea-gossips of the gun decks and forecastle went a rumor perdue that

the Master-at-arms was a chevalier who had volunteered into the King's

Navy by way of compounding for some mysterious swindle whereof he

had been arraigned at the King's Bench. The fact that nobody could

substantiate this report was, of course, nothing against its secret

currency. Such a rumor once started on the gun decks in reference to

almost anyone below the rank of a commissioned officer would, during

the period assigned to this narrative, have seemed not altogether

wanting in credibility to the tarry old wiseacres of a man-of-war

crew. And indeed a man of Claggart's accomplishments, without prior

nautical experience, entering the navy at mature life, as he did,

and necessarily allotted at the start to the lowest grade in it; a

man, too, who never made allusion to his previous life ashore; these

were circumstances which in the dearth of exact knowledge as to his

true antecedents opened to the invidious a vague field for unfavorable

surmise.

    But the sailors' dog-watch gossip concerning him derived a vague

plausibility from the fact that now for some period the British Navy

could so little afford to be squeamish in the matter of keeping up the

muster-rolls, that not only were press-gangs notoriously abroad both

afloat and ashore, but there was little or no secret about another

matter, namely that the London police were at liberty to capture any

able-bodied suspect, any questionable fellow at large and summarily

ship him to dockyard or fleet. Furthermore, even among voluntary

enlistments there were instances where the motive thereto partook

neither of patriotic impulse nor yet of a random desire to

experience a bit of sea-life and martial adventure. Insolvent

debtors of minor grade, together with the promiscuous lame ducks of

morality found in the Navy a convenient and secure refuge. Secure,

because once enlisted aboard a King's-ship, they were as much in

sanctuary, as the transgressor of the Middle Ages harboring himself

under the shadow of the altar. Such sanctioned irregularities, which

for obvious reasons the Government would hardly think to parade at the

time, and which consequently, and as affecting the least influential

class of mankind, have all but dropped into oblivion, lend color to

something for the truth whereof I do not vouch, and hence have some

scruple in stating; something I remember having seen in print,

though the book I can not recall; but the same thing was personally

communicated to me now more than forty years ago by an old pensioner

in a cocked hat with whom I had a most interesting talk on the terrace

at Greenwich, a Baltimore Negro, a Trafalgar man. It was to this

effect: In the case of a war-ship short of hands whose speedy

sailing was imperative, the deficient quota in lack of any other way

of making it good, would be eked out by draughts culled direct from

the jails. For reasons previously suggested it would not perhaps be

easy at the present day directly to prove or disprove the

allegation. But allowed as a verity, how significant would it be of

England's straits at the time, confronted by those wars which like a

flight of harpies rose shrieking from the din and dust of the fallen

Bastille. That era appears measurably clear to us who look back at it,

and but read of it. But to the grandfathers of us graybeards, the more

thoughtful of them, the genius of it presented an aspect like that

of Camouns' Spirit of the Cape, an eclipsing menace mysterious and

prodigious. Not America was exempt from apprehension. At the height of

Napoleon's unexampled conquests, there were Americans who had fought

at Bunker Hill who looked forward to the possibility that the Atlantic

might prove no barrier against the ultimate schemes of this French

upstart from the revolutionary chaos who seemed in act of fulfilling

judgement prefigured in the Apocalypse.

    But the less credence was to be given to the gun-deck talk

touching Claggart, seeing that no man holding his office in a

man-of-war can ever hope to be popular with the crew. Besides, in

derogatory comments upon anyone against whom they have a grudge, or

for any reason or no reason mislike, sailors are much like landsmen;

they are apt to exaggerate or romance it.

    About as much was really known to the Indomitable's tars of the

Master-at-arms' career before entering the service as an astronomer

knows about a comet's travels prior to its first observable appearance

in the sky. The verdict of the sea quid-nuncs has been cited only by

way of showing what sort of moral impression the man made upon rude

uncultivated natures whose conceptions of human wickedness were

necessarily of the narrowest, limited to ideas of vulgar rascality,- a

thief among the swinging hammocks during a night-watch, or the man

brokers and land-sharks of the sea-ports.

    It was no gossip, however, but fact, that though, as before

hinted, Claggart upon his entrance into the navy was, as a novice,

assigned to the least honourable section of a man-of-war's crew,

embracing the drudgery, he did not long remain there.

    The superior capacity he immediately evinced, his constitutional

sobriety, ingratiating deference to superiors, together with a

peculiar ferreting genius manifested on a singular occasion; all

this capped by a certain austere patriotism abruptly advanced him to

the position of Master-at-arms.

    Of this maritime Chief of Police the ship's-corporals, so

called, were the immediate subordinates, and compliant ones; and this,

as is to be noted in some business departments ashore, almost to a

degree inconsistent with entire moral volition. His place put

various converging wires of underground influence under the Chief's

control, capable when astutely worked thro' his understrappers, of

operating to the mysterious discomfort, if nothing worse, of any of

the sea-commonalty.
