




III





Almost as soon as the train left Calais her head had dropped

back into the corner, and she had fallen asleep.



Sitting opposite, in the compartment from which he had

contrived to have other travellers excluded, Darrow looked

at her curiously.  He had never seen a face that changed so

quickly.  A moment since it had danced like a field of

daisies in a summer breeze; now, under the pallid

oscillating light of the lamp overhead, it wore the hard

stamp of experience, as of a soft thing chilled into shape

before its curves had rounded: and it moved him to see that

care already stole upon her when she slept.



The story she had imparted to him in the wheezing shaking

cabin, and at the Calais buffet--where he had insisted on

offering her the dinner she had missed at Mrs. Murrett's--

had given a distincter outline to her figure.  From the

moment of entering the New York boarding-school to which a

preoccupied guardian had hastily consigned her after the

death of her parents, she had found herself alone in a busy

and indifferent world. Her youthful history might, in fact,

have been summed up in the statement that everybody had been

too busy to look after her.  Her guardian, a drudge in a big

banking house, was absorbed by "the office"; the guardian's

wife, by her health and her religion; and an elder sister,

Laura, married, unmarried, remarried, and pursuing, through

all these alternating phases, some vaguely "artistic" ideal

on which the guardian and his wife looked askance, had (as

Darrow conjectured) taken their disapproval as a pretext for

not troubling herself about poor Sophy, to whom--perhaps for

this reason--she had remained the incarnation of remote

romantic possibilities.



In the course of time a sudden "stroke" of the guardian's

had thrown his personal affairs into a state of confusion

from which--after his widely lamented death--it became

evident that it would not be possible to extricate his

ward's inheritance.  No one deplored this more sincerely

than his widow, who saw in it one more proof of her

husband's life having been sacrificed to the innumerable

duties imposed on him, and who could hardly--but for the

counsels of religion--have brought herself to pardon the

young girl for her indirect share in hastening his end.

Sophy did not resent this point of view.  She was really

much sorrier for her guardian's death than for the loss of

her insignificant fortune.  The latter had represented only

the means of holding her in bondage, and its disappearance

was the occasion of her immediate plunge into the wide

bright sea of life surrounding the island-of her captivity.

She had first landed--thanks to the intervention of the

ladies who had directed her education--in a Fifth Avenue

school-room where, for a few months, she acted as a buffer

between three autocratic infants and their bodyguard of

nurses and teachers.  The too-pressing attentions of their

father's valet had caused her to fly this sheltered spot,

against the express advice of her educational superiors, who

implied that, in their own case, refinement and self-respect

had always sufficed to keep the most ungovernable passions

at bay.  The experience of the guardian's widow having been

precisely similar, and the deplorable precedent of Laura's

career being present to all their minds, none of these

ladies felt any obligation to intervene farther in Sophy's

affairs; and she was accordingly left to her own resources.



A schoolmate from the Rocky Mountains, who was taking her

father and mother to Europe, had suggested Sophy's

accompanying them, and "going round" with her while her

progenitors, in the care of the courier, nursed their

ailments at a fashionable bath.  Darrow gathered that the

"going round" with Mamie Hoke was a varied and diverting

process; but this relatively brilliant phase of Sophy's

career was cut short by the elopement of the inconsiderate

Mamie with a "matinee idol" who had followed her from New

York, and by the precipitate return of her parents to

negotiate for the repurchase of their child.



It was then--after an interval of repose with compassionate

but impecunious American friends in Paris--that Miss Viner

had been drawn into the turbid current of Mrs. Murrett's

career.  The impecunious compatriots had found Mrs. Murrett

for her, and it was partly on their account (because they

were such dears, and so unconscious, poor confiding things,

of what they were letting her in for) that Sophy had stuck

it out so long in the dreadful house in Chelsea.  The

Farlows, she explained to Darrow, were the best friends she

had ever had (and the only ones who had ever "been decent"

about Laura, whom they had seen once, and intensely

admired); but even after twenty years of Paris they were the

most incorrigibly inexperienced angels, and quite persuaded

that Mrs. Murrett was a woman of great intellectual

eminence, and the house at Chelsea "the last of the salons"

--Darrow knew what she meant?  And she hadn't liked to

undeceive them, knowing that to do so would be virtually to

throw herself back on their hands, and feeling, moreover,

after her previous experiences, the urgent need of gaining,

at any cost, a name for stability; besides which--she threw

it off with a slight laugh--no other chance, in all these

years, had happened to come to her.



She had brushed in this outline of her career with light

rapid strokes, and in a tone of fatalism oddly untinged by

bitterness.  Darrow perceived that she classified people

according to their greater or less "luck" in life, but she

appeared to harbour no resentment against the undefined

power which dispensed the gift in such unequal measure.

Things came one's way or they didn't; and meanwhile one

could only look on, and make the most of small

compensations, such as watching "the show" at Mrs.

Murrett's, and talking over the Lady Ulricas and other

footlight figures.  And at any moment, of course, a turn of

the kaleidoscope might suddenly toss a bright spangle into

the grey pattern of one's days.



This light-hearted philosophy was not without charm to a

young man accustomed to more traditional views. George

Darrow had had a fairly varied experience of feminine types,

but the women he had frequented had either been pronouncedly

"ladies" or they had not. Grateful to both for ministering

to the more complex masculine nature, and disposed to assume

that they had been evolved, if not designed, to that end, he

had instinctively kept the two groups apart in his mind,

avoiding that intermediate society which attempts to

conciliate both theories of life.  "Bohemianism" seemed to

him a cheaper convention than the other two, and he liked,

above all, people who went as far as they could in their own

line--liked his "ladies" and their rivals to be equally

unashamed of showing for exactly what they were.  He had not

indeed--the fact of Lady Ulrica was there to remind him--

been without his experience of a third type; but that

experience had left him with a contemptuous distaste for the

woman who uses the privileges of one class to shelter the

customs of another.



As to young girls, he had never thought much about them

since his early love for the girl who had become Mrs. Leath.

That episode seemed, as he looked back on it, to bear no

more relation to reality than a pale decorative design to

the confused richness of a summer landscape.  He no longer

understood the violent impulses and dreamy pauses of his own

young heart, or the inscrutable abandonments and reluctances

of hers. He had known a moment of anguish at losing her--the

mad plunge of youthful instincts against the barrier of

fate; but the first wave of stronger sensation had swept

away all but the outline of their story, and the memory of

Anna Summers had made the image of the young girl sacred,

but the class uninteresting.



Such generalisations belonged, however, to an earlier stage

of his experience.  The more he saw of life the more

incalculable he found it; and he had learned to yield to his

impressions without feeling the youthful need of relating

them to others.  It was the girl in the opposite seat who

had roused in him the dormant habit of comparison.  She was

distinguished from the daughters of wealth by her avowed

acquaintance with the real business of living, a familiarity

as different as possible from their theoretical proficiency;

yet it seemed to Darrow that her experience had made her

free without hardness and self-assured without

assertiveness.





The rush into Amiens, and the flash of the station lights

into their compartment, broke Miss Viner's sleep, and

without changing her position she lifted her lids and looked

at Darrow.  There was neither surprise nor bewilderment in

the look.  She seemed instantly conscious, not so much of

where she was, as of the fact that she was with him; and

that fact seemed enough to reassure her.  She did not even

turn her head to look out; her eyes continued to rest on him

with a vague smile which appeared to light her face from

within, while her lips kept their sleepy droop.



Shouts and the hurried tread of travellers came to them

through the confusing cross-lights of the platform.  A head

appeared at the window, and Darrow threw himself forward to

defend their solitude; but the intruder was only a train

hand going his round of inspection. He passed on, and the

lights and cries of the station dropped away, merged in a

wider haze and a hollower resonance, as the train gathered

itself up with a long shake and rolled out again into the

darkness.



Miss Viner's head sank back against the cushion, pushing out

a dusky wave of hair above her forehead.  The swaying of the

train loosened a lock over her ear, and she shook it back

with a movement like a boy's, while her gaze still rested on

her companion.



"You're not too tired?"



She shook her head with a smile.



"We shall be in before midnight.  We're very nearly on

time."  He verified the statement by holding up his watch to

the lamp.



She nodded dreamily.  "It's all right.  I telegraphed Mrs.

Farlow that they mustn't think of coming to the station; but

they'll have told the concierge to look out for me."



"You'll let me drive you there?"



She nodded again, and her eyes closed.  It was very pleasant

to Darrow that she made no effort to talk or to dissemble

her sleepiness.  He sat watching her till the upper lashes

met and mingled with the lower, and their blent shadow lay

on her cheek; then he stood up and drew the curtain over the

lamp, drowning the compartment in a bluish twilight.



As he sank back into his seat he thought how differently

Anna Summers--or even Anna Leath--would have behaved.  She

would not have talked too much; she would not have been

either restless or embarrassed; but her adaptability, her

appropriateness, would not have been nature but "tact."  The

oddness of the situation would have made sleep impossible,

or, if weariness had overcome her for a moment, she would

have waked with a start, wondering where she was, and how

she had come there, and if her hair were tidy; and nothing

short of hairpins and a glass would have restored her self-

possession...



The reflection set him wondering whether the "sheltered"

girl's bringing-up might not unfit her for all subsequent

contact with life.  How much nearer to it had Mrs. Leath

been brought by marriage and motherhood, and the passage of

fourteen years?  What were all her reticences and evasions

but the result of the deadening process of forming a "lady"?

The freshness he had marvelled at was like the unnatural

whiteness of flowers forced in the dark.



As he looked back at their few days together he saw that

their intercourse had been marked, on her part, by the same

hesitations and reserves which had chilled their earlier

intimacy.  Once more they had had their hour together and

she had wasted it.  As in her girlhood, her eyes had made

promises which her lips were afraid to keep.  She was still

afraid of life, of its ruthlessness, its danger and mystery.

She was still the petted little girl who cannot be left

alone in the dark...His memory flew back to their youthful

story, and long-forgotten details took shape before him.

How frail and faint the picture was!  They seemed, he and

she, like the ghostly lovers of the Grecian Urn, forever

pursuing without ever clasping each other.  To this day he

did not quite know what had parted them: the break had been

as fortuitous as the fluttering apart of two seed-vessels on

a wave of summer air...



The very slightness, vagueness, of the memory gave it an

added poignancy.  He felt the mystic pang of the parent for

a child which has just breathed and died. Why had it

happened thus, when the least shifting of influences might

have made it all so different?  If she had been given to him

then he would have put warmth in her veins and light in her

eyes: would have made her a woman through and through.

Musing thus, he had the sense of waste that is the bitterest

harvest of experience.  A love like his might have given her

the divine gift of self-renewal; and now he saw her fated to

wane into old age repeating the same gestures, echoing the

words she had always heard, and perhaps never guessing that,

just outside her glazed and curtained consciousness, life

rolled away, a vast blackness starred with lights, like the

night landscape beyond the windows of the train.



The engine lowered its speed for the passage through a

sleeping station.  In the light of the platform lamp Darrow

looked across at his companion.  Her head had dropped toward

one shoulder, and her lips were just far enough apart for

the reflection of the upper one to deepen the colour of the

other.  The jolting of the train had again shaken loose the

lock above her ear. It danced on her cheek like the flit of

a brown wing over flowers, and Darrow felt an intense desire

to lean forward and put it back behind her ear.
