




VIII





All day, since the late reluctant dawn, the rain had come

down in torrents.  It streamed against Darrow's high-perched

windows, reduced their vast prospect of roofs and chimneys

to a black oily huddle, and filled the room with the drab

twilight of an underground aquarium.



The streams descended with the regularity of a third day's

rain, when trimming and shuffling are over, and the weather

has settled down to do its worst.  There were no variations

of rhythm, no lyrical ups and downs: the grey lines

streaking the panes were as dense and uniform as a page of

unparagraphed narrative.



George Darrow had drawn his armchair to the fire.  The time-

table he had been studying lay on the floor, and he sat

staring with dull acquiescence into the boundless blur of

rain, which affected him like a vast projection of his own

state of mind.  Then his eyes travelled slowly about the

room.



It was exactly ten days since his hurried unpacking had

strewn it with the contents of his portmanteaux.  His

brushes and razors were spread out on the blotched marble of

the chest of drawers.  A stack of newspapers had accumulated

on the centre table under the "electrolier", and half a

dozen paper novels lay on the mantelpiece among cigar-cases

and toilet bottles; but these traces of his passage had made

no mark on the featureless dulness of the room, its look of

being the makeshift setting of innumerable transient

collocations.  There was something sardonic, almost

sinister, in its appearance of having deliberately "made up"

for its anonymous part, all in noncommittal drabs and

browns, with a carpet and paper that nobody would remember,

and chairs and tables as impersonal as railway porters.



Darrow picked up the time-table and tossed it on to the

table.  Then he rose to his feet, lit a cigar and went to

the window.  Through the rain he could just discover the

face of a clock in a tall building beyond the railway roofs.

He pulled out his watch, compared the two time-pieces, and

started the hands of his with such a rush that they flew

past the hour and he had to make them repeat the circuit

more deliberately.  He felt a quite disproportionate

irritation at the trifling blunder.  When he had corrected

it he went back to his chair and threw himself down, leaning

back his head against his hands.  Presently his cigar went

out, and he got up, hunted for the matches, lit it again and

returned to his seat.



The room was getting on his nerves.  During the first few

days, while the skies were clear, he had not noticed it, or

had felt for it only the contemptuous indifference of the

traveller toward a provisional shelter.  But now that he was

leaving it, was looking at it for the last time, it seemed

to have taken complete possession of his mind, to be soaking

itself into him like an ugly indelible blot.  Every detail

pressed itself on his notice with the familiarity of an

accidental confidant: whichever way he turned, he felt the

nudge of a transient intimacy...



The one fixed point in his immediate future was that his

leave was over and that he must be back at his post in

London the next morning.  Within twenty-four hours he would

again be in a daylight world of recognized activities,

himself a busy, responsible, relatively necessary factor in

the big whirring social and official machine.  That fixed

obligation was the fact he could think of with the least

discomfort, yet for some unaccountable reason it was the one

on which he found it most difficult to fix his thoughts.

Whenever he did so, the room jerked him back into the circle

of its insistent associations.  It was extraordinary with

what a microscopic minuteness of loathing he hated it all:

the grimy carpet and wallpaper, the black marble mantel-

piece, the clock with a gilt allegory under a dusty bell,

the high-bolstered brown-counterpaned bed, the framed card

of printed rules under the electric light switch, and the

door of communication with the next room.  He hated the door

most of all...



At the outset, he had felt no special sense of

responsibility.  He was satisfied that he had struck the

right note, and convinced of his power of sustaining it.

The whole incident had somehow seemed, in spite of its

vulgar setting and its inevitable prosaic propinquities, to

be enacting itself in some unmapped region outside the pale

of the usual.  It was not like anything that had ever

happened to him before, or in which he had ever pictured

himself as likely to be involved; but that, at first, had

seemed no argument against his fitness to deal with it.



Perhaps but for the three days' rain he might have got away

without a doubt as to his adequacy.  The rain had made all

the difference.  It had thrown the whole picture out of

perspective, blotted out the mystery of the remoter planes

and the enchantment of the middle distance, and thrust into

prominence every commonplace fact of the foreground.  It was

the kind of situation that was not helped by being thought

over; and by the perversity of circumstance he had been

forced into the unwilling contemplation of its every

aspect...



His cigar had gone out again, and he threw it into the fire

and vaguely meditated getting up to find another. But the

mere act of leaving his chair seemed to call for a greater

exertion of the will than he was capable of, and he leaned

his head back with closed eyes and listened to the drumming

of the rain.



A different noise aroused him.  It was the opening and

closing of the door leading from the corridor into the

adjoining room.  He sat motionless, without opening his

eyes; but now another sight forced itself under his lowered

lids.  It was the precise photographic picture of that other

room.  Everything in it rose before him and pressed itself

upon his vision with the same acuity of distinctness as the

objects surrounding him.  A step sounded on the floor, and

he knew which way the step was directed, what pieces of

furniture it had to skirt, where it would probably pause,

and what was likely to arrest it.  He heard another sound,

and recognized it as that of a wet umbrella placed in the

black marble jamb of the chimney-piece, against the hearth.

He caught the creak of a hinge, and instantly differentiated

it as that of the wardrobe against the opposite wall.  Then

he heard the mouse-like squeal of a reluctant drawer, and

knew it was the upper one in the chest of drawers beside the

bed: the clatter which followed was caused by the mahogany

toilet-glass jumping on its loosened pivots...



The step crossed the floor again.  It was strange how much

better he knew it than the person to whom it belonged!  Now

it was drawing near the door of communication between the

two rooms.  He opened his eyes and looked.  The step had

ceased and for a moment there was silence.  Then he heard a

low knock.  He made no response, and after an interval he

saw that the door handle was being tentatively turned.  He

closed his eyes once more...



The door opened, and the step was in the room, coming

cautiously toward him.  He kept his eyes shut, relaxing his

body to feign sleep.  There was another pause, then a

wavering soft advance, the rustle of a dress behind his

chair, the warmth of two hands pressed for a moment on his

lids. The palms of the hands had the lingering scent of some

stuff that he had bought on the Boulevard...He looked up and

saw a  letter falling over his shoulder to his knee...



"Did I disturb you?  I'm so sorry!  They gave me this just now

when I came in."



The letter, before he could catch it, had slipped between

his knees to the floor.  It lay there, address upward, at

his feet, and while he sat staring down at the strong

slender characters on the blue-gray envelope an arm reached

out from behind to pick it up.



"Oh, don't--DON'T" broke from him, and he bent over and

caught the arm.  The face above it was close to his.



"Don't what?"



----"take the trouble," he stammered.



He dropped the arm and stooped down.  His grasp closed over

the letter, he fingered its thickness and weight and

calculated the number of sheets it must contain.



Suddenly he felt the pressure of the hand on his shoulder,

and became aware that the face was still leaning over him,

and that in a moment he would have to look up and kiss it...



He bent forward first and threw the unopened letter into the

middle of the fire.
