




VI





At the Theatre Francais, the next afternoon, Darrow yawned

and fidgeted in his seat.



The day was warm, the theatre crowded and airless, and the

performance, it seemed to him, intolerably bad.  He stole a

glance at his companion, wondering if she shared his

feelings.  Her rapt profile betrayed no unrest, but

politeness might have caused her to feign an interest that

she did not feel.  He leaned back impatiently, stifling

another yawn, and trying to fix his attention on the stage.

Great things were going forward there, and he was not

insensible to the stern beauties of the ancient drama.  But

the interpretation of the play seemed to him as airless and

lifeless as the atmosphere of the theatre.  The players were

the same whom he had often applauded in those very parts,

and perhaps that fact added to the impression of staleness

and conventionality produced by their performance.  Surely

it was time to infuse new blood into the veins of the

moribund art.  He had the impression that the ghosts of

actors were giving a spectral performance on the shores of

Styx.



Certainly it was not the most profitable way for a young man

with a pretty companion to pass the golden hours of a spring

afternoon.  The freshness of the face at his side,

reflecting the freshness of the season, suggested dapplings

of sunlight through new leaves, the sound of a brook in the

grass, the ripple of tree-shadows over breezy meadows...



When at length the fateful march of the cothurns was stayed

by the single pause in the play, and Darrow had led Miss

Viner out on the balcony overhanging the square before the

theatre, he turned to see if she shared his feelings.  But

the rapturous look she gave him checked the depreciation on

his lips.



"Oh, why did you bring me out here?  One ought to creep away

and sit in the dark till it begins again!"



"Is THAT the way they made you feel?"



"Didn't they YOU?...As if the gods were there all the

while, just behind them, pulling the strings?" Her hands

were pressed against the railing, her face shining and

darkening under the wing-beats of successive impressions.



Darrow smiled in enjoyment of her pleasure.  After all, he

had felt all that, long ago; perhaps it was his own fault,

rather than that of the actors, that the poetry of the play

seemed to have evaporated...But no, he had been right in

judging the performance to be dull and stale: it was simply

his companion's inexperience, her lack of occasions to

compare and estimate, that made her think it brilliant.



"I was afraid you were bored and wanted to come away."



"BORED?" She made a little aggrieved grimace.  "You mean

you thought me too ignorant and stupid to appreciate it?"



"No; not that."  The hand nearest him still lay on the

railing of the balcony, and he covered it for a moment with

his.  As he did so he saw the colour rise and tremble in her

cheek.



"Tell me just what you think," he said, bending his head a

little, and only half-aware of his words.



She did not turn her face to his, but began to talk rapidly,

trying to convey something of what she felt. But she was

evidently unused to analyzing her aesthetic emotions, and

the tumultuous rush of the drama seemed to have left her in

a state of panting wonder, as though it had been a storm or

some other natural cataclysm.  She had no literary or

historic associations to which to attach her impressions:

her education had evidently not comprised a course in Greek

literature.  But she felt what would probably have been

unperceived by many a young lady who had taken a first in

classics: the ineluctable fatality of the tale, the dread

sway in it of the same mysterious "luck" which pulled the

threads of her own small destiny.  It was not literature to

her, it was fact: as actual, as near by, as what was

happening to her at the moment and what the next hour held

in store.  Seen in this light, the play regained for Darrow

its supreme and poignant reality.  He pierced to the heart

of its significance through all the artificial accretions

with which his theories of art and the conventions of the

stage had clothed it, and saw it as he had never seen it: as

life.



After this there could be no question of flight, and he took

her back to the theatre, content to receive his own

sensations through the medium of hers.  But with the

continuation of the play, and the oppression of the heavy

air, his attention again began to wander, straying back over

the incidents of the morning.



He had been with Sophy Viner all day, and he was surprised

to find how quickly the time had gone.  She had hardly

attempted, as the hours passed, to conceal her satisfaction

on finding that no telegram came from the Farlows.  "They'll

have written," she had simply said; and her mind had at once

flown on to the golden prospect of an afternoon at the

theatre.  The intervening hours had been disposed of in a

stroll through the lively streets, and a repast, luxuriously

lingered over, under the chestnut-boughs of a restaurant in

the Champs Elysees.  Everything entertained and interested

her, and Darrow remarked, with an amused detachment, that

she was not insensible to the impression her charms

produced.  Yet there was no hard edge of vanity in her sense

of her prettiness: she seemed simply to be aware of it as a

note in the general harmony, and to enjoy sounding the note

as a singer enjoys singing.



After luncheon, as they sat over their coffee, she had again

asked an immense number of questions and delivered herself

of a remarkable variety of opinions. Her questions testified

to a wholesome and comprehensive human curiosity, and her

comments showed, like her face and her whole attitude, an

odd mingling of precocious wisdom and disarming ignorance.

When she talked to him about "life"--the word was often on

her lips--she seemed to him like a child playing with a

tiger's cub; and he said to himself that some day the child

would grow up--and so would the tiger. Meanwhile, such

expertness qualified by such candour made it impossible to

guess the extent of her personal experience, or to estimate

its effect on her character.  She might be any one of a

dozen definable types, or she might--more disconcertingly to

her companion and more perilously to herself--be a shifting

and uncrystallized mixture of them all.



Her talk, as usual, had promptly reverted to the stage. She

was eager to learn about every form of dramatic expression

which the metropolis of things theatrical had to offer, and

her curiosity ranged from the official temples of the art to

its less hallowed haunts.  Her searching enquiries about a

play whose production, on one of the latter scenes, had

provoked a considerable amount of scandal, led Darrow to

throw out laughingly: "To see THAT you'll have to wait

till you're married!" and his answer had sent her off at a

tangent.



"Oh, I never mean to marry," she had rejoined in a tone of

youthful finality.



"I seem to have heard that before!"



"Yes; from girls who've only got to choose!" Her eyes had

grown suddenly almost old.  "I'd like you to see the only

men who've ever wanted to marry me!  One was the doctor on

the steamer, when I came abroad with the Hokes: he'd been

cashiered from the navy for drunkenness. The other was a

deaf widower with three grown-up daughters, who kept a

clock-shop in Bayswater!--Besides," she rambled on, "I'm not

so sure that I believe in marriage.  You see I'm all for

self-development and the chance to live one's life.  I'm

awfully modern, you know."



It was just when she proclaimed herself most awfully modern

that she struck him as most helplessly backward; yet the

moment after, without any bravado, or apparent desire to

assume an attitude, she would propound some social axiom

which could have been gathered only in the bitter soil of

experience.



All these things came back to him as he sat beside her in

the theatre and watched her ingenuous absorption. It was on

"the story" that her mind was fixed, and in life also, he

suspected, it would always be "the story", rather than its

remoter imaginative issues, that would hold her.  He did not

believe there were ever any echoes in her soul...



There was no question, however, that what she felt was felt

with intensity: to the actual, the immediate, she spread

vibrating strings.  When the play was over, and they came

out once more into the sunlight, Darrow looked down at her

with a smile.



"Well?" he asked.



She made no answer.  Her dark gaze seemed to rest on him

without seeing him.  Her cheeks and lips were pale, and the

loose hair under her hat-brim clung to her forehead in damp

rings.  She looked like a young priestess still dazed by the

fumes of the cavern.



"You poor child--it's been almost too much for you!"



She shook her head with a vague smile.



"Come," he went on, putting his hand on her arm, "let's jump

into a taxi and get some air and sunshine.  Look, there are

hours of daylight left; and see what a night it's going to

be!"



He pointed over their heads, to where a white moon hung in

the misty blue above the roofs of the rue de Rivoli.



She made no answer, and he signed to a motor-cab, calling

out to the driver: "To the Bois!"



As the carriage turned toward the Tuileries she roused

herself.  "I must go first to the hotel.  There may be a

message--at any rate I must decide on something."



Darrow saw that the reality of the situation had suddenly

forced itself upon her.  "I MUST decide on something,"

she repeated.



He would have liked to postpone the return, to persuade her

to drive directly to the Bois for dinner.  It would have

been easy enough to remind her that she could not start for

Joigny that evening, and that therefore it was of no moment

whether she received the Farlows' answer then or a few hours

later; but for some reason he hesitated to use this

argument, which had come so naturally to him the day before.

After all, he knew she would find nothing at the hotel--so

what did it matter if they went there?



The porter, interrogated, was not sure.  He himself had

received nothing for the lady, but in his absence his

subordinate might have sent a letter upstairs.



Darrow and Sophy mounted together in the lift, and the young

man, while she went into her room, unlocked his own door and

glanced at the empty table.  For him at least no message had

come; and on her threshold, a moment later, she met him with

the expected: "No--there's nothing!"



He feigned an unregretful surprise.  "So much the better!

And now, shall we drive out somewhere?  Or would you rather

take a boat to Bellevue?  Have you ever dined there, on the

terrace, by moonlight?  It's not at all bad.  And there's no

earthly use in sitting here waiting."



She stood before him in perplexity.



"But when I wrote yesterday I asked them to telegraph. I

suppose they're horribly hard up, the poor dears, and they

thought a letter would do as well as a telegram."  The colour

had risen to her face.  "That's why I wrote instead of

telegraphing; I haven't a penny to spare myself!"



Nothing she could have said could have filled her listener

with a deeper contrition.  He felt the red in his own face

as he recalled the motive with which he had credited her in

his midnight musings.  But that motive, after all, had

simply been trumped up to justify his own disloyalty: he had

never really believed in it. The reflection deepened his

confusion, and he would have liked to take her hand in his

and confess the injustice he had done her.



She may have interpreted his change of colour as an

involuntary protest at being initiated into such shabby

details, for she went on with a laugh: "I suppose you can

hardly understand what it means to have to stop and think

whether one can afford a telegram?  But I've always had to

consider such things.  And I mustn't stay here any longer

now--I must try to get a night train for Joigny.  Even if

the Farlows can't take me in, I can go to the hotel: it will

cost less than staying here."  She paused again and then

exclaimed: "I ought to have thought of that sooner; I ought

to have telegraphed yesterday!  But I was sure I should hear

from them today; and I wanted--oh, I DID so awfully want

to stay!" She threw a troubled look at Darrow. "Do you

happen to remember," she asked, "what time it was when you

posted my letter?"

