




V





At the porter's desk a brief "Pas de lettres" fell

destructively on the fabric of these hopes.

Mrs. Leath had not written--she had not taken the trouble to

explain her telegram.  Darrow turned away with a sharp pang

of humiliation.  Her frugal silence mocked his prodigality

of hopes and fears.  He had put his question to the porter

once before, on returning to the hotel after luncheon; and

now, coming back again in the late afternoon, he was met by

the same denial.  The second post was in, and had brought

him nothing.



A glance at his watch showed that he had barely time to

dress before taking Miss Viner out to dine; but as he turned

to the lift a new thought struck him, and hurrying back into

the hall he dashed off another telegram to his servant:

"Have you forwarded any letter with French postmark today?

Telegraph answer Terminus."



Some kind of reply would be certain to reach him on his

return from the theatre, and he would then know definitely

whether Mrs. Leath meant to write or not. He hastened up to

his room and dressed with a lighter heart.



Miss Viner's vagrant trunk had finally found its way to its

owner; and, clad in such modest splendour as it furnished,

she shone at Darrow across their restaurant table.  In the

reaction of his wounded vanity he found her prettier and

more interesting than before.  Her dress, sloping away from

the throat, showed the graceful set of her head on its

slender neck, and the wide brim of her hat arched above her

hair like a dusky halo.  Pleasure danced in her eyes and on

her lips, and as she shone on him between the candle-shades

Darrow felt that he should not be at all sorry to be seen

with her in public.  He even sent a careless glance about

him in the vague hope that it might fall on an acquaintance.



At the theatre her vivacity sank into a breathless hush, and

she sat intent in her corner of their baignoire, with

the gaze of a neophyte about to be initiated into the sacred

mysteries.  Darrow placed himself behind her, that he might

catch her profile between himself and the stage.  He was

touched by the youthful seriousness of her expression.  In

spite of the experiences she must have had, and of the

twenty-four years to which she owned, she struck him as

intrinsically young; and he wondered how so evanescent a

quality could have been preserved in the desiccating Murrett

air.  As the play progressed he noticed that her immobility

was traversed by swift flashes of perception.  She was not

missing anything, and her intensity of attention when

Cerdine was on the stage drew an anxious line between her

brows.



After the first act she remained for a few minutes rapt and

motionless; then she turned to her companion with a quick

patter of questions.  He gathered from them that she had

been less interested in following the general drift of the

play than in observing the details of its interpretation.

Every gesture and inflection of the great actress's had been

marked and analyzed; and Darrow felt a secret gratification

in being appealed to as an authority on the histrionic art.

His interest in it had hitherto been merely that of the

cultivated young man curious of all forms of artistic

expression; but in reply to her questions he found things to

say about it which evidently struck his listener as

impressive and original, and with which he himself was not,

on the whole, dissatisfied.  Miss Viner was much more

concerned to hear his views than to express her own, and the

deference with which she received his comments called from

him more ideas about the theatre than he had ever supposed

himself to possess.



With the second act she began to give more attention to the

development of the play, though her interest was excited

rather by what she called "the story" than by the conflict

of character producing it.  Oddly combined with her sharp

apprehension of things theatrical, her knowledge of

technical "dodges" and green-room precedents, her glibness

about "lines" and "curtains", was the primitive simplicity

of her attitude toward the tale itself, as toward something

that was "really happening" and at which one assisted as at

a street-accident or a quarrel overheard in the next room.

She wanted to know if Darrow thought the lovers "really

would" be involved in the catastrophe that threatened them,

and when he reminded her that his predictions were

disqualified by his having already seen the play, she

exclaimed: "Oh, then, please don't tell me what's going to

happen!" and the next moment was questioning him about

Cerdine's theatrical situation and her private history.  On

the latter point some of her enquiries were of a kind that

it is not in the habit of young girls to make, or even to

know how to make; but her apparent unconsciousness of the

fact seemed rather to reflect on her past associates than on

herself.



When the second act was over, Darrow suggested their taking

a turn in the foyer; and seated on one of its cramped

red velvet sofas they watched the crowd surge up and down in

a glare of lights and gilding.  Then, as she complained of

the heat, he led her through the press to the congested

cafe at the foot of the stairs, where orangeades were

thrust at them between the shoulders of packed

consommateurs and Darrow, lighting a cigarette while she

sucked her straw, knew the primitive complacency of the man

at whose companion other men stare.



On a corner of their table lay a smeared copy of a

theatrical journal.  It caught Sophy's eye and after poring

over the page she looked up with an excited exclamation.



'They're giving Oedipe tomorrow afternoon at the

Francais!  I suppose you've seen it heaps and heaps of

times?"



He smiled back at her.  "You must see it too.  We'll go

tomorrow."



She sighed at his suggestion, but without discarding it.

"How can I?  The last train for Joigny leaves at four."



"But you don't know yet that your friends will want you."



"I shall know tomorrow early.  I asked Mrs. Farlow to

telegraph as soon as she got my letter."

A twinge of compunction shot through Darrow.  Her words

recalled to him that on their return to the hotel after

luncheon she had given him her letter to post, and that he

had never thought of it again.  No doubt it was still in the

pocket of the coat he had taken off when he dressed for

dinner.  In his perturbation he pushed back his chair, and

the movement made her look up at him.



"What's the matter?"



"Nothing.  Only--you know I don't fancy that letter can have

caught this afternoon's post."



"Not caught it?  Why not?"



"Why, I'm afraid it will have been too late."  He bent his

head to light another cigarette.



She struck her hands together with a gesture which, to his

amusement, he noticed she had caught from Cerdine.



"Oh, dear, I hadn't thought of that!  But surely it will

reach them in the morning?"



"Some time in the morning, I suppose.  You know the French

provincial post is never in a hurry.  I don't believe your

letter would have been delivered this evening in any case."

As this idea occurred to him he felt himself almost

absolved.



"Perhaps, then, I ought to have telegraphed?"



"I'll telegraph for you in the morning if you say so."



The bell announcing the close of the entr'-acte shrilled

through the cafe, and she sprang to her feet.



"Oh, come, come!  We mustn't miss it!"



Instantly forgetful of the Farlows, she slipped her arm

through his and turned to push her way back to the theatre.



As soon as the curtain went up she as promptly forgot her

companion.  Watching her from the corner to which he had

returned, Darrow saw that great waves of sensation were

beating deliciously against her brain.  It was as though

every starved sensibility were throwing out feelers to the

mounting tide; as though everything she was seeing, hearing,

imagining, rushed in to fill the void of all she had always

been denied.



Darrow, as he observed her, again felt a detached enjoyment

in her pleasure.  She was an extraordinary conductor of

sensation: she seemed to transmit it physically, in

emanations that set the blood dancing in his veins.  He had

not often had the opportunity of studying the effects of a

perfectly fresh impression on so responsive a temperament,

and he felt a fleeting desire to make its chords vibrate for

his own amusement.



At the end of the next act she discovered with dismay that

in their transit to the cafe she had lost the beautiful

pictured programme he had bought for her. She wanted to go

back and hunt for it, but Darrow assured her that he would

have no trouble in getting her another.  When he went out in

quest of it she followed him protestingly to the door of the

box, and he saw that she was distressed at the thought of

his having to spend an additional franc for her.  This

frugality smote Darrow by its contrast to her natural bright

profusion; and again he felt the desire to right so clumsy

an injustice.



When he returned to the box she was still standing in the

doorway, and he noticed that his were not the only eyes

attracted to her.  Then another impression sharply diverted

his attention.  Above the fagged faces of the Parisian crowd

he had caught the fresh fair countenance of Owen Leath

signalling a joyful recognition.  The young man, slim and

eager, had detached himself from two companions of his own

type, and was seeking to push through the press to his step-

mother's friend.  The encounter, to Darrow, could hardly

have been more inopportune; it woke in him a confusion of

feelings of which only the uppermost was allayed by seeing

Sophy Viner, as if instinctively warned, melt back into the

shadow of their box.



A minute later Owen Leath was at his side.  "I was sure it

was you!  Such luck to run across you!  Won't you come off

with us to supper after it's over?  Montmartre, or wherever

else you please.  Those two chaps over there are friends of

mine, at the Beaux Arts; both of them rather good fellows--

and we'd be so glad----"



For half a second Darrow read in his hospitable eye the

termination "if you'd bring the lady too"; then it deflected

into: "We'd all be so glad if you'd come."



Darrow, excusing himself with thanks, lingered on for a few

minutes' chat, in which every word, and every tone of his

companion's voice, was like a sharp light flashed into

aching eyes.  He was glad when the bell called the audience

to their seats, and young Leath left him with the friendly

question: "We'll see you at Givre later on?"



When he rejoined Miss Viner, Darrow's first care was to find

out, by a rapid inspection of the house, whether Owen

Leath's seat had given him a view of their box. But the

young man was not visible from it, and Darrow concluded that

he had been recognized in the corridor and not at his

companion's side.  He scarcely knew why it seemed to him so

important that this point should be settled; certainly his

sense of reassurance was less due to regard for Miss Viner

than to the persistent vision of grave offended eyes...



During the drive back to the hotel this vision was

persistently kept before him by the thought that the evening

post might have brought a letter from Mrs. Leath.  Even if

no letter had yet come, his servant might have telegraphed

to say that one was on its way; and at the thought his

interest in the girl at his side again cooled to the

fraternal, the almost fatherly. She was no more to him,

after all, than an appealing young creature to whom it was

mildly agreeable to have offered an evening's diversion; and

when, as they rolled into the illuminated court of the

hotel, she turned with a quick movement which brought her

happy face close to his, he leaned away, affecting to be

absorbed in opening the door of the cab.



At the desk the night porter, after a vain search through

the pigeon-holes, was disposed to think that a letter or

telegram had in fact been sent up for the gentleman; and

Darrow, at the announcement, could hardly wait to ascend to

his room.  Upstairs, he and his companion had the long

dimly-lit corridor to themselves, and Sophy paused on her

threshold, gathering up in one hand the pale folds of her

cloak, while she held the other out to Darrow.



"If the telegram comes early I shall be off by the first

train; so I suppose this is good-bye," she said, her eyes

dimmed by a little shadow of regret.



Darrow, with a renewed start of contrition, perceived that

he had again forgotten her letter; and as their hands met he

vowed to himself that the moment she had left him he would

dash down stairs to post it.



"Oh, I'll see you in the morning, of course!"



A tremor of pleasure crossed her face as he stood before

her, smiling a little uncertainly.



"At any rate," she said, "I want to thank you now for my

good day."



He felt in her hand the same tremor he had seen in her face.

"But it's YOU, on the contrary--" he began, lifting the

hand to his lips.



As he dropped it, and their eyes met, something passed

through hers that was like a light carried rapidly behind a

curtained window.



"Good night; you must be awfully tired," he said with a

friendly abruptness, turning away without even waiting to

see her pass into her room.  He unlocked his door, and

stumbling over the threshold groped in the darkness for the

electric button.  The light showed him a telegram on the

table, and he forgot everything else as he caught it up.



"No letter from France," the message read.



It fell from Darrow's hand to the floor, and he dropped into

a chair by the table and sat gazing at the dingy drab and

olive pattern of the carpet.  She had not written, then; she

had not written, and it was manifest now that she did not

mean to write.  If she had had any intention of explaining

her telegram she would certainly, within twenty-four hours,

have followed it up by a letter.  But she evidently did not

intend to explain it, and her silence could mean only that

she had no explanation to give, or else that she was too

indifferent to be aware that one was needed.



Darrow, face to face with these alternatives, felt a

recrudescence of boyish misery.  It was no longer his hurt

vanity that cried out.  He told himself that he could have

borne an equal amount of pain, if only it had left Mrs.

Leath's image untouched; but he could not bear to think of

her as trivial or insincere.  The thought was so intolerable

that he felt a blind desire to punish some one else for the

pain it caused him.



As he sat moodily staring at the carpet its silly

intricacies melted into a blur from which the eyes of Mrs.

Leath again looked out at him.  He saw the fine sweep of her

brows, and the deep look beneath them as she had turned from

him on their last evening in London.  "This will be good-

bye, then," she had said; and it occurred to him that her

parting phrase had been the same as Sophy Viner's.



At the thought he jumped to his feet and took down from its

hook the coat in which he had left Miss Viner's letter.  The

clock marked the third quarter after midnight, and he knew

it would make no difference if he went down to the post-box

now or early the next morning; but he wanted to clear his

conscience, and having found the letter he went to the door.



A sound in the next room made him pause.  He had become

conscious again that, a few feet off, on the other side of a

thin partition, a small keen flame of life was quivering and

agitating the air.  Sophy's face came hack to him

insistently.  It was as vivid now as Mrs. Leath's had been a

moment earlier.  He recalled with a faint smile of

retrospective pleasure the girl's enjoyment of her evening,

and the innumerable fine feelers of sensation she had thrown

out to its impressions.



It gave him a curiously close sense of her presence to think

that at that moment she was living over her enjoyment as

intensely as he was living over his unhappiness. His own

case was irremediable, but it was easy enough to give her a

few more hours of pleasure.  And did she not perhaps

secretly expect it of him?  After all, if she had been very

anxious to join her friends she would have telegraphed them

on reaching Paris, instead of writing.  He wondered now that

he had not been struck at the moment by so artless a device

to gain more time.  The fact of her having practised it did

not make him think less well of her; it merely strengthened

the impulse to use his opportunity.  She was starving, poor

child, for a little amusement, a little personal life--why

not give her the chance of another day in Paris?  If he did

so, should he not be merely falling in with her own hopes?



At the thought his sympathy for her revived.  She became of

absorbing interest to him as an escape from himself and an

object about which his thwarted activities could cluster.

He felt less drearily alone because of her being there, on

the other side of the door, and in his gratitude to her for

giving him this relief he began, with indolent amusement, to

plan new ways of detaining her.  He dropped back into his

chair, lit a cigar, and smiled a little at the image of her

smiling face.  He tried to imagine what incident of the day

she was likely to be recalling at that particular moment,

and what part he probably played in it.  That it was not a

small part he was certain, and the knowledge was undeniably

pleasant.



Now and then a sound from her room brought before him more

vividly the reality of the situation and the strangeness of

the vast swarming solitude in which he and she were

momentarily isolated, amid long lines of rooms each holding

its separate secret.  The nearness of all these other

mysteries enclosing theirs gave Darrow a more intimate sense

of the girl's presence, and through the fumes of his cigar

his imagination continued to follow her to and fro, traced

the curve of her slim young arms as she raised them to undo

her hair, pictured the sliding down of her dress to the

waist and then to the knees, and the whiteness of her feet

as she slipped across the floor to bed...



He stood up and shook himself with a yawn, throwing away the

end of his cigar.  His glance, in following it, lit on the

telegram which had dropped to the floor. The sounds in the

next room had ceased, and once more he felt alone and

unhappy.



Opening the window, he folded his arms on the sill and

looked out on the vast light-spangled mass of the city, and

then up at the dark sky, in which the morning planet stood.

