





VII





Darrow was still standing on her threshold.  As she put the

question he entered the room and closed the door behind him.



His heart was beating a little faster than usual and he had

no clear idea of what he was about to do or say, beyond the

definite conviction that, whatever passing impulse of

expiation moved him, he would not be fool enough to tell her

that he had not sent her letter. He knew that most

wrongdoing works, on the whole, less mischief than its

useless confession; and this was clearly a case where a

passing folly might be turned, by avowal, into a serious

offense.



"I'm so sorry--so sorry; but you must let me help you...You

will let me help you?" he said.



He took her hands and pressed them together between his,

counting on a friendly touch to help out the insufficiency

of words.  He felt her yield slightly to his clasp, and

hurried on without giving her time to answer.



"Isn't it a pity to spoil our good time together by

regretting anything you might have done to prevent our

having it?"



She drew back, freeing her hands.  Her face, losing its look

of appealing confidence, was suddenly sharpened by distrust.



"You didn't forget to post my letter?"



Darrow stood before her, constrained and ashamed, and ever

more keenly aware that the betrayal of his distress must be

a greater offense than its concealment.



"What an insinuation!" he cried, throwing out his hands with

a laugh.



Her face instantly melted to laughter.  "Well, then--I

WON'T be sorry; I won't regret anything except that our

good time is over!"



The words were so unexpected that they routed all his

resolves.  If she had gone on doubting him he could probably

have gone on deceiving her; but her unhesitating acceptance

of his word made him hate the part he was playing.  At the

same moment a doubt shot up its serpenthead in his own

bosom.  Was it not he rather than she who was childishly

trustful?  Was she not almost too ready to take his word, and

dismiss once for all the tiresome question of the letter?

Considering what her experiences must have been, such

trustfulness seemed open to suspicion.  But the moment his

eyes fell on her he was ashamed of the thought, and knew it

for what it really was: another pretext to lessen his own

delinquency.



"Why should our good time be over?" he asked.  "Why

shouldn't it last a little longer?"



She looked up, her lips parted in surprise; but before she

could speak he went on: "I want you to stay with me--I want

you, just for a few days, to have all the things you've

never had.  It's not always May and Paris--why not make the

most of them now?  You know me--we're not strangers--why

shouldn't you treat me like a friend?"



While he spoke she had drawn away a little, but her hand

still lay in his.  She was pale, and her eyes were fixed on

him in a gaze in which there was neither distrust or

resentment, but only an ingenuous wonder.  He was

extraordinarily touched by her expression.



"Oh, do!  You must.  Listen: to prove that I'm sincere I'll

tell you...I'll tell you I didn't post your letter...I

didn't post it because I wanted so much to give you a few

good hours...and because I couldn't bear to have you go."



He had the feeling that the words were being uttered in

spite of him by some malicious witness of the scene, and yet

that he was not sorry to have them spoken.



The girl had listened to him in silence.  She remained

motionless for a moment after he had ceased to speak; then

she snatched away her hand.



"You didn't post my letter?  You kept it back on purpose?  And

you tell me so NOW, to prove to me that I'd better put

myself under your protection?" She burst into a laugh that

had in it all the piercing echoes of her Murrett past, and

her face, at the same moment, underwent the same change,

shrinking into a small malevolent white mask in which the

eyes burned black. "Thank you--thank you most awfully for

telling me!  And for all your other kind intentions!  The

plan's delightful--really quite delightful, and I'm

extremely flattered and obliged."



She dropped into a seat beside her dressing-table, resting

her chin on her lifted hands, and laughing out at him under

the elf-lock which had shaken itself down over her eyes.



Her outburst did not offend the young man; its immediate

effect was that of allaying his agitation.  The theatrical

touch in her manner made his offense seem more venial than

he had thought it a moment before.



He drew up a chair and sat down beside her.  "After all," he

said, in a tone of good-humoured protest, "I needn't have

told you I'd kept back your letter; and my telling you seems

rather strong proof that I hadn't any very nefarious designs

on you."



She met this with a shrug, but he did not give her time to

answer.  "My designs," he continued with a smile, "were not

nefarious.  I saw you'd been through a bad time with Mrs.

Murrett, and that there didn't seem to be much fun ahead for

you; and I didn't see--and I don't yet see--the harm of

trying to give you a few hours of amusement between a

depressing past and a not particularly cheerful future."  He

paused again, and then went on, in the same tone of friendly

reasonableness: "The mistake I made was not to tell you this

at once--not to ask you straight out to give me a day or

two, and let me try to make you forget all the things that

are troubling you.  I was a fool not to see that if I'd put

it to you in that way you'd have accepted or refused, as you

chose; but that at least you wouldn't have mistaken my

intentions.--Intentions!" He stood up, walked the length of

the room, and turned back to where she still sat motionless,

her elbows propped on the dressing-table, her chin on her

hands.  "What rubbish we talk about intentions!  The truth is

I hadn't any: I just liked being with you.  Perhaps you

don't know how extraordinarily one can like being with

you...I was depressed and adrift myself; and you made me

forget my bothers; and when I found you were going--and

going back to dreariness, as I was--I didn't see why we

shouldn't have a few hours together first; so I left your

letter in my pocket."



He saw her face melt as she listened, and suddenly she

unclasped her hands and leaned to him.



"But are YOU unhappy too?  Oh, I never understood--I

never dreamed it!  I thought you'd always had everything in

the world you wanted!"



Darrow broke into a laugh at this ingenuous picture of his

state. He was ashamed of trying to better his case by an

appeal to her pity, and annoyed with himself for alluding to

a subject he would rather have kept out of his thoughts.

But her look of sympathy had disarmed him; his heart was

bitter and distracted; she was near him, her eyes were

shining with compassion--he bent over her and kissed her

hand.



"Forgive me--do forgive me," he said.



She stood up with a smiling head-shake.  "Oh, it's not so

often that people try to give me any pleasure--much less two

whole days of it!  I sha'n't forget how kind you've been.  I

shall have plenty of time to remember. But this IS good-

bye, you know.  I must telegraph at once to say I'm coming."



"To say you're coming?  Then I'm not forgiven?"



"Oh, you're forgiven--if that's any comfort."



"It's not, the very least, if your way of proving it is to

go away!"



She hung her head in meditation.  "But I can't stay.--How

CAN I stay?" she broke out, as if arguing with some

unseen monitor.



"Why can't you?  No one knows you're here...No one need ever

know."



She looked up, and their eyes exchanged meanings for a rapid

minute.  Her gaze was as clear as a boy's.  "Oh, it's not

THAT," she exclaimed, almost impatiently; "it's not people

I'm afraid of!  They've never put themselves out for me--why

on earth should I care about them?"



He liked her directness as he had never liked it before.

"Well, then, what is it?  Not ME, I hope?"



"No, not you: I like you. It's the money!  With me that's

always the root of the matter.  I could never yet afford a

treat in my life!"



Is THAT all?" He laughed, relieved by her naturalness.

"Look here; since we re talking as man to man--can't you

trust me about that too?"



"Trust you?  How do you mean?  You'd better not trust

ME!" she laughed back sharply.  "I might never be able to

pay up!"



His gesture brushed aside the allusion.  "Money may be the

root of the matter; it can't be the whole of it, between

friends.  Don't you think one friend may accept a small

service from another without looking too far ahead or

weighing too many chances?  The question turns entirely on

what you think of me.  If you like me well enough to be

willing to take a few days' holiday with me, just for the

pleasure of the thing, and the pleasure you'll be giving me,

let's shake hands on it. If you don't like me well enough

we'll shake hands too; only I shall be sorry," he ended.



"Oh, but I shall be sorry too!" Her face, as she lifted it

to his, looked so small and young that Darrow felt a

fugitive twinge of compunction, instantly effaced by the

excitement of pursuit.



"Well, then?" He stood looking down on her, his eyes

persuading her.  He was now intensely aware that his

nearness was having an effect which made it less and less

necessary for him to choose his words, and he went on, more

mindful of the inflections of his voice than of what he was

actually saying: "Why on earth should we say good-bye if

we're both sorry to?  Won't you tell me your reason?  It's not

a bit like you to let anything stand in the way of your

saying just what you feel. You mustn't mind offending me,

you know!"



She hung before him like a leaf on the meeting of cross-

currents, that the next ripple may sweep forward or whirl

back.  Then she flung up her head with the odd boyish

movement habitual to her in moments of excitement. "What I

feel?  Do you want to know what I feel?  That you're giving me

the only chance I've ever had!"



She turned about on her heel and, dropping into the nearest

chair, sank forward, her face hidden against the dressing-

table.



Under the folds of her thin summer dress the modelling of

her back and of her lifted arms, and the slight hollow

between her shoulder-blades, recalled the faint curves of a

terra-cotta statuette, some young image of grace hardly more

than sketched in the clay.  Darrow, as he stood looking at

her, reflected that her character, for all its seeming

firmness, its flashing edges of "opinion", was probably no

less immature.  He had not expected her to yield so suddenly

to his suggestion, or to confess her yielding in that way.

At first he was slightly disconcerted; then he saw how her

attitude simplified his own.  Her behaviour had all the

indecision and awkwardness of inexperience.  It showed that

she was a child after all; and all he could do--all he had

ever meant to do--was to give her a child's holiday to look

back to.



For a moment he fancied she was crying; but the next she was

on her feet and had swept round on him a face she must have

turned away only to hide the first rush of her pleasure.



For a while they shone on each other without speaking; then

she sprang to him and held out both hands.



"Is it true?  Is it really true?  Is it really going to happen

to ME?"



He felt like answering: "You're the very creature to whom it

was bound to happen"; but the words had a double sense that

made him wince, and instead he caught her proffered hands

and stood looking at her across the length of her arms,

without attempting to bend them or to draw her closer.  He

wanted her to know how her words had moved him; but his

thoughts were blurred by the rush of the same emotion that

possessed her, and his own words came with an effort.



He ended by giving her back a laugh as frank as her own, and

declaring, as he dropped her hands: "All that and more too--

you'll see!"

