




        LETTERS

        by Thomas Jefferson





        A YOUTH OF SIXTEEN



        _To John Harvie_

        _Shadwell, Jan. 14, 1760_



        SIR, -- I was at Colo. Peter Randolph's about a Fortnight ago,

& my Schooling falling into Discourse, he said he thought it would be

to my Advantage to go to the College, & was desirous I should go, as

indeed I am myself for several Reasons.  In the first place as long

as I stay at the Mountains the Loss of one fourth of my Time is

inevitable, by Company's coming here & detaining me from School.  And

likewise my Absence will in a great Measure put a Stop to so much

Company, & by that Means lessen the Expences of the Estate in

House-Keeping.  And on the other Hand by going to the College I shall

get a more universal Acquaintance, which may hereafter be serviceable

to me; & I suppose I can pursue my Studies in the Greek & Latin as

well there as here, & likewise learn something of the Mathematics.  I

shall be glad of your opinion.





        OLD COKE AND YOUNG LADIES



        _To John Page_

        _Fairfield, December 25, 1762_





        DEAR PAGE, -- This very day, to others the day of greatest

mirth and jollity, sees me overwhelmed with more and greater

misfortunes than have befallen a descendant of Adam for these

thousand years past, I am sure; and perhaps, after excepting Job,

since the creation of the world.  I think his misfortunes were

somewhat greater than mine: for although we may be pretty nearly on a

level in other respects, yet, I thank my God, I have the advantage of

brother Job in this, that Satan has not as yet put forth his hand to

load me with bodily afflictions.  You must know, dear Page, that I am

now in a house surrounded with enemies, who take counsel together

against my soul; and when I lay me down to rest, they say among

themselves, come let us destroy him.  I am sure if there is such a

thing as a Devil in this world, he must have been here last night and

have had some hand in contriving what happened to me.  Do you think

the cursed rats (at his instigation, I suppose) did not eat up my

pocket-book, which was in my pocket, within a foot of my head?  And

not contented with plenty for the present, they carried away my

jemmy-worked silk garters, and half a dozen new minuets I had just

got, to serve, I suppose, as provision for the winter.  But of this I

should not have accused the Devil, (because, you know rats will be

rats, and hunger, without the addition of his instigations, might

have urged them to do this,) if something worse, and from a different

quarter, had not happened.  You know it rained last night, or if you

do not know it, I am sure I do.  When I went to bed, I laid my watch

in the usual place, and going to take her up after I arose this

morning, I found her in the same place, it's true! but _Quantum

mutatus ab illo!_ all afloat in water, let in at a leak in the roof

of the house, and as silent and still as the rats that had eat my

pocket-book.  Now, you know, if chance had had anything to do in this

matter, there were a thousand other spots where it might have chanced

to leak as well as at this one, which was perpendicularly over my

watch.  But I'll tell you; it's my opinion that the Devil came and

bored the hole over it on purpose.  Well, as I was saying, my poor

watch had lost her speech.  I should not have cared much for this,

but something worse attended it; the subtle particles of the water

with which the case was filled, had, by their penetration, so

overcome the cohesion of the particles of the paper, of which my dear

picture and watch-paper were composed, that, in attempting to take

them out to dry them, good God!  _Mens horret referre!_ My cursed

fingers gave them such a rent, as I fear I never shall get over.

This, cried I, was the last stroke Satan had in reserve for me: he

knew I cared not for anything else he could do to me, and was

determined to try this last most fatal expedient.  _"Multis fortunae

vulneribus percussus, huic uni me imparem sensi, et penitus

succubui!"_ I would have cried bitterly, but I thought it beneath the

dignity of a man, and a man too who had read {ton onton, ta men

ephemin, ta dok ephemin}.  However, whatever misfortunes may attend

the picture or lover, my hearty prayers shall be, that all the health

and happiness which Heaven can send may be the portion of the

original, and that so much goodness may ever meet with what may be

most agreeable in this world, as I am sure it must be in the next.

And now, although the picture be defaced, there is so lively an image

of her imprinted in my mind, that I shall think of her too often, I

fear, for my peace of mind; and too often, I am sure, to get through

old Coke this winter; for God knows I have not seen him since I

packed him up in my trunk in Williamsburg.  Well, Page, I do wish the

Devil had old Coke, for I am sure I never was so tired of an old dull

scoundrel in my life.  What! are there so few inquietudes tacked to

this momentary life of our's, that we must need be loading ourselves

with a thousand more?  Or, as brother Job says, (who, by the bye, I

think began to whine a little under his afflictions,) "Are not my

days few?  Cease then, that I may take comfort a little before I go

whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness, and the

shadow of death." But the old fellows say we must read to gain

knowledge, and gain knowledge to make us happy and admired.  _Mere

jargon!_ Is there any such thing as happiness in this world?  No.

And as for admiration, I am sure the man who powders most, perfumes

most, embroiders most, and talks most nonsense, is most admired.

Though to be candid, there are some who have too much good sense to

esteem such monkey-like animals as these, in whose formation, as the

saying is, the tailors and barbers go halves with God Almighty; and

since these are the only persons whose esteem is worth a wish, I do

not know but that, upon the whole, the advice of these old fellows

may be worth following.



        You cannot conceive the satisfaction it would give me to have a

letter from you.  Write me very circumstantially everything which

happened at the wedding.  Was she there? because, if she was, I ought

to have been at the Devil for not being there too.  If there is any

news stirring in town or country, such as deaths, courtships, or

marriages, in the circle of my acquaintance, let me know it.

Remember me affectionately to all the young ladies of my

acquaintance, particularly the Miss Burwells, and Miss Potters, and

tell them that though that heavy earthly part of me, my body, be

absent, the better half of me, my soul, is ever with them; and that

my best wishes shall ever attend them.  Tell Miss Alice Corbin that I

verily believe the rats knew I was to win a pair of garters from her,

or they never would have been so cruel as to carry mine away.  This

very consideration makes me so sure of the bet, that I shall ask

everybody I see from that part of the world what pretty gentleman is

making his addresses to her.  I would fain ask the favour of Miss

Becca Burwell to give me another watch-paper of her own cutting,

which I should esteem much more, though it were a plain round one,

than the nicest in the world cut by other hands -- however, I am

afraid she would think this presumption, after my suffering the other

to get spoiled.  If you think you can excuse me to her for this, I

should be glad if you would ask her.  Tell Miss Sukey Potter that I

heard, just before I came out of town, that she was offended with me

about something, what it is I do not know; but this I know, that I

never was guilty of the least disrespect to her in my life, either in

word or deed; as far from it as it has been possible for one to be.

I suppose when we meet next, she will be _endeavouring_ to repay an

imaginary affront with a real one: but she may save herself the

trouble, for nothing that she can say or do to me shall ever lessen

her in my esteem, and I am determined always to look upon her as the

same honest-hearted, good-humored, agreeable lady I ever did.  Tell

-- tell -- in short, tell them all ten thousand things more than

either you or I can now or ever shall think of as long as we live.



        My mind has been so taken up with thinking of my acquaintances,

that, till this moment, I almost imagined myself in Williamsburg,

talking to you in our old unreserved way; and never observed, till I

turned over the leaf, to what an immoderate size I had swelled my

letter -- however, that I may not tire your patience by further

additions, I will make but this one more, that I am sincerely and

affectionately, Dear Page, your friend and servant.



        P. S. I am now within an easy day's ride of Shadwell, whither I

shall proceed in two or three days.





        A VISIT TO ANNAPOLIS



        _To John Page_

        _Annapolis, May 25, 1766_



        DEAR PAGE -- I received your last by T. Nelson whom I luckily

met on my road hither. surely never did small hero experience greater

misadventures than I did on the first two or three days of my

travelling. twice did my horse run away with me and greatly endanger

the breaking my neck on the first day. on the second I drove two

hours through as copious a rain as ever I have seen, without meeting

with a single house to which I could repair for shelter. on the third

in going through Pamunkey, being unacquainted with the ford, I passed

through water so deep as to run over the cushion as I sat on it, and

to add to the danger, at that instant one wheel mounted a rock which

I am confident was as high as the axle, and rendered it necessary for

me to exercise all my skill in the doctrine of gravity, in order to

prevent the center of gravity from being left unsupported the

consequence of which would according to Bob. Carter's opinion have

been the corruition of myself, chair and all into the water. whether

that would have been the case or not, let the learned determine: it

was not convenient for me to try the experiment at that time, and I

therefore threw my whole weight on the mounted wheel and escaped the

danger.  I confess that on this occasion I was seised with a violent

hydrophobia.  I had the pleasure of passing two or three days on my

way hither at the two Will. Fitzhugh's and Col'o. Harrison's where

were S. Potter, P. Stith, and Ben Harrison, since which time I have

seen no face known to me before, except Cap't. Mitchell's who is

here. -- but I will now give you some account of what I have seen in

this metropolis. the assembly happens to be sitting at this time.

their upper and lower house, as they call them, sit in different

houses.  I went into the lower, sitting in an old courthouse, which,

judging from it's form and appearance, was built in the year one.  I

was surprised on approaching it to hear as great a noise and hubbub

as you will usually observe at a publick meeting of the planters in

Virginia. the first object which struck me after my entrance was the

figure of a little old man dressed but indifferently, with a yellow

queue wig on, and mounted in the judge's chair. this the gentleman

who walked with me informed me was the speaker, a man of a very fair

character, but who by the bye, has very little the air of a speaker.

at one end of the justices' bench stood a man whom in another place I

should from his dress and phis have taken for Goodall the lawyer in

Williamsburgh, reading a bill then before the house with a schoolboy

tone and an abrupt pause at every half dozen words.  this I found to

be the clerk of the assembly. the mob (for such was their appearance)

sat covered on the justices' and lawyers' benches, and were divided

into little clubs amusing themselves in the common chit chat way.  I

was surprised to see them address the speaker without rising from

their seats, and three, four, and five at a time without being

checked. when a motion was made, the speaker instead of putting the

question in the usual form, only asked the gentlemen whether they

chose that such or such a thing should be done, and was answered by a

yes sir, or no sir: and tho' the voices appeared frequently to be

divided, they never would go to the trouble of dividing the house,

but the clerk entered the resolutions, I supposed, as he thought

proper. in short everything seems to be carried without the house in

general's knowing what was proposed. the situation of this place is

extremely beautiful, and very commodious for trade having a most

secure port capable of receiving the largest vessels, those of 400

hh'ds being able to brush against the sides of the dock. the houses

are in general better than those in Williamsburgh, but the gardens

more indifferent. the two towns seem much of a size. they have no

publick buildings worth mentioning except a governor's house, the

hull of which after being nearly finished, they have suffered to go

to ruin.  I would give you an account of the rejoicings here on the

repeal of the stamp act, but this you will probably see in print

before my letter can reach you.  I shall proceed tomorrow to

Philadelphia where I shall make the stay necessary for inoculation,

thence going on to New-York I shall return by water to Williamsburgh,

about the middle of July, till which time you have the prayers of



        Dear Page

        Your affectionate friend



 

        P. S. I should be glad if you could in some indirect manner,

without discovering that it was my desire, let J. Randolph know when

I propose to be in the city of Williamsburgh.





        THE STUDY OF LAW

 

        _To Thomas Turpin_

        _Shadwell, Feb.  5, 1769_



        DEAR SIR, -- I am truly concerned that it is not in my power to

undertake the superintendance of your son in his studies; but my

situation both present and future renders it utterly impossible.  I

do not expect to be here more than two months in the whole between

this and November next, at which time I propose to remove to another

habitation which I am about to erect, and on a plan so contracted as

that I shall have but one spare bedchamber for whatever visitants I

may have. nor have I reason to expect at any future day to pass a

greater proportion of my time at home. thus situated it would even

have been injustice to Phill to have undertaken to give him an

assistance which will not be within my power; a task which I

otherwise should with the greatest pleasure have taken on me, and

would have desired no higher satisfaction than to see him hold that

rank in the profession to which his genius and application must

surely advance him. these however encourage me to hope that the

presence of an assistant will be little necessary.  I always was of

opinion that the placing a youth to study with an attorney was rather

a prejudice than a help. we are all too apt by shifting on them our

business, to incroach on that time which should be devoted to their

studies. the only help a youth wants is to be directed what books to

read, and in what order to read them.  I have accordingly recommended

strongly to Phill to put himself into apprenticeship with no one, but

to employ his time for himself alone. to enable him to do this to

advantage I have laid down a plan of study which will afford him all

the assistance a tutor could, without subjecting him to the

inconvenience of expending his own time for the emolument of another.

one difficulty only occurs, that is, the want of books.  but this I

am in hopes you will think less of remedying when it is considered

that had he been placed under the care of another, a proper

collection of books must have been provided for him before he engaged

in the practice of his profession; for a lawyer without books would

be like a workman without tools. the only difference then is that

they must now be procured something earlier. should you think it

necessary, it would be better to consider the money laid out in books

as a part of the provision made for him and to deduct it from what

you intended to give him, than that he should be without them.  I

have given him a catalogue of such as will be necessary, amounting in

the whole to about pound 100 sterling, but divided into four

invoices.  Should Phill enter on the plan of study recommended, I

shall endeavor as often as possible to take your house in on my way

to and from Williamsburgh as it will afford me the double

satisfaction of observing his progress in science and of seeing

yourself, my aunt, and the family.  I am Dear Sir with great respect



        Your most humble servant





        A GENTLEMAN'S LIBRARY



        _To Robert Skip with a List of Books_

        _Monticello, Aug. 3, 1771_



        I sat down with a design of executing your request to form a

catalogue of books to the amount of about 50 lib. sterl.  But could

by no means satisfy myself with any partial choice I could make.

Thinking therefore it might be as agreeable to you I have framed such

a general collection as I think you would wish and might in time find

convenient to procure.  Out of this you will chuse for yourself to

the amount you mentioned for the present year and may hereafter as

shall be convenient proceed in completing the whole.  A view of the

second column in this catalogue would I suppose extort a smile from

the face of gravity.  Peace to its wisdom!  Let me not awaken it.  A

little attention however to the nature of the human mind evinces that

the entertainments of fiction are useful as well as pleasant.  That

they are pleasant when well written every person feels who reads.

But wherein is its utility asks the reverend sage, big with the

notion that nothing can be useful but the learned lumber of Greek and

Roman reading with which his head is stored?



        I answer, everything is useful which contributes to fix in the

principles and practices of virtue.  When any original act of charity

or of gratitude, for instance, is presented either to our sight or

imagination, we are deeply impressed with its beauty and feel a

strong desire in ourselves of doing charitable and grateful acts

also.  On the contrary when we see or read of any atrocious deed, we

are disgusted with it's deformity, and conceive an abhorence of vice.

Now every emotion of this kind is an exercise of our virtuous

dispositions, and dispositions of the mind, like limbs of the body

acquire strength by exercise.  But exercise produces habit, and in

the instance of which we speak the exercise being of the moral

feelings produces a habit of thinking and acting virtuously.  We

never reflect whether the story we read be truth or fiction.  If the

painting be lively, and a tolerable picture of nature, we are thrown

into a reverie, from which if we awaken it is the fault of the

writer.  I appeal to every reader of feeling and sentiment whether

the fictitious murther of Duncan by Macbeth in Shakespeare does not

excite in him as great a horror of villany, as the real one of Henry

IV. by Ravaillac as related by Davila?  And whether the fidelity of

Nelson and generosity of Blandford in Marmontel do not dilate his

breast and elevate his sentiments as much as any similar incident

which real history can furnish?  Does he not in fact feel himself a

better man while reading them, and privately covenant to copy the

fair example?  We neither know nor care whether Lawrence Sterne

really went to France, whether he was there accosted by the

Franciscan, at first rebuked him unkindly, and then gave him a peace

offering: or whether the whole be not fiction.  In either case we

equally are sorrowful at the rebuke, and secretly resolve _we_ will

never do so: we are pleased with the subsequent atonement, and view

with emulation a soul candidly acknowleging it's fault and making a

just reparation.  Considering history as a moral exercise, her

lessons would be too infrequent if confined to real life.  Of those

recorded by historians few incidents have been attended with such

circumstances as to excite in any high degree this sympathetic

emotion of virtue.  We are therefore wisely framed to be as warmly

interested for a fictitious as for a real personage.  The field of

imagination is thus laid open to our use and lessons may be formed to

illustrate and carry home to the heart every moral rule of life.

Thus a lively and lasting sense of filial duty is more effectually

impressed on the mind of a son or daughter by reading King Lear, than

by all the dry volumes of ethics, and divinity that ever were

written.  This is my idea of well written Romance, of Tragedy, Comedy

and Epic poetry. -- If you are fond of speculation the books under

the head of Criticism will afford you much pleasure.  Of Politics and

Trade I have given you a few only of the best books, as you would

probably chuse to be not unacquainted with those commercial

principles which bring wealth into our country, and the

constitutional security we have for the enjoiment ofthat wealth.  In

Law I mention a few systematical books, as a knowledge of the

minutiae of that science is not neces-sary for a private gentleman.

In Religion, History, Natural philosophy, I have followed the same

plan in general, -- But whence the necessity of this collection?

Come to the new Rowanty, from which you may reach your hand to a

library formed on a more extensive plan.  Separated from each other

but a few paces the possessions of each would be open to the other.

A spring centrically situated might be the scene of every evening's

joy.  There we should talk over the lessons of the day, or lose them

in music, chess or the merriments of our family companions.  The

heart thus lightened our pillows would be soft, and health and long

life would attend the happy scene.  Come then and bring our dear

Tibby with you, the first in your affections, and second in mine.

Offer prayers for me too at that shrine to which tho' absent I pray

continual devotions.  In every scheme of happiness she is placed in

the foreground of the picture, as the princi-pal figure.  Take that

away, and it is no picture for me.  Bear my affections to Wintipock

clothed in the warmest expressions of sincerity; and to yourself be

every human felicity.  Adieu.



        ENCLOSURE



        _FINE ARTS_.

        Observations on gardening. Payne.  5/

        Webb's essay on painting. 12mo 3/

        Pope's Iliad. 18/

        ------- Odyssey. 15/

        Dryden's Virgil. 12mo. 12/

        Milton's works. 2 v. 8vo. Donaldson.  Edinburgh 1762. 10/

        Hoole's Tasso. 12mo. 5/

        Ossian with Blair's criticisms. 2 v.  8vo. 10/

        Telemachus by Dodsley. 6/

        Capell's Shakespear. 12mo. 30/

        Dryden's plays. 6v. 12mo. 18/

        Addison's plays. 12mo. 3/

        Otway's plays. 3 v. 12mo. 9/

        Rowe's works. 2 v. 12mo. 6/

        Thompson's works. 4 v. 12mo. 12/

        Young's works. 4 v. 12mo. 12/

        Home's plays. 12mo. 3/

        Mallet's works. 3 v. 12mo. 9/

        Mason's poetical works. 5/

        Terence. Eng. 3/

        Moliere. Eng. 15/

        Farquhar's plays. 2 v. 12mo. 6/

        Vanbrugh's plays. 2 v. 12mo. 6/

        Steele's plays. 3/

        Congreve's works. 3 v. 12mo. 9/

        Garric's dramatic works. 2 v. 8vo.  10/

        Foote's dramatic works. 2 v. 8vo. 10/

        Rousseau's Eloisa. Eng. 4 v. 12mo.  12/

        ----- Emilius and Sophia. Eng.  4 v. 12mo. 12/

        Marmontel's moral tales. Eng. 2 v.  12mo. 12/

        Gil Blas. by Smollett. 6/

        Don Quixot. by Smollett 4 v. 12mo.  12/

        David Simple. 2 v. 12mo. 6/

      Roderic Random.               }

        2 v. 12mo. 6/               }

      Peregrine Pickle.             }  _these are written by Smollett_

      4 v. 12mo. 12/                }

      Launcelot                     }

        Graves. 6/                  }

      Adventures of a               }

        guinea. 2 v.                }

        12mo. 6/                    }



      Pamela. 4 v. 12mo.            }

        12/                         }   _these are by Richardson._

      Clarissa. 8 v. 12mo.          }

        24/

      Grandison. 7 v.               }

        12mo. 9/                    }

      Fool of quality. 3 v.         }

        12mo. 9/                    }



      Feilding's works. 12 v. 12mo. pound 1.16



      Constantia. 2 v.              }

        12mo. 6/                    }  _by Langhorne._

      Solyman and                   }

        Almena. 12mo.               }

        3/                          }



      Belle assemblee. 4 v. 12mo. 12/

      Vicar of Wakefeild. 2 v. 12mo. 6/. by

        Dr. Goldsmith

      Sidney Bidulph. 5 v. 12mo. 15/

      Lady Julia Mandeville. 2 v. 12mo. 6/

      Almoran and Hamet. 2 v. 12mo. 6/

      Tristam Shandy. 9 v. 12mo. pound 1.7

      Sentimental journey. 2 v. 12mo. 6/

      Fragments of antient poetry.  Edinburgh. 2/

      Percy's Runic poems. 3/

      Percy's reliques of antient English

        poetry. 3 v. 12mo. 9/

        Percy's Han Kiou Chouan. 4 v.  12mo. 12/

        Percy's Miscellaneous Chinese peices. 2 v. 12mo. 6/

      Chaucer. 10/

      Spencer. 6 v. 12mo. 15/



        Waller's poems. 12mo. 3/

        Dodsley's collection of poems. 6 v.  12mo. 18/

        Pearch's collection of poems. 4 v.  12mo. 12/

        Gray's works. 5/

        Ogilvie's poems. 5/

        Prior's poems. 2 v. 12mo. Foulis. 6/

        Gay's works. 12mo. Foulis. 3/

        Shenstone's works. 2 v. 12mo. 6/

        Dryden's works. 4 v. 12mo. Foulis.  12/

        Pope's works. by Warburton. 12mo.  pound 1.4

        Churchill's poems. 4 v. 12mo. 12/

        Hudibrass. 3/

        Swift's works. 21 v. small 8vo. pound 3.3

        Swift's literary correspondence. 3 v.  9/

        Spectator. 9 v. 12mo. pound 1.7

        Tatler. 5 v. 12mo. 15/

        Guardian. 2 v. 12mo. 6/

        Freeholder. 12mo. 3/

        Ld. Lyttleton's Persian letters. 12mo.  3/

 

        _CRITICISM ON THE FINE ARTS._

 

      Ld. Kaim's elements of criticism.

          2 v. 8vo. 10/

        Burke on the sublime and beautiful.

        8vo. 5/

      Hogarth's analysis of beauty. 4to.

        pound 1.1

      Reid on the human mind. 8vo. 5/

      Smith's theory of moral sentiments.

        8vo. 5/

      Johnson's dictionary. 2 v. fol. pound 3

      Capell's prolusions. 12mo. 3/



           _POLITICKS, TRADE._



      Montesquieu's spirit of the laws.

        2 v. 12mo. 6/

      Locke on government. 8vo. 5/

      Sidney on government. 4to. 15/

      Marmontel's Belisarius. 12mo. Eng.

        3/

      Ld. Bolingbroke's political works.

        5 v. 8vo. pound 1.5

      Montesquieu's rise & fall of the Roman

        governmt. 12mo. 3/

      Steuart's Political oeconomy. 2 v.

        4to. pound 1.10

      Petty's Political arithmetic. 8vo. 5/



        _RELIGION._



      Locke's conduct of the mind in

        search of truth. 12mo. 3/

      Xenophon's memoirs of Socrates. by

        Feilding. 8vo. 5/

      Epictetus. by Mrs. Carter. 2 v.

        12mo. 6/

      Antoninus by Collins. 3/

      Seneca. by L'Estrange. 8vo. 5/

      Cicero's Offices. by Guthrie. 8vo. 5/

      Cicero's Tusculan questions. Eng. 3/

      Ld. Bolingbroke's Philosophical

        works. 5 v. 8vo. pound 1.5

      Hume's essays. 4 v. 12mo. 12/

      Ld. Kaim's Natural religion. 8vo. 6/

      Philosophical survey of Nature. 3/

      Oeconomy of human life. 2/

      Sterne's sermons. 7 v. 12mo. pound 1.1

      Sherlock on death. 8vo. 5/

      Sherlock on a future state. 5/



      _LAW._



      Ld. Kaim's Principles of equity. fol.

        pound 1.1

      Blackstone's Commentaries. 4 v.

        4to. pound 4.4

      Cuningham's Law dictionary. 2 v.

        fol. pound 3



      _HISTORY. ANTIENT._



      Bible. 6/

      Rollin's Antient history. Eng. 13 v.

        12mo. pound 1.19

      Stanyan's Graecian history. 2 v. 8vo.

        10/

      Livy. (the late translation). 12/

      Sallust by Gordon. 12mo. 12/

      Tacitus by Gordon. 12mo. 15/

      Caesar by Bladen. 8vo. 5/

      Josephus. Eng. 1.0

      Vertot's Revolutions of Rome. Eng.

        9/

      Plutarch's lives. by Langhorne. 6 v.

        8vo. pound 1.10

      Bayle's Dictionary. 5 v. fol. pound 7.10.

      Jeffery's Historical & Chronological

        chart. 15/



      _HISTORY. MODERN._



      Robertson's History of Charles the

        Vth. 3 v. 4to. pound 3.3

      Bossuet's history of France. 4 v.

        12mo. 12/

      Davila. by Farneworth. 2 v. 4to.

        pound 1.10.

      Hume's history of England. 8 v.

        8vo. pound 2.8.

      Clarendon's history of the rebellion.

        6 v. 8vo. pound 1.10.

      Robertson's history of Scotland.

        2 v. 8vo. 12/

      Keith's history of Virginia. 4to. 12/

      Stith's history of Virginia. 6/



      _NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.  NATURAL HISTORY &c._



      Nature displayed. Eng. 7 v. 12mo.

      Franklin on Electricity. 4to. 10/

      Macqueer's elements of Chemistry.

        2 v. 8vo. 10/

      Home's principles of agriculture.

        8vo. 5/

      Tull's horse-hoeing husbandry. 8vo.

        5/

      Duhamel's husbandry. 4to. 15/

      Millar's Gardener's diet. fol. pound 2.10.

      Buffon's natural history. Eng.

        pound 2.10.

      A compendium of Physic & Surgery.

        Nourse. 12mo. 1765. 3/

      Addison's travels. 12mo. 3/

      Anson's voiage. 8vo. 6/

      Thompson's travels. 2 v. 12mo. 6/

      Lady M. W. Montague's letters. 3 v.

        12mo. 9/



      _MISCELLANEOUS._



      Ld. Lyttleton's dialogues of the

        dead. 8vo. 5/

      Fenelon's dialogues of the dead.

        Eng. 12mo. 3/

      Voltaire's works. Eng. pound 4.

      Locke on Education. 12mo. 3/

      Owen's Dict. of arts & sciences 4 v.

        8vo. pound 2.

