





        THE REWARDS OF TRAVEL




        _To Lafayette_

        _Nice, April 11, 1787_




        Your head, my dear friend, is full of Notable things; and being

better employed, therefore, I do not expect letters from you.  I am

constantly roving about, to see what I have never seen before, and

shall never see again.  In the great cities, I go to see what

travellers think alone worthy of being seen; but I make a job of it,

and generally gulp it all down in a day.  On the other hand, I am

never satiated with rambling through the fields and farms, examining

the culture and cultivators, with a degree of curiosity which makes

some take me to be a fool, and others to be much wiser than I am.  I

have been pleased to find among the people a less degree of physical

misery than I had expected.  They are generally well clothed, and

have a plenty of food, not animal indeed, but vegetable, which is as

wholesome.  Perhaps they are over worked, the excess of the rent

required by the landlord, obliging them to too many hours of labor in

order to produce that, and where-with to feed and clothe themselves.

The soil of Champagne and Burgundy I have found more universally good

than I had expected, and as I could not help making a comparison with

England, I found that comparison more unfavorable to the latter than

is generally admitted.  The soil, the climate, and the productions

are superior to those of England, and the husbandry as good, except

in one point; that of manure.  In England, long leases for twenty-one

years, or three lives, to wit, that of the farmer, his wife, and son,

renewed by the son as soon as he comes to the possession, for his own

life, his wife's and eldest child's, and so on, render the farms

there almost hereditary, make it worth the farmer's while to manure

the lands highly, and give the landlord an opportunity of

occasionally making his rent keep pace with the improved state of the

lands.  Here the leases are either during pleasure, or for three,

six, or nine years, which does not give the farmer time to repay

himself for the expensive operation of well manuring, and therefore,

he manures ill, or not at all.  I suppose, that could the practice of

leasing for three lives be introduced in the whole kingdom, it would,

within the term of your life, increase agricultural productions fifty

per cent; or were any one proprietor to do it with his own lands, it

would increase his rents fifty per cent, in the course of twenty-five

years.  But I am told the laws do not permit it.  The laws then, in

this particular, are unwise and unjust, and ought to give that

permission.  In the southern provinces, where the soil is poor, the

climate hot and dry, and there are few animals, they would learn the

art, found so precious in England, of making vegetable manure, and

thus improving these provinces in the article in which nature has

been least kind to them.  Indeed, these provinces afford a singular

spectacle.  Calculating on the poverty of their soil, and their

climate by its latitude only, they should have been the poorest in

France.  On the contrary, they are the richest, from one fortuitous

circumstance.  Spurs or ramifications of high mountains, making down

from the Alps, and as it were, reticulating these provinces, give to

the vallies the protection of a particular inclosure to each, and the

benefit of a general stagnation of the northern winds produced by the

whole of them, and thus countervail the advantage of several degrees

of latitude.  From the first olive fields of Pierrelatte, to the

orangeries of Hieres, has been continued rapture to me.  I have often

wished for you.  I think you have not made this journey.  It is a

pleasure you have to come, and an improvement to be added to the many

you have already made.  It will be a great comfort to you, to know,

from your own inspection, the condition of all the provinces of your

own country, and it will be interesting to them at some future day,


to be known to you.  This is, perhaps, the only moment of your life

in which you can acquire that knowledge.  And to do it most

effectually, you must be absolutely incognito, you must ferret the

people out of their hovels as I have done, look into their kettles,

eat their bread, loll on their beds under pretence of resting

yourself, but in fact to find if they are soft.  You will feel a

sublime pleasure in the course of this investigation, and a sublimer

one hereafter, when you shall be able to apply your knowledge to the

softening of their beds, or the throwing a morsel of meat into their

kettle of vegetables.




        You will not wonder at the subjects of my letter: they are the

only ones which have been presented to my mind for some time past;

and the waters must always be what are the fountains from which they

flow.  According to this, indeed, I should have intermixed, from

beginning to end, warm expressions of friendship to you.  But,

according to the ideas of our country, we do not permit ourselves to

speak even truths, when they may have the air of flattery.  I content

myself, therefore, with saying once for all, that I love you, your

wife and children.  Tell them so, and adieu.

 

        Yours affectionately,







        "THE GRAND RECIPE FOR FELICITY"




        _To Martha Jefferson_

        _May 21, 1787_




        I write to you, my dear Patsy, from the Canal of Languedoc, on

which I am at present sailing, as I have been for a week past,

cloudless skies above, limpid waters below, and find on each hand a

row of nightingales in full chorus.  This delightful bird had given

me a rich treat before at the fountain of Vaucluse.  After visiting

the tomb of Laura at Avignon, I went to see this fountain, a noble

one of itself, and rendered for ever famous by the songs of Petrarch

who lived near it.  I arrived there somewhat fatigued, and sat down

by the fountain to repose myself.  It gushes, of the size of a river,

from a secluded valley of the mountain, the ruins of Petrarch's

chateau being perched on a rock 200 feet perpendicular above.  To add

to the enchantment of the scene, every tree and bush was filled with

nightingales in full song.  I think you told me you had not yet

noticed this bird.  As you have trees in the garden of the convent,

there must be nightingales in them, and this is the season of their

song.  Endeavor my dear, to make yourself acquainted with the music

of this bird, that when you return to your own country you may be

able to estimate it's merit in comparison with that of the mocking

bird.  The latter has the advantage of singing thro' a great part of

the year, whereas the nightingale sings but about 5. or 6 weeks in

the spring, and a still shorter term and with a more feeble voice in

the fall.  I expect to be at Paris about the middle of next month.

By that time we may begin to expect our dear Polly.  It will be a

circumstance of inexpressible comfort to me to have you both with me

once more.  The object most interesting to me for the residue of my

life, will be to see you both developing daily those principles of

virtue and goodness which will make you valuable to others and happy

in yourselves, and acquiring those talents and that degree of science

which will guard you at all times against ennui, the most dangerous

poison of life.  A mind always employed is always happy.  This is the

true secret, the grand recipe for felicity.  The idle are the only

wretched.  In a world which furnishes so many emploiments which are

useful, and so many which are amusing, it is our own fault if we ever

know what ennui is, or if we are ever driven to the miserable

resource of gaming, which corrupts our dispositions, and teaches us a

habit of hostility against all mankind.  We are now entering the port

of Toulouse, where I quit my bark; and of course must conclude my

letter.  Be good and be industrious, and you will be what I shall

most love in the world.  Adieu my dear child.  Yours affectionately,







        AFFAIRS OF DIPLOMACY




        _To John Adams_

        _Paris, July 1, 1787_




        DEAR SIR -- I returned about three weeks ago from a very

useless voiage.  Useless, I mean, as to the object which first

suggested it, that of trying the effect of the mineral waters of Aix

en Provence on my hand.  I tried these because recommended among six

or eight others as equally beneficial, and because they would place

me at the beginning of a tour to the seaports of Marseilles,

Bourdeaux, Nantes and Lorient which I had long meditated, in hopes

that a knowlege of the places and persons concerned in our commerce

and the information to be got from them might enable me sometimes to

be useful.  I had expected to satisfy myself at Marseilles of the

causes of the difference of quality between the rice of Carolina and

that of Piedmont which is brought in quantities to Marseilles.  Not

being able to do it, I made an excursion of three weeks into the rice

country beyond the Alps, going through it from Vercelli to Pavia

about 60 miles.  I found the difference to be, not in the management

as had been supposed both here and in Carolina, but in the species of

rice, and I hope to enable them in Carolina to begin the Cultivation

of the Piedmont rice and carry it on hand in hand with their own that

they may supply both qualities, which is absolutely necessary at this

market.  I had before endeavored to lead the depot of rice from Cowes

to Honfleur and hope to get it received there on such terms as may

draw that branch of commerce from England to this country.  It is an

object of 250,000 guineas a year.  While passing thro' the towns of

Turin, Milan and Genoa, I satisfied myself of the practicability of

introducing our whale oil for their consumption and I suppose it

would be equally so in the other great cities of that country.  I was

sorry that I was not authorized to set the matter on foot.  The

merchants with whom I chose to ask conferences, met me freely, and

communicated fully, knowing I was in a public character.  I could

however only prepare a disposition to meet our oil merchants.  On the

article of tobacco I was more in possession of my ground, and put

matters into a train for inducing their government to draw their

tobaccos directly from the U.S. and not as heretofore from G.B.  I am

now occupied with the new ministry here to put the concluding hand to

the new regulations for our commerce with this country, announced in

the letter of M. de Calonnes which I sent you last fall.  I am in

hopes in addition to those, to obtain a suppression of the duties on

Tar, pitch, and turpentine, and an extension of the privileges of

American _whale_ oil, to their _fish_ oils in general.  I find that

the quantity of Codfish oil brought to Lorient is considerable.  This

being got off hand (which will be in a few days) the chicaneries and

vexations of the farmers on the article of tobacco, and their

elusions of the order of Bernis, call for the next attention.  I have

reason to hope good dispositions in the new ministry towards our

commerce with this country.  Besides endeavoring on all occasions to

multiply the points of contact and connection with this country,

which I consider as our surest main-stay under every event, I have

had it much at heart to remove from between us every subject of

misunderstanding or irritation.  Our debts to the king, to the

officers, and the farmers are of this description.  The having

complied with no part of our engagements in these draws on us a great

deal of censure, and occasioned a language in the Assemblees des

notables very likely to produce dissatisfaction between us.  Dumas

being on the spot in Holland, I had asked of him some time ago, in

confidence, his opinion on the practicability of transferring these

debts from France to Holland, and communicated his answer to

Congress, pressing them to get you to go over to Holland and try to

effect this business.  Your knowlege of the ground and former

successes occasioned me to take this liberty without consulting you,

because I was sure you would not weigh your personal trouble against

public good.  I have had no answer from Congress, but hearing of your

journey to Holland have hoped that some money operation had led you

there.  If it related to the debts of this country I would ask a

communication of what you think yourself at liberty to communicate,

as it might change the form of my answers to the eternal applications

I receive.  The debt to the officers of France carries an interest of

about 2000 guineas, so we may suppose it's principal is between 30.

and 40,000.  This makes more noise against [us] than all our other

debts put together.




        I send you the arrets which begin the reformation here, and

some other publications respecting America: together with copies of

letters received from Obryon and Lambe.  It is believed that a naval

armament has been ordered at Brest in correspondence with that of

England.  We know certainly that orders are given to form a camp in

the neighborhood of Brabant, and that Count Rochambeau has the

command of it.  It's amount I cannot assert.  Report says 15,000 men.

This will derange the plans of oeconomy.  I take the liberty of

putting under your cover a letter for Mrs. Kinloch of South Carolina,

with a packet, and will trouble you to enquire for her and have them

delivered.  The packet is of great consequence, and therefore

referred to her care, as she will know the safe opportunities of

conveying it.  Should you not be able to find her, and can forward

the packet to it's address by any very safe conveiance I will beg you

to do it.  I have the honour to be with sentiments of the most

perfect friendship and esteem Dear Sir your most obedient and most

humble servant,







        "A PEEP . . . INTO ELYSIUM"




        _To Maria Cosway_

        _Paris, July 1, 1787_




        You conclude, Madam, from my long silence that I am gone to the

other world.  Nothing else would have prevented my writing to you so

long.  I have not thought of you the less, but I took a peep only

into Elysium.  I entered it at one door, & came out at another,

having seen, as I past, only Turin, Milan, & Genoa.  I calculated the

hours it would have taken to carry me on to Rome, but they were

exactly so many more than I had to spare.  Was not this provoking?

In thirty hours from Milan I could have been at the espousals of the

Doge and the Adriatic, but I am born to lose every thing I love.  Why

were you not with me?  So many enchanting scenes which only wanted

your pencil to consecrate them to fame.  Whenever you go to Italy you

must pass at the Col de Tende.  You may go in your chariot in full

trot from Nice to Turin, as if there were no mountain.  But have your

pallet & pencil ready: for you will be sure to stop in the passage,

at the chateau de Saorgio.  Imagine to yourself, madam, a castle &

village hanging to a cloud in front, on one hand a mountain cloven

through to let pass a gurgling stream; on the other a river, over

which is thrown a magnificent bridge; the whole formed into a bason,

it's sides shagged with rocks, olive trees, vines, herds, &c.  I

insist on your painting it.  How do you do?  How have you done? and

when are you coming here?  If not at all, what did you ever come for?

Only to make people miserable at losing you.  Consider that you are

but a day from Paris.  If you come by the way of St. Omers, which is

but two posts further, you will see a new & beautiful country.  Come

then, my dear Madam, and we will breakfast every day _a Angloise_,

hie away to the Desert, dine under the bowers of Marly, and forget

that we are ever to part again.  I received, in the moment of my

departure your favor of Feb. 15. and long to receive another: but

lengthy, warm, & flowing from the heart, as do the sentiments of

friendship & esteem with which I have the honor to be, dear Madam,

your affectionate friend and servant.







        "THE HOMAGE OF REASON"




        _To Peter Carr_

        _Paris, Aug. 10, 1787_




        DEAR PETER, -- I have received your two letters of Decemb. 30

and April 18, and am very happy to find by them, as well as by

letters from Mr. Wythe, that you have been so fortunate as to attract

his notice & good will; I am sure you will find this to have been one

of the most fortunate events of your life, as I have ever been

sensible it was of mine.  I inclose you a sketch of the sciences to

which I would wish you to apply in such order as Mr.  Wythe shall

advise; I mention also the books in them worth your reading, which

submit to his correction.  Many of these are among your father's

books, which you should have brought to you.  As I do not recollect

those of them not in his library, you must write to me for them,

making out a catalogue of such as you think you shall have occasion

for in 18 months from the date of your letter, & consulting Mr. Wythe

on the subject.  To this sketch I will add a few particular

observations.




        1. Italian. I fear the learning this language will confound

your French and Spanish.  Being all of them degenerated dialects of

the Latin, they are apt to mix in conversation.  I have never seen a

person speaking the three languages who did not mix them.  It is a

delightful language, but late events having rendered the Spanish more

useful, lay it aside to prosecute that.




        2. Spanish. Bestow great attention on this, & endeavor to

acquire an accurate knowlege of it.  Our future connections with

Spain & Spanish America will render that language a valuable

acquisition.  The antient history of a great part of America, too, is

written in that language.  I send you a dictionary.




        3. Moral philosophy. I think it lost time to attend lectures in

this branch.  He who made us would have been a pitiful bungler if he

had made the rules of our moral conduct a matter of science.  For one

man of science, there are thousands who are not.  What would have

become of them?  Man was destined for society.  His morality

therefore was to be formed to this object.  He was endowed with a

sense of right & wrong merely relative to this.  This sense is as

much a part of his nature as the sense of hearing, seeing, feeling;

it is the true foundation of morality, & not the {to kalon}, truth,

&c. as fanciful writers have imagined.  The moral sense, or

conscience, is as much a part of man as his leg or arm.  It is given

to all human beings in a stronger or weaker degree, as force of

members is given them in a greater or less degree.  It may be

strengthened by exercise, as may any particular limb of the body.

This sense is submitted indeed in some degree to the guidance of

reason; but it is a small stock which is required for this: even a

less one than what we call common sense.  State a moral case to a

ploughman & a professor.  The former will decide it as well, & often

better than the latter, because he has not been led astray by

artificial rules.  In this branch therefore read good books because

they will encourage as well as direct your feelings.  The writings of

Sterne particularly form the best course of morality that ever was

written.  Besides these read the books mentioned in the enclosed

paper; and above all things lose no occasion of exercising your

dispositions to be grateful, to be generous, to be charitable, to be

humane, to be true, just, firm, orderly, courageous &c.  Consider

every act of this kind as an exercise which will strengthen your

moral faculties, & increase your worth.




        4. Religion. Your reason is now mature enough to examine this

object.  In the first place divest yourself of all bias in favour of

novelty & singularity of opinion.  Indulge them in any other subject

rather than that of religion.  It is too important, & the

consequences of error may be too serious.  On the other hand shake

off all the fears & servile prejudices under which weak minds are

servilely crouched.  Fix reason firmly in her seat, and call to her

tribunal every fact, every opinion.  Question with boldness even the

existence of a god; because, if there be one, he must more approve of

the homage of reason, than that of blindfolded fear.  You will

naturally examine first the religion of your own country.  Read the

bible then, as you would read Livy or Tacitus.  The facts which are

within the ordinary course of nature you will believe on the

authority of the writer, as you do those of the same kind in Livy &

Tacitus.  The testimony of the writer weighs in their favor in one

scale, and their not being against the laws of nature does not weigh

against them.  But those facts in the bible which contradict the laws

of nature, must be examined with more care, and under a variety of

faces.  Here you must recur to the pretensions of the writer to

inspiration from god.  Examine upon what evidence his pretensions are

founded, and whether that evidence is so strong as that its falsehood

would be more improbable than a change in the laws of nature in the

case he relates.  For example in the book of Joshua we are told the

sun stood still several hours.  Were we to read that fact in Livy or

Tacitus we should class it with their showers of blood, speaking of

statues, beasts, &c.  But it is said that the writer of that book was

inspired.  Examine therefore candidly what evidence there is of his

having been inspired.  The pretension is entitled to your inquiry,

because millions believe it.  On the other hand you are astronomer

enough to know how contrary it is to the law of nature that a body

revolving on its axis as the earth does, should have stopped, should

not by that sudden stoppage have prostrated animals, trees,

buildings, and should after a certain time have resumed its

revolution, & that without a second general prostration.  Is this

arrest of the earth's motion, or the evidence which affirms it, most

within the law of probabilities?  You will next read the new

testament.  It is the history of a personage called Jesus.  Keep in

your eye the opposite pretensions 1. of those who say he was begotten

by god, born of a virgin, suspended & reversed the laws of nature at

will, & ascended bodily into heaven: and 2. of those who say he was a

man of illegitimate birth, of a benevolent heart, enthusiastic mind,

who set out without pretensions to divinity, ended in believing them,

& was punished capitally for sedition by being gibbeted according to

the Roman law which punished the first commission of that offence by

whipping, & the second by exile or death _in furca_.  See this law in

the Digest Lib. 48. tit. 19. 28. 3. & Lipsius Lib. 2. de cruce. cap.

2. These questions are examined in the books I have mentioned under

the head of religion, & several others.  They will assist you in your

inquiries, but keep your reason firmly on the watch in reading them

all.  Do not be frightened from this inquiry by any fear of it's

consequences.  If it ends in a belief that there is no god, you will

find incitements to virtue in the comfort & pleasantness you feel in

it's exercise, and the love of others which it will procure you.  If

you find reason to believe there is a god, a consciousness that you

are acting under his eye, & that he approves you, will be a vast

additional incitement; if that there be a future state, the hope of a

happy existence in that increases the appetite to deserve it; if that

Jesus was also a god, you will be comforted by a belief of his aid

and love.  In fine, I repeat that you must lay aside all prejudice on

both sides, & neither believe nor reject anything because any other

persons, or description of persons have rejected or believed it.

Your own reason is the only oracle given you by heaven, and you are

answerable not for the rightness but uprightness of the decision.  I

forgot to observe when speaking of the new testament that you should

read all the histories of Christ, as well of those whom a council of

ecclesiastics have decided for us to be Pseudo-evangelists, as those

they named Evangelists.  Because these Pseudo-evangelists pretended

to inspiration as much as the others, and you are to judge their

pretensions by your own reason, & not by the reason of those

ecclesiastics.  Most of these are lost.  There are some however still

extant, collected by Fabricius which I will endeavor to get & send

you.




        5. Travelling. This makes men wiser, but less happy.  When men

of sober age travel, they gather knolege which they may apply

usefully for their country, but they are subject ever after to

recollections mixed with regret, their affections are weakened by

being extended over more objects, & they learn new habits which

cannot be gratified when they return home.  Young men who travel are

exposed to all these inconveniences in a higher degree, to others

still more serious, and do not acquire that wisdom for which a

previous foundation is requisite by repeated & just observations at

home.  The glare of pomp & pleasure is analogous to the motion of

their blood, it absorbs all their affection & attention, they are

torn from it as from the only good in this world, and return to their

home as to a place of exile & condemnation.  Their eyes are for ever

turned back to the object they have lost, & it's recollection poisons

the residue of their lives.  Their first & most delicate passions are

hackneyed on unworthy objects here, & they carry home only the dregs,

insufficient to make themselves or anybody else happy.  Add to this

that a habit of idleness, an inability to apply themselves to

business is acquired & renders them useless to themselves & their

country.  These observations are founded in experience.  There is no

place where your pursuit of knolege will be so little obstructed by

foreign objects as in your own country, nor any wherein the virtues

of the heart will be less exposed to be weakened.  Be good, be

learned, & be industrious, & you will not want the aid of travelling

to render you precious to your country, dear to your friends, happy

within yourself.  I repeat my advice to take a great deal of

exercise, & on foot.  Health is the first requisite after morality.

Write to me often & be assured of the interest I take in your

success, as well as of the warmth of those sentiments of attachment

with which I am, dear Peter, your affectionate friend.




        P.S. Let me know your age in your next letter.  Your cousins

here are well & desire to be remembered to you.




        ENCLOSURE




      Antient history.  Herodot. Thucyd. Xenoph. hellen. Xenoph. Anab.

        Q. Curt. Just.

        Livy. Polybius. Sallust. Caesar. Suetonius. Tacitus. Aurel.

        Victor. Herodian.

        Gibbons' decline of the Roman empire. Milot histoire ancienne.

      Mod. hist. English.  Tacit. Germ. & Agricole -- Hume to the end of

        H.VI. then Habington's E.IV. -- S't. Thomas Moor's E.5. &

        R.3. -- L'd Bacon's H.7. -- L'd. Herbert of Cherbury's H.8. -- K.

        Edward's journal (in Burnet) B'p. of Hereford's E.6. & Mary.--

        Cambden's Eliz. -- Wilson's Jac.I. -- Ludlow (omit Clarendon as

        too seducing for a young republican. By and by read him)

        Burnet's Charles 2. Jac.2. W'm. & Mary & Anne -- L'd Orrery down to

        George 1. & 2. -- Burke's G.3. -- Robertson's hist. of Scotland.

      American.  Robertson's America. -- Douglass's N. America --

        Hutcheson's Massachusets. Smith's N. York. -- Smith's N. Jersey

        -- Franklin's review of Pennsylvania. -- Smith's, Stith's,

        Keith's, & Beverley's hist. of Virginia

      Foreign.  Mallet's North'n. Antiquities by Percy --

          Puffendorf's hist'y.

          of Europe & Martiniere's of Asia, Africa & America -- Milot

        histoire Moderne. Voltaire histoire universelle -- Milot hist. de

        France -- Mariana's hist. of Spain in Span. -- Robertson's Charles

        V. -- Watson's Phil. II. & III. -- Grotii Belgica. Mosheim's

        Ecclesiastical history.

      Poetry  Homer -- Milton -- Ossian -- Sophocles -- Aeschylus

          -- Eurip. -- Metastasio -- Shakesp. -- Theocritus

          -- Anacreon [ . . . ]

      Mathematics  Bezout & whatever else Mr. Madison recommends.

      Astronomy  Delalande &'c. as Mr. Madison shall recommend.

      Natural Philosophy.  Musschenbroeck.




      Botany. Linnaei Philosophia Botanica -- Genera plantarum --

        Species plantarum -- Gronorii flora [ . . . ]

      Chemistry.  Fourcroy.

      Agriculture. Home's principles of Agriculture -- Tull &c.

      Anatomy.  Cheselden.

      Morality. The Socratic dialogues -- Cicero's Philosophies -- Kaim's

        principles of Nat'l. religion -- Helvetius de l'esprit et

          de l'homme.  Locke's Essay. -- Lucretius -- Traite de Morale

          & du bonheur

      Religion.  Locke's Conduct of the mind. -- Middleton's works --

        Bolingbroke's philosoph. works -- Hume's essays -- Voltaire's

        works -- Beattie

      Politics & Law.  Whatever Mr. Wythe pleases, who will be so good

        as to correct also all the preceding articles which are only

        intended as a groundwork to be finished by his pencil.







        REVOLT OF THE NOBLES




        _To John Adams_

        _Paris, Aug. 30, 1787_




        DEAR SIR -- Since your favor of July 10. mine have been of July

17. 23 and 28.  The last inclosed a bill of exchange from Mr. Grand

on Tessier for pound 46-17-10 sterl. to answer Genl. Sullivan's bill

for that sum.  I hope it got safe to hand, tho' I have been anxious

about it as it went by post and my letters thro' that channel

sometimes miscarry.




        From the separation of the Notables to the present moment has

been perhaps the most interesting interval ever known in this

country.  The propositions of the Government, approved by the

Notables, were precious to the nation and have been in an honest

course of execution, some of them being carried into effect, and

others preparing.  Above all the establishment of the Provincial

assemblies, some of which have begun their sessions, bid fair to be

the instrument for circumscribing the power of the crown and raising

the people into consideration.  The election given to them is what

will do this.  Tho' the minister who proposed these improvements

seems to have meant them as the price of the new supplies, the game

has been so played as to secure the improvements to the nation

without securing the price.  The Notables spoke softly on the subject

of the additional supplies, but the parliament took them up roundly,

refused to register the edicts for the new taxes, till compelled in a

bed of justice and prefered themselves to be transferred to Troyes

rather than withdraw their opposition.  It is urged principally

against the king, that his revenue is 130. millions more than that of

his predecessor was, and yet he demands 120.  millions further.  You

will see this well explained in the `Conference entre un ministre

d'etat et un Conseiller au parlement' which I send you with some

other small pamphlets.  In the mean time all tongues in Paris (and in

France as it is said) have been let loose, and never was a license of

speaking against the government exercised in London more freely or

more universally.  Caracatures, placards, bon mots, have been

indulged in by all ranks of people, and I know of no well attested

instance of a single punishment.  For some time mobs of 10; 20;

30,000 people collected daily, surrounded the parliament house,

huzzaed the members, even entered the doors and examined into their

conduct, took the horses out of the carriages of those who did well,

and drew them home.  The government thought it prudent to prevent

these, drew some regiments into the neighborhood, multiplied the

guards, had the streets constantly patrolled by strong parties,

suspended privileged places, forbad all clubs, etc.  The mobs have

ceased: perhaps this may be partly owing to the absence of

parliament.  The Count d'Artois, sent to hold a bed of justice in the

Cour des Aides, was hissed and hooted without reserve by the

populace; the carriage of Madame de (I forget the name) in the

queen's livery was stopped by the populace under a belief that it was

Madame de Polignac's whom they would have insulted, the queen going

to the theater at Versailles with Madame de Polignac was received

with a general hiss.  The king, long in the habit of drowning his

cares in wine, plunges deeper and deeper; the queen cries but sins

on.  The Count d'Artois is detested, and Monsieur [Louis, Comte de

Provence] the general favorite.  The Archbishop of Thoulouse is made

Ministre principale, a virtuous, patriotic and able character.  The

Marechal de Castries retired yesterday notwithstanding strong

sollicitations to remain in office.  The Marechal de Segur retired at

the same time, prompted to it by the court.  Their successors are not

yet known.  M. de St. Prist goes Ambassador to Holland in the room of

Verac transferred to Switzerland, and the Count de Moustier goes to

America in the room of the Chevalier de la Luzerne who has a promise

of the first vacancy.  These nominations are not yet made formally,

but they are decided on and the parties are ordered to prepare for

their destination.  As it has been long since I have had a

confidential conveiance to you, I have brought together the principal

facts from the adjournment of the Notables to the present moment

which, as you will perceive from their nature, required a

confidential conveyance.  I have done it the rather because, tho' you

will have heard many of them and seen them in the public papers, yet

floating in the mass of lies which constitute the atmospheres of

London and Paris, you may not have been sure of their truth: and I

have mentioned every truth of any consequence to enable you to stamp

as false the facts pretermitted.  I think that in the course of three

months the royal authority has lost, and the rights of the nation

gained, as much ground, by a revolution of public opinion only, as

England gained in all her civil wars under the Stuarts.  I rather

believe too they will retain the ground gained, because it is

defended by the young and the middle aged, in opposition to the old

only.  The first party increases, and the latter diminishes daily

from the course of nature.  You may suppose that under this

situation, war would be unwelcome to France.  She will surely avoid

it if not forced by the courts of London and Berlin.  If forced, it

is probable she will change the system of Europe totally by an

alliance with the two empires, to whom nothing would be more

desireable.  In the event of such a coalition, not only Prussia but

the whole European world must receive from them their laws.  But

France will probably endeavor to preserve the present system if it

can be done by sacrifising to a certain degree the pretensions of the

patriotic party in Holland.  But of all these matters you can judge,

in your position, where less secrecy is observed, better than I can.

I have news from America as late as July 19.  Nothing had then

transpired from the Federal convention.  I am sorry they began their

deliberations by so abominable a precedent as that of tying up the

tongues of their members.  Nothing can justify this example but the

innocence of their intentions, and ignorance of the value of public

discussions.  I have no doubt that all their other measures will be

good and wise.  It is really an assembly of demigods.  Genl.

Washington was of opinion they should not separate till October.  I

have the honour to be with every sentiment of friendship and respect

Dear Sir Your most obedient and most humble servant,







        A MOOSE FROM NEW HAMPSHIRE




        _To Buffon_

        _Paris, Octob. 1, 1787_




        SIR, -- I had the honour of informing you some time ago that I

had written to some of my friends in America, desiring they would

send me such of the spoils of the Moose, Caribou, Elk & deer as might

throw light on that class of animals; but more particularly to send

me the complete skeleton, skin, & horns of the Moose, in such

condition as that the skin might be sewed up & stuffed on it's

arrival here.  I am happy to be able to present to you at this moment

the bones & skin of a Moose, the horns of the Caribou, the elk, the

deer, the spiked horned buck, & the Roebuck of America.  They all

come from New Hampshire & Massachusetts.  I give you their popular

names, as it rests with yourself to decide their real names.  The

skin of the Moose was drest with the hair on, but a great deal of it

has come off, and the rest is ready to drop off.  The horns of the

elk are remarkably small.  I have certainly seen of them which would

have weighed five or six times as much.  This is the animal which we

call elk in the Southern parts of America, and of which I have given

some description in the Notes on Virginia, of which I had the honour

of presenting you a copy.  I really doubt whether the flat-horned elk

exists in America; and I think this may be properly classed with the

elk, the principal difference being in the horns.  I have seen the

Daim, the Cerf, the Chevreuil of Europe.  But the animal we call Elk,

and which may be distinguished as the Round-horned elk, is very

different from them.  I have never seen the Brand-hirtz or Cerf

d'Ardennes, nor the European elk.  Could I get a sight of them I

think I should be able to say to which of them the American elk

resembles most, as I am tolerably well acquainted with that animal.

I must observe also that the horns of the Deer, which accompany these

spoils, are not of the fifth or sixth part of the weight of some that

I have seen.  This individual has been of age, according to our

method of judging.  I have taken measures particularly to be

furnished with large horns of our elk & our deer, & therefore beg of

you not to consider those now sent as furnishing a specimen of their

ordinary size.  I really suspect you will find that the Moose, the

Round horned elk, & the American deer are species not existing in

Europe.  The Moose is perhaps of a new class.  I wish these spoils,

Sir, may have the merit of adding anything new to the treasures of

nature which have so fortunately come under your observation, & of

which she seems to have given you the key: they will in that case be

some gratification to you, which it will always be pleasing to me to

have procured, having the honor to be with sentiments of the most

perfect esteem & respect, Sir, your most obedient, & most humble

servant.







        THE NEW CONSTITUTION




        _To William S. Smith_

        _Paris, Nov. 13, 1787_




        DEAR SIR, -- I am now to acknoledge the receipt of your favors

of October the 4th, 8th, & 26th.  In the last you apologise for your

letters of introduction to Americans coming here.  It is so far from

needing apology on your part, that it calls for thanks on mine.  I

endeavor to shew civilities to all the Americans who come here, &

will give me opportunities of doing it: and it is a matter of comfort

to know from a good quarter what they are, & how far I may go in my

attentions to them.  Can you send me Woodmason's bills for the two

copying presses for the M. de la Fayette, & the M. de Chastellux?

The latter makes one article in a considerable account, of old

standing, and which I cannot present for want of this article. -- I

do not know whether it is to yourself or Mr. Adams I am to give my

thanks for the copy of the new constitution.  I beg leave through you

to place them where due.  It will be yet three weeks before I shall

receive them from America.  There are very good articles in it: &

very bad.  I do not know which preponderate.  What we have lately

read in the history of Holland, in the chapter on the Stadtholder,

would have sufficed to set me against a chief magistrate eligible for

a long duration, if I had ever been disposed towards one: & what we

have always read of the elections of Polish kings should have forever

excluded the idea of one continuable for life.  Wonderful is the

effect of impudent & persevering lying.  The British ministry have so

long hired their gazetteers to repeat and model into every form lies

about our being in anarchy, that the world has at length believed

them, the English nation has believed them, the ministers themselves

have come to believe them, & what is more wonderful, we have believed

them ourselves.  Yet where does this anarchy exist?  Where did it

ever exist, except in the single instance of Massachusetts?  And can

history produce an instance of rebellion so honourably conducted?  I

say nothing of it's motives.  They were founded in ignorance, not

wickedness.  God forbid we should ever be 20 years without such a

rebellion.  The people cannot be all, & always, well informed.  The

part which is wrong will be discontented in proportion to the

importance of the facts they misconceive.  If they remain quiet under

such misconceptions it is a lethargy, the forerunner of death to the

public liberty.  We have had 13. states independent 11. years.  There

has been one rebellion.  That comes to one rebellion in a century & a

half for each state.  What country before ever existed a century &

half without a rebellion? & what country can preserve it's liberties

if their rulers are not warned from time to time that their people

preserve the spirit of resistance?  Let them take arms.  The remedy

is to set them right as to facts, pardon & pacify them.  What signify

a few lives lost in a century or two?  The tree of liberty must be

refreshed from time to time with the blood of patriots & tyrants.  It

is it's natural manure.  Our Convention has been too much impressed

by the insurrection of Massachusetts: and in the spur of the moment

they are setting up a kite to keep the hen-yard in order.  I hope in

God this article will be rectified before the new constitution is

accepted.  -- You ask me if any thing transpires here on the subject

of S. America?  Not a word.  I know that there are combustible

materials there, and that they wait the torch only.  But this country

probably will join the extinguishers. -- The want of facts worth

communicating to you has occasioned me to give a little loose to

dissertation.  We must be contented to amuse, when we cannot inform.







        MORE ON THE CONSTITUTION




        _To John Adams_

        _Paris, Nov. 13, 1787_




        DEAR SIR -- This will be delivered you by young Mr. Rutledge.

Your knowledge of his father will introduce him to your notice.  He

merits it moreover on his own account.




        I am now to acknolege your favors of Oct. 8 and 26.  That of

August 25. was duly received, nor can I recollect by what accident I

was prevented from acknoleging it in mine of Sep. 28.  It has been

the source of my subsistence hitherto, and must continue to be so

till I receive letters on the affairs of money from America.  Van

Staphorsts & Willinks have answered my draughts. -- Your books for M.

de la Fayette are received here.  I will notify it to him, who is at

present with his provincial assembly in Auvergne.




        Little is said lately of the progress of the negociations

between the courts of Petersburg, Vienna, and Versailles.  The

distance of the former and the cautious, unassuming character of it's

minister here is one cause of delays: a greater one is the greediness

and instable character of the emperor.  Nor do I think that the

Principal here [Brienne] will be easily induced to lend himself to

any connection which shall threaten a war within a considerable

number of years.  His own reign will be that of peace only, in all

probability; and were any accident to tumble him down, this country

would immediately gird on it's sword and buckler, and trust to

occurrences for supplies of money.  The wound their honour has

sustained festers in their hearts, and it may be said with truth that

the Archbishop and a few priests, determined to support his measures

because proud to see their order come again into power, are the only

advocates for the line of conduct which has been pursued.  It is said

and believed thro' Paris literally that the Count de Monmorin

`pleuroit comme un enfant ["wept like a child"]' when obliged to sign

the counter declaration.  Considering the phrase as figurative, I

believe it expresses the distress of his heart.  Indeed he has made

no secret of his individual opinion.  In the mean time the Principal

goes on with a firm and patriotic spirit, in reforming the cruel

abuses of the government and preparing a new constitution which will

give to this people as much liberty as they are capable of managing.

This I think will be the glory of his administration, because, tho' a

good theorist in finance, he is thought to execute badly.  They are

about to open a loan of 100. millions to supply present wants, and it

is said the preface of the Arret will contain a promise of the

Convocation of the States general during the ensuing year. 12. or 15.

provincial assemblies are already in action, and are going on well;

and I think that tho' the nation suffers in reputation, it will gain

infinitely in happiness under the present administration.  I inclose

to Mr. Jay a pamphlet which I will beg of you to forward.  I leave it

open for your perusal.  When you shall have read it, be so good as to

stick a wafer in it.  It is not yet published, nor will be for some

days.  This copy has been ceded to me as a favor.




        How do you like our new constitution?  I confess there are

things in it which stagger all my dispositions to subscribe to what

such an assembly has proposed.  The house of federal representatives

will not be adequate to the management of affairs either foreign or

federal.  Their President seems a bad edition of a Polish king.  He

may be reelected from 4. years to 4. years for life.  Reason and

experience prove to us that a chief magistrate, so continuable, is an

officer for life.  When one or two generations shall have proved that

this is an office for life, it becomes on every succession worthy of

intrigue, of bribery, of force, and even of foreign interference.  It

will be of great consequence to France and England to have America

governed by a Galloman or Angloman.  Once in office, and possessing

the military force of the union, without either the aid or check of a

council, he would not be easily dethroned, even if the people could

be induced to withdraw their votes from him.  I wish that at the end

of the 4. years they had made him for ever ineligible a second time.

Indeed I think all the good of this new constitution might have been

couched in three or four new articles to be added to the good, old,

and venerable fabrick, which should have been preserved even as a

religious relique.  -- Present me and my daughters affectionately to

Mrs. Adams.  The younger one continues to speak of her warmly.

Accept yourself assurances of the sincere esteem and respect with

which I have the honour to be, Dear Sir, your friend and servant,




        P. S. I am in negociation with de la Blancherie.  You shall

hear from me when arranged.







        OBJECTIONS TO THE CONSTITUTION




        _To James Madison_

        _Paris, Dec. 20, 1787_




        DEAR SIR, -- My last to you was of Oct. 8 by the Count de

Moustier.  Yours of July 18. Sep. 6. & Oct. 24. have been

successively received, yesterday, the day before & three or four days

before that.  I have only had time to read the letters, the printed

papers communicated with them, however interesting, being obliged to

lie over till I finish my dispatches for the packet, which dispatches

must go from hence the day after tomorrow.  I have much to thank you

for.  First and most for the cyphered paragraph respecting myself.

These little informations are very material towards forming my own

decisions.  I would be glad even to know when any individual member

thinks I have gone wrong in any instance.  If I know myself it would

not excite ill blood in me, while it would assist to guide my

conduct, perhaps to justify it, and to keep me to my duty, alert.  I

must thank you too for the information in Thos. Burke's case, tho'

you will have found by a subsequent letter that I have asked of you a

further investigation of that matter.  It is to gratify the lady who

is at the head of the Convent wherein my daughters are, & who, by her

attachment & attention to them, lays me under great obligations.  I

shall hope therefore still to receive from you the result of the

further enquiries my second letter had asked. -- The parcel of rice

which you informed me had miscarried accompanied my letter to the

Delegates of S. Carolina.  Mr. Bourgoin was to be the bearer of both

& both were delivered together into the hands of his relation here

who introduced him to me, and who at a subsequent moment undertook to

convey them to Mr. Bourgoin.  This person was an engraver

particularly recommended to D'r. Franklin & Mr. Hopkinson.  Perhaps

he may have mislaid the little parcel of rice among his baggage. -- I

am much pleased that the sale of Western lands is so successful.  I

hope they will absorb all the Certificates of our Domestic debt

speedily, in the first place, and that then offered for cash they

will do the same by our foreign one.




        The season admitting only of operations in the Cabinet, and

these being in a great measure secret, I have little to fill a

letter.  I will therefore make up the deficiency by adding a few

words on the Constitution proposed by our Convention.  I like much

the general idea of framing a government which should go on of itself

peaceably, without needing continual recurrence to the state

legislatures.  I like the organization of the government into

Legislative, Judiciary & Executive.  I like the power given the

Legislature to levy taxes, and for that reason solely approve of the

greater house being chosen by the people directly.  For tho' I think

a house chosen by them will be very illy qualified to legislate for

the Union, for foreign nations &c. yet this evil does not weigh

against the good of preserving inviolate the fundamental principle

that the people are not to be taxed but by representatives chosen

immediately by themselves.  I am captivated by the compromise of the

opposite claims of the great & little states, of the latter to equal,

and the former to proportional influence.  I am much pleased too with

the substitution of the method of voting by persons, instead of that

of voting by states: and I like the negative given to the Executive

with a third of either house, though I should have liked it better

had the Judiciary been associated for that purpose, or invested with

a similar and separate power.  There are other good things of less

moment.  I will now add what I do not like.  First the omission of a

bill of rights providing clearly & without the aid of sophisms for

freedom of religion, freedom of the press, protection against

standing armies, restriction against monopolies, the eternal &

unremitting force of the habeas corpus laws, and trials by jury in

all matters of fact triable by the laws of the land & not by the law

of nations.  To say, as Mr. Wilson does that a bill of rights was not

necessary because all is reserved in the case of the general

government which is not given, while in the particular ones all is

given which is not reserved, might do for the audience to whom it was

addressed, but is surely a gratis dictum, opposed by strong

inferences from the body of the instrument, as well as from the

omission of the clause of our present confederation which had

declared that in express terms.  It was a hard conclusion to say

because there has been no uniformity among the states as to the cases

triable by jury, because some have been so incautious as to abandon

this mode of trial, therefore the more prudent states shall be

reduced to the same level of calamity.  It would have been much more

just & wise to have concluded the other way that as most of the

states had judiciously preserved this palladium, those who had

wandered should be brought back to it, and to have established

general right instead of general wrong.  Let me add that a bill of

rights is what the people are entitled to against every government on

earth, general or particular, & what no just government should

refuse, or rest on inferences.  The second feature I dislike, and

greatly dislike, is the abandonment in every instance of the

necessity of rotation in office, and most particularly in the case of

the President.  Experience concurs with reason in concluding that the

first magistrate will always be re-elected if the Constitution

permits it.  He is then an officer for life.  This once observed, it

becomes of so much consequence to certain nations to have a friend or

a foe at the head of our affairs that they will interfere with money

& with arms.  A Galloman or an Angloman will be supported by the

nation he befriends.  If once elected, and at a second or third

election out voted by one or two votes, he will pretend false votes,

foul play, hold possession of the reins of government, be supported

by the States voting for him, especially if they are the central ones

lying in a compact body themselves & separating their opponents: and

they will be aided by one nation of Europe, while the majority are

aided by another.  The election of a President of America some years

hence will be much more interesting to certain nations of Europe than

ever the election of a king of Poland was.  Reflect on all the

instances in history antient & modern, of elective monarchies, and

say if they do not give foundation for my fears.  The Roman emperors,

the popes, while they were of any importance, the German emperors

till they became hereditary in practice, the kings of Poland, the

Deys of the Ottoman dependances.  It may be said that if elections

are to be attended with these disorders, the seldomer they are

renewed the better.  But experience shews that the only way to

prevent disorder is to render them uninteresting by frequent changes.

An incapacity to be elected a second time would have been the only

effectual preventative.  The power of removing him every fourth year

by the vote of the people is a power which will not be exercised.

The king of Poland is removeable every day by the Diet, yet he is

never removed. -- Smaller objections are the Appeal in fact as well

as law, and the binding all persons Legislative Executive & Judiciary

by oath to maintain that constitution.  I do not pretend to decide

what would be the best method of procuring the establishment of the

manifold good things in this constitution, and of getting rid of the

bad.  Whether by adopting it in hopes of future amendment, or, after

it has been duly weighed & canvassed by the people, after seeing the

parts they generally dislike, & those they generally approve, to say

to them `We see now what you wish.  Send together your deputies

again, let them frame a constitution for you omitting what you have

condemned, & establishing the powers you approve.  Even these will be

a great addition to the energy of your government.' -- At all events

I hope you will not be discouraged from other trials, if the present

one should fail of its full effect. -- I have thus told you freely

what I like & dislike: merely as a matter of curiosity, for I know

your own judgment has been formed on all these points after having

heard everything which could be urged on them.  I own I am not a

friend to a very energetic government.  It is always oppressive.  The

late rebellion in Massachusetts has given more alarm than I think it

should have done.  Calculate that one rebellion in 13 states in the

course of 11 years, is but one for each state in a century & a half.

No country should be so long without one.  Nor will any degree of

power in the hands of government prevent insurrections.  France, with

all it's despotism, and two or three hundred thousand men always in

arms has had three insurrections in the three years I have been here

in every one of which greater numbers were engaged than in

Massachusetts & a great deal more blood was spilt.  In Turkey, which

Montesquieu sup-poses more despotic, insurrections are the events of

every day.  In England, where the hand of power is lighter than here,

but heavier than with us they happen every half dozen years.  Compare

again the ferocious depredations of their insurgents with the order,

the moderation & the almost self extinguishment of ours. -- After

all, it is my principle that the will of the majority should always

prevail.  If they approve the proposed Convention in all it's parts,

I shall concur in it chearfully, in hopes that they will amend it

whenever they shall find it work wrong.  I think our governments will

remain virtuous for many centuries; as long as they are chiefly

agricultural; and this will be as long as there shall be vacant lands

in any part of America.  When they get piled upon one another in

large cities, as in Europe, they will become corrupt as in Europe.

Above all things I hope the education of the common people will be

attended to; convinced that on their good sense we may rely with the

most security for the preservation of a due degree of liberty.  I

have tired you by this time with my disquisitions & will therefore

only add assurances of the sincerity of those sentiments of esteem &

attachment with which I am Dear Sir your affectionate friend &

servant




        P. S. The instability of our laws is really an immense evil.  I

think it would be well to provide in our constitutions that there

shall always be a twelve-month between the ingross-ing a bill &

passing it: that it should then be offered to it's passage without

changing a word: and that if circum-stances should be thought to

require a speedier passage, it should take two thirds of both houses

instead of a bare majority.







        A STRATEGY ON RATIFICATION




        _To Alexander Donald_

        _Paris, February 7, 1788_




        DEAR SIR, -- I received duly your friendly letter of November

the 12th.  By this time, you will have seen published by Congress,

the new regulations obtained from this court, in favor of our

commerce.  You will observe, that the arrangement relative to tobacco

is a continuation of the order of Berni for five years, only leaving

the price to be settled between the buyer and seller.  You will see

too, that all contracts for tobacco are forbidden, till it arrives in

France.  Of course, your proposition for a contract is precluded.  I

fear the prices here will be low, especially if the market be

crowded.  You should be particularly attentive to the article, which

requires that the tobacco should come in French or American bottoms,

as this article will, in no instance, be departed from.




        I wish with all my soul, that the nine first conventions may

accept the new constitution, because this will secure to us the good

it contains, which I think great and important.  But I equally wish,

that the four latest conventions, which ever they be, may refuse to

accede to it, till a declaration of rights be annexed.  This would

probably command the offer of such a declaration, and thus give to

the whole fabric, perhaps as much perfection as any one of that kind

ever had.  By a declaration of rights, I mean one which shall

stipulate freedom of religion, freedom of the press, freedom of

commerce against monopolies, trial by juries in all cases, no

suspensions of the habeas corpus, no standing armies.  These are

fetters against doing evil, which no honest government should

decline.  There is another strong feature in the new constitution,

which I as strongly dislike.  That is, the perpetual reeligibility of

the President.  Of this I expect no amendment at present, because I

do not see that any body has objected to it on your side the water.

But it will be productive of cruel distress to our country, even in

your day and mine.  The importance to France and England, to have our

government in the hands of a friend or a foe, will occasion their

interference by money, and even by arms.  Our President will be of

much more consequence to them than a King of Poland.  We must take

care, however, that neither this, nor any other objection to the new

form, produces a schism in our Union.  That would be an incurable

evil, because near friends falling out, never re-unite cordially;

whereas, all of us going together, we shall be sure to cure the evils

of our new constitution, before they do great harm.  The box of books

I had taken the liberty to address to you, is but just gone from

Havre for New York.  I do not see, at present, any symptoms strongly

indicating war.  It is true, that the distrust existing between the

two courts of Versailles and London, is so great, that they can

scarcely do business together.  However, the difficulty and doubt of

obtaining money make both afraid to enter into war.  The little

preparations for war, which we see, are the effect of distrust,

rather then of a design to commence hostilities.  And in such a state

of mind, you know, small things may produce a rupture: so that though

peace is rather probable, war is very possible.




        Your letter has kindled all the fond recollections of antient

times; recollections much dearer to me than any thing I have known

since.  There are minds which can be pleased by honors and

preferments; but I see nothing in them but envy and enmity.  It is

only necessary to possess them, to know how little they contribute to

happiness, or rather how hostile they are to it.  No attachments

soothe the mind so much as those contracted in early life; nor do I

recollect any societies which have given me more pleasure, than those

of which you have partaken with me.  I had rather be shut up in a

very modest cottage, with my books, my family and a few old friends,

dining on simple bacon, and letting the world roll on as it liked,

than to occupy the most splendid post, which any human power can

give.  I shall be glad to hear from you often.  Give me the small

news as well as the great.  Tell Dr. Currie, that I believe I am

indebted to him a letter, but that like the mass of our countrymen, I

am not, at this moment, able to pay all my debts; the post being to

depart in an hour, and the last stroke of a pen I am able to send by

it, being that which assures you of the sentiments of esteem and

attachment, with which I am, Dear Sir, your affectionate friend and

servant,










 




        "A SON OF NATURE"




        _To Maria Cosway_

        _Paris, April 24, 1788_




        I arrived here, my dear friend, the last night, and in a bushel

of letters presented me by way of reception, I saw that one was of

your handwriting.  It is the only one I have yet opened, and I answer

it before I open another.  I do not think I was in arrears in our

epistolary account when I left Paris.  In affection I am sure you

were greatly my debtor.  I often determined during my journey to

write to you: but sometimes the fatigue of exercise, and sometimes

fatigued attention hindered me.




        At Dusseldorff I wished for you much.  I surely never saw so

precious a collection of paintings.  Above all things those of Van

der Werff affected me the most.  His picture of Sarah delivering Agar

to Abraham is delicious.  I would have agreed to have been Abraham

though the consequence could have been that I should have been dead

five or six thousand years.  Carlo Dolce became also a violent


favorite.  I am so little of a connoisseur that I preferred the works

of these two authors to the old faded red things of Rubens.  I am but

a son of nature, loving what I see & feel, without being able to give

a reason, nor caring much whether there be one.  At Heidelberg I

wished for you too.  In fact I led you by the hand thro' the whole

garden.




        I was struck with the resemblance of this scene to that of

Vaucluse as seen from what is called the chateau of Petrarch.  Nature

has formed both on the same sketch, but she has filled up that of

Heidelberg with a bolder hand, the river is larger, the mountains

more majestic and better clothed.  Art too has seconded her views.

The chateau of Petrarch is the ruin of a modest country house, that

of Heidelberg would stand well along side the pyramids of Egypt.  It

is certainly the most magnificent ruin after those left us by the

antients.




        At Strasbourg I sat down to write to you, but for my soul I

could think of nothing at Strasbourg but the promontory of noses, of

Diego, of Slawkenburgius his historiaga, & the procession of the

Strasburgers to meet the man with the nose.  Had I written to you

from thence it would have been a continuation of Sterne upon noses, &

I knew that nature had not formed me for a Continuator of Sterne: so

let it alone till I came here and received your angry letter.  It is

a proof of your esteem, but I love better to have soft testimonials

of it.




        You must therefore now write me a letter teeming with

affection; such as I feel for you.  So much I have no right to ask.

Being but just arrived I am not _au fait_ of the small news affecting

your acquaintances here.  I know only that the princess Lubomirski is

still here & that she has taken the house that was M. de Simoulin's.

When you come again therefore you will be somewhat nearer to me, but

not near enough: and still surrounded by a numerous cortege, so that

I shall see you only by scraps as I did when you were here last.  The

time before we were half days & whole days together, & I found this

too little.  Adieu!  God bless you!




                                         Your's affectionately







        "AMAZONS AND ANGELS"




        _To Anne Willing Bingham_

        _Paris, May 11, 1788_




        DEAR MADAM, -- A gentleman going to Philadelphia furnishes me

the occasion of sending you some numbers of the Cabinet des Modes &

some new theatrical pieces.  These last have had great success on the

stage, where they have excited perpetual applause.  We have now need

of something to make us laugh, for the topics of the times are sad

and eventful.  The gay and thoughtless Paris is now become a furnace

of Politics.  All the world is now politically mad.  Men, women,

children talk nothing else, & you know that naturally they talk much,

loud & warm.  Society is spoilt by it, at least for those who, like

myself, are but lookers on.  -- You too have had your political

fever.  But our good ladies, I trust, have been too wise to wrinkle

their foreheads with politics.  They are contented to soothe & calm

the minds of their husbands returning ruffled from political debate.

They have the good sense to value domestic happiness above all other,

and the art to cultivate it beyond all others.  There is no part of

the earth where so much of this is enjoyed as in America.  You agree

with me in this; but you think that the pleasures of Paris more than

supply its wants; in other words that a Parisian is happier than an

American.  You will change your opinion, my dear Madam, and come over

to mine in the end.  Recollect the women of this capital, some on

foot, some on horses, & some in carriages hunting pleasure in the

streets, in routs & assemblies, and forgetting that they have left it

behind them in their nurseries; compare them with our own

countrywomen occupied in the tender and tranquil amusements of

domestic life, and confess that it is a comparison of Amazons and

Angels.  -- You will have known from the public papers that Monsieur

de Buffon, the father, is dead & you have known long ago that the son

and his wife are separated.  They are pursuing pleasure in opposite

directions.  Madame de Rochambeau is well: so is Madame de la

Fayette.  I recollect no other Nouvelles de societe interesting to

you.  And as for political news of battles & sieges, Turks &

Russians, I will not detail them to you, because you would be less

handsome after reading them.  I have only to add then, what I take a

pleasure in repeating, tho' it will be the thousandth time that I

have the honour to be with sentiments of very sincere respect &

attachment, dear Madam, your most obedient & most humble servant.







        "THE CRUMBS OF SCIENCE"




        _To the Rev. James Madison_

        _Paris, July 19, 1788_




        DEAR SIR, -- My last letter to you was of the 13th of August

last.  As you seem willing to accept of the crumbs of science on

which we are subsisting here, it is with pleasure I continue to hand

them on to you, in proportion as they are dealt out.  Herschel's

volcano in the moon you have doubtless heard of, and placed among the

other vagaries of a head, which seems not organised for sound

induction.  The wildness of the theories hitherto proposed by him, on

his own discoveries, seems to authorise us to consider his merit as

that of a good optician only.  You know also, that Doctor Ingenhouse

had discovered, as he supposed, from experiment, that vegetation

might be promoted by occasioning streams of the electrical fluid to

pass through a plant, and that other physicians had received and

confirmed this theory.  He now, however, retracts it, and finds by

more decisive experiments, that the electrical fluid can neither

forward nor retard vegetation.  Uncorrected still of the rage of

drawing general conclusions from partial and equivocal observations,

he hazards the opinion that _light_ promotes vegetation.  I have

heretofore supposed from observation, that light affects the color of

living bodies, whether vegetable or animal; but that either the one

or the other receives _nutriment_ from that fluid, must be permitted

to be doubted of, till better confirmed by observation.  It is always

better to have no ideas, than false ones; to believe nothing, than to

believe what is wrong.  In my mind, theories are more easily

demolished than rebuilt.




        An Abbe here, has shaken, if not destroyed, the theory of de

Dominis, Descartes and Newton, for explaining the phenomenon of the

rainbow.  According to that theory, you know, a cone of rays issuing

from the sun, and falling on a cloud in the opposite part of the

heavens, is reflected back in the form of a smaller cone, the apex of

which is the eye of the observer: so that the eye of the observer

must be in the axis of both cones, and equally distant from every

part of the bow.  But he observes, that he has repeatedly seen bows,

the one end of which has been very near to him, and the other at a

very great distance.  I have often seen the same thing myself.  I

recollect well to have seen the end of a rainbow between myself and a

house, or between myself and a bank, not twenty yards distant; and

this repeatedly.  But I never saw, what he says he has seen,

different rainbows at the same time, intersecting each other.  I

never saw coexistent bows, which were not concentric also.  Again,

according to the theory, if the sun is in the horizon, the horizon

intercepts the lower half of the bow, if above the horizon, that

intercepts more than the half, in proportion.  So that generally, the

bow is less than a semicircle, and never more.  He says he has seen

it more than a semicircle.  I have often seen the leg of the bow

below my level.  My situation at Monticello admits this, because

there is a mountain there in the opposite direction of the

afternoon's sun, the valley between which and Monticello, is five

hundred feet deep.  I have seen a leg of a rainbow plunge down on the

river running through the valley.  But I do not recollect to have

remarked at any time, that the bow was more than half a circle.  It

appears to me, that these facts demolish the Newtonian hypothesis,

but they do not support that erected in its stead by the Abbe.  He

supposes a cloud between the sun and observer, and that through some

opening in that cloud, the rays pass, and form an iris on the

opposite part of the heavens, just as a ray passing through a hole in

the shutter of a darkened room, and falling on a prism there, forms

the prismatic colors on the opposite wall.  According to this, we

might see bows of more than the half circle, as often as of less.  A

thousand other objections occur to this hypothesis, which need not be

suggested to you.  The result is, that we are wiser than we were, by

having an error the less in our catalogue; but the blank occasioned

by it, must remain for some happier hypothesist to fill up.




        The dispute about the conversion and reconversion of water and

air, is still stoutly kept up.  The contradictory experiments of

chemists, leave us at liberty to conclude what we please.  My

conclusion is, that art has not yet invented sufficient aids, to

enable such subtle bodies to make a well defined impression on organs

as blunt as ours: that it is laudable to encourage investigation, but

to hold back conclusion.  Speaking one day with Monsieur de Buffon,

on the present ardor of chemical inquiry, he affected to consider

chemistry but as cookery, and to place the toils of the laboratory on

a footing with those of the kitchen.  I think it, on the contrary,

among the most useful of sciences, and big with future discoveries

for the utility and safety of the human race.  It is yet, indeed, a

mere embryon.  Its principles are contested; experiments seem

contradictory; their subjects are so minute as to escape our senses;

and their result too fallacious to satisfy the mind.  It is probably

an age too soon, to propose the establishment of a system.  The

attempt, therefore, of Lavoisier to reform the chemical nomenclature,

is premature.  One single experiment may destroy the whole filiation

of his terms, and his string of sulphates, sulfites and sulfures, may

have served no other end, than to have retarded the progress of the

science, by a jargon, from the confusion of which, time will be

requisite to extricate us.  Accordingly, it is not likely to be

admitted generally.




        You are acquainted with the properties of the composition of

nitre, salt of tartar and sulphur, called pulvis fulminans.  Of this,

the explosion is produced by heat alone.  Monsieur Bertholet, by

dissolving silver in the nitrous acid, precipitating it with lime

water, and drying the precipitate on ammoniac, has discovered a

powder which fulminates most powerfully, on coming into contact with

any substance whatever.  Once made, it cannot be touched.  It cannot

be put into a bottle, but must remain in the capsula, where dried.

The property of the spathic acid, to corrode flinty substances, has

been lately applied by a Mr. Puymaurin, to engrave on glass, as

artists engrave on copper, with aquafortis.  M. de la Place has

discovered, that the secular acceleration and retardation of the

moon's motion, is occasioned by the action of the sun, in proportion

as his excentricity changes, or, in other words, as the orbit of the

earth increases or diminishes.  So that this irregularity is now

perfectly calculable.




        Having seen announced in a gazette, that some person had found

in a library of Sicily, an Arabic translation of Livy, which was

thought to be complete, I got the charge des affaires of Naples here,

to write to Naples to inquire into the fact.  He obtained in answer,

that an Arabic translation was found, and that it would restore to us

seventeen of the books lost, to wit, from the sixtieth to the

seventy-seventh, inclusive: that it was in possession of an Abbe

Vella, who, as soon as he shall have finished a work he has on hand,

will give us an Italian, and perhaps a Latin translation of this

Livy.  There are persons, however, who doubt the truth of this

discovery, founding their doubts on some personal cricumstances

relating to the person who says he has this translation.  I find,

nevertheless, that the charge des affaires believes in the discovery,

which makes me hope it may be true.




        A countryman of ours, a Mr. Ledyard of Connecticut, set out

from hence some time ago for St. Petersburg, to go thence to

Kamtschatka, thence to cross over to the western coast of America ,

and penetrate through the continent, to the other side of it.  He had

got within a few days' journey of Kamtschatka, when he was arrested

by order of the Empress of Russia, sent back, and turned adrift in

Poland.  He went to London; engaged under the auspices of a private

society, formed there for pushing discoveries into Africa; passed by

this place, which he left a few days ago for Marseilles, where he

will embark for Alexandria and Grand Cairo; thence explore the Nile

to its source; cross the head of the Niger, and descend that to its

mouth.  He promises me, if he escapes through his journey, he will go

to Kentucky, and endeavor to penetrate westwardly to the South Sea.




        The death of M. de Buffon you have heard long ago.  I do not

know whether we shall have any thing posthumous of his.  As to

political news, this country is making its way to a good

constitution.  The only danger is, they may press so fast as to

produce an appeal to arms, which might have an unfavorable issue for

them.  As yet, the appeal is not made.  Perhaps the war which seems

to be spreading from nation to nation, may reach them: this would

insure the calling of the States General, and this, as is supposed,

the establishment of a constitution.




        I have the honor to be, with sentiments of sincere esteem and

respect, Dear Sir, your friend and servant,







        "A MONOPOLY OF DESPOTISM"




        _To St. John de Crevecoeur_

        _Paris, August 9, 1788_




        DEAR SIR, -- While our second revolution is just brought to a

happy end with you, yours here, is but cleverly under way.  For some

days, I was really melancholy with the apprehension, that arms would

be appealed to, and the opposition crushed in its first efforts.  But

things seem now to wear a better aspect.  While the opposition keeps

at its highest wholesome point, government, unwilling to draw the

sword, is not forced to do it.  The contest here is exactly what it

was in Holland: a contest between the monarchical and aristocratical

parts of the government, for a monopoly of despotism over the people.

The aristocracy in Holland, seeing that their common prey was likely

to escape out of their clutches, chose rather to retain its former

portion, and therefore coalesced with the single head.  The people

remained victims.  Here, I think, it will take a happier turn.  The

parliamentary part of the aristocracy is alone firmly united.  The

Noblesse and Clergy, but especially the former, are divided partly

between the parliamentary and the despotic party, and partly united

with the real patriots, who are endeavoring to gain for the nation

what they can, both from the parliamentary and the single despotism.

I think I am not mistaken in believing, that the King and some of his

ministers are well affected to this band; and surely, that they will

make great cessions to the people, rather than small ones to the

parliament.  They are, accordingly, yielding daily to the national

reclamations, and will probably end, in according a well tempered

constitution.  They promise the States General for the next year, and

I have good information that an _Arret_ will appear the day after

tomorrow, announcing them for May, 1789.  How they will be composed,

and what they will do, cannot be foreseen.  Their convocation,

however, will tranquillise the public mind, in a great degree, till

their meeting.  There are, however, two intervening difficulties.  1.

Justice cannot till then continue completely suspended, as it now is.

The parliament will not resume their functions, but in their entire

body.  The baillages are afraid to accept of them.  What will be

done?  2. There are well founded fears of a bankruptcy before the

month of May.  In the mean time, the war is spreading from nation to

nation.  Sweden has commenced hostilities against Russia; Denmark is

shewing its teeth against Sweden; Prussia against Denmark; and

England too deeply engaged in playing the back game, to avoid coming

forward, and dragging this country and Spain in with her.  But even

war will not prevent the assembly of the States General, because it

cannot be carried on without them.  War, however, is not the most

favorable moment for divesting the monarchy of power.  On the

contrary, it is the moment when the energy of a single hand, shews

itself in the most seducing form.




        Your friend the Countess d'Houdetot has had a long illness at

Sanois.  She was well enough the other day to come to Paris & was so

good as to call on me, as I did also on her, without finding each

other.  The Dutchess Danville is in the country altogether.  Your

sons are well.  Their master speaks very highly of the genius &

application of Aly, and more favorably of the genius than application

of the younger.  They are both fine lads, and will make you very

happy.  I am not certain whether more exercise than the rules of the

school admit would not be good for Aly.  I conferred the other day on

this subject with M. le Moine, who seems to be of that opinion, &

disposed to give him every possible indulgence.




        A very considerable portion of this country, has been desolated

by a hail.  I considered the newspaper accounts, of hailstones of ten

pounds weight, as exaggerations.  But in a conversation with the Duke

de la Rochefoucaut, the other day, he assured me, that though he

could not say he had seen such himself, yet he considered the fact as

perfectly established.  Great contributions, public and private, are

making for the sufferers.  But they will be like the drop of water

from the finger of Lazarus.  There is no remedy for the present evil,

nor way to prevent future ones, but to bring the people to such a

state of ease, as not to be ruined by the loss of a single crop.

This hail may be considered as the _coup de grace_ to an expiring

victim.  In the arts, there is nothing new discovered since you left

us, which is worth communicating.  Mr. Payne's iron bridge was

exhibited here, with great approbation.  An idea has been encouraged,

of executing it in three arches, at the King's garden.  But it will

probably not be done.




        I am, with sentiments of perfect esteem and attachment, Dear

Sir, your most obedient and most humble servant,







        COMMERCE, WAR, AND REVOLUTION




        _To George Washington_

        _Paris, Dec. 4, 1788_




        SIR, -- Your favor of Aug. 31. came to hand yesterday; and a

confidential conveiance offering, by the way of London, I avail

myself of it to acknolege the receipt.




 

        I have seen, with infinite pleasure, our new constitution

accepted by 11. states, not rejected by the 12th. and that the 13th.

happens to be a state of the least importance.  It is true, that the

minorities in most of the accepting states have been very

respectable, so much so as to render it prudent, were it not

otherwise reasonable, to make some sacrifice to them.  I am in hopes

that the annexation of the bill of rights to the constitution will

alone draw over so great a proportion of the minorities, as to leave

little danger in the opposition of the residue; and that this

annexation may be made by Congress and the assemblies, without

calling a convention which might endanger the most valuable parts of

the system.  Calculation has convinced me that circumstances may

arise, and probably will arise, wherein all the resources of taxation

will be necessary for the safety of the state.  For tho' I am

decidedly of opinion we should take no part in European quarrels, but

cultivate peace and commerce with all, yet who can avoid seeing the

source of war, in the tyranny of those nations who deprive us of the

natural right of trading with our neighbors?  The products of the

U.S. will soon exceed the European demand: what is to be done with

the surplus, when there shall be one?  It will be employed, without

question, to open by force a market for itself with those placed on

the same continent with us, and who wish nothing better.  Other

causes too are obvious, which may involve us in war; and war requires

every resource of taxation & credit.  The power of making war often

prevents it, and in our case would give efficacy to our desire of

peace.  If the new government wears the front which I hope it will, I

see no impossibility in the availing ourselves of the wars of others

to open the other parts of America to our commerce, as the price of

our neutrality.




        The campaign between the Turks & two empires has been clearly

in favor of the former.  The emperor is secretly trying to bring

about a peace.  The alliance between England, Prussia and Holland,

(and some suspect Sweden also) renders their mediation decisive

whenever it is proposed.  They seemed to interpose it so

magisterially between Denmark & Sweden, that the former submitted to

it's dictates, and there was all reason to believe that the war in

the North-Western parts of Europe would be quieted.  All of a sudden

a new flame bursts out in Poland.  The king and his party are devoted

to Russia.  The opposition rely on the protection of Prussia.  They

have lately become the majority in the confederated diet, and have

passed a vote for subjecting their army to a commission independent

of the king, and propose a perpetual diet in which case he will be a

perpetual cypher.  Russia declares against such a change in their

constitution, and Prussia has put an army into readiness for marching

at a moment's warning on the frontiers of Poland.  These events are

too recent to see as yet what turn they will take, or what effect

they will have on the peace of Europe.  So is that also of the lunacy

of the king of England, which is a decided fact, notwithstanding all

the stuff the English papers publish about his fevers, his deliriums

&c.  The truth is that the lunacy declared itself almost at once; and

with as few concomitant complaints as usually attend the first

development of that disorder.  I suppose a regency will be

established, and if it consist of a plurality of members it will

probably be peaceable.  In this event it will much favor the present

wishes of this country, which are so decidedly for peace, that they

refused to enter into the mediation between Sweden and Russia, lest

it should commit them.  As soon as the convocation of the

States-general was announced, a tranquillity took place thro' the

whole kingdom.  Happily no open rupture had taken place in any part

of it.  The parliaments were re-instated in their functions at the

same time.  This was all they desired, and they had called for the

States general only through fear that the crown could not otherwise

be forced to re-instate them.  Their end obtained, they began to

foresee danger to themselves in the States general.  They began to

lay the foundations for cavilling at the legality of that body, if

it's measures should be hostile to them.  The court, to clear itself

of the dispute, convened the Notables who had acted with general

approbation on the former occasion, and referred to them the forms of

calling and organising the States-general.  These Notables consist

principally of nobility & clergy, the few of the tiers etat among

them being either parliament-men, or other privileged persons.  The

court wished that in the future States general the members of the

Tiersetat should equal those of both the other orders, and that they

should form but one house, all together, & vote by persons, not by

orders.  But the Notables, in the true spirit of priests and nobles,

combining together against the people, have voted by 5 bureaux out of

6. that the people or tiers etat shall have no greater number of

deputies than each of the other orders separately, and that they

shall vote by orders: so that two orders concurring in a vote, the

third will be overruled, for it is not here as in England where each

of the three branches has a negative on the other two.  If this

project of theirs succeeds, a combination between the two houses of

clergy & nobles, will render the representation of the Tiers etat

merely nugatory.  The bureaux are to assemble together to consolidate

their separate votes; but I see no reasonable hope of their changing

this.  Perhaps the king, knowing that he may count on the support of

the nation and attach it more closely to him, may take on himself to

disregard the opinion of the Notables in this instance, and may call

an equal representation of the people, in which precedents will

support him.  In every event, I think the present disquiet will end

well.  The nation has been awaked by our revolution, they feel their

strength, they are enlightened, their lights are spreading, and they

will not retrograde.  The first states general may establish 3.

important points without opposition from the court.  1. their own

periodical convocation.  2. their exclusive right of taxation (which

has been confessed by the king.) 3. the right of registering laws and

of previously proposing amendments to them, as the parliaments have

by usurpation been in the habit of doing.  The court will consent to

this from it's hatred to the parliaments, and from the desire of

having to do with one rather than many legislatures.  If the states

are prudent they will not aim at more than this at first, lest they

should shock the dispositions of the court, and even alarm the public

mind, which must be left to open itself by degrees to successive

improvements.  These will follow from the nature of things.  How far

they can proceed, in the end, towards a thorough reformation of

abuse, cannot be foreseen.  In my opinion a kind of influence, which

none of their plans of reform take into account, will elude them all;

I mean the influence of women in the government.  The manners of the

nation allow them to visit, alone, all persons in office, to sollicit

the affairs of the husband, family, or friends, and their

sollicitations bid defiance to laws and regulations.  This obstacle

may seem less to those who, like our countrymen, are in the habit of

considering Right, as a barrier against all sollicitation.  Nor can

such an one, without the evidence of his own eyes, believe the

desperate state to which things are reduced in this country from the

omnipotence of an influence which, fortunately for the happiness of

the sex itself, does not endeavor to extend itself in our country

beyond the domestic line.




        Your communications to the Count de Moustier, whatever they may

have been, cannot have done injury to my endeavors here to open the

W. Indies to us.  On this head the ministers are invincibly mute,

tho' I have often tried to draw them into the subject.  I have

therefore found it necessary to let it lie till war or other

circumstance may force it on.  Whenever they are in war with England,

they must open the islands to us, and perhaps during that war they

may see some price which might make them agree to keep them always

open.  In the meantime I have laid my shoulder to the opening the

markets of this country to our produce, and rendering it's

transportation a nursery for our seamen.  A maritime force is the

only one by which we can act on Europe.  Our navigation law (if it be

wise to have any) should be the reverse of that of England.  Instead

of confining _importations_ to home-bottoms or those of the

_producing_ nations, I think we should confine _exportations_ to home

bottoms or to those of nations _having treaties with us_.  Our

exportations are heavy, and would nourish a great force of our own,

or be a tempting price to the nation to whom we should offer a

participation of it in exchange for free access to all their

possessions.  This is an object to which our government alone is

adequate in the gross, but I have ventured to pursue it, here, so far

as the consumption of productions by this country extends.  Thus in

our arrangements relative to tobacco, none can be received here but

in French or American bottoms.  This is emploiment for nearly 2000

seamen, and puts nearly that number of British out of employ.  By the

_Arret_ of Dec, 1787, it was provided that our whale oils should not

be received here but in French or American bottoms, and by later

regulations all oils but those of France and America are excluded.

This will put 100 English whale vessels immediately out of employ,

and 150. ere long; and call so many of French & American into

service.  We have had 6000 seamen formerly in this business, the

whole of whom we have been likely to lose.  The consumption of rice

is growing fast in this country, and that of Carolina gaining ground

on every other kind.  I am of opinion the whole of the Carolina rice

can be consumed here.  It's transportation employs 2500 sailors,

almost all of them English at present; the rice being deposited at

Cowes & brought from thence here.  It would be dangerous to confine

this transportation to French & American bottoms the ensuing year,

because they will be much engrossed by the transportation of wheat &

flour hither, and the crop of rice might lie on hand for want of

vessels; but I see no objections to the extensions of our principle

to this article also, beginning with the year 1790.  However, before

there is a necessity of deciding on this I hope to be able to consult

our new government in person, as I have asked of Congress a leave of

absence for 6. months, that is to say from April to November next.

It is necessary for me to pay a short visit to my native country,

first to reconduct my family thither, and place them in the hands of

their friends, & secondly to place my private affairs under certain

arrangements.  When I left my own house, I expected to be absent but

5 months, & I have been led by events to an absence of 5 years.  I

shall hope therefore for the pleasure of personal conferences with

your Excellency on the subject of this letter and others interesting

to our country, of getting my own ideas set to rights by a

communication of yours, and of taking again the tone of sentiment of

my own country which we lose in some degree after a certain absence.

You know doubtless of the death of the Marquise de Chastellux.  The

Marquis de La Fayette is out of favor with the court, but high in

favor with the nation.  I once feared for his personal liberty, but I

hope he is on safe ground at present.  On the subject of the whale

fishery I inclose you some observations I drew up for the ministry

here, in order to obtain a correction of their _Arret_ of Sepr last,

whereby they had involved our oils with the English in a general

exclusion from their ports.  They will accordingly correct this, so

that our oils will participate with theirs in the monopoly of their

markets.  There are several things incidentally introduced which do

not seem pertinent to the general question.  They were rendered

necessary by particular circumstances the explanation of which would

add to a letter already too long.  I will trespass no further then

than to assure you of the sentiments of sincere attachment and

respect with which I have the honor to be your Excellency's most

obedt. humble servant.




        P.S. The observations inclosed, tho' printed, have been put

into confidential hands only.







        CONVENING THE ESTATES GENERAL




        _To Richard Price_

        _Paris, January 8, 1789_




        DEAR SIR, -- I was favored with your letter of October 26th,

and far from finding any of its subjects uninteresting as you

apprehend, they were to me, as everything which comes from you,

pleasing and instructive.  I concur with you strictly in your opinion

of the comparative merits of atheism and demonism, and really see

nothing but the latter in the being worshipped by many who think

themselves Christians.  Your opinions and writings will have effect

in bringing others to reason on this subject.  Our new Constitution,

of which you speak also, has succeeded beyond what I apprehended it

would have done.  I did not at first believe that eleven States out

of thirteen would have consented to a plan consolidating them as much

into one.  A change in their dispositions, which had taken place

since I left them, had rendered this consolidation necessary, that is

to say, had called for a federal government which could walk upon its

own legs, without leaning for support on the State legislatures.  A

sense of necessity, and a submission to it, is to me a new and

consolatory proof that, whenever the people are well-informed, they

can be trusted with their own government; that, whenever things get

so far wrong as to attract their notice, they may be relied on to set

them to rights.  You say you are not sufficiently informed about the

nature and circumstances of the present struggle here.  Having been

on the spot from its first origin, and watched its movements as an

uninterested spectator, with no other bias than a love of mankind, I

will give you my ideas of it.  Though celebrated writers of this and

other countries had already sketched good principles on the subject

of government, yet the American war seems first to have awakened the

thinking part of this nation in general from the sleep of despotism

in which they were sunk.  The officers too who had been to America,

were mostly young men, less shackled by habit and prejudice, and more

ready to assent to the dictates of common sense and common right.

They came back impressed with these.  The press, notwithstanding its

shackles, began to disseminate them; conversation, too, assumed new

freedom; politics became the theme of all societies, male and female,

and a very extensive and zealous party was formed, which may be

called the Patriotic party, who, sensible of the abusive government

under which they lived, longed for occasions of reforming it.  This

party comprehended all the honesty of the kingdom, sufficiently at

its leisure to think; the men of letters, the easy bourgeois, the

young nobility, partly from reflection, partly from mode; for those

sentiments became a matter of mode, and as such united most of the

young women to the party.  Happily for the nation, it happened that,

at the same moment, the dissipations of the court had exhausted the

money and credit of the State, and M. de Calonnes found himself

obliged to appeal to the nation, and to develop to it the ruin of

their finances.  He had no idea of supplying the deficit by

economies, he saw no means but new taxes.  To tempt the nation to

consent to these some douceurs were necessary.  The Notables were

called in 1787.  The leading vices of the constitution and

administration were ably sketched out, good remedies proposed, and

under the splendor of the propositions, a demand for more money was

couched.  The Notables concurred with the minister in the necessity

of reformation, adroitly avoided the demand of money, got him

displaced, and one of their leading men placed in his room.  The

archbishop of Thoulouse, by the aid of the hopes formed of him, was

able to borrow some money, and he reformed considerably the expenses

of the court.  Notwithstanding the prejudices since formed against

him, he appeared to me to pursue the reformation of the laws and

constitution as steadily as a man could do who had to drag the court

after him, and even to conceal from them the consequences of the

measures he was leading them into.  In his time the criminal laws

were reformed, provincial assemblies and States established in most

of the provinces, the States General promised, and a solemn

acknowledgment made by the King that he could not impose a new tax

without the consent of the nation.  It is true he was continually

goaded forward by the public clamors, excited by the writings and

workings of the Patriots, who were able to keep up the public

fermentation at the exact point which borders on resistance, without

entering on it.  They had taken into their alliance the Parliaments

also, who were led, by very singular circumstances, to espouse, for

the first time, the rights of the nation.  They had from old causes

had personal hostility against M.  de Calonnes.  They refused to

register his laws or his taxes, and went so far as to acknowledge

they had no power to do it.  They persisted in this with his

successor, who therefore exiled them.  Seeing that the nation did not

interest themselves much for their recall, they began to fear that

the new judicatures proposed in their place would be established and

that their own suppression would be perpetual.  In short, they found

their own strength insufficient to oppose that of the King.  They

therefore insisted that the States General should be called.  Here

they became united with and supported by the Patriots, and their

joint influence was sufficient to produce the promise of that

assembly.  I always suspected that the archbishops had no objections

to this force under which they laid him.  But the Patriots and

Parliament insisted it was their efforts which extorted the promise

against his will.  The re-establishment of the Parliament was the

effect of the same coalition between the Patriots and Parliament;

but, once re-established, the latter began to see danger in that very

power, the States General, which they had called for in a moment of

despair, but which they now foresaw might very possibly abridge their

powers.  They began to prepare grounds for questioning their

legality, as a rod over the head of the States, and as a refuge if

they should really extend their reformations to them.  Mr. Neckar

came in at this period and very dexterously disembarrassed the

administration of these disputes by calling the notables to advise

the form of calling and constituting the States.  The court was well

disposed towards the people, not from principles of justice or love

to them; but they want money.  No more can be had from the people.

They are squeezed to the last drop.  The clergy and nobles, by their

privileges and influence, have kept their property in a great measure

untaxed hitherto.  They then remain to be squeezed, and no agent is

powerful enough for this but the people.  The court therefore must

ally itself with the people.  But the Notables, consisting mostly of

privileged characters, had proposed a method of composing the States,

which would have rendered the voice of the people, or Tiers Etats, in

the States General, inefficient for the purpose of the court.  It

concurred then with the Patriots in intriguing with the Parliament to

get them to pass a vote in favor of the rights of the people.  This

vote, balancing that of the Notables, has placed the court at liberty

to follow its own views, and they have determined that the Tiers Etat

shall have in the States General as many votes as the clergy and

nobles put together.  Still a great question remains to be decided,

that is, shall the States General vote by orders, or by persons?

precedents are both ways.  The clergy will move heaven and earth to

obtain the suffrage by orders, because that parries the effect of all

hitherto done for the people.  The people will probably send their

deputies expressly instructed to consent to no tax, to no adoption of

the public debts, unless the unprivileged part of the nation has a

voice equal to that of the privileged; that is to say, unless the

voice of the Tiers Etat be equalled to that of the clergy and nobles.

They will have the young noblesse in general on their side, and the

King and court.  Against them will be the ancient nobles and the

clergy.  So that I hope, upon the whole, that by the time they meet,

there will be a majority of the nobles themselves in favor of the

Tiers Etat.  So far history.  We are now to come to prophecy; for you

will ask, to what will all this lead?  I answer, if the States

General do not stumble at the threshold on the question before

stated, and which must be decided before they can proceed to

business, then they will in their first session easily obtain, 1.

Their future periodical convocation of the States.  2. Their

exclusive right to raise and appropriate money which includes that of

establishing a civil list.  3. A participation in legislation;

probably at first, it will only be a transfer to them of the portion

of it now exercised by parliament, that is to say, a right to propose

amendments and a negative.  But it must infallibly end in a right of

origination.  4. Perhaps they may make a declaration of rights.  It

will be attempted at least.  Two other objects will be attempted,

viz., a habeas corpus law and a free press.  But probably they may

not obtain these in the first session, or with modifications only,

and the nation must be left to ripen itself more for their unlimited

adoption.  Upon the whole, it has appeared to me that the basis of

the present struggle is an illumination of the public mind as to the

rights of the nation, aided by fortunate incidents; that they can

never retrograde, but from the natural progress of things, must press

forward to the establishment of a constitution which shall assure to

them a good degree of liberty.  They flatter themselves they shall

form a better constitution than the English.  I think it will be

better in some points -- worse in others.  It will be better in the

article of representation, which will be more equal.  It will be

worse, as their situation obliges them to keep up the dangerous

machine of a standing army.  I doubt, too, whether they will obtain

the trial by jury, because they are not sensible of its value.




        I am sure I have by this time heartily tired you with this long

epistle, and that you will be glad to see it brought to an end, with

assurances of the sentiments of esteem and respect with which I have

the honor to be, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble

servant.

