




        HOPE FOR "OUR BLACK BRETHREN"




        _To Benjamin Banneker_

        _Philadelphia, Aug. 30, 1791_




        SIR, -- I thank you sincerely for your letter of the 19th

instant and for the Almanac it contained.  No body wishes more than I

do to see such proofs as you exhibit, that nature has given to our

black brethren, talents equal to those of the other colors of men,

and that the appearance of a want of them is owing merely to the

degraded condition of their existence, both in Africa & America.  I

can add with truth, that no body wishes more ardently to see a good

system commenced for raising the condition both of their body & mind

to what it ought to be, as fast as the imbecility of their present

existence, and other circumstances which cannot be neglected, will

admit.  I have taken the liberty of sending your Almanac to Monsieur

de Condorcet, Secretary of the Academy of Sciences at Paris, and

member of the Philanthropic society, because I considered it as a

document to which your whole colour had a right for their

justification against the doubts which have been entertained of them.

I am with great esteem, Sir Your most obed't humble serv't.







        STRENGTHENING THE STATE GOVERNMENTS




        _To Archibald Stuart_

        _Philadelphia, Dec. 23, 1791_




        DEAR SIR, -- I received duly your favor of Octob 22. and should

have answered it by the gentleman who delivered it, but that he left

town before I knew of it.




        That it is really important to provide a constitution for our

state cannot be doubted: as little can it be doubted that the

ordinance called by that name has important defects.  But before we

attempt it, we should endeavor to be as certain as is practicable

that in the attempt we should not make bad worse.  I have understood

that Mr. Henry has always been opposed to this undertaking: and I

confess that I consider his talents and influence such as that, were

it decided that we should call a Convention for the purpose of

amending, I should fear he might induce that convention either to fix

the thing as at present, or change it for the worse.  Would it not

therefore be well that means should be adopted for coming at his

ideas of the changes he would agree to, & for communicating to him

those which we should propose?  Perhaps he might find ours not so

distant from his but that some mutual sacrifices might bring them

together.




        I shall hazard my own ideas to you as hastily as my business

obliges me.  I wish to preserve the line drawn by the federal

constitution between the general & particular governments as it

stands at present, and to take every prudent means of preventing

either from stepping over it.  Tho' the experiment has not yet had a

long enough course to shew us from which quarter encroachments are

most to be feared, yet it is easy to foresee from the nature of

things that the encroachments of the state governments will tend to

an excess of liberty which will correct itself (as in the late

instance) while those of the general government will tend to

monarchy, which will fortify itself from day to day, instead of

working its own cure, as all experience shews.  I would rather be

exposed to the inconve-niencies attending too much liberty than those

attending too small a degree of it.  Then it is important to

strengthen the state governments: and as this cannot be done by any

change in the federal constitution, (for the preservation of that is

all we need contend for,) it must be done by the states themselves,

erecting such barriers at the constitutional line as cannot be

surmounted either by themselves or by the general government.  The

only barrier in their power is a wise government.  A weak one will

lose ground in every contest.  To obtain a wise & an able government,

I consider the following changes as important.  Render the

legislature a desirable station by lessening the number of

representatives (say to 100) and lengthening somewhat their term, and

proportion them equally among the electors: adopt also a better mode

of appointing Senators.  Render the Executive a more desirable post

to men of abilities by making it more independant of the legislature.

To wit, let him be chosen by other electors, for a longer time, and

ineligible for ever after.  Responsibility is a tremendous engine in

a free government.  Let him feel the whole weight of it then by

taking away the shelter of his executive council.  Experience both

ways has already established the superiority of this measure.  Render

the Judiciary respectable by every possible means, to wit, firm

tenure in office, competent salaries, and reduction of their numbers.

Men of high learning and abilities are few in every country; & by

taking in those who are not so, the able part of the body have their

hands tied by the unable.  This branch of the government will have

the weight of the conflict on their hands, because they will be the

last appeal of reason.  -- These are my general ideas of amendments;

but, preserving the ends, I should be flexible & conciliatory as to

the means.  You ask whether Mr. Madison and myself could attend on a

convention which should be called?  Mr. Madison's engagements as a

member of Congress will probably be from October to March or April in

every year.  Mine are constant while I hold my office, and my

attendance would be very unimportant.  Were it otherwise, my office

should not stand in the way of it.  I am with great & sincere esteem,

Dr Sir, your friend & servt.







        "A STEPPING STONE TO MONARCHY"




        _To the President of the United States_

        (GEORGE WASHINGTON)

        _Philadelphia, May 23, 1792_




        DEAR SIR, -- I have determined to make the subject of a letter,

what for some time past, has been a subject of inquietude to my mind

without having found a good occasion of disburthening itself to you

in conversation, during the busy scenes which occupied you here.

Perhaps too you may be able, in your present situation, or on the

road, to give it more time & reflection than you could do here at any

moment.




        When you first mentioned to me your purpose of retiring from

the government, tho' I felt all the magnitude of the event, I was in

a considerable degree silent.  I knew that, to such a mind as yours,

persuasion was idle & impertinent: that before forming your decision,

you had weighed all the reasons for & against the measure, had made

up your mind on full view of them, & that there could be little hope

of changing the result.  Pursuing my reflections too I knew we were

some day to try to walk alone; and if the essay should be made while

you should be alive & looking on, we should derive confidence from

that circumstance, & resource if it failed.  The public mind too was

calm & confident, and therefore in a favorable state for making the

experiment.  Had no change of circumstances intervened, I should not,

with any hope of success, have now ventured to propose to you a

change of purpose.  But the public mind is no longer confident and

serene; and that from causes in which you are in no ways personally

mixed.  Tho these causes have been hackneyed in the public papers in

detail, it may not be amiss, in order to calculate the effect they

are capable of producing, to take a view of them in the mass, giving

to each the form, real or imaginary, under which they have been

presented.




        It has been urged then that a public debt, greater than we can

possibly pay before other causes of adding new debt to it will occur,

has been artificially created, by adding together the whole amount of

the debtor & creditor sides of accounts, instead of taking only their

balances, which could have been paid off in a short time: That this

accumulation of debt has taken for ever out of our power those easy

sources of revenue, which, applied to the ordinary necessities and

exigencies of government, would have answered them habitually, and

covered us from habitual murmurings against taxes & tax-gatherers,

reserving extraordinary calls, for those extraordinary occasions

which would animate the people to meet them: That though the calls

for money have been no greater than we must generally expect, for the

same or equivalent exigencies, yet we are already obliged to strain

the impost till it produces clamour, and will produce evasion, & war

on our own citizens to collect it: and even to resort to an _Excise_

law, of odious character with the people, partial in it's operation,

unproductive unless enforced by arbitrary & vexatious means, and

committing the authority of the government in parts where resistance

is most probable, & coercion least practicable.  They cite

propositions in Congress and suspect other projects on foot still to

increase the mass of debt.  They say that by borrowing at 2/3 of the

interest, we might have paid off the principal in 2/3 of the time:

but that from this we are precluded by it's being made irredeemable

but in small portions & long terms: That this irredeemable quality

was given it for the avowed purpose of inviting it's transfer to

foreign countries.  They predict that this transfer of the principal,

when compleated, will occasion an exportation of 3. millions of

dollars annually for the interest, a drain of coin, of which as there

has been no example, no calculation can be made of it's consequences:

That the banishment of our coin will be compleated by the creation of

10. millions of paper money, in the form of bank bills, now issuing

into circulation.  They think the 10. or 12. percent annual profit

paid to the lenders of this paper medium taken out of the pockets of

the people, who would have had without interest the coin it is

banishing: That all the capital employed in paper speculation is

barren & useless, producing, like that on a gaming table, no

accession to itself, and is withdrawn from commerce & agriculture

where it would have produced addition to the common mass: That it

nourishes in our citizens habits of vice and idleness instead of

industry & morality: That it has furnished effectual means of

corrupting such a portion of the legislature, as turns the balance

between the honest voters which ever way it is directed: That this

corrupt squadron, deciding the voice of the legislature, have

manifested their dispositions to get rid of the limitations imposed

by the constitution on the general legislature, limitations, on the

faith of which, the states acceded to that instrument: That the

ultimate object of all this is to prepare the way for a change, from

the present republican form of government, to that of a monarchy, of

which the English constitution is to be the model.  That this was

contemplated in the Convention is no secret, because it's partisans

have made none of it.  To effect it then was impracticable, but they

are still eager after their object, and are predisposing every thing

for it's ultimate attainment.  So many of them have got into the

legislature, that, aided by the corrupt squadron of paper dealers,

who are at their devotion, they make a majority in both houses.  The

republican party, who wish to preserve the government in it's present

form, are fewer in number.  They are fewer even when joined by the

two, three, or half dozen anti-federalists, who, tho they dare not

avow it, are still opposed to any general government: but being less

so to a republican than a monarchical one, they naturally join those

whom they think pursuing the lesser evil.




        Of all the mischiefs objected to the system of measures before

mentioned, none is so afflicting, and fatal to every honest hope, as

the corruption of the legislature.  As it was the earliest of these

measures, it became the instrument for producing the rest, & will be

the instrument for producing in future a king, lords & commons, or

whatever else those who direct it may chuse.  Withdrawn such a

distance from the eye of their constituents, and these so dispersed

as to be inaccessible to public information, & particularly to that

of the conduct of their own representatives, they will form the most

corrupt government on earth, if the means of their corruption be not

prevented.  The only hope of safety hangs now on the numerous

representation which is to come forward the ensuing year.  Some of

the new members will probably be either in principle or interest,

with the present majority, but it is expected that the great mass

will form an accession to the republican party.  They will not be

able to undo all which the two preceding legislatures, & especially

the first, have done.  Public faith & right will oppose this.  But

some parts of the system may be rightfully reformed; a liberation

from the rest unremittingly pursued as fast as right will permit, &

the door shut in future against similar commitments of the nation.

Should the next legislature take this course, it will draw upon them

the whole monarchical & paper interest.  But the latter I think will

not go all lengths with the former, because creditors will never, of

their own accord, fly off entirely from their debtors.  Therefore

this is the alternative least likely to produce convulsion.  But

should the majority of the new members be still in the same

principles with the present, & shew that we have nothing to expect

but a continuance of the same practices, it is not easy to conjecture

what would be the result, nor what means would be resorted to for

correction of the evil.  True wisdom would direct that they should be

temperate & peaceable, but the division of sentiment & interest

happens unfortunately to be so geographical, that no mortal can say

that what is most wise & temperate would prevail against what is most

easy & obvious.  I can scarcely contemplate a more incalculable evil

than the breaking of the union into two or more parts.  Yet when we

review the mass which opposed the original coalescence, when we

consider that it lay chiefly in the Southern quarter, that the

legislature have availed themselves of no occasion of allaying it,

but on the contrary whenever Northern & Southern prejudices have come

into conflict, the latter have been sacrificed & the former soothed;

that the owners of the debt are in the Southern & the holders of it

in the Northern division; that the Anti-federal champions are now

strengthened in argument by the fulfilment of their predictions; that

this has been brought about by the Monarchical federalists

themselves, who, having been for the new government merely as a

stepping stone to monarchy, have themselves adopted the very

constructions of the constitution, of which, when advocating it's

acceptance before the tribunal of the people, they declared it

insusceptible; that the republican federalists, who espoused the same

government for it's intrinsic merits, are disarmed of their weapons,

that which they denied as prophecy being now become true history: who

can be sure that these things may not proselyte the small number

which was wanting to place the majority on the other side?  And this

is the event at which I tremble, & to prevent which I consider your

continuance at the head of affairs as of the last importance.  The

confidence of the whole union is centred in you.  Your being at the

helm, will be more than an answer to every argument which can be used

to alarm & lead the people in any quarter into violence or secession.

North & South will hang together, if they have you to hang on; and,

if the first correction of a numerous representation should fail in

it's effect, your presence will give time for trying others not

inconsistent with the union & peace of the states.




        I am perfectly aware of the oppression under which your present

office lays your mind, & of the ardor with which you pant for

retirement to domestic life.  But there is sometimes an eminence of

character on which society have such peculiar claims as to controul

the predelection of the individual for a particular walk of

happiness, & restrain him to that alone arising from the present &

future benedictions of mankind.  This seems to be your condition, &

the law imposed on you by providence in forming your character, &

fashioning the events on which it was to operate; and it is to

motives like these, & not to personal anxieties of mine or others who

have no right to call on you for sacrifices, that I appeal from your

former determination & urge a revisal of it, on the ground of change

in the aspect of things.  Should an honest majority result from the

new & enlarged representation; should those acquiesce whose

principles or interest they may controul, your wishes for retirement

would be gratified with less danger, as soon as that shall be

manifest, without awaiting the completion of the second period of

four years.  One or two sessions will determine the crisis; and I

cannot but hope that you can resolve to add one or two more to the

many years you have already sacrificed to the good of mankind.




        The fear of suspicion that any selfish motive of continuance in

office may enter into this sollicitation on my part obliges me to

declare that no such motive exists.  It is a thing of mere

indifference to the public whether I retain or relinquish my purpose

of closing my tour with the first periodical renovation of the

government.  I know my own measure too well to suppose that my

services contribute any thing to the public confidence, or the public

utility.  Multitudes can fill the office in which you have been

pleased to place me, as much to their advantage & satisfaction.  I

therefore have no motive to consult but my own inclination, which is

bent irresistibly on the tranquil enjoyment of my family, my farm, &

my books.  I should repose among them it is true, in far greater

security, if I were to know that you remained at the watch, and I

hope it will be so.  To the inducements urged from a view of our

domestic affairs, I will add a bare mention, of what indeed need only

be mentioned, that weighty motives for your continuance are to be

found in our foreign affairs.  I think it probable that both the

Spanish & English negotiations, if not completed before your purpose

is known, will be suspended from the moment it is known; & that the

latter nation will then use double diligence in fomenting the Indian

war.  -- With my wishes for the future, I shall at the same time

express my gratitude for the past, at least my portion in it; & beg

permission to follow you whether in public or private life with those

sentiments of sincere attachment & respect, with which I am

unalterably, Dear Sir, Your affectionate friend & humble servant.







        "THE MONSTER ARISTOCRACY"




        _To Lafayette_

        _Philadelphia, June 16, 1792_




        Behold you, then, my dear friend, at the head of a great army,

establishing the liberties of your country against a foreign enemy.

May heaven favor your cause, and make you the channel thro' which it

may pour it's favors.  While you are exterminating the monster

aristocracy, & pulling out the teeth & fangs of it's associate

monarchy, a contrary tendency is discovered in some here.  A sect has

shewn itself among us, who declare they espoused our new

constitution, not as a good & sufficient thing itself, but only as a

step to an English constitution, the only thing good & sufficient in

itself, in their eye.  It is happy for us that these are preachers

without followers, and that our people are firm & constant in their

republican purity.  You will wonder to be told that it is from the

Eastward chiefly that these champions for a king, lords & commons

come.  They get some important associates from New York, and are

puffed off by a tribe of Agioteurs which have been hatched in a bed

of corruption made up after the model of their beloved England.  Too

many of these stock jobbers & king-jobbers have come into our

legislature, or rather too many of our legislature have become stock

jobbers & king-jobbers.  However the voice of the people is beginning

to make itself heard, and will probably cleanse their seats at the

ensuing election.  -- The machinations of our old enemies are such as

to keep us still at bay with our Indian neighbors.  -- What are you

doing for your colonies?  They will be lost if not more effectually

succoured.  Indeed no future efforts you can make will ever be able

to reduce the blacks.  All that can be done in my opinion will be to

compound with them as has been done formerly in Jamaica.  We have

been less zealous in aiding them, lest your government should feel

any jealousy on our account.  But in truth we as sincerely wish their

restoration, and their connection with you, as you do yourselves.  We

are satisfied that neither your justice nor their distresses will

ever again permit their being forced to seek at dear & distant

markets those first necessaries of life which they may have at

cheaper markets placed by nature at their door, & formed by her for

their support.  -- What is become of Mde de Tessy and Mde de Tott?  I

have not heard of them since they went to Switzerland.  I think they

would have done better to have come & reposed under the Poplars of

Virginia.  Pour into their bosoms the warmest effusions of my

friendship & tell them they will be warm and constant unto death.

Accept of them also for Mde de la Fayette & your dear children -- but

I am forgetting that you are in the field of war, & they I hope in

those of peace.  Adieu my dear friend!  God bless you all.  Yours

affectionately.







        THE RIGHTS OF MAN




        _To Thomas Paine_

        _Philadelphia, June 19, 1792_




        DEAR SIR, -- I received with great pleasure the present of your

pamphlets, as well for the thing itself as that it was a testimony of

your recollection.  Would you believe it possible that in this

country there should be high & important characters who need your

lessons in republicanism, & who do not heed them?  It is but too true

that we have a sect preaching up & pouting after an English

constitution of king, lords, & commons, & whose heads are itching for

crowns, coronets & mitres.  But our people, my good friend, are firm

and unanimous in their principles of republicanism & there is no

better proof of it than that they love what you write and read it

with delight.  The printers season every newspaper with extracts from

your last, as they did before from your first part of the Rights of

Man.  They have both served here to separate the wheat from the

chaff, and to prove that tho' the latter appears on the surface, it

is on the surface only.  The bulk below is sound & pure.  Go on then

in doing with your pen what in other times was done with the sword:

shew that reformation is more practicable by operating on the mind

than on the body of man, and be assured that it has not a more

sincere votary nor you a more ardent well-wisher than Yrs. &c.







        THE CONFLICT WITH HAMILTON




        _To the President of the United States_

        (GEORGE WASHINGTON)

        _Monticello, Sep. 9, 1792_




        DEAR SIR, -- I received on the 2d inst the letter of Aug 23,

which you did me the honor to write me; but the immediate return of

our post, contrary to his custom, prevented my answer by that

occasion.  The proceedings of Spain mentioned in your letter are

really of a complexion to excite uneasiness, & a suspicion that their

friendly overtures about the Missisipi have been merely to lull us

while they should be strengthening their holds on that river.  Mr.

Carmichael's silence has been long my astonishment: and however it

might have justified something very different from a new appointment,

yet the public interest certainly called for his junction with Mr.

Short as it is impossible but that his knolege of the ground of

negotiation of persons & characters, must be useful & even necessary

to the success of the mission.  That Spain & Gr Britain may

understand one another on our frontiers is very possible; for however

opposite their interests or disposition may be in the affairs of

Europe, yet while these do not call them into opposite action, they

may concur as against us.  I consider their keeping an agent in the

Indian country as a circumstance which requires serious interference

on our part; and I submit to your decision whether it does not

furnish a proper occasion to us to send an additional instruction to

Messrs.  Carmichael & Short to insist on a mutual & formal

stipulation to forbear employing agents or pensioning any persons

within each other's limits: and if this be refused, to propose the

contrary stipulation, to wit, that each party may freely keep agents

within the Indian territories of the other, in which case we might

soon sicken them of the license.




        I now take the liberty of proceeding to that part of your

letter wherein you notice the internal dissentions which have taken

place within our government, & their disagreeable effect on it's

movements.  That such dissentions have taken place is certain, & even

among those who are nearest to you in the administration.  To no one

have they given deeper concern than myself: to no one equal

mortification at being myself a part of them.  Tho' I take to myself

no more than my share of the general observations of your letter, yet

I am so desirous ever that you should know the whole truth, & believe

no more than the truth, that I am glad to seize every occasion of

developing to you whatever I do or think relative to the government;

& shall therefore ask permission to be more lengthy now than the

occasion particularly calls for, or could otherwise perhaps justify.




        When I embarked in the government, it was with a determination

to intermeddle not at all with the legislature, & as little as

possible with my co-departments.  The first and only instance of

variance from the former part of my resolution, I was duped into by

the Secretary of the Treasury and made a tool for forwarding his

schemes, not then sufficiently understood by me; and of all the

errors of my political life, this has occasioned me the deepest

regret.  It has ever been my purpose to explain this to you, when,

from being actors on the scene, we shall have become uninterested

spectators only.  The second part of my resolution has been

religiously observed with the war department; & as to that of the

Treasury, has never been farther swerved from than by the mere

enunciation of my sentiments in conversation, and chiefly among those

who, expressing the same sentiments, drew mine from me.  If it has

been supposed that I have ever intrigued among the members of the

legislatures to defeat the plans of the Secretary of the Treasury, it

is contrary to all truth.  As I never had the desire to influence the

members, so neither had I any other means than my friendships, which

I valued too highly to risk by usurpations on their freedom of

judgment, & the conscientious pursuit of their own sense of duty.

That I have utterly, in my private conversations, disapproved of the

system of the Secretary of the treasury, I acknolege & avow: and this

was not merely a speculative difference.  His system flowed from

principles adverse to liberty, & was calculated to undermine and

demolish the republic, by creating an influence of his department

over the members of the legislature.  I saw this influence actually

produced, & it's first fruits to be the establishment of the great

outlines of his project by the votes of the very persons who, having

swallowed his bait were laying themselves out to profit by his plans:

& that had these persons withdrawn, as those interested in a question

ever should, the vote of the disinterested majority was clearly the

reverse of what they made it.  These were no longer the votes then of

the representatives of the people, but of deserters from the rights &

interests of the people: & it was impossible to consider their

decisions, which had nothing in view but to enrich themselves, as the

measures of the fair majority, which ought always to be respected.

-- If what was actually doing begat uneasiness in those who wished

for virtuous government, what was further proposed was not less

threatening to the friends of the Constitution.  For, in a Report on

the subject of manufactures (still to be acted on) it was expressly

assumed that the general government has a right to exercise all

powers which may be for the _general welfare_, that is to say, all

the legitimate powers of government: since no government has a

legitimate right to do what is not for the welfare of the governed.

There was indeed a sham-limitation of the universality of this power

_to cases where money is to be employed_.  But about what is it that

money cannot be employed?  Thus the object of these plans taken

together is to draw all the powers of government into the hands of

the general legislature, to establish means for corrupting a

sufficient corps in that legislature to divide the honest votes &

preponderate, by their own, the scale which suited, & to have that

corps under the command of the Secretary of the Treasury for the

purpose of subverting step by step the principles of the

constitution, which he has so often declared to be a thing of nothing

which must be changed.  Such views might have justified something

more than mere expressions of dissent, beyond which, nevertheless, I

never went.  -- Has abstinence from the department committed to me

been equally observed by him?  To say nothing of other interferences

equally known, in the case of the two nations with which we have the

most intimate connections, France & England, my system was to give

some satisfactory distinctions to the former, of little cost to us,

in return for the solid advantages yielded us by them; & to have met

the English with some restrictions which might induce them to abate

their severities against our commerce.  I have always supposed this

coincided with your sentiments.  Yet the Secretary of the treasury,

by his cabals with members of the legislature, & by high-toned

declamation on other occasions, has forced down his own system, which

was exactly the reverse.  He undertook, of his own authority, the

conferences with the ministers of those two nations, & was, on every

consultation, provided with some report of a conversation with the

one or the other of them, adapted to his views.  These views, thus

made to prevail, their execution fell of course to me; & I can safely

appeal to you, who have seen all my letters & proceedings, whether I

have not carried them into execution as sincerely as if they had been

my own, tho' I ever considered them as inconsistent with the honor &

interest of our country.  That they have been inconsistent with our

interest is but too fatally proved by the stab to our navigation

given by the French.  -- So that if the question be By whose fault is

it that Colo Hamilton & myself have not drawn together? the answer

will depend on that to two other questions; whose principles of

administration best justify, by their purity, conscientious

adherence? and which of us has, notwithstanding, stepped farthest

into the controul of the department of the other?




        To this justification of opinions, expressed in the way of

conversation, against the views of Colo Hamilton, I beg leave to add

some notice of his late charges against me in Fenno's gazette; for

neither the stile, matter, nor venom of the pieces alluded to can

leave a doubt of their author.  Spelling my name & character at full

length to the public, while he conceals his own under the signature

of "an American" he charges me 1.  With having written letters from

Europe to my friends to oppose the present constitution while

depending.  2. With a desire of not paying the public debt.  3. With

setting up a paper to decry & slander the government.  1. The first

charge is most false.  No man in the U.S. I suppose, approved of

every title in the constitution: no one, I believe approved more of

it than I did: and more of it was certainly disproved by my accuser

than by me, and of it's parts most vitally republican.  Of this the

few letters I wrote on the subject (not half a dozen I believe) will

be a proof: & for my own satisfaction & justification, I must tax you

with the reading of them when I return to where they are.  You will

there see that my objection to the constitution was that it wanted a

bill of rights securing freedom of religion, freedom of the press,

freedom from standing armies, trial by jury, & a constant Habeas

corpus act.  Colo Hamilton's was that it wanted a king and house of

lords.  The sense of America has approved my objection & added the

bill of rights, not the king and lords.  I also thought a longer term

of service, insusceptible of renewal, would have made a President

more independant.  My country has thought otherwise, & I have

acquiesced implicitly.  He wishes the general government should have

power to make laws binding the states in all cases whatsoever.  Our

country has thought otherwise: has he acquiesced?  Notwithstanding my

wish for a bill of rights, my letters strongly urged the adoption of

the constitution, by nine states at least, to secure the good it

contained.  I at first thought that the best method of securing the

bill of rights would be for four states to hold off till such a bill

should be agreed to.  But the moment I saw Mr. Hancock's proposition

to pass the constitution as it stood, and give perpetual instructions

to the representatives of every state to insist on a bill of rights,

I acknoleged the superiority of his plan, & advocated universal

adoption.  2. The second charge is equally untrue.  My whole

correspondence while in France, & every word, letter, & act on the

subject since my return, prove that no man is more ardently intent to

see the public debt soon & sacredly paid off than I am.  This exactly

marks the difference between Colo Hamilton's views & mine, that I

would wish the debt paid to morrow; he wishes it never to be paid,

but always to be a thing where with to corrupt & manage the

legislature.  3. I have never enquired what number of sons, relations

& friends of Senators, representatives, printers or other useful

partisans Colo Hamilton has provided for among the hundred clerks of

his department, the thousand excisemen, custom-house officers, loan

officers &c. &c. &c. appointed by him, or at his nod, and spread over

the Union; nor could ever have imagined that the man who has the

shuffling of millions backwards & forwards from paper into money &

money into paper, from Europe to America, & America to Europe, the

dealing out of Treasury-secrets among his friends in what time &

measure he pleases, and who never slips an occasion of making friends

with his means, that such an one I say would have brought forward a

charge against me for having appointed the poet Freneau translating

clerk to my office, with a salary of 250. dollars a year.  That fact

stands thus.  While the government was at New York I was applied to

on behalf of Freneau to know if there was any place within my

department to which he could be appointed.  I answered there were but

four clerkships, all of which I found full, and continued without any

change.  When we removed to Philadelphia, Mr. Pintard the translating

clerk, did not chuse to remove with us.  His office then became

vacant.  I was again applied to there for Freneau, & had no

hesitation to promise the clerkship for him.  I cannot recollect

whether it was at the same time, or afterwards, that I was told he

had a thought of setting up a newspaper there.  But whether then, or

afterwards, I considered it as a circumstance of some value, as it

might enable me to do, what I had long wished to have done, that is,

to have the material parts of the Leyden gazette brought under your

eye & that of the public, in order to possess yourself & them of a

juster view of the affairs of Europe than could be obtained from any

other public source.  This I had ineffectually attempted through the

press of Mr. Fenno while in New York, selecting & translating

passages myself at first then having it done by Mr.  Pintard the

translating clerk, but they found their way too slowly into Mr.

Fenno's papers.  Mr. Bache essayed it for me in Philadelphia, but his

being a daily paper, did not circulate sufficiently in the other

states.  He even tried, at my request, the plan of a weekly paper of

recapitulation from his daily paper, in hopes that that might go into

the other states, but in this too we failed.  Freneau, as translating

clerk, & the printer of a periodical paper likely to circulate thro'

the states (uniting in one person the parts of Pintard & Fenno)

revived my hopes that the thing could at length be effected.  On the

establishment of his paper therefore, I furnished him with the Leyden

gazettes, with an expression of my wish that he could always

translate & publish the material intelligence they contained; & have

continued to furnish them from time to time, as regularly as I

received them.  But as to any other direction or indication of my

wish how his press should be conducted, what sort of intelligence he

should give, what essays encourage, I can protest in the presence of

heaven, that I never did by myself or any other, directly or

indirectly, say a syllable, nor attempt any kind of influence.  I can

further protest, in the same awful presence, that I never did by

myself or any other, directly or indirectly, write, dictate or

procure any one sentence or sentiment to be inserted _in his, or any

other gazette_, to which my name was not affixed or that of my

office.  -- I surely need not except here a thing so foreign to the

present subject as a little paragraph about our Algerine captives,

which I put once into Fenno's paper.  -- Freneau's proposition to

publish a paper, having been about the time that the writings of

Publicola, & the discourses on Davila had a good deal excited the

public attention, I took for granted from Freneau's character, which

had been marked as that of a good whig, that he would give free place

to pieces written against the aristocratical & monarchical principles

these papers had inculcated.  This having been in my mind, it is

likely enough I may have expressed it in conversation with others;

tho' I do not recollect that I did.  To Freneau I think I could not,

because I had still seen him but once, & that was at a public table,

at breakfast, at Mrs.  Elsworth's, as I passed thro' New York the

last year.  And I can safely declare that my expectations looked only

to the chastisement of the aristocratical & monarchical writers, &

not to any criticisms on the proceedings of government: Colo Hamilton

can see no motive for any appointment but that of making a convenient

partizan.  But you Sir, who have received from me recommendations of

a Rittenhouse, Barlow, Paine, will believe that talents & science are

sufficient motives with me in appointments to which they are fitted:

& that Freneau, as a man of genius, might find a preference in my eye

to be a translating clerk, & make good title to the little aids I

could give him as the editor of a gazette, by procuring subscriptions

to his paper, as I did some, before it appeared, & as I have with

pleasure done for the labours of other men of genius.  I hold it to

be one of the distinguishing excellencies of elective over hereditary

succesions, that the talents, which nature has provided in sufficient

proportion, should be selected by the society for the government of

their affairs, rather than that this should be transmitted through

the loins of knaves & fools passing from the debauches of the table

to those of the bed.  Colo Hamilton, alias "Plain facts," says that

Freneau's salary began before he resided in Philadelphia.  I do not

know what quibble he may have in reserve on the word "residence." He

may mean to include under that idea the removal of his family; for I

believe he removed, himself, before his family did, to Philadelphia.

But no act of mine gave commencement to his salary before he so far

took up his abode in Philadelphia as to be sufficiently in readiness

for the duties of the office.  As to the merits or demerits of his

paper, they certainly concern me not.  He & Fenno are rivals for the

public favor.  The one courts them by flattery, the other by censure,

& I believe it will be admitted that the one has been as servile, as

the other severe.  But is not the dignity, & even decency of

government committed, when one of it's principal ministers enlists

himself as an anonymous writer or paragraphist for either the one or

the other of them? -- No government ought to be without censors: &

where the press is free, no one ever will.  If virtuous, it need not

fear the fair operation of attack & defence.  Nature has given to man

no other means of sifting out the truth either in religion, law, or

politics.  I think it as honorable to the government neither to know,

nor notice, it's sycophants or censors, as it would be undignified &

criminal to pamper the former & persecute the latter.  -- So much for

the past.  A word now of the future.




        When I came into this office, it was with a resolution to

retire from it as soon as I could with decency.  It pretty early

appeared to me that the proper moment would be the first of those

epochs at which the constitution seems to have contemplated a

periodical change or renewal of the public servants.  In this I was

confirmed by your resolution respecting the same period; from which

however I am happy in hoping you have departed.  I look to that

period with the longing of a wave-worn mariner, who has at length the

land in view, & shall count the days & hours which still lie between

me & it.  In the meanwhile my main object will be to wind up the

business of my office avoiding as much as possible all new

enterprize.  With the affairs of the legislature, as I never did

intermeddle, so I certainly shall not now begin.  I am more desirous

to predispose everything for the repose to which I am withdrawing,

than expose it to be disturbed by newspaper contests.  If these

however cannot be avoided altogether, yet a regard for your quiet

will be a sufficient motive for my deferring it till I become merely

a private citizen, when the propriety or impropriety of what I may

say or do may fall on myself alone.  I may then too avoid the charge

of misapplying that time which now belonging to those who employ me,

should be wholly devoted to their service.  If my own justification,

or the interests of the republic shall require it, I reserve to

myself the right of then appealing to my country, subscribing my name

to whatever I write, & using with freedom & truth the facts & names

necessary to place the cause in it's just form before that tribunal.

To a thorough disregard of the honors & emoluments of office I join

as great a value for the esteem of my countrymen, & conscious of

having merited it by an integrity which cannot be reproached, & by an

enthusiastic devotion to their rights & liberty, I will not suffer my

retirement to be clouded by the slanders of a man whose history, from

the moment at which history can stoop to notice him, is a tissue of

machinations against the liberty of the country which has not only

received and given him bread, but heaped it's honors on his head.  --

Still however I repeat the hope that it will not be necessary to make

such an appeal.  Though little known to the people of America, I

believe that, as far as I am known, it is not as an enemy to the

republic, nor an intriguer against it, nor a waster of it's revenue,

nor prostitutor of it to the purposes of corruption, as the American

represents me; and I confide that yourself are satisfied that, as to

dissensions in the newspapers, not a syllable of them has ever

proceeded from me; & that no cabals or intrigues of mine have

produced those in the legislature, & I hope I may promise, both to

you & myself, that none will receive aliment from me during the short

space I have to remain in office, which will find ample employment in

closing the present business of the department.  -- Observing that

letters written at Mount Vernon on the Monday, & arriving at Richmond

on the Wednesday, reach me on Saturday, I have now the honor to

mention that the 22d instant will be the last of our post-days that I

shall be here, & consequently that no letter from you after the 17th,

will find me here.  Soon after that I shall have the honor of

receiving at Mount Vernon your orders for Philadelphia, & of there

also delivering you the little matter which occurs to me as proper

for the opening of Congress, exclusive of what has been recommended

in former speeches, & not yet acted on.  In the meantime & ever I am

with great and sincere affection & respect, dear Sir, your most

obedient and most humble servant.







        "THE WILL OF THE NATION"




        _To the U.S. Minister to France_

        (Gouverneur Morris)

        _Philadelphia, Dec. 30, 1792_




        DEAR SIR -- My last to you was of Mar. 7. since which I have

received your Nos. 8. and 9. I am apprehensive that your situation

must have been difficult during the transition from the late form of

government to the re-establishment of some other legitimate

authority, and that you may have been at a loss to determine with

whom business might be done.  Nevertheless when principles are well

understood their application is less embarrassing.  We surely cannot

deny to any nation that right whereon our own government is founded,

that every one may govern itself under whatever forms it pleases, and

change these forms at it's own will, and that it may transact it's

business with foreign nations through whatever organ it thinks

proper, whether King, convention, assembly, committee, President, or

whatever else it may chuse.  The will of the nation is the only thing

essential to be regarded.  On the dissolution of the late

constitution in France, by removing so integral a part of it as the

King, the National Assembly, to whom a part only of the public

authority had been delegated, sensible of the incompetence of their

powers to transact the affairs of the nation legitimately, incited

their fellow citizens to appoint a national convention during this

defective state of the national authority.  Duty to our constituents

required that we should suspend paiment of the monies yet unpaid of

our debt to that country, because there was no person or persons

substantially authorized by the nation of France to receive the

monies and give us a good acquittal.  On this ground my last letter

desired you to suspend paiments till further orders, with an

assurance, if necessary, that the suspension should not be continued

a moment longer than should be necessary for us to see the

re-establishment of some person or body of persons with authority to

receive and give us a good acquittal.  Since that we learn that a

Convention is assembled, invested with full powers by the nation to

transact it's affairs.  Tho' we know that from the public papers

only, instead of waiting for a formal annunciation of it, we hasten

to act upon it by authorizing you, if the fact be true, to consider

the suspension of paiment, directed in my last letter, as now taken

off, and to proceed as if it had never been imposed; considering the

Convention, or the government they shall have established as the

lawful representatives of the Nation and authorized to act for them.

Neither the honor nor inclination of our country would justify our

withholding our paiment under a scrupulous attention to forms.  On

the contrary they lent us that money when we were under their

circumstances, and it seems providential that we can not only repay

them the same sum, but under the same circumstances.  Indeed, we wish

to omit no opportunity of convincing them how cordially we desire the

closest union with them: Mutual good offices, mutual affection and

similar principles of government seem to have destined the two people

for the most intimate communion, and even for a complete exchange of

citizenship among the individuals composing them.




        During the fluctuating state of the Assignats of France, I must

ask the favor of you to inform me in every letter of the rate of

exchange between them & coin, this being necessary for the regulation

of our custom houses.  We are continuing our supplies to the island

of St. Domingo at the request of the Minister of France here.  We

would wish however to receive a more formal sanction from the

government of France than has yet been given.  Indeed, we know of

none but a vote of the late National Assembly for 4 millions of

livres of our debt, sent to the government of St. Domingo,

communicated by them to the Minister here, & by him to us.  And this

was in terms not properly applicable to the form of our advances.  We

wish therefore for a full sanction of the past & a complete

expression of the desires of their government as to future supplies

to their colonies.  Besides what we have furnished publicly,

individual merchants of the U.S. have carried considerable supplies

to the island of St. Domingo, which have been sometimes purchased,

sometimes taken by force, and bills given by the administration of

the colony on the minister here, which have been protested for want

of funds.  We have no doubt that justice will be done to these







        PAEAN TO THE FRENCH REVOLUTION




        _To William Short_

        _Philadelphia, Jan. 3, 1793_




        DEAR SIR, -- My last private letter to you was of Oct. 16.

since which I have received your No. 103, 107, 108, 109, 110, 112,

113 & 114 and yesterday your private one of Sep 15, came to hand.

The tone of your letters had for some time given me pain, on account

of the extreme warmth with which they censured the proceedings of the

Jacobins of France.  I considered that sect as the same with the

Republican patriots, & the Feuillants as the Monarchical patriots,

well known in the early part of the revolution, & but little distant

in their views, both having in object the establishment of a free

constitution, & differing only on the question whether their chief

Executive should be hereditary or not.  The Jacobins (as since

called) yielded to the Feuillants & tried the experiment of retaining

their hereditary Executive.  The experiment failed completely, and

would have brought on the reestablishment of despotism had it been

pursued.  The Jacobins saw this, and that the expunging that officer

was of absolute necessity.  And the Nation was with them in opinion,

for however they might have been formerly for the constitution framed

by the first assembly, they were come over from their hope in it, and

were now generally Jacobins.  In the struggle which was necessary,

many guilty persons fell without the forms of trial, and with them

some innocent.  These I deplore as much as any body, & shall deplore

some of them to the day of my death.  But I deplore them as I should

have done had they fallen in battle.  It was necessary to use the arm

of the people, a machine not quite so blind as balls and bombs, but

blind to a certain degree.  A few of their cordial friends met at

their hands the fate of enemies.  But time and truth will rescue &

embalm their memories, while their posterity will be enjoying that

very liberty for which they would never have hesitated to offer up

their lives.  The liberty of the whole earth was depending on the

issue of the contest, and was ever such a prize won with so little

innocent blood?  My own affections have been deeply wounded by some

of the martyrs to this cause, but rather than it should have failed,

I would have seen half the earth desolated.  Were there but an Adam &

an Eve left in every country, & left free, it would be better than as

it now is.  I have expressed to you my sentiments, because they are

really those of 99. in an hundred of our citizens.  The universal

feasts, and rejoicings which have lately been had on account of the

successes of the French shewed the genuine effusions of their hearts.

You have been wounded by the sufferings of your friends, and have by

this circumstance been hurried into a temper of mind which would be

extremely disrelished if known to your countrymen.  The _reserve of

the President of the United States_ had never permitted me to

discover the light in which he viewed it, and as I was more anxious

that you should satisfy him than me, I had still avoided explanations

with you on the subject.  But your 113. induced him to break silence

and to notice the extreme acrimony of your expressions.  He added

that he had been informed the sentiments you expressed _in your

conversations_ were equally offensive to our allies, & that you

should consider yourself as the representative of your country and

that what you say might be imputed to your constituents.  He desired

me therefore to write to you on this subject.  He added that he

considered _France as the sheet anchor of this country and its

friendship as a first object._ There are in the U.S. some characters

of opposite principles; some of them are high in office, others

possessing great wealth, and all of them hostile to France and fondly

looking to England as the staff of their hope.  These I named to you

on a former occasion.  Their prospects have certainly not brightened.

Excepting them, this country is entirely republican, friends to the

constitution, anxious to preserve it and to have it administered

according to it's own republican principles.  The little party above

mentioned have espoused it only as a stepping stone to monarchy, and

have endeavored to approximate it to that in it's administration in

order to render it's final transition more easy.  The successes of

republicanism in France have given the coup de grace to their

prospects, and I hope to their projects. -- I have developed to you

faithfully the sentiments of your country, that you may govern

yourself accordingly.  I know your republicanism to be pure, and that

it is no decay of that which has embittered you against it's votaries

in France, but too great a sensibility at the partial evil which it's

object has been accomplished there.  I have written to you in the

stile to which I have been always accustomed with you, and which

perhaps it is time I should lay aside.  But while old men are

sensible enough of their own advance in years, they do not

sufficiently recollect it in those whom they have seen young.  In

writing too the last private letter which will probably be written

under present circumstances, in contemplating that your

correspondence will shortly be turned over to I know not whom, but

certainly to some one not in the habit of considering your interests

with the same fostering anxieties I do, I have presented things

without reserve, satisfied you will ascribe what I have said to it's

true motive, use it for your own best interest, and in that fulfil

completely what I had in view.




        With respect to the subject of your letter of Sep. 15. you will

be sensible that many considerations would prevent my undertaking the

reformation of a system with which I am so soon to take leave.  It is

but common decency to leave to my successor the moulding of his own

business. -- Not knowing how otherwise to convey this letter to you

with certainty, I shall appeal to the friendship and honour of the

Spanish commissioners here, to give it the protection of their cover,

as a letter of private nature altogether.  We have no remarkable

event here lately, but the death of Dr. Lee; nor have I anything new


to communicate to you of your friends or affairs.  I am with

unalterable affection & wishes for your prosperity, my dear Sir, you

sincere friend and servant.







        PEACEABLE COERCION




        _To James Madison_

        _March 24, 1793_




        The idea seems to gain credit that the naval powers combined

against France will prohibit supplies even of provisions to that

country.  Should this be formally notified I should suppose Congress

would be called, because it is a justifiable cause of war, & as the

Executive cannot decide the question of war on the affirmative side,

neither ought it to do so on the negative side, by preventing the

competent body from deliberating on the question.  But I should hope

that war would not be their choice.  I think it will furnish us a

happy opportunity of setting another example to the world, by shewing

that nations may be brought to do justice by appeals to their

interests as well as by appeals to arms.  I should hope that Congress

instead of a denunciation of war, would instantly exclude from our

ports all the manufactures, produce, vessels & subjects of the

nations committing this aggression, during the continuance of the

aggression & till full satisfaction made for it.  This would work

well in many ways, safely in all, & introduce between nations another

umpire than arms.  It would relieve us too from the risks & the

horrors of cutting throats.  The death of the king of France has not

produced as open condemnations from the Monocrats as I expected.  I

dined the other day in a company where the subject was discussed.  I

will name the company in the order in which they manifested their

partialities; beginning with the warmest Jacobinism & proceeding by

shades to the most heart felt aristocracy.  Smith (N.Y.) Coxe.

Stewart. T. Shippen. Bingham. Peters. Breck. Meredith. Wolcott.  It

is certain that the ladies of this city, of the first circle are all

open-mouthed against the murderers of a sovereign, and they generally

speak those sentiments which the more cautious husband smothers.  I

believe it is pretty certain that Smith (S.C.) and Miss A. are not to

come together.  Ternant has at length openly hoisted the flag of

monarchy by going into deep mourning for his prince.  I suspect he

thinks a cessation of his visits to me a necessary accompaniment to

this pious duty.  A connection between him & Hamilton seems to be

springing up.  On observing that Duer was secretary to the old board

of treasury, I suspect him to have been the person who suggested to

Hamilton the letter of mine to that board which he so tortured in his

Catullus.  Dunlap has refused to print the piece which we had heard

of before your departure, and it has been several days in Bache's

hands, without any notice of it.  The President will leave this about

the 27th inst., & return about the 20th of April.  Adieu.







        THE GALLANT GENET




        _To James Madison_

        _Phila, May 19, 1793_




        I wrote you last on the 13'th..  Since that I have received

yours of the 8'th..  I have scribbled on a separate paper some

general notes on the plan of a house you enclosed.  I have done more.

I have endeavored to throw the same area, the same extent of walls,

the same number of rooms, &of the same size, into another form so as

to offer a choiceto the builder.  Indeed I varied my plan by shewing

that itwould be with alcove bed rooms, to which I am much attached.




        I dare say you will have judged from the pusillanimity of the

proclamation, from whose pen it came.  A fear lest any affection

should be discovered is distinguishable enough.  This base fear will

produce the very evil they wish to avoid.  For our constituents

seeing that the government does not express their mind, perhaps

rather leans the other way, are coming forward to express it

themselves.  It was suspected that there was not a clear mind in the

P.'s counsellors to receive Genet.  The citizens however determined

to receive him.  Arrangements were taken for meeting him at Gray's

ferry in a great body.  He escaped that by arriving in town with the

letters which brought information that he was on the road.  The

merchants _i.e._ Fitzsimmons & co. were to present an address to _the

P._ on the neutrality proclaimed.  It contained much wisdom but no

affection.  You will see it in the papers inclosed.  The citizens

determined to address _Genet._ Rittenhouse, Hutcheson, Dallas,

Sargeant &c. were at the head of it.  Tho a select body of only 30.

was appointed to present it, yet a vast concourse of people attended

them.  I have not seen it; but it is understood to be the counter

address. -- Ternant's hopes of employment in the French army turn out

to be without grounds.  He is told by the minister of war expressly

that the places of Marechal de camp are all full.  He thinks it more

prudent therefore to remain in America.  He delivered yesterday his

letters of recall, & Mr. Genet presented his of credence.  It is

impossible for anything to be more affectionate, more magnanimous

than the purport of his mission.  `We know that under present

circumstances we have a right to call upon you for the guarantee of

our islands.  But we do not desire it.  We wish you to do nothing but

what is for your own good, and we will do all in our power to promote

it.  Cherish your own peace & prosperity.  You have expressed a

willingness to enter into a more liberal treaty of commerce with us;

I bring full powers (& he produced them) to form such a treaty, and a

preliminary decree of the National convention to lay open our country

& it's colonies to you for every purpose of utility, without your

participating the burthens of maintaining & defending them.  We see

in you the only person on earth who can love us sincerely & merit to

be so loved.' In short he offers everything & asks nothing.  Yet I

know the offers will be opposed, & suspect they will not be accepted.

In short, my dear Sir, it is impossible for you to conceive what is

passing in our conclave: and it is evident that one or two at least,

under pretence of avoiding war on the one side have no great

antipathy to run foul of it on the other, and to make a part in the

confederacy of princes against human liberty. -- The people in the

Western parts of this state have been to the excise officer &

threatened to burn his house &c.  They were blacked & otherwise

disguised so as to be unknown.  He has resigned, and H.  says there

is no possibility of getting the law executed there, & that probably

the evil will spread.  A proclamation is to be issued, and another

instance of my being forced to appear to approve what I have

condemned uniformly from it's first conception.




        I expect every day to receive from Mr. Pinckney the model of

the Scotch threshing machine.  It was to have come in a ship which

arrived 3. weeks ago, but the workman had not quite finished it.  Mr.

P. writes me word that the machine from which my model is taken

threshes 8. quarters (64. bushels) of oats _an hour_, with 4. horses

& 4. men.  I hope to get it in time to have one erected at Monticello

to clean out the present crop. -- I inclose you the pamphlet you

desired.  Adieu.







        THE DEBT OF SERVICE




        _To James Madison_

        _June 9, 1793_




        I have to acknolege the receipt of your two favors of May 27 &

29, since the date of my last which was of the 2 inst.  In that of

the 27th you say `you must not make your final exit from public life

till it will be marked with justifying circumstances which all good

citizens will respect, & to which your friends can appeal.' -- To my

fellow-citizens the debt of service has been fully & faithfully paid.

I acknolege that such a debt exists, that a tour of duty, in whatever

line he can be most useful to his country, is due from every

individual.  It is not easy perhaps to say of what length exactly

this tour should be, but we may safely say of what length it should

not be.  Not of our whole life, for instance, for that would be to be

born a slave -- not even of a very large portion of it.  I have now

been in the public service four & twenty years; one half of which has

been spent in total occupation with their affairs, & absence from my

own.  I have served my tour then.  No positive engagement, by word or

deed, binds me to their further service.  No commitment of their

interests in any enterprise by me requires that I should see them

through it. -- I am pledged by no act which gives any tribunal a call

upon me before I withdraw.  Even my enemies do not pretend this.  I

stand clear then of public right on all points. -- My friends I have

not committed.  No circumstances have attended my passage from office

to office, which could lead them, & others through them, into

deception as to the time I might remain; & particularly they & all

have known with what reluctance I engaged & have continued in the

present one, & of my uniform determination to retire from it at an

early day. -- If the public then has no claim on me, & my friends

nothing to justify; the decision will rest on my own feelings alone.

There has been a time when these were very different from what they

are now: when perhaps the esteem of the world was of higher value in

my eye than everything in it.  But age, experience & reflection,

preserving to that only it's due value, have set a higher on

tranquility.  The motion of my blood no longer keeps time with the

tumult of the world.  It leads me to seek for happiness in the lap

and love of my family, in the society of my neighbors & my books, in

the wholesome occupations of my farm & my affairs, in an interest or

affection in every bud that opens, in every breath that blows around

me, in an entire freedom of rest or motion, of thought or

incogitancy, owing account to myself alone of my hours & actions.

What must be the principle of that calculation which should balance

against these the circumstances of my present existence! worn down

with labours from morning to night, & day to day; knowing them as

fruitless to others as they are vexatious to myself, committed singly

in desperate & eternal contest against a host who are systematically

undermining the public liberty & prosperity, even the rare hours of

relaxation sacrificed to the society of persons in the same

intentions, of whose hatred I am conscious even in those moments of

conviviality when the heart wishes most to open itself to the

effusions of friendship & confidence, cut off from my family &

friends, my affairs abandoned to chaos & derangement, in short giving

everything I love, in exchange for everything I hate, and all this

without a single gratification in possession or prospect, in present

enjoyment or future wish. -- Indeed my dear friend, duty being out of

the question, inclination cuts off all argument, & so never let there

be more between you & me, on this subject.




        I inclose you some papers which have passed on the subject of a

new loan.  You will see by them that the paper-Coryphaeus is either

undaunted, or desperate.  I believe that the statement inclosed has

secured a decision against his proposition. -- I dined yesterday in a

company where Morris & Bingham were, & happened to sit between them.

In the course of a conversation after dinner Morris made one of his

warm declarations that after the expiration of his present Senatorial

term nothing on earth should ever engage him to serve again in any

public capacity.  He did this with such solemnity as renders it

impossible he should not be in earnest. -- The President is not well.

Little lingering fevers have been hanging about him for a week or ten

days, and have affected his looks most remarkably.  He is also

extremely affected by the attacks made & kept up on him in the public

papers.  I think he feels those things more than any person I ever

yet met with.  I am sincerely sorry to see them.  I remember an

observation of yours, made when I first went to New York, that the

satellites & sycophants which surrounded him had wound up the

ceremonials of the government to a pitch of stateliness which nothing

but his personal character could have supported, & which no character

after him could ever maintain.  It appears now that even his will be

insufficient to justify them in the appeal of the times to common

sense as the arbiter of everything.  Naked he would have been

sanctimoniously reverenced, but inveloped in the rags of royalty,

they can hardly be torn off without laceration.  It is the more

unfortunate that this attack is planted on popular ground, on the

love of the people to France & it's cause, which is universal. --

Genet mentions freely enough in conversation that France does not

wish to involve us in the war by our guarantee.  The information from

St. Domingo & Martinique is that those two islands are disposed &

able to resist any attack which Great Britain can make on them by

land.  A blockade would be dangerous, could it be maintained in that

climate for any length of time.  I delivered to Genet your letter to

Roland.  As the latter is out of office, he will direct it to the

Minister of the Interior.  I found every syllable of it strictly

proper.  Your ploughs shall be duly attended to.  Have you ever taken

notice of Tull's horse-houghing plough?  I am persuaded that that,

where you wish your work to be very exact, & our great plough where a

less degree will suffice, leave us nothing to wish for from other

countries as to ploughs, under our circumstances. -- I have not yet

received my threshing machine.  I fear the late long & heavy rains

must have extended to us, & affected our wheat.  Adieu.  Yours

affectionately.







        "MY FAMILY, MY FARM, AND MY BOOKS"




        _To Mrs. Church_

        _Germantown, Nov. 27th, 1793_




        I have received, my good friend, your kind letter of August

19th, with the extract from that of Lafayette, for whom my heart has

been constantly bleeding.  The influence of the United States has

been put into action, as far as it could be either with decency or

effect.  But I fear that distance and difference of principle give

little hold to General Washington on the jailers of Lafayette.

However, his friends may be assured that our zeal has not been

inactive.  Your letter gives me the first information that our dear

friend Madame de Corny has been, as to her fortune among the victims

of the times.  Sad times, indeed! and much lamented victim!  I know

no country where the remains of a fortune could place her so much at

her ease as this, and where public esteem is so attached to worth,

regardless of wealth; but our manners, and the state of our society

here, are so different from those to which her habits have been

formed, that she would lose more perhaps in that scale.  And Madame

Cosway in a convent!  I knew that to much goodness of heart she

joined enthusiasm and religion; but I thought that very enthusiasm

would have prevented her from shutting up her adoration of the God of

the universe within the walls of a cloister; that she would rather

have sought the _mountain-top._ How happy should I be that it were

_mine_ that you, she, and Madame de Corny would seek.  You say,

indeed, that you are coming to America, but I know that means New

York.  In the meantime I am going to Virginia.  I have at length

become able to fix that to the beginning of the new year.  I am then

to be liberated from the hated occupations of politics, and to remain

in the bosom of my family, my farm, and my books.  I have my house to

build, my fields to farm, and to watch for the happiness of those who

labor for mine.  I have one daughter married to a man of science,

sense, virtue, and competence; in whom indeed I have nothing more to

wish.  They live with me.  If the other shall be as fortunate, in due

process of time I shall imagine myself as blessed as the most blessed

of the patriarchs.  Nothing could then withdraw my thoughts a moment

from home but the recollection of my friends abroad.  I often put the

question, whether yourself and Kitty will ever come to see your

friends at Monticello? but it is my affection and not my experience

of things which has leave to answer, and I am determined to believe

the answer, because in that belief I find I sleep sounder, and wake

more cheerful.  _En attendant_, God bless you.




        Accept the homage of my sincere and constant affection.







        "LUCERNE AND POTATOES"




        _To Tench Coxe_

        _Monticello, May 1, 1794_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your several favors of Feb. 22, 27, & March 16.

which had been accumulating in Richmond during the prevalence of the

small pox in that place, were lately brought to me, on the permission

given the post to resume his communication.  I am particularly to

thank you for your favor in forwarding the Bee.  Your letters give a

comfortable view of French affairs, and later events seem to confirm

it.  Over the foreign powers I am convinced they will triumph

completely, & I cannot but hope that that triumph, & the consequent

disgrace of the invading tyrants, is destined, in the order of

events, to kindle the wrath of the people of Europe against those who

have dared to embroil them in such wickedness, and to bring at

length, kings, nobles, & priests to the scaffolds which they have

been so long deluging with human blood.  I am still warm whenever I

think of these scoundrels, tho I do it as seldom as I can, preferring

infinitely to contemplate the tranquil growth of my lucerne &

potatoes.  I have so completely withdrawn myself from these

spectacles of usurpation & misrule, that I do not take a single

newspaper, nor read one a month; & I feel myself infinitely the

happier for it.  We are alarmed here with the apprehensions of war;

and sincerely anxious that it may be avoided; but not at the expense

either of our faith or honor.  It seems much the general opinion

here, that the latter has been too much wounded not to require

reparation, & to seek it even in war, if that be necessary.  As to

myself, I love peace, and I am anxious that we should give the world

still another useful lesson, by showing to them other modes of

punishing injuries than by war, which is as much a punishment to the

punisher as to the sufferer.  I love, therefore, mr. Clarke's

proposition of cutting off all communication with the nation which

has conducted itself so atrociously.  This, you will say, may bring

on war.  If it does, we will meet it like men; but it may not bring

on war, & then the experiment will have been a happy one.  I believe

this war would be vastly more unanimously approved than any one we

ever were engaged in; because the aggressions have been so wanton &

bare-faced, and so unquestionably against our desire. -- I am sorry

mr. Cooper & Priestly did not take a more general survey of our

country before they fixed themselves.  I think they might have

promoted their own advantage by it, and have aided the introduction

of our improvement where it is more wanting.  The prospect of wheat

for the ensuing year is a bad one.  This is all the sort of news you

can expect from me.  From you I shall be glad to hear all sort of

news, & particularly any improvements in the arts applicable to

husbandry or household manufacture.







        WHISKEY REBELS AND DEMOCRATIC SOCIETIES




        _To James Madison_

        _Monticello, Dec. 28, 1794_




        DEAR SIR, -- I have kept mr. Jay's letter a post or two, with

an intention of considering attentively the observation it contains;

but I have really now so little stomach for anything of that kind,

that I have not resolution enough even to endeavor to understand the

observations.  I therefore return the letter, not to delay your

answer to it, and beg you in answering for yourself to assure him of

my respects and thankful acceptance of Chalmers' Treaties, which I do

not possess, and if you possess yourself of the scope of his

reasoning, make any answer to it you please for me.  If it had been

on the rotation of my crops, I would have answered myself, lengthily

perhaps, but certainly _con gusto._




        The denunciation of the democratic societies is one of the

extraordinary acts of boldness of which we have seen so many from the

fraction of monocrats.  It is wonderful indeed, that the President

should have permitted himself to be the organ of such an attack on

the freedom of discussion, the freedom of writing, printing &

publishing.  It must be a matter of rare curiosity to get at the

modifications of these rights proposed by them, and to see what line

their ingenuity would draw between democratical societies, whose

avowed object is the nourishment of the republican principles of our

constitution, and the society of the Cincinnati, _a self-created_

one, carving out for itself hereditary distinctions, lowering over

our Constitution eternally, meeting together in all parts of the

Union, periodically, with closed doors, accumulating a capital in

their separate treasury, corresponding secretly & regularly, & of

which society the very persons denouncing the democrats are

themselves the fathers, founders, & high officers.  Their sight must

be perfectly dazzled by the glittering of crowns & coronets, not to

see the extravagance of the proposition to suppress the friends of

general freedom, while those who wish to confine that freedom to the

few, are permitted to go on in their principles & practices.  I here

put out of sight the persons whose misbehavior has been taken

advantage of to slander the friends of popular rights; and I am happy

to observe, that as far as the circle of my observation & information

extends, everybody has lost sight of them, and views the abstract

attempt on their natural & constitutional rights in all it's

nakedness.  I have never heard, or heard of, a single expression or

opinion which did not condemn it as an inexcusable aggression.  And

with respect to the transactions against the excise law, it appears

to me that you are all swept away in the torrent of governmental

opinions, or that we do not know what these transactions have been.

We know of none which, according to the definitions of the law, have

been anything more than riotous.  There was indeed a meeting to

consult about a separation.  But to consult on a question does not

amount to a determination of that question in the affirmative, still

less to the acting on such a determination; but we shall see, I

suppose, what the court lawyers, & courtly judges, & would-be

ambassadors will make of it.  The excise law is an infernal one.  The

first error was to admit it by the Constitution; the 2d., to act on

that admission; the 3d & last will be, to make it the instrument of

dismembering the Union, & setting us all afloat to chuse which part

of it we will adhere to.  The information of our militia, returned

from the Westward, is uniform, that tho the people there let them

pass quietly, they were objects of their laughter, not of their fear;

that 1000 men could have cut off their whole force in a thousand

places of the Alleganey; that their detestation of the excise law is

universal, and has now associated to it a detestation of the

government; & that separation which perhaps was a very distant &

problematical event, is now near, & certain, & determined in the mind

of every man.  I expected to have seen some justification of arming

one part of the society against another; of declaring a civil war the

moment before the meeting of that body which has the sole right of

declaring war; of being so patient of the kicks & scoffs of our

enemies, & rising at a feather against our friends; of adding a

million to the public debt & deriding us with recommendations to pay

it if we can &c., &c.  But the part of the speech which was to be

taken as a justification of the armament, reminded me of parson

Saunders' demonstration why minus into minus make plus.  After a

parcel of shreds of stuff from Aesop's fables, and Tom Thumb, he

jumps all at once into his Ergo, minus multiplied into minus make

plus.  Just so the 15,000 men enter after the fables, in the speech.

-- However, the time is coming when we shall fetch up the leeway of

our vessel.  The changes in your house, I see, are going on for the

better, and even the Augean herd over your heads are slowly purging

off their impurities.  Hold on then, my dear friend, that we may not

shipwreck in the meanwhile.  I do not see, in the minds of those with

whom I converse, a greater affliction than the fear of your

retirement; but this must not be, unless to a more splendid & a more

efficacious post.  There I should rejoice to see you; I hope I may

say, I shall rejoice to see you.  I have long had much in my mind to

say to you on that subject.  But double delicacies have kept me

silent.  I ought perhaps to say, while I would not give up my own

retirement for the empire of the universe, how I can justify wishing

one whose happinesss I have so much at heart as yours, to take the

front of the battle which is fighting for my security.  This would be

easy enough to be done, but not at the heel of a lengthy epistle.




        Let us quit this, and turn to the fine weather we are basking

in.  We have had one of our tropical winters.  Once only a snow of 3.

inches deep, which went off the next day, and never as much ice as

would have cooled a bottle of wine.  And we have now but a month to

go through of winter weather.  For February always gives us a good

sample of the spring of which it is the harbinger.  I recollect no

small news interesting to you.  You will have heard, I suppose, that

Wilson Nicholas has bought Carr's Carrsgrove and Harvey's barracks.

I rejoice in the prosperity of a virtuous man, and hope his

prosperity will not taint his virtue.  Present me respectfully to

Mrs. Madison, and pray her to keep you where you are for her own

satisfaction and the public good; and accept the cordial affections

of all.  Adieu.







        FARMING




        _To John Taylor_

        _Monticello, Dec. 29, 1794_




        DEAR SIR, -- I have long owed you a letter, for which my

conscience would not have let me rest in quiet but on the

consideration that the paiment would not be worth your acceptance.

The debt is not merely for a letter the common traffic of every day,

but for valuable ideas, which instructed me, which I have adopted, &

am acting on them.  I am sensible of the truth of your observations

that the atmosphere is the great storehouse of matter for recruiting

our lands, that tho' efficacious, it is slow in it's operation, and

we must therefore give them time instead of the loads of quicker

manure given in other countries, that for this purpose we must avail

ourselves of the great quantities of land we possess in proportion to

our labour, and that while putting them to nurse with the atmosphere,

we must protect them from the bite & tread of animals, which are

nearly a counterpoise for the benefits of the atmosphere.  As good

things, as well as evil, go in a train, this relieves us from the

labor & expence of crossfences, now very sensibly felt on account of

the scarcity & distance of timber.  I am accordingly now engaged in

applying my cross fences to the repair of the outer ones and

substituting rows of peach trees to preserve the boundaries of the

fields.  And though I observe your strictures on rotations of crops,

yet it appears that in this I differ from you only in words.  You

keep half your lands in culture, the other half at nurse; so I

propose to do.  Your scheme indeed requires only four years & mine

six; but the proportion of labour & rest is the same.  My years of

rest, however, are employed, two of them in producing clover, yours

in volunteer herbage.  But I still understand it to be your opinion

that clover is best where lands will produce them.  Indeed I think

that the important improvement for which the world is indebted to

Young is the substitution of clover crops instead of unproductive

fallows; & the demonstration that lands are more enriched by clover

than by volunteer herbage or fallows; and the clover crops are highly

valuable.  That our red lands which are still in tolerable heart will

produce fine clover I know from the experience of the last year; and

indeed that of my neighbors had established the fact.  And from

observations on accidental plants in the feilds which have been

considerably harrassed with corn, I believe that even these will

produce clover fit for soiling of animals green.  I think, therefore,

I can count on the success of that improver.  My third year of rest

will be devoted to cowpenning, & to a trial of the buckwheat

dressing.  A further progress in surveying my open arable lands has

shewn me that I can have 7 fields in each of my farms where I

expected only six; consequently that I can add more to the portion of

rest & ameliorating crops.  I have doubted on a question on which I

am sure you can advise me well, whether I had better give this newly

acquired year as an addition to the continuance of my clover, or

throw it with some improving crop between two of my crops of grain,

as for instance between my corn & rye.  I strongly incline to the

latter, because I am not satisfied that one cleansing crop in seven

years will be sufficient; and indeed I think it important to separate

my exhausting crops by alternations of amelioraters.  With this view

I think to try an experiment of what Judge Parker informs me he

practises.  That is, to turn in my wheat stubble the instant the

grain is off, and sow turneps to be fed out by the sheep.  But

whether this will answer in our fields which are harrassed, I do not

know.  We have been in the habit of sowing only our freshest lands in

turneps, hence a presumption that wearied lands will not bring them.

But Young's making turneps to be fed on by sheep the basis of his

improvement of poor lands, affords evidence that tho they may not

bring great crops, they will bring them in a sufficient degree to

improve the lands.  I will try that experiment, however, this year,

as well as the one of buckwheat.  I have also attended to another

improver mentioned by you, the winter-vetch, & have taken measures to

get the seed of it from England, as also of the Siberian vetch which

Millar greatly commends, & being a biennial might perhaps take the

place of clover in lands which do not suit that.  The winter vetch I

suspect may be advantageously thrown in between crops, as it gives a

choice to use it as green feed in the spring if fodder be run short,

or to turn it in as a green-dressing.  My rotation, with these

amendments, is as follows: --




        1. Wheat, followed the same year by turneps, to be fed on by

the sheep.




        2. Corn & potatoes mixed, & in autumn the vetch to be used as

fodder in the spring if wanted, or to be turned in as a dressing.




        3. Peas or potatoes, or both according to the quality of the

field.




        4. Rye and clover sown on it in the spring.  Wheat may be

substituted here for rye, when it shall be found that the 2'd., 3'd.,

5'th., & 6'th. fields will subsist the farm.




        5. Clover.




        6. Clover, & in autumn turn it in & sow the vetch.




        7. Turn in the vetch in the spring, then sow buckwheat & turn

that in, having hurdled off the poorest spots for cow-penning.  In

autumn sow wheat to begin the circle again.




        I am for throwing the whole force of my husbandry on the

wheat-field, because it is the only one which is to go to market to

produce money.  Perhaps the clover may bring in something in the form

of stock.  The other feilds are merely for the consumption of the

farm.  Melilot, mentioned by you, I never heard of.  The horse bean I

tried this last year.  It turned out nothing.  The President has

tried it without success.  An old English farmer of the name of

Spuryear, settled in Delaware, has tried it there with good success;

but he told me it would not do without being well shaded, and I think

he planted it among his corn for that reason.  But he acknoleged our

pea was as good an ameliorater & a more valuable pulse, as being food

for man as well as horse.  The succory is what Young calls Chicoria

Intubus.  He sent some seed to the President, who gave me some, & I

gave it to my neighbors to keep up till I should come home.  One of

them has cultivated it with great success, is very fond of it, and

gave me some seed which I sowed last spring.  Tho' the summer was

favorable it came on slowly at first, but by autumn became large &

strong.  It did not seed that year, but will the next, & you shall be

furnished with seed.  I suspect it requires rich ground, & then

produces a heavy crop for green feed for horses & cattle.  I had poor

success with my potatoes last year, not having made more than 60 or

70 bushels to the acre.  But my neighbors having made good crops, I

am not disheartened.  The first step towards the recovery of our

lands is to find substitutes for corn & bacon.  I count on potatoes,

clover, & sheep.  The two former to feed every animal on the farm

except my negroes, & the latter to feed them, diversified with

rations of salted fish & molasses, both of them wholesome, agreeable,

& cheap articles of food.




        For pasture I rely on the forests by day, & soiling in the

evening.  Why could we not have a moveable airy cow house, to be set

up in the middle of the feild which is to be dunged, & soil our

cattle in that thro' the summer as well as winter, keeping them

constantly up & well littered?  This, with me, would be in the clover

feild of the 1'st. year, because during the 2'd. year it would be

rotting, and would be spread on it in fallow the beginning of the

3'd., but such an effort would be far above the present tyro state of

my farming.  The grosser barbarisms in culture which I have to

encounter, are more than enough for all my attentions at present.

The dung-yard must be my last effort but one.  The last would be

irrigation.  It might be thought at first view, that the

interposition of these ameliorations or dressings between my crops

will be too laborious, but observe that the turneps & two dressings

of vetch do not cost a single ploughing.  The turning in the

wheat-stubble for the turneps is the fallow for the corn of the

succeeding year.  The 1'st. sowing of vetches is on the corn (as is

now practised for wheat), and the turning it in is the

flush-ploughing for the crop of potatoes & peas.  The 2'd. sowing of

the vetch is on the wheat fallow, & the turning it in is the

ploughing necessary for sowing the buckwheat.  These three

ameliorations, then, will cost but a harrowing each.  On the subject

of the drilled husbandry, I think experience has established it's

preference for some plants, as the turnep, pea, bean, cabbage, corn,

&c., and that of the broadcast for other plants as all the bread

grains & grasses, except perhaps lucerne & S't. foin in soils &

climates very productive of weeds.  In dry soils & climates the

broadcast is better for lucerne & S't. foin, as all the south of

France can testify.




        I have imagined and executed a mould-board which may be

mathematically demonstrated to be perfect, as far as perfection

depends on mathematical principles, and one great circumstance in

it's favor is that it may be made by the most bungling carpenter, &

cannot possibly vary a hair's breadth in it's form, but by gross

negligence.  You have seen the musical instrument called a sticcado.

Suppose all it's sticks of equal length, hold the fore-end

horizontally on the floor to receive the turf which presents itself

horizontally, and with the right hand twist the hind-end to the

perpendicular, or rather as much beyond the perpendicular as will be

necessary to cast over the turf completely.  This gives an idea (tho

not absolutely exact) of my mould-board.  It is on the principle of

two wedges combined at right angles, the first in the direct line of

the furrow to raise the turf gradually, the other across the furrow

to turn it over gradually.  For both these purposes the wedge is the

instrument of the least resistance.  I will make a model of the

mould-board & lodge it with Col'o. Harvie in Richmond for you.  This

brings me to my thanks for the drill plough lodged with him for me,

which I now expect every hour to receive, and the price of which I

have deposited in his hands to be called for when you please.  A good

instrument of this kind is almost the greatest desideratum in

husbandry.  I am anxious to conjecture beforehand what may be

expected from the sowing turneps in jaded ground, how much from the

acre, & how large they will be?  Will your experience enable you to

give me a probable conjecture?  Also what is the produce of potatoes,

& what of peas in the same kind of ground?  It must now have been

several pages since you began to cry out `mercy.' In mercy then I

will here finish with my affectionate remembrance to my old friend.

Mr. Pendleton, & respects to your fireside, & to yourself assurances

of the sincere esteem of, dear Sir,

                                                 Your friend & serv't,
