




        "THE SPIRIT OF 1776"




        _To Thomas Lomax_

        _Monticello, Mar. 12, 1799_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your welcome favor of last month came to my hands

in Philadelphia.  So long a time has elapsed since we have been

separated by events, that it was like a letter from the dead, and

recalled to my memory very dear recollections.  My subsequent journey

through life has offered nothing which, in comparison with those, is

not cheerless & dreary.  It is a rich comfort sometimes to look back

on them.




        I take the liberty of enclosing a letter to mr. Baylor, open,

because I solicit your perusal of it.  It will, at the same time,

furnish the apology for my not answering you from Philadelphia.  You

ask for any communication I may be able to make, which may administer

comfort to you.  I can give that which is solid.  The spirit of 1776

is not dead.  It has only been slumbering.  The body of the American

people is substantially republican.  But their virtuous feelings have

been played on by some fact with more fiction; they have been the

dupes of artful man;oeuvres, & made for a moment to be willing

instruments in forging chains for themselves.  But time & truth have

dissipated the delusion, & opened their eyes.  They see now that

France has sincerely wished peace, & their seducers have wished war,

as well for the loaves & fishes which arise out of war expences, as

for the chance of changing the constitution, while the people should

have time to contemplate nothing but the levies of men and money.

Pennsylvania, Jersey & N York are coming majestically round to the

true principles.  In Pensylva, 13. out of 22. counties had already

petitioned on the alien & sedition laws.  Jersey & N Y had begun the

same movement, and tho' the rising of Congress stops that channel for

the expression of their sentiment, the sentiment is going on rapidly,

& before their next meeting those three States will be solidly

embodied in sentiment with the six Southern & Western ones.  The

atrocious proceedings of France towards this country, had well nigh

destroyed its liberties.  The Anglomen and monocrats had so artfully

confounded the cause of France with that of freedom, that both went

down in the same scale.  I sincerely join you in abjuring all

political connection with every foreign power; and tho I cordially

wish well to the progress of liberty in all nations, and would

forever give it the weight of our countenance, yet they are not to be

touched without contamination from their other bad principles.

Commerce with all nations, alliance with none, should be our motto.




        Accept assurances of the constant & unaltered affection of,

dear Sir, your sincere friend and servant.







        FREEDOM OF MIND




        _To William Green Munford_

        _Monticello, June 18, 1799_




        DEAR SIR -- I have to acknolege the reciept of your favor of

May 14 in which you mention that you have finished the 6. first books

of Euclid, plane trigonometry, surveying & algebra and ask whether I

think a further pursuit of that branch of science would be useful to

you.  There are some propositions in the latter books of Euclid, &

some of Archimedes, which are useful, & I have no doubt you have been

made acquainted with them.  Trigonometry, so far as this, is most

valuable to every man.  There is scarcely a day in which he will not

resort to it for some of the purposes of common life.  The science of

calculation also is indispensible as far as the extraction of the

square & cube roots; algebra as far as the quadratic equation & the

use of logarithms are often of value in ordinary cases: but all

beyond these is but a luxury; a delicious luxury indeed; but not to

be indulged in by one who is to have a profession to follow for his

subsistence.  In this light I view the conic sections, curves of the

higher orders, perhaps even spherical trigonometry, algebraical

operations beyond the 2d dimension, and fluxions.  There are other

branches of science however worth the attention of every man.

Astronomy, botany, chemistry, natural philosophy, natural history,

anatomy.  Not indeed to be a proficient in them; but to possess their

general principles & outlines, so as that we may be able to amuse and

inform ourselves further in any of them as we proceed through life &

have occasion for them.  Some knowledge of them is necessary for our

character as well as comfort.  The general elements of astronomy & of

natural philosophy are best acquired at an academy where we can have

the benefit of the instruments & apparatus usually provided there:

but the others may well be acquired from books alone as far as our

purposes require.  I have indulged myself in these observations to

you, because the evidence cannot be unuseful to you of a person who

has often had occasion to consider which of his acquisitions in

science have been really useful to him in life, and which of them

have been merely a matter of luxury.




        I am among those who think well of the human character

generally.  I consider man as formed for society, and endowed by

nature with those dispositions which fit him for society.  I believe

also, with Condorcet, as mentioned in your letter, that his mind is

perfectible to a degree of which we cannot as yet form any

conception.  It is impossible for a man who takes a survey of what is

already known, not to see what an immensity in every branch of

science yet remains to be discovered, & that too of articles to which

our faculties seem adequate.  In geometry & calculation we know a

great deal.  Yet there are some desiderata.  In anatomy great

progress has been made; but much is still to be acquired.  In natural

history we possess knowlege; but we want a great deal.  In chemistry

we are not yet sure of the first elements.  Our natural philosophy is

in a very infantine state; perhaps for great advances in it, a

further progress in chemistry is necessary.  Surgery is well

advanced; but prodigiously short of what may be.  The state of

medecine is worse than that of total ignorance.  Could we divest

ourselves of every thing we suppose we know in it, we should start

from a higher ground & with fairer prospects.  From Hippocrates to

Brown we have had nothing but a succession of hypothetical systems

each having it's day of vogue, like the fashions & fancies of caps &

gowns, & yielding in turn to the next caprice.  Yet the human frame,

which is to be the subject of suffering & torture under these learned

modes, does not change.  We have a few medecines, as the bark, opium,

mercury, which in a few well defined diseases are of unquestionable

virtue: but the residuary list of the materia medica, long as it is,

contains but the charlataneries of the art; and of the diseases of

doubtful form, physicians have ever had a false knowlege, worse than

ignorance.  Yet surely the list of unequivocal diseases & remedies is

capable of enlargement; and it is still more certain that in the

other branches of science, great fields are yet to be explored to

which our faculties are equal, & that to an extent of which we cannot

fix the limits.  I join you therefore in branding as cowardly the

idea that the human mind is incapable of further advances.  This is

precisely the doctrine which the present despots of the earth are

inculcating, & their friends here re-echoing; & applying especially

to religion & politics; `that it is not probable that any thing

better will be discovered than what was known to our fathers.' We are

to look backwards then & not forwards for the improvement of science,

& to find it amidst feudal barbarisms and the fires of Spital-fields.

But thank heaven the American mind is already too much opened, to

listen to these impostures; and while the art of printing is left to

us, science can never be retrograde; what is once acquired of real

knowlege can never be lost.  To preserve the freedom of the human

mind then & freedom of the press, every spirit should be ready to

devote itself to martyrdom; for as long as we may think as we will, &

speak as we think, the condition of man will proceed in improvement.

The generation which is going off the stage has deserved well of

mankind for the struggles it has made, & for having arrested that

course of despotism which had overwhelmed the world for thousands &

thousands of years.  If there seems to be danger that the ground they

have gained will be lost again, that danger comes from the generation

your cotemporary.  But that the enthusiasm which characterises youth

should lift its parricide hands against freedom & science, would be

such a monstrous phaenomenon as I cannot place among possible things

in this age & this country.  Your college at least has shewn itself

incapable of it; and if the youth of any other place have seemed to

rally under other banners it has been from delusions which they will

soon dissipate.  I shall be happy to hear from you from time to time,

& of your progress in study, and to be useful to you in whatever is

in my power; being with sincere esteem Dear Sir your friend & servt







        COMMON LAW AND THE WILL OF THE NATION




        _To Edmund Randolph_

        _Monticello, Aug. 18, 1799_




        DEAR SIR, -- I received only two days ago your favor of the

12th, and as it was on the eve of the return of our post, it was not

possible to make so prompt a despatch of the answer.  Of all the

doctrines which have ever been broached by the federal government,

the novel one, of the common law being in force & cognizable as an

existing law in their courts, is to me the most formidable.  All

their other assumptions of un-given powers have been in the detail.

The bank law, the treaty doctrine, the sedition act, alien act, the

undertaking to change the state laws of evidence in the state courts

by certain parts of the stamp act, &c., &c., have been solitary,

unconsequential, timid things, in comparison with the audacious,

barefaced and sweeping pretension to a system of law for theU S,

without the adoption of their legislature, and so infinitively beyond

their power to adopt.  If this assumption be yielded to, the state

courts may be shut up, as there will then be nothing to hinder

citizens of the same state suing each other in the federal courts in

every case, as on a bond for instance, because the common law obliges

payment of it, & the common law they say is their law.  I am happy

you have taken up the subject; & I have carefully perused &

considered the notes you enclosed, and find but a single paragraph

which I do not approve.  It is that wherein (page 2.) you say, that

laws being emanations from the legislative department, &, when once

enacted, continuing in force from a presumption that their will so

continues, that that presumption fails & the laws of course fall, on

the destruction of that legislative department.  I do not think this

is the true bottom on which laws & the administering them rest.  The

whole body of the nation is the sovereign legislative, judiciary and

executive power for itself.  The inconvenience of meeting to exercise

these powers in person, and their inaptitude to exercise them, induce

them to appoint special organs to declare their legislative will, to

judge & to execute it.  It is the will of the nation which makes the

law obligatory; it is their will which creates or annihilates the

organ which is to declare & announce it.  They may do it by a single

person, as an Emperor of Russia, (constituting his declarations

evidence of their will,) or by a few persons, as the Aristocracy of

Venice, or by a complication of councils, as in our former regal

government, or our present republican one.  The law being law because

it is the will of the nation, is not changed by their changing the

organ through which they chuse to announce their future will; no more

than the acts I have done by one attorney lose their obligation by my

changing or discontinuing that attorney.  This doctrine has been, in

a certain degree sanctioned by the federal executive.  For it is

precisely that on which the continuance of obligation from our treaty

with France was established, and the doctrine was particularly

developed in a letter to Gouverneur Morris, written with the

approbation of President Washington and his cabinet.  Mercer once

prevailed on the Virginia Assembly to declare a different doctrine in

some resolutions.  These met universal disapprobation in this, as

well as the other States, and if I mistake not, a subsequent Assembly

did something to do away the authority of their former unguarded

resolutions.  In this case, as in all others, the true principle will

be quite as effectual to establish the just deductions, for before

the revolution, the nation of Virginia had, by the organs they then

thought proper to constitute, established a system of laws, which

they divided into three denominations of 1, common law; 2, statute

law; 3, Chancery: or if you please, into two only, of 1, common law;

2, Chancery.  When, by the declaration of Independence, they chose to

abolish their former organs of declaring their will, the acts of will

already formally & constitutionally declared, remained untouched.

For the nation was not dissolved, was not annihilated; it's will,

therefore, remained in full vigor; and on the establishing the new

organs, first of a convention, & afterwards a more complicated

legislature, the old acts of national will continued in force, until

the nation should, by its new organs, declare it's will changed.  The

common law, therefore, which was not in force when we landed here,

nor till we had formed ourselves into a nation, and had manifested by

the organs we constituted that the common law was to be our law,

continued to be our law, because the nation continued in being, &

because though it changed the organs for the future declarations of

its will, yet it did not change its former declarations that the

common law was it's law.  Apply these principles to the present case.

Before the revolution there existed no such nation as the U S; they

then first associated as a nation, but for special purposes only.

They had all their laws to make, as Virginia had on her first

establishment as a nation.  But they did not, as Virginia had done,

proceed to adopt a whole system of laws ready made to their hand.  As

their association as a nation was only for special purposes, to wit,

for the management of their concerns with one another & with foreign

nations, and the states composing the association chose to give it

powers for those purposes & no others, they could not adopt any

general system, because it would have embraced objects on which this

association had no right to form or declare a will.  It was not the

organ for declaring a national will in these cases.  In the cases

confided to them, they were free to declare the will of the nation,

the law; but till it was declared there could be no law.  So that the

common law did not become, ipso facto, law on the new association; it

could only become so by a positive adoption, & so far only as they

were authorized to adopt.




        I think it will be of great importance, when you come to the

proper part, to portray at full length the consequences of this new

doctrine, that the common law is the law of theU S, & that their

courts have, of course, jurisdiction co-extensive with that law, that

is to say, general over all cases & persons.  But, great heavens!

Who could have conceived in 1789 that within ten years we should have

to combat such windmills.  Adieu.  Yours affectionately.







        IDEAS FOR A UNIVERSITY




        _To Dr. Joseph Priestley_

        _Philadelphia, Jan. 18, 1800_




        DEAR SIR, -- I have to thank you for the pamphlets you were so

kind as to send me.  You will know what I thought of them by my

having before sent a dozen sets to Virginia to distribute among my

friends.  Yet I thank you not the less for these, which I value the

more as they came from yourself.  The stock of them which Campbell

had was, I believe, exhausted the first or second day of advertising

them.  The Papers of political arithmetic, both in your & Mr.

Cooper's pamphlets, are the most precious gifts that can be made to

us; for we are running navigation mad, & commerce mad, & navy mad,

which is worst of all.  How desirable is it that you could pursue

that subject for us.  From the Porcupines of our country you will

receive no thanks; but the great mass of our nation will edify &

thank you.  How deeply have I been chagrined & mortified at the

persecutions which fanaticism & monarchy have excited against you,

even here!  At first I believed it was merely a continuance of the

English persecution.  But I observe that on the demise of Porcupine &

division of his inheritance between Fenno & Brown, the latter (tho'

succeeding only to the _federal_ portion of Porcupinism, not the

_Anglican_, which is Fenno's part) serves up for the palate of his

sect, dishes of abuse against you as high seasoned as Porcupine's

were.  You have sinned against church & king, & can therefore never

be forgiven.  How sincerely have I regretted that your friend, before

he fixed his choice of a position, did not visit the vallies on each

side of the blue ridge in Virginia, as Mr.  Madison & myself so much

wished.  You would have found there equal soil, the finest climate &

most healthy one on the earth, the homage of universal reverence &

love, & the power of the country spread over you as a shield.  But

since you would not make it your country by adoption, you must now do

it by your good offices.  I have one to propose to you which will

produce their good, & gratitude to you for ages, and in the way to

which you have devoted a long life, that of spreading light among

men.




        We have in that state a college (Wm. & Mary) just well enough

endowed to draw out the miserable existence to which a miserable

constitution has doomed it.  It is moreover eccentric in it's

position, exposed to bilious diseases as all the lower country is, &

therefore abandoned by the public care, as that part of the country

itself is in a considerable degree by it's inhabitants.  We wish to

establish in the upper & healthier country, & more centrally for the

state, an University on a plan so broad & liberal & _modern_, as to

be worth patronizing with the public support, and be a temptation to

the youth of other states to come and drink of the cup of knowledge &

fraternize with us.  The first step is to obtain a good plan; that

is, a judicious selection of the sciences, & a practicable grouping

of some of them together, & ramifying of others, so as to adapt the

professorships to our uses & our means.  In an institution meant

chiefly for use, some branches of science, formerly esteemed, may be

now omitted; so may others now valued in Europe, but useless to us

for ages to come.  As an example of the former, the oriental

learning, and of the latter, almost the whole of the institution

proposed to Congress by the Secretary of war's report of the 5th

inst.  Now there is no one to whom this subject is so familiar as

yourself.  There is no one in the world who, equally with yourself,

unites this full possession of the subject with such a knowledge of

the state of our existence, as enables you to fit the garment to him

who is to _pay_ for it & to _wear_ it.  To you therefore we address

our solicitations, and to lessen to you as much as possible the

ambiguities of our object, I will venture even to sketch the sciences

which seem useful & practicable for us, as they occur to me while

holding my pen.  Botany, Chemistry, Zoology, Anatomy, Surgery,

Medicine, Natl Philosophy, Agriculture, Mathematics, Astronomy,

Geology, Geography, Politics, Commerce, History, Ethics, Law, Arts,

Finearts.  This list is imperfect because I make it hastily, and

because I am unequal to the subject.  It is evident that some of

these articles are too much for one professor & must therefore be

ramified; others may be ascribed in groups to a single professor.

This is the difficult part of the work, & requires a head perfectly

knowing the extent of each branch, & the limits within which it may

be circumscribed, so as to bring the whole within the powers of the

fewest professors possible, & consequently within the degree of

expence practicable for us.  We should propose that the professors

follow no other calling, so that their whole time may be given to

their academical functions; and we should propose to draw from Europe

the first characters in science, by considerable temptations, which

would not need to be repeated after the first set should have

prepared fit successors & given reputation to the institution.  From

some splendid characters I have received offers most perfectly

reasonable & practicable.




        I do not propose to give you all this trouble merely of my own

head, that would be arrogance.  It has been the subject of

consultation among the ablest and highest characters of our State,

who only wait for a plan to make a joint & I hope successful effort

to get the thing carried into effect.  They will receive your ideas

with the greatest deference & thankfulness.  We shall be here

certainly for two months to come; but should you not have leisure to

think of it before Congress adjourns, it will come safely to me

afterwards by post, the nearest post office being Milton.




        Will not the arrival of Dupont tempt you to make a visit to

this quarter?  I have no doubt the alarmists are already whetting

their shafts for him also, but their glass is nearly run out, and the

day I believe is approaching when we shall be as free to pursue what

is true wisdom as the effects of their follies will permit; for some

of them we shall be forced to wade through because we are emerged in

them.




        Wishing you that pure happiness which your pursuits and

circumstances offer, and which I am sure you are too wise to suffer a

diminution of by the pigmy assaults made on you, and with every

sentiment of affectionate esteem & respect, I am, dear Sir, your most

humble, and most obedient servant.







        "A SUBLIME LUXURY"




        _To Dr. Joseph Priestley_

        _Philadelphia, Jan. 27, 1800_




        DEAR SIR, -- In my letter of the 18th, I omitted to say any

thing of the languages as part of our proposed university.  It was

not that I think, as some do, that they are useless.  I am of a very

different opinion.  I do not think them essential to the obtaining

eminent degrees of science; but I think them very useful towards it.

I suppose there is a portion of life during which our faculties are

ripe enough for this, & for nothing more useful.  I think the Greeks

& Romans have left us the present models which exist of fine

composition, whether we examine them as works of reason, or of style

& fancy; and to them we probably owe these characteristics of modern

composition.  I know of no composition of any other antient people,

which merits the least regard as a model for it's matter or style.

To all this I add, that to read the Latin & Greek authors in their

original, is a sublime luxury; and I deem luxury in science to be at

least as justifiable as in architecture, painting, gardening, or the

other arts.  I enjoy Homer in his own language infinitely beyond

Pope's translation of him, & both beyond the dull narrative of the

same events by Dares Phrygius; & it is an innocent enjoyment.  I

thank on my knees, him who directed my early education, for having

put into my possession this rich source of delight; and I would not

exchange it for anything which I could then have acquired, & have not

since acquired.  With this regard for those languages, you will

acquit me of meaning to omit them.  About 20. years ago, I drew a

bill for our legislature, which proposed to lay off every county into

hundreds or townships of 5. or 6. miles square, in the centre of each

of which was to be a free English school; the whole state was further

laid off into 10. districts, in each of which was to be a college for

teaching the languages, geography, surveying, and other useful things

of that grade; and then a single University for the sciences.  It was

received with enthusiasm; but as I had proposed that Wm & Mary, under

an improved form, should be the University, & that was at that time

pretty highly Episcopal, the dissenters after a while began to

apprehend some secret design of a preference to that sect and nothing

could then be done.  About 3. years ago they enacted that part of my

bill which related to English schools, except that instead of

obliging, they left it optional in the court of every county to carry

it into execution or not.  I think it probable the part of the plan

for the middle grade of education, may also be brought forward in due

time.  In the meanwhile, we are not without a sufficient number of

good country schools, where the languages, geography, & the first

elements of Mathematics, are taught.  Having omitted this information

in my former letter, I thought it necessary now to supply it, that

you might know on what base your superstructure was to be reared.  I

have a letter from M. Dupont, since his arrival at N. York, dated the

20th, in which he says he will be in Philadelphia within about a

fortnight from that time; but only on a visit.  How much would it

delight me if a visit from you at the same time, were to shew us two

such illustrious foreigners embracing each other in my country, as

the asylum for whatever is great & good.  Pardon, I pray you, the

temporary delirium which has been excited here, but which is fast

passing away.  The Gothic idea that we are to look backwards instead

of forwards for the improvement of the human mind, and to recur to

the annals of our ancestors for what is most perfect in government,

in religion & in learning, is worthy of those bigots in religion &

government, by whom it has been recommended, & whose purposes it

would answer.  But it is not an idea which this country will endure;

and the moment of their showing it is fast ripening; and the signs of

it will be their respect for you, & growing detestation of those who

have dishonored our country by endeavors to disturb our tranquility

in it.  No one has felt this with more sensibility than, my dear Sir,

your respectful & affectionate friend & servant.







        THE 18TH BRUMAIRE




        _To John Breckinridge_

        _Philadelphia, Jan. 29, 1800_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favor of the 13th has been duly received, as

had been that containing the resolutions of your legislature on the

subject of the former resolutions.  I was glad to see the subject

taken up, and done with so much temper, firmness and propriety.  From

the reason of the thing I cannot but hope that the Western country

will be laid off into a separate Judiciary district.  From what I

recollect of the dispositions on the same subject at the last

session, I should expect that the partiality to a general & uniform

system would yield to geographical & physical impracticabilities.  I

was once a great advocate for introducing into chancery viva voce

testimony, & trial by jury.  I am still so as to the latter, but have

retired from the former opinion on the information received from both

your state & ours, that it worked inconveniently.  I introduced it

into the Virginia law, but did not return to the bar, so as to see

how it answered.  But I do not understand how the viva voce

examination comes to be practiced in the Federal court with you, &

not in your own courts; the Federal courts being decided by law to

proceed & decide by the laws of the states.




        A great revolution has taken place at Paris.  The people of

that country having never been in the habit of self-government, are

not yet in the habit of acknoleging that fundamental law of nature,

by which alone self government can be exercised by a society, I mean

the _lex majoris partis_.  Of the sacredness of this law, our

countrymen are impressed from their cradle, so that with them it is

almost innate.  This single circumstance may possibly decide the fate

of the two nations.  One party appears to have been prevalent in the

Directory & council of 500. the other in the council of antients.

Sieyes & Ducos, the minority in the Directory, not being able to

carry their points there seem to have gained over Buonaparte, &

associating themselves with the majority of the Council of antients,

have expelled (*) 120. odd members the most obnoxious of the minority

of the Elders, & of the majority of the council of 500. so as to give

themselves a majority in the latter council also.  They have

established Buonaparte, Sieyes & Ducos into an executive, or rather

Dictatorial consulate, given them a committee of between 20. & 30.

from each council, & have adjourned to the 20th of Feb.  Thus the

Constitution of the 3d year which was getting consistency & firmness

from time is demolished in an instant, and nothing is said about a

new one.  How the nation will bear it is yet unknown.  Had the

Consuls been put to death in the first tumult & before the nation had

time to take sides, the Directory & councils might have reestablished

themselves on the spot.  But that not being done, perhaps it is now

to be wished that Buonaparte may be spared, as, according to his

protestations, he is for liberty, equality & representative

government, and he is more able to keep the nation together, & to

ride out the storm than any other.  Perhaps it may end in their

establishing a single representative & that in his person.  I hope it

will not be for life, for fear of the influence of the example on our

countrymen.  It is very material for the latter to be made sensible

that their own character & situation are materially different from

the French; & that whatever may be the fate of republicanism there,

we are able to preserve it inviolate here: we are sensible of the

duty & expediency of submitting our opinions to the will of the

majority and can wait with patience till they get right if they

happen to be at any time wrong.  Our vessel is moored at such a

distance, that should theirs blow up, ours is still safe, if we will

but think so.




        (*) 60. were expelled from the 500, so as to change the

majority there to the other side.  It seems doubtful whether any were

expelled from the Antients.  The majority there was already with the

Consular party.




        I had recommended the enclosed letter to the care of the

postmaster at Louisville; but have been advised it is better to get a

friend to forward it by some of the boats.  I will ask that favor of

you.  It is the duplicate of one with the same address which I

inclosed last week to mr. Innes & should therefore go by a different

conveyance.  I am with great esteem dear sir your friend & servant.







        ILLUMINATISM




        _To Bishop James Madison_

        _Philadelphia, Jan. 31, 1800_




        DEAR SIR, -- I have received your favor of the 17th, &

communicated it to Mr. Smith.  I lately forwarded your letter from

Dr. Priestley, endorsed `with a book'; I struck those words through

with my pen, because no book had then come.  It is now received, &

shall be forwarded to Richmond by the first opportunity: but such

opportunities are difficult to find; gentlemen going in the stage not

liking to take charge of a packet which is to be attended to every

time the stage is changed.  The best chance will be by some captain

of a vessel going round to Richmond.  I shall address it to the care

of Mr. George Jefferson there.




        I have lately by accident got a sight of a single volume (the

3d.) of the Abbe Barruel's `Antisocial conspiracy,' which gives me

the first idea I have ever had of what is meant by the Illuminatism

against which `illuminate Morse' as he is now called, & his

ecclesiastical & monarchical associates have been making such a hue

and cry.  Barruel's own parts of the book are perfectly the ravings

of a Bedlamite.  But he quotes largely from Wishaupt whom he

considers as the founder of what he calls the order.  As you may not

have had an opportunity of forming a judgment of this cry of `mad

dog' which has been raised against his doctrines, I will give you the

idea I have formed from only an hour's reading of Barruel's

quotations from him, which you may be sure are not the most

favorable.  Wishaupt seems to be an enthusiastic Philanthropist.  He

is among those (as you know the excellent Price and Priestley also

are) who believe in the indefinite perfectibility of man.  He thinks

he may in time be rendered so perfect that he will be able to govern

himself in every circumstance so as to injure none, to do all the

good he can, to leave government no occasion to exercise their powers

over him, & of course to render political government useless.  This

you know is Godwin's doctrine, and this is what Robinson, Barruel &

Morse had called a conspiracy against all government.  Wishaupt

believes that to promote this perfection of the human character was

the object of Jesus Christ.  That his intention was simply to

reinstate natural religion, & by diffusing the light of his morality,

to teach us to govern ourselves.  His precepts are the love of god &

love of our neighbor.  And by teaching innocence of conduct, he

expected to place men in their natural state of liberty & equality.

He says, no one ever laid a surer foundation for liberty than our

grand master, Jesus of Nazareth.  He believes the Free masons were

originally possessed of the true principles & objects of

Christianity, & have still preserved some of them by tradition, but

much disfigured.  The means he proposes to effect this improvement of

human nature are `to enlighten men, to correct their morals & inspire

them with benevolence.  Secure of our success, sais he, we abstain

from violent commotions.  To have foreseen the happiness of posterity

& to have prepared it by irreproachable means, suffices for our

felicity.  The tranquility of our consciences is not troubled by the

reproach of aiming at the ruin or overthrow of states or thrones.' As

Wishaupt lived under the tyranny of a despot & priests, he knew that

caution was necessary even in spreading information, & the principles

of pure morality.  He proposed therefore to lead the Free masons to

adopt this object & to make the objects of their institution the

diffusion of science & virtue.  He proposed to initiate new members

into his body by gradations proportioned to his fears of the

thunderbolts of tyranny.  This has given an air of mystery to his

views, was the foundation of his banishment, the subversion of the

masonic order, & is the colour for the ravings against him of

Robinson, Barruel & Morse, whose real fears are that the craft would

be endangered by the spreading of information, reason, & natural

morality among men.  This subject being new to me, I have imagined

that if it be so to you also, you may receive the same satisfaction

in seeing, which I have had in forming the analysis of it: & I

believe you will think with me that if Wishaupt had written here,

where no secrecy is necessary in our endeavors to render men wise &

virtuous, he would not have thought of any secret machinery for that

purpose.  As Godwin, if he had written in Germany, might probably

also have thought secrecy & mysticism prudent.  I will say nothing to

you on the late revolution of France, which is painfully interesting.

Perhaps when we know more of the circumstances which gave rise to it,

& the direction it will take, Buonaparte, its chief organ, may stand

in a better light than at present.  I am with great esteem, dear sir,

your affectionate friend.







        "A FEW PLAIN DUTIES"




        _To Gideon Granger_

        _Monticello, Aug. 13, 1800_




        DEAR SIR, -- I received with great pleasure your favor of June

4, and am much comforted by the appearance of a change of opinion in

your state; for tho' we may obtain, & I believe shall obtain, a

majority in the legislature of the United States, attached to the

preservation of the Federal constitution according to it's obvious

principles, & those on which it was known to be received; attached

equally to the preservation to the states of those rights

unquestionably remaining with them; friends to the freedom of

religion, freedom of the press, trial by jury & to economical

government; opposed to standing armies, paper systems, war, & all

connection, other than commerce, with any foreign nation; in short, a

majority firm in all those principles which we have espoused and the

federalists have opposed uniformly; still, should the whole body of

New England continue in opposition to these principles of government,

either knowingly or through delusion, our government will be a very

uneasy one.  It can never be harmonious & solid, while so respectable

a portion of it's citizens support principles which go directly to a

change of the federal constitution, to sink the state governments,

consolidate them into one, and to monarchize that.  Our country is

too large to have all its affairs directed by a single government.

Public servants at such a distance, & from under the eye of their

constituents, must, from the circumstance of distance, be unable to

administer & overlook all the details necessary for the good

government of the citizens, and the same circumstance, by rendering

detection impossible to their constituents, will invite the public

agents to corruption, plunder & waste.  And I do verily believe, that

if the principle were to prevail, of a common law being in force in

the U S, (which principle possesses the general government at once of

all the powers of the state governments, and reduces us to a single

consolidated government,) it would become the most corrupt government

on the earth.  You have seen the practises by which the public

servants have been able to cover their conduct, or, where that could

not be done, delusions by which they have varnished it for the eye of

their constituents.  What an augmentation of the field for jobbing,

speculating, plundering, office-building & office-hunting would be

produced by an assumption of all the state powers into the hands of

the general government.  The true theory of our constitution is

surely the wisest & best, that the states are independent as to

everything within themselves, & united as to everything respecting

foreign nations.  Let the general government be reduced to foreign

concerns only, and let our affairs be disentangled from those of all

other nations, except as to commerce, which the merchants will manage

the better, the more they are left free to manage for themselves, and

our general government may be reduced to a very simple organization,

& a very unexpensive one; a few plain duties to be performed by a few

servants.  But I repeat, that this simple & economical mode of

government can never be secured, if the New England States continue

to support the contrary system.  I rejoice, therefore, in every

appearance of their returning to those principles which I had always

imagined to be almost innate in them.  In this State, a few persons

were deluded by the X. Y. Z. duperies.  You saw the effect of it in

our last Congressional representatives, chosen under their influence.

This experiment on their credulity is now seen into, and our next

representation will be as republican as it has heretofore been.  On

the whole, we hope, that by a part of the Union having held on to the

principles of the constitution, time has been given to the states to

recover from the temporary frenzy into which they had been decoyed,

to rally round the constitution, & to rescue it from the destruction

with which it had been threatened even at their own hands.  I see

copied from the American Magazine two numbers of a paper signed Don

Quixotte, most excellently adapted to introduce the real truth to the

minds even of the most prejudiced.




        I would, with great pleasure, have written the letter you

desired in behalf of your friend, but there are existing

circumstances which render a letter from me to that magistrate as

improper as it would be unavailing.  I shall be happy, on some more

fortunate occasion, to prove to you my desire of serving your wishes.




        I sometime ago received a letter from a Mr. M'Gregory of Derby,

in your State; it is written with such a degree of good sense &

appearance of candor, as entitles it to an answer.  Yet the writer

being entirely unknown to me, and the stratagems of the times very

multifarious, I have thought it best to avail myself of your

friendship, & enclose the answer to you.  You will see it's nature.

If you find from the character of the person to whom it is addressed,

that no improper use would probably be made of it, be so good as to

seal & send it.  Otherwise suppress it.




        How will the vote of your State and R I be as to A. and P.?




        I am, with great and sincere esteem, dear Sir, your friend and

servant.







        "I HAVE SWORN UPON THE ALTAR OF GOD .  .  . "




        _To Dr. Benjamin Rush_

        _Monticello, Sep. 23, 1800_




        DEAR SIR, -- I have to acknolege the receipt of your favor of

Aug. 22, and to congratulate you on the healthiness of your city.

Still Baltimore, Norfolk & Providence admonish us that we are not

clear of our new scourge.  When great evils happen, I am in the habit

of looking out for what good may arise from them as consolations to

us, and Providence has in fact so established the order of things, as

that most evils are the means of producing some good.  The yellow

fever will discourage the growth of great cities in our nation, & I

view great cities as pestilential to the morals, the health and the

liberties of man.  True, they nourish some of the elegant arts, but

the useful ones can thrive elsewhere, and less perfection in the

others, with more health, virtue & freedom, would be my choice.




        I agree with you entirely, in condemning the mania of giving

names to objects of any kind after persons still living.  Death alone

can seal the title of any man to this honor, by putting it out of his

power to forfeit it.  There is one other mode of recording merit,

which I have often thought might be introduced, so as to gratify the

living by praising the dead.  In giving, for instance, a commission

of chief justice to Bushrod Washington, it should be in consideration

of his integrity, and science in the laws, and of the services

rendered to our country by his illustrious relation, &c.  A

commission to a descendant of Dr. Franklin, besides being in

consideration of the proper qualifications of the person, should add

that of the great services rendered by his illustrious ancestor, Bn

Fr, by the advancement of science, by inventions useful to man, &c.

I am not sure that we ought to change all our names.  And during the

regal government, sometimes, indeed, they were given through

adulation; but often also as the reward of the merit of the times,

sometimes for services rendered the colony.  Perhaps, too, a name

when given, should be deemed a sacred property.




        I promised you a letter on Christianity, which I have not

forgotten.  On the contrary, it is because I have reflected on it,

that I find much more time necessary for it than I can at present

dispose of.  I have a view of the subject which ought to displease

neither the rational Christian nor Deists, and would reconcile many

to a character they have too hastily rejected.  I do not know that it

would reconcile the _genus irritabile vatum_ who are all in arms

against me.  Their hostility is on too interesting ground to be

softened.  The delusion into which the X. Y. Z. plot shewed it

possible to push the people; the successful experiment made under the

prevalence of that delusion on the clause of the constitution, which,

while it secured the freedom of the press, covered also the freedom

of religion, had given to the clergy a very favorite hope of

obtaining an establishment of a particular form of Christianity thro'

the U. S.; and as every sect believes its own form the true one,

every one perhaps hoped for his own, but especially the Episcopalians

& Congregationalists.  The returning good sense of our country

threatens abortion to their hopes, & they believe that any portion of

power confided to me, will be exerted in opposition to their schemes.

And they believe rightly; for I have sworn upon the altar of god,

eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man.

But this is all they have to fear from me: & enough too in their

opinion, & this is the cause of their printing lying pamphlets

against me, forging conversations for me with Mazzei, Bishop Madison,

&c., which are absolute falsehoods without a circumstance of truth to

rest on; falsehoods, too, of which I acquit Mazzei & Bishop Madison,

for they are men of truth.




        But enough of this: it is more than I have before committed to

paper on the subject of all the lies that has been preached and

printed against me.  I have not seen the work of Sonnoni which you

mention, but I have seen another work on Africa, (Parke's,) which I

fear will throw cold water on the hopes of the friends of freedom.

You will hear an account of an attempt at insurrection in this state.

I am looking with anxiety to see what will be it's effect on our

state.  We are truly to be pitied.  I fear we have little chance to

see you at the Federal city or in Virginia, and as little at

Philadelphia.  It would be a great treat to receive you here.  But

nothing but sickness could effect that; so I do not wish it.  For I

wish you health and happiness, and think of you with affection.

Adieu.







        "PHILOSOPHICAL VEDETTE" AT A DISTANCE




        _To William Dunbar_

        _Washington, Jan. 12, 1801_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favor of July 14, with the papers

accompanying it, came safely to hand about the last of October.  That

containing remarks on the line of demarcation I perused according to

your permission, and with great satisfaction, and then enclosed to a

friend in Philadelphia, to be forwarded to it's address.  The papers

addressed to me, I took the liberty of communicating to the

Philosophical society.  That on the language by signs is quite new.

Soon after receiving your meteorological diary, I received one of

Quebec; and was struck with the comparison between - 32 & + 19 3/4

the lowest depression of the thermometer at Quebec & the Natchez.  I

have often wondered that any human being should live in a cold

country who can find room in a warm one.  I have no doubt but that

cold is the source of more sufferance to all animal nature than

hunger, thirst, sickness, & all the other pains of life & of death

itself put together.  I live in a temperate climate, and under

circumstances which do not expose me often to cold.  Yet when I

recollect on one hand all the sufferings I have had from cold, & on

the other all my other pains, the former preponderate greatly.  What

then must be the sum of that evil if we take in the vast proportion

of men who are obliged to be out in all weather, by land & by sea,

all the families of beasts, birds, reptiles, & even the vegetable

kingdom! for that too has life, and where there is life there may be

sensation.  I remark a rainbow of a great portion of the circle

observed by you when on the line of demarcation.  I live in a

situation which has given me an opportunity of seeing more than the

semicircle often.  I am on a hill 500 f. perpendicularly high.  On

the east side it breaks down abruptly to the base, where a river

passes through.  A rainbow, therefore, about sunset, plunges one of

it's legs down to the river, 500 f. below the level of the eye on the

top of the hill.  I have twice seen bows formed by the moon.  They

were of the color of the common circle round the moon, and were very

near, being within a few paces of me in both instances.  I thank you

for the little vocabularies of Bedais, Jankawis and Teghas.  I have

it much at heart to make as extensive a collection as possible of the

Indian tongues.  I have at present about 30. tolerably full, among

which the number radically different, is truly wonderful.  It is

curious to consider how such handfuls of men came by different

languages, & how they have preserved them so distinct.  I at first

thought of reducing them all to one orthography, but I soon become

sensible that this would occasion two sources of error instead of

one.  I therefore think it best to keep them in the form of

orthography in which they were taken, only noting whether that were

English, French, German, or what.  I have never been a very punctual

correspondent, and it is possible that new duties may make me less

so.  I hope I shall not on that account lose the benefit of your

communications.  Philosophical vedette at the distance of one

thousand miles, and on the verge of the terra incognita of our

continent, is precious to us here.  I pray you to accept assurances

of my high consideration & esteem, and friendly salutations.







        THE REVOLUTION OF 1800




        _To John Dickinson_

        _Washington, Mar. 6, 1801_




        DEAR SIR, -- No pleasure can exceed that which I received from

reading your letter of the 21st ult.  It was like the joy we expect

in the mansions of the blessed, when received with the embraces of

our fathers, we shall be welcomed with their blessing as having done

our part not unworthily of them.  The storm through which we have

passed, has been tremendous indeed.  The tough sides of our Argosie

have been thoroughly tried.  Her strength has stood the waves into

which she was steered, with a view to sink her.  We shall put her on

her republican tack, & she will now show by the beauty of her motion

the skill of her builders.  Figure apart, our fellow citizens have

been led hood-winked from their principles, by a most extraordinary

combination of circumstances.  But the band is removed, and they now

see for themselves.  I hope to see shortly a perfect consolidation,

to effect which, nothing shall be spared on my part, short of the

abandonment of the principles of our revolution.  A just and solid

republican government maintained here, will be a standing monument &

example for the aim & imitation of the people of other countries; and

I join with you in the hope and belief that they will see, from our

example, that a free government is of all others the most energetic;

that the inquiry which has been excited among the mass of mankind by

our revolution & it's consequences, will ameliorate the condition of

man over a great portion of the globe.  What a satisfaction have we

in the contemplation of the benevolent effects of our efforts,

compared with those of the leaders on the other side, who have

discountenanced all advances in science as dangerous innovations,

have endeavored to render philosophy and republicanism terms of

reproach, to persuade us that man cannot be governed but by the rod,

&c.  I shall have the happiness of living & dying in the contrary

hope.  Accept assurances of my constant & sincere respect and

attachment, and my affectionate salutations.







        SOMETHING NEW UNDER THE SUN




        _To Dr. Joseph Priestley_

        _Washington, Mar. 21, 1801_




        DEAR SIR, -- I learnt some time ago that you were in

Philadelphia, but that it was only for a fortnight; & supposed you

were gone.  It was not till yesterday I received information that you

were still there, had been very ill, but were on the recovery.  I

sincerely rejoice that you are so.  Yours is one of the few lives

precious to mankind, & for the continuance of which every thinking

man is solicitous.  Bigots may be an exception.  What an effort, my

dear Sir, of bigotry in Politics & Religion have we gone through!

The barbarians really flattered themselves they should be able to

bring back the times of Vandalism, when ignorance put everything into

the hands of power & priestcraft.  All advances in science were

proscribed as innovations.  They pretended to praise and encourage

education, but it was to be the education of our ancestors.  We were

to look backwards, not forwards, for improvement; the President

himself declaring, in one of his answers to addresses, that we were

never to expect to go beyond them in real science.  This was the real

ground of all the attacks on you.  Those who live by mystery &

_charlatanerie_, fearing you would render them useless by simplifying

the Christian philosophy, -- the most sublime & benevolent, but most

perverted system that ever shone on man, -- endeavored to crush your

well-earnt & well-deserved fame.  But it was the Lilliputians upon

Gulliver.  Our countrymen have recovered from the alarm into which

art & industry had thrown them; science & honesty are replaced on

their high ground; and you, my dear Sir, as their great apostle, are

on it's pinnacle.  It is with heartfelt satisfaction that, in the

first moments of my public action, I can hail you with welcome to our

land, tender to you the homage of it's respect & esteem, cover you

under the protection of those laws which were made for the wise and

good like you, and disdain the legitimacy of that libel on

legislation, which under the form of a law, was for some time placed

among them.




        As the storm is now subsiding, and the horizon becoming serene,

it is pleasant to consider the phenomenon with attention.  We can no

longer say there is nothing new under the sun.  For this whole

chapter in the history of man is new.  The great extent of our

Republic is new.  Its sparse habitation is new.  The mighty wave of

public opinion which has rolled over it is new.  But the most

pleasing novelty is, it's so quickly subsiding over such an extent of

surface to it's true level again.  The order & good sense displayed

in this recovery from delusion, and in the momentous crisis which

lately arose, really bespeak a strength of character in our nation

which augurs well for the duration of our Republic; & I am much

better satisfied now of it's stability than I was before it was

tried.  I have been, above all things, solaced by the prospect which

opened on us, in the event of a non-election of a President; in which

case, the federal government would have been in the situation of a

clock or watch run down.  There was no idea of force, nor of any

occasion for it.  A convention, invited by the Republican members of

Congress, with the virtual President & Vice President, would have

been on the ground in 8. weeks, would have repaired the Constitution

where it was defective, & wound it up again.  This peaceable &

legitimate resource, to which we are in the habit of implicit

obedience, superseding all appeal to force, and being always within

our reach, shows a precious principle of self-preservation in our

composition, till a change of circumstances shall take place, which

is not within prospect at any definite period.




        But I have got into a long disquisition on politics, when I

only meant to express my sympathy in the state of your health, and to

tender you all the affections of public & private hospitality.  I

should be very happy indeed to see you here.  I leave this about the

30th inst., to return about the twenty-fifth of April.  If you do not

leave Philadelphia before that, a little excursion hither would help

your health.  I should be much gratified with the possession of a

guest I so much esteem, and should claim a right to lodge you, should

you make such an excursion.







        WISDOM AND PATRIOTISM




        _To Moses Robinson_

        _Washington, March 23, 1801_




        DEAR SIR, -- I have to acknowledge the receipt of your favor of

the 3rd instant, and to thank you for the friendly expressions it

contains.  I entertain real hope that the whole body of your fellow

citizens (many of whom had been carried away by the X. Y. Z.

business) will shortly be consolidated in the same sentiments.  When

they examine the real principles of both parties, I think they will

find little to differ about.  I know, indeed, that there are some of

their leaders who have so committed themselves, that pride, if no

other passion, will prevent their coalescing.  We must be easy with

them.  The eastern States will be the last to come over, on account

of the dominion of the clergy, who had got a smell of union between

Church and State, and began to indulge reveries which can never be

realised in the present state of science.  If, indeed, they could

have prevailed on us to view all advances in science as dangerous

innovations, and to look back to the opinions and practices of our

forefathers, instead of looking forward, for improvement, a promising

groundwork would have been laid.  But I am in hopes their good sense

will dictate to them, that since the mountain will not come to them,

they had better go to the mountain: that they will find their

interest in acquiescing in the liberty and science of their country,

and that the Christian religion, when divested of the rags in which

they have enveloped it, and brought to the original purity and

simplicity of its benevolent institutor, is a religion of all others

most friendly to liberty, science, and the freest expansion of the

human mind.




        I sincerely wish with you, we could see our government so

secured as to depend less on the character of the person in whose

hands it is trusted.  Bad men will sometimes get in, and with such an

immense patronage, may make great progress in corrupting the public

mind and principles.  This is a subject with which wisdom and

patriotism should be occupied.




        I pray you to accept assurances of my high respect and esteem.







        RECONCILIATION AND REFORM




        _To Elbridge Gerry_

        _Washington, Mar. 29, 1801_




        MY DEAR SIR, -- Your two letters of Jan. 15 and Feb. 24, came

safely to hand, and I thank you for the history of a transaction

which will ever be interesting in our affairs.  It has been very

precisely as I had imagined.  I thought, on your return, that if you

had come forward boldly, and appealed to the public by a full

statement, it would have had a great effect in your favor personally,

& that of the republican cause then oppressed almost unto death.  But

I judged from a tact of the southern pulse.  I suspect that of the

north was different and decided your conduct; and perhaps it has been

as well.  If the revolution of sentiment has been later, it has

perhaps been not less sure.  At length it is arrived.  What with the

natural current of opinion which has been setting over to us for 18.

months, and the immense impetus which was given it from the 11th to

the 17th of Feb., we may now say that the U.S. from N.Y. southwardly,

are as unanimous in the principles of '76, as they were in '76.  The

only difference is, that the leaders who remain behind are more

numerous & bolder than the apostles of toryism in '76.  The reason

is, that we are now justly more tolerant than we could safely have

been then, circumstanced as we were.  Your part of the Union tho' as

absolutely republican as ours, had drunk deeper of the delusion, & is

therefore slower in recovering from it.  The aegis of government, &

the temples of religion & of justice, have all been prostituted there

to toll us back to the times when we burnt witches.  But your people

will rise again.  They will awake like Sampson from his sleep, &

carry away the gates & posts of the city.  You, my friend, are

destined to rally them again under their former banner, and when

called to the post, exercise it with firmness & with inflexible

adherence to your own principles.  The people will support you,

notwithstanding the howlings of the ravenous crew from whose jaws

they are escaping.  It will be a great blessing to our country if we

can once more restore harmony and social love among its citizens.  I

confess, as to myself, it is almost the first object of my heart, and

one to which I would sacrifice everything but principle.  With the

people I have hopes of effecting it.  But their Coryphaei are

incurables.  I expect little from them.




        I was not deluded by the eulogiums of the public papers in the

first moments of change.  If they could have continued to get all the

loaves & fishes, that is, if I would have gone over to them, they

would continue to eulogise.  But I well knew that the moment that

such removals should take place, as the justice of the preceding

administration ought to have executed, their hue and cry would be set

up, and they would take their old stand.  I shall disregard that

also.  Mr. Adams' last appointments, when he knew he was naming

counsellors & aids for me & not for himself, I set aside as far as

depends on me.  Officers who have been guilty of gross abuses of

office, such as marshals packing juries, &c., I shall now remove, as

my predecessor ought in justice to have done.  The instances will be

few, and governed by strict rule, & not party passion.  The right of

opinion shall suffer no invasion from me.  Those who have acted well

have nothing to fear, however they may have differed from me in

opinion: those who have done ill, however, have nothing to hope; nor

shall I fail to do justice lest it should be ascribed to that

difference of opinion.  A coalition of sentiments is not for the

interest of printers.  They, like the clergy, live by the zeal they

can kindle, and the schisms they can create.  It is contest of

opinion in politics as well as religion which makes us take great

interest in them, and bestow our money liberally on those who furnish

aliment to our appetite.  The mild and simple principles of the

Christian philosophy would produce too much calm, too much regularity

of good, to extract from it's disciples a support for a numerous

priesthood, were they not to sophisticate it, ramify it, split it

into hairs, and twist it's texts till they cover the divine morality

of it's author with mysteries, and require a priesthood to explain

them.  The Quakers seem to have discovered this.  They have no

priests, therefore no schisms.  They judge of the text by the

dictates of common sense & common morality.  So the printers can

never leave us in a state of perfect rest and union of opinion.  They

would be no longer useful, and would have to go to the plough.  In

the first moments of quietude which have succeeded the election, they

seem to have aroused their lying faculties beyond their ordinary

state, to re-agitate the public mind.  What appointments to office

have they detailed which had never been thought of, merely to found a

text for their calumniating commentaries.  However, the steady

character of our countrymen is a rock to which we may safely moor;

and notwithstanding the efforts of the papers to disseminate early

discontents, I expect that a just, dispassionate and steady conduct,

will at length rally to a proper system the great body of our

country.  Unequivocal in principle, reasonable in manner, we shall be

able I hope to do a great deal of good to the cause of freedom &

harmony.  I shall be happy to hear from you often, to know your own

sentiments & those of others on the course of things, and to concur

with you in efforts for the common good.  Your letters through the

post will now come safely.  Present my best respects to Mrs. Gerry, &

accept yourself assurances of my constant esteem and high

consideration.

