




        "UNLEARNED VIEWS OF MEDICINE"




        _To Dr. Caspar Wistar_

        _Washington, June 21, 1807_




        DEAR SIR, -- I have a grandson, the son of Mr. Randolph, now

about 15 years of age, in whose education I take a lively interest.

His time has not hitherto been employed to the greatest advantage, a

frequent change of tutors having prevented the steady pursuit of any

one plan.  Whether he possesses that lively imagination, usually

called genius, I have not had opportunities of knowing.  But I think

he has an observing mind & sound judgment.  He is assiduous, orderly,

& of the most amiable temper & dispositions.  As he will be at ease

in point of property, his education is not directed to any particular

possession, but will embrace those sciences which give to retired

life usefulness, ornament or amusement.  I am not a friend to placing

growing men in populous cities, because they acquire there habits &

partialities which do not contribute to the happiness of their after

life.  But there are particular branches of science, which are not so

advantageously taught anywhere else in the U.S. as in Philadelphia.

The garden at the Woodlands for Botany, Mr. Peale's Museum for

Natural History, your Medical school for Anatomy, and the able

professors in all of them, give advantages not to be found elsewhere.

We propose, therefore, to send him to Philadelphia to attend the

schools of Botany, Natural History, Anatomy, & perhaps Surgery; but

not of Medicine.  And why not of Medicine, you will ask?  Being led

to the subject, I will avail myself of the occasion to express my

opinions on that science, and the extent of my medical creed.  But,

to finish first with respect to my grandson, I will state the favor I

ask of you, which is the object of this letter.




        Having been born & brought up in a mountainous & healthy

country, we should be unwilling he should go to Philadelphia until

the autumnal diseases cease.  It is important therefore for us to

know, at what period after that, the courses of lectures in Natural

history, Botany, Chemistry, Anatomy & Surgery begin and end, and what

days or hours they occupy?  The object of this is that we may be able

so to marshal his pursuits as to bring their accomplishment within

the shortest space practicable.  I shall write to Doctor Barton for

information as to the courses of natural history & botany but not

having a sufficient acquaintance with professors of chemistry &

surgery, if you can add the information respecting their school to

that of your own, I shall be much obliged to you.  What too are the

usual terms of boarding?  What the compensations to professors?  And

can you give me a conjectural estimate of other necessary expenses?

In these we do not propose to indulge him beyond what is necessary,

decent, & usual, because all beyond that leads to dissipation &

idleness, to which, at present, he has no propensities.  I think Mr.

Peale has not been in the habit of receiving a boarder.  His house &

family would, of themselves, be a school of virtue & instruction; &

hours of leisure there would be as improving as busy ones elsewhere.

But I say this only on the possibility of so desirable a location for

him, and not with the wish that the thought should become known to

Mr. Peale, unless some former precedent should justify it's

suggestion to him.  I am laying a heavy tax on your busy time, but I

think your goodness will pardon it in consideration of it's bearing

on my happiness.




        This subject dismissed, I may now take up that which it led to,

and further tax your patience with unlearned views of medicine;

which, as in most cases, are, perhaps, the more confident in

proportion as they are less enlightened.




        We know, from what we see & feel, that the animal body in it's

organs and functions is subject to derangement, inducing pain, &

tending to it's destruction.  In this disordered state, we observe

nature providing for the re-establishment of order, by exciting some

salutary evacuation of the morbific matter, or by some other

operation which escapes our imperfect senses and researches.  She

brings on a crisis, by stools, vomiting, sweat, urine, expectoration,

bleeding, &c., which, for the most part, ends in the restoration of

healthy action.  Experience has taught us, also, that there are

certain substances, by which, applied to the living body, internally

or externally, we can at will produce these same evacuations, and

thus do, in a short time, what nature would do but slowly, and do

effectually, what perhaps she would not have strength to accomplish.

Where, then, we have seen a disease, characterized by specific signs

or phenomena, and relieved by a certain natural evacuation or

process, whenever that disease recurs under the same appearances, we

may reasonably count on producing a solution of it, by the use of

such substances as we have found produce the same evacuation or

movement.  Thus, fulness of the stomach we can relieve by emetics;

diseases of the bowels, by purgatives; inflammatory cases, by

bleeding; intermittents, by the Peruvian bark; syphilis, by mercury:

watchfulness, by opium; &c.  So far, I bow to the utility of

medicine.  It goes to the well-defined forms of disease, & happily,

to those the most frequent.  But the disorders of the animal body, &

the symptoms indicating them, are as various as the elements of which

the body is composed.  The combinations, too, of these symptoms are

so infinitely diversified, that many associations of them appear too

rarely to establish a definite disease; and to an unknown disease,

there cannot be a known remedy.  Here then, the judicious, the moral,

the humane physician should stop.  Having been so often a witness to

the salutary efforts which nature makes to re-establish the

disordered functions, he should rather trust to their action, than

hazard the interruption of that, and a greater derangement of the

system, by conjectural experiments on a machine so complicated & so

unknown as the human body, & a subject so sacred as human life.  Or,

ifthe appearance of doing something be necessary to keep alive the

hope & spirits of the patient, it should be of the most innocent

character.  One of the most successful physicians I have ever known,

has assured me, that he used more bread pills, drops of colored

water, & powders of hickory ashes, than of all other medicines put

together.  It was certainly a pious fraud.  But the adventurous

physician goes on, & substitutes presumption for knolege.  From the

scanty field of what is known, he launches into the boundless region

of what is unknown.  He establishes for his guide some fanciful

theory of corpuscular attraction, of chemical agency, of mechanical

powers, of stimuli, of irritability accumulated or exhausted, of

depletion by the lancet & repletion by mercury, or some other

ingenious dream, which lets him into all nature's secrets at short

hand.  On the principle which he thus assumes, he forms his table of

nosology, arrays his diseases into families, and extends his curative

treatment, by analogy, to all the cases he has thus arbitrarily

marshalled together.  I have lived myself to see the disciples of

Hoffman, Boerhaave, Stalh, Cullen, Brown, succeed one another like

the shifting figures of a magic lantern, & their fancies, like the

dresses of the annual doll-babies from Paris, becoming, from their

novelty, the vogue of the day, and yielding to the next novelty their

ephemeral favor.  The patient, treated on the fashionable theory,

sometimes gets well in spite of the medicine.  The medicine therefore

restored him, & the young doctor receives new courage to proceed in

his bold experiments on the lives of his fellow creatures.  I believe

we may safely affirm, that the inexperienced & presumptuous band of

medical tyros let loose upon the world, destroys more of human life

in one year, than all the Robinhoods, Cartouches, & Macheaths do in a

century.  It is in this part of medicine that I wish to see a reform,

an abandonment of hypothesis for sober facts, the first degree of

value set on clinical observation, and the lowest on visionary

theories.  I would wish the young practitioner, especially, to have

deeply impressed on his mind, the real limits of his art, & that when

the state of his patient gets beyond these, his office is to be a

watchful, but quiet spectator of the operations of nature, giving

them fair play by a well-regulated regimen, & by all the aid they can

derive from the excitement of good spirits & hope in the patient.  I

have no doubt, that some diseases not yet understood may in time be

transferred to the table of those known.  But, were I a physician, I

would rather leave the transfer to the slow hand of accident, than

hasten it by guilty experiments on those who put their lives into my

hands.  The only sure foundations of medicine are, an intimate

knolege of the human body, and observation on the effects of

medicinal substances on that.  The anatomical & clinical schools,

therefore, are those in which the young physician should be formed.

If he enters with innocence that of the theory of medicine, it is

scarcely possible he should come out untainted with error.  His mind

must be strong indeed, if, rising above juvenile credulity, it can

maintain a wise infidelity against the authority of his instructors,

& the bewitching delusions of their theories.  You see that I

estimate justly that portion of instruction which our medical

students derive from your labors; &, associating with it one of the

chairs which my old & able friend, Doctor Rush, so honorably fills, I

consider them as the two fundamental pillars of the edifice.  Indeed,

I have such an opinion of the talents of the professors in the other

branches which constitute the school of medicine with you, as to hope

& believe, that it is from this side of the Atlantic, that Europe,

which has taught us so many other things, will at length be led into

sound principles in this branch of science, the most important of all

others, being that to which we commit the care of health & life.




        I dare say, that by this time, you are sufficiently sensible

that old heads as well as young, may sometimes be charged with

ignorance and presumption.  The natural course of the human mind is

certainly from credulity to scepticism; and this is perhaps the most

favorable apology I can make for venturing so far out of my depth, &

to one too, to whom the strong as well as the weak points of this

science are so familiar.  But having stumbled on the subject in my

way, I wished to give a confession of my faith to a friend; & the

rather, as I had perhaps, at time, to him as well as others,

expressed my scepticism in medicine, without defining it's extent or

foundation.  At any rate, it has permitted me, for a moment, to

abstract myself from the dry & dreary waste of politics, into which I

have been impressed by the times on which I happened, and to indulge

in the rich fields of nature, where alone I should have served as a

volunteer, if left to my natural inclinations & partialities.




        I salute you at all times with affection & respect.







        TORPEDOES AND SUBMARINES




        _To Robert Fulton_

        _Monticello, August 16, 1807_




        SIR, -- Your letter of July 28, came to hand just as I was

about leaving Washington, & it has not been sooner in my power to

acknolege it.  I consider your torpedoes as very valuable means of

defence of harbors, & have no doubt that we should adopt them to a

considerable degree.  Not that I go the whole length (as I believe

you do) of considering them as solely to be relied on.  Neither a

nation nor those entrusted with it's affairs, could be justifiable,

however sanguine their expectations, in trusting solely to an engine

not yet sufficiently tried, under all the circumstances which may

occur, & against which we know not as yet what means of parrying may

be devised.  If, indeed, the mode of attaching them to the cable of a

ship be the only one proposed, modes of prevention cannot be

difficult.  But I have ever looked to the submarine boat as most to

be depended on for attaching them, & tho' I see no mention of it in

your letter, or your publications, I am in hopes it is not abandoned

as impracticable.  I should wish to see a corps of young men trained

to this service.  It would belong to the engineers if at land, but

being nautical, I suppose we must have a corps of naval engineers, to

practise & use them.  I do not know whether we have authority to put

any part of our existing naval establishment in a course of training,

but it shall be the subject of a consultation with the Secretary of

the Navy.  Genl Dearborne has informed you of the urgency of our want

of you at N Orleans for the locks there.




        I salute you with great respect & esteem.







        RELIGIOUS FREEDOM




        _To Rev. Samuel Miller_

        _Washington, Jan. 23, 1808_




        SIR, -- I have duly received your favor of the 18th and am

thankful to you for having written it, because it is more agreeable

to prevent than to refuse what I do not think myself authorized to

comply with.  I consider the government of the U S. as interdicted by

the Constitution from intermeddling with religious institutions,

their doctrines, discipline, or exercises.  This results not only

from the provision that no lawshall be made respecting the

establishment, or free exercise, of religion, but from that also

which reserves to the states the powers not delegated to the U.S.

Certainly no power to prescribe any religious exercise, or to assume

authority in religious discipline, has been delegated to the general

government.  It must then rest with the states, as far as it can be

in any human authority.  But it is only proposed that I should

_recommend_, not prescribe a day of fasting & prayer.  That is, that

I should _indirectly_ assume to the U.S. an authority over religious

exercises which the Constitution has directly precluded them from.

It must be meant too that this recommendation is to carry some

authority, and to be sanctioned by some penalty on those who

disregard it; not indeed of fine and imprisonment, but of some degree

of proscription perhaps in public opinion.  And does the change in

the nature of the penalty make the recommendation the less _a law_ of

conduct for those to whom it is directed?  I do not believe it is for

the interest of religion to invite the civil magistrate to direct

it's exercises, it's discipline, or it's doctrines; nor of the

religious societies that the general government should be invested

with the power of effecting any uniformity of time or matter among

them.  Fasting & prayer are religious exercises.  The enjoining them

an act of discipline.  Every religious society has a right to

determine for itself the times for these exercises, & the objects

proper for them, according to their own particular tenets; and this

right can never be safer than in their own hands, where the

constitution has deposited it.




        I am aware that the practice of my predecessors may be quoted.

But I have ever believed that the example of state executives led to

the assumption of that authority by the general government, without

due examination, which would have discovered that what might be a

right in a state government, was a violation of that right when

assumed by another.  Be this as it may, every one must act according

to the dictates of his own reason, & mine tells me that civil powers

alone have been given to the President of the U S. and no authority

to direct the religious exercises of his constituents.




        I again express my satisfaction that you have been so good as

to give me an opportunity of explaining myself in a private letter,

in which I could give my reasons more in detail than might have been

done in a public answer: and I pray you to accept the assurances of

my high esteem & respect.







        "SUBJECTS FOR A MAD-HOUSE"




        _To Dr. Thomas Leib_

        _Washington, June 23, 1808_




        SIR, -- I have duly received your favor covering a copy of the

talk to the Tammany society, for which I thank you, and particularly

for the favorable sentiments expressed towards myself.  Certainly,

nothing will so much sweeten the tranquillity and comfort of

retirement, as the knoledge that I carry with me the good will &

approbation of my republican fellow citizens, and especially of the

individuals in unison with whom I have so long acted.  With respect

to the federalists, I believe we think alike; for when speaking of

them, we never mean to include a worthy portion of our fellow

citizens, who consider themselves as in duty bound to support the

constituted authorities of every branch, and to reserve their

opposition to the period of election.  These having acquired the

appellation of federalists, while a federal administration was in

place, have not cared about throwing off their name, but adhering to

their principle, are the supporters of the present order of things.

The other branch of the federalists, those who are so in principle as

well as in name, disapprove of the republican principles & features

of our Constitution, and would, I believe, welcome any public

calamity (war with England excepted) which might lessen the

confidence of our country in those principles & forms.  I have

generally considered them rather as subjects for a mad-house.  But

they are now playing a game of the most mischevious tendency, without

perhaps being themselves aware of it.  They are endeavoring to

convince England that we suffer more by the embargo than they do, &

that if they will but hold out awhile, we must abandon it.  It is

true, the time will come when we must abandon it.  But if this is

before the repeal of the orders of council, we must abandon it only

for a state of war.  The day is not distant, when that will be

preferable to a longer continuance of the embargo.  But we can never

remove that, & let our vessels go out & be taken under these orders,

without making reprisal.  Yet this is the very state of things which

these federal monarchists are endeavoring to bring about; and in this

it is but too possible they may succeed.  But the fact is, that if we

have war with England, it will be solely produced by their

manoeuvres.  I think that in two or three months we shall know what

will be the issue.




        I salute you with esteem & respect.







        BONES FOR THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE




        _To Lacepede, with a Catalogue_

        _Washington, July 14, 1808_




        SIR, -- If my recollection does not deceive me, the collection

of the remains of the animal incognitum of the Ohio (sometimes called

mammoth), possessed by the Cabinet of Natural History at Paris, is

not very copious.  Under this impression, and presuming that this

Cabinet is allied to the National Institute, to which I am desirous

of rendering some service, I have lately availed myself of an

opportunity of collecting some of those remains.  General Clarke (the

companion of Governor Lewis in his expedition to the Pacific Ocean)

being,on a late journey, to pass by the Big-bone Lick of the Ohio,

was kind enough to undertake to employ for me a number of laborers,

and to direct their operations in digging for these bones at this

important deposit of them.  The result of these researches will

appear in the enclosed catalogue of specimens which I am now able to

place at the disposal of the National Institute.  An aviso being to

leave this place for some port of France on public service, I deliver

the packages to Captain Haley, to be deposited with the Consul of the

United States, at whatever port he may land.  They are addressed to

Mr. Warden of our legation at Paris, for the National Institute, and

he will have the honor of delivering them.  To these I have added the

horns of an animal called by the natives the Mountain Ram, resembling

the sheep by his head, but more nearly the deer in his other parts;

as also the skin of another animal, resembling the sheep by his

fleece but the goat in his other parts.  This is called by the

natives the Fleecy Goat, or in thestyle of the natural historian, the

Pokotragos.  I suspect it to be nearly related to the Pacos, and were

we to group the fleecy animals together, it would stand perhaps with

the Vigogne, Pacos, and Sheep.  The Mountain Ram was found in

abundance by Messrs. Lewis and Clarke on their western tour, and was

frequently an article of food for their party, and esteemed more

delicate than the deer.  The Fleecy Goat they did not see, but

procured two skins from the Indians, of which this is one.  Their

description will be given in the work of Governor Lewis, the journal

and geographical part of which may be soon expected from the press;

but the parts relating to the plants and animals observed in his

tour, will be delayed by the engravings.  In the meantime, the plants

of which he brought seeds, have been very successfully raised in the

botanical garden of Mr. Hamilton of the Woodlands, and by Mr.

McMahon, a gardener of Philadelphia; and on the whole, it is with

pleasure I can assure you that the addition to our knowledge in every

department, resulting from this tour of Messrs. Lewis and Clarke, has

entirely fulfilled my expectations in setting it on foot, and that

the world will find that those travellers have well earned its favor.

I will take care that the Institute as well as yourself shall receive

Governor Lewis's work as it appears.




        It is with pleasure I embrace this occasion of returning you my

thanks for the favor of your very valuable works, _sur les poissons

et les cetacees_, which you were so kind as to send me through Mr.

Livingston and General Turreau, and which I find entirely worthy of

your high reputation in the literary world.  That I have not sooner

made this acknowledgment has not proceeded from any want of respect

and attachment to yourself, or a just value of your estimable

present, but from the strong and incessant calls of duty to other

objects.  The candor of your character gives me confidence of your

indulgence on this head, and I assure you with truth that no

circumstances are more welcome to me than those which give me the

occasion of recalling myself to your recollection, and of renewing to

you the assurances of sincere personal attachment, and of great

respect and consideration.




        _Contents of the large square Box._




        A Fibia.




        A Radius.




        Two ribs belonging to the upper part of the thorax.




 

        Two ribs from a lower part of the thorax.




        One entire vertebra.




        Two spinous processes of the vertebra broken from the bodies.




        Dentes molares, which appear to have belonged to the full-grown

animal.




        A portion of the under-jaw of a young animal with two molar

teeth in it.




        These teeth appear to have belonged to a first set, as they are

small, and the posterior has but three grinding ridges, instead of

five, the common number in adult teeth of the lower jaw.




        Another portion of the under-jaw, including the symphisis, or

chin.  In this portion the teeth of one side are every way complete;

to wit, the posterior has five transverse ridges, and the anterior

three.




        A fragment of the upper-jaw with one molar tooth much worn.




        Molar teeth which we suppose to be like those of the mammoth or

elephant of Siberia.  They are essentially different from those of

the mammoth or elephant of this country, and although similar in some

respects to the teeth of the Asiatic elephant, they agree more

completely with the description of the teeth found in Siberia in the

arrangement and size of the transverse lamina of enamel.  This idea,

however, is not derived from actual comparison of the different teeth

with each other, for we have no specimens of Siberian teeth in this

country; but from inferences deduced from the various accounts and

drawings of these teeth to be found in books.  A few of these teeth

have been found in several places where the bones of the American

animal have existed.




        An Astragalus.




        An Oscalcis.




        Os naviculare.




        In the large box in which the preceding bones are, is a small

one containing a promiscuous mass of small bones, chiefly of the

feet.




        In the large irregular-shaped box, a tusk of large size.  The

spiral twist in all the specimens of these tusks which we have seen,

was remarked so long ago as the time of Breyneus, in his description

of the tusks of the Siberian mammoth in the Philosophical

Transactions, if that paper is rightly recollected, for the book is

not here to be turned to at present.  Many fragments of tusks have

been sent from the Ohio, generally resembling portions of such tusks

as are brought to us in the course of commerce.  But of these spiral

tusks, in a tolerable complete state, we have had only four.  One was

found near the head of the north branch of the Susquehanna.  A second

possessed by Mr. Peale, was found with the skeleton, near the Hudson.

A third is at Monticello, found with the bones of this collection at

the Big-bone lick of Ohio, and the fourth isthat now sent for the

Institute, found at the same place and larger than that at

Monticello.




        The smallest box contains the horns of the mountain ram, and

skin of the fleecy goat.







        PLOUGHS




        _To Monsieur Sylvestre_

        _Washington, July 15, 1808_




        SIR, -- I had received from you on a former occasion the four

first volumes of the Memoirs of the Agricultural Society of the

Seine, and since that, your letter of September 19th, with the 6th,

7th, 8ths, and 9th volumes, being for the years 1804 '5 '6, with some

separate memoirs.  These I have read with great avidity and

satisfaction, and now return you my thanksfor them.  But I owe

particular acknowledgments for the valuable present of the Theatre de

De Serres, which I consider as a prodigy for the age in which it was

composed, and shows an advancement in the science of agriculture

which I had never suspected to have belonged to that time.  Brought

down to the present day by the very valuable notes added, it is

really such a treasure of agricultural knowledge, as has not before

been offered to the world in a single work.




        It is not merely for myself, but for my country, that I must do

homage to the philanthropy of the Society, which has dictated their

destination for me of their newly-improved plough.  I shall certainly

so use it as to answer their liberal views, by making the

opportunities of profiting by it as general as possible.




        I have just received information that a plough addressed to me

has arrived at New York, _from England_, but unaccompanied by any

letter or other explanation.  As I have had no intimation of such an

article to be forwarded to me from that country, I presume it is the

one sent by the Society of the Seine, that it has been carried into

England under their orders of council, and permitted to come on from

thence.  This I shall know within a short time.  I shall with great

pleasure attend to the construction and transmission to the Society

of a plough with my mould board.  This is the only part of that

useful instrument to which I have paid any particular attention.  But

knowing how much the perfection of the plough must depend, 1st, on

the line of traction; 2d, on the direction of the share; 3d, on the

angle of the wing; 4th, on the form of the mould-board; and persuaded

that I shall find the three first advantages eminently exemplified in

that which the Society sends me, I am anxious to see combined with

these a mould-board of my form, in the hope it will still advance the

perfection of that machine.  But for this I must ask time till I am

relieved from the cares which have now a right to all my time, that

is to say, till the next Spring.  Then giving, in the leisure of

retirement, all the time and attention this construction merits and

requires, I will certainly render to the Society the result in a

plough of the best form I shall be able to have executed.  In the

meantime, accept for them and yourself the assurances of my high

respect and consideration.







        EDUCATION OF A GRANDSON




        _To Thomas Jefferson Randolph_

        _Washington, Nov. 24th, 1808_




        MY DEAR JEFFERSON -- I have just recieved the inclosed letter

under cover from Mr. Bankhead which I presume is from Anne and will

inform you she is well.  Mr. Bankhead has consented to go and pursue

his studies at Monticello, and live with us till his pursuits or

circumstances may require a separate establishment.  Your situation,

thrown at such a distance from us and alone, cannot but give us all,

great anxieties for you.  As much has been secured for you, by your

particular position and the acquaintance to which you have been

recommended, as could be done towards shielding you from the dangers

which surround you.  But thrown on a wide world, among entire

strangers without a friend or guardian to advise so young too and

with so little experience of mankind, your dangers are great, and

still your safety must rest on yourself.  A determination never to do

what is wrong, prudence, and good humor, will go far towards securing

to you the estimation of the world.  When I recollect that at 14.

years of age, the whole care and direction of my self was thrown on

my self entirely, without a relation or friend qualified to advise or

guide me, and recollect the various sorts of bad company with which I

associated from time to time, I am astonished I did not turn off with

some of them, and become as worthless to society as they were.  I had

the good fortune to become acquainted very early with some characters

of very high standing, and to feel the incessant wish that I could

even become what they were.  Under temptations and difficulties, I

could ask myself what would Dr. Small, Mr. Wythe, Peyton Randolph do

in this situation?  What course in it will ensure me their

approbation?  I am certain that this mode of deciding on my conduct

tended more to it's correctness than any reasoning powers I

possessed.  Knowing the even and dignified line they pursued, I could

never doubt for a moment which of two courses would be in character

for them.  Whereas seeking the same object through a process of moral

reasoning, and with the jaundiced eye of youth, I should often have

erred.  From the circumstances of my position I was often thrown into

the society of horseracers, cardplayers, Foxhunters, scientific and

professional men, and of dignified men; and many a time have I asked

myself, in the enthusiastic moment of the death of a fox, the victory

of a favorite horse, the issue of a question eloquently argued at the

bar or in the great Council of the nation, well, which of these kinds

of reputation should I prefer?  That of a horse jockey?  A foxhunter?

An Orator?  Or the honest advocate of my country's rights?  Be

assured my dear Jefferson, that these little returns into ourselves,

this self-cathechising habit, is not trifling, nor useless, but leads

to the prudent selection and steady pursuits of what is right?  I

have mentioned good humor as one of the preservatives of our peace

and tranquillity.  It is among the most effectual, and it's effect is

so well imitated and aided artificially by politeness, that this also

becomes an acquisition of first rate value.  In truth, politeness is

artificial good humor, it covers the natural want of it, and ends by

rendering habitual a substitute nearly equivalent to the real virtue.

It is the practice of sacrificing to those whom we meet in society

all the little conveniences and preferences which will gratify them,

and deprive us of nothing worth a moment's consideration; it is the

giving a pleasing and flattering turn to our expressions which will

conciliate others, and make them pleased with us as well as

themselves.  How cheap a price for the good will of another!  When

this is in return for a rude thing said by another, it brings him to

his senses, it mortifies and corrects him in the most salutary way,

and places him at the feet of your good nature in the eyes of the

company.  But in stating prudential rules for our government in

society I must not omit the important one of never entering into

dispute or argument withanother.  I never yet saw an instance of one

of two disputantsconvincing the other by argument.  I have seen many

on their getting warm, becoming rude, and shooting one another.

Conviction is the effect of our own dispassionate reasoning, either

in solitude, or weighing within ourselves dispassionately what we

hear from others standing uncommitted in argument ourselves.  It was

one of the rules which above all others made Doctr. Franklin the most

amiable of men in society, `never to contradict any body.' If he was

urged to anounce an opinion, he did it rather by asking questions, as

if for information, or by suggesting doubts.  When I hear another

express an opinion, which is not mine, I say to myself, He has a

right to his opinion, as I to mine; why should I question it.  His

error does me no injury, and shall I becomea Don Quixot to bring all

men by force of argument, to one opinion?  If a fact be misstated, it

is probable he is gratified by a belief of it, and I have no right to

deprive him of the gratification.  If he wants information he will

ask it, and then I will give it in measured terms; but if he still

believes his own story, and shows a desire to dispute the fact with

me, I hear him and say nothing.  It is his affair, not mine, if he

prefers error.  There are two classes of disputants most frequently

to be met with among us.  The first is of young students just entered

the threshold of science, with a first view of it's outlines, not yet

filled up with the details and modifications which a further progress

would bring to their knoledge.  The other consists of the

ill-tempered and rude men in society who have taken up a passion for

politics.  (Good humor and politeness never introduce into mixed

society a question on which they foresee there will be a difference

of opinion.) From both of these classes of disputants, my dear

Jefferson, keep aloof, as you would from the infected subjects of

yellow fever or pestilence.  Consider yourself, when with them, as

among the patients of Bedlam needing medical more than moral counsel.

Be a listener only, keep within yourself, and endeavor to establish

with yourself the habit of silence, especially in politics.  In the

fevered state of our country, no good can ever result from any

attempt to set one of these fiery zealots to rights either in fact or

principle.  They are determined as to the facts they will believe,

and the opinions on which they will act.  Get by them, therefore as

you would by an angry bull: it is not for a man of sense to dispute

the road with such an animal.  You will be more exposed than others

to have these animals shaking their horns at you, because of the

relation in which you stand with me and to hate me as a chief in the

antagonist party your presence will be to them what the vomit-grass

is to the sick dog a nostrum for producing an ejaculation.  Look upon

them exactly with that eye, and pity them as objects to whom you can

administer only occasional ease.  My character is not within their

power.  It is in the hands of my fellow citizens at large, and will

be consigned to honor or infamy by the verdict of the republican mass

of our country, according to what themselves will have seen, not what

their enemies and mine shall have said.  Never therefore consider

these puppies in politics as requiring any notice from you, and

always shew that you are not afraid to leave my character to the

umpirage of public opinion.  Look steadily to the pursuits which have

carried you to Philadelphia, be very select in the society you attach

yourself to; avoid taverns, drinkers, smoakers, and idlers and

dissipated persons generally; for it is with such that broils and

contentions arise, and you will find your path more easy and

tranquil.  The limits of my paper warn me that it is time for me to

close with my affectionate Adieux.




        P. S. Present me affectionately to Mr. Ogilvie, and in doing

the same to Mr. Peale tell him I am writing with his polygraph and

shall send him mine the first moment I have leisure enough to pack

it.







        SOWING THE UPLAND RICE




        _To Dr. Benjamin Waterhouse_

        _Washington, December 1, 1808_




        SIR, -- In answer to the inquiries of the benevolent Dr. De

Carro on the subject of the upland or mountain rice, Oryza Mutica, I

will state to you what I know of it.  I first became informed of the

existence of a rice which would grow in uplands without any more

water than the common rains, by reading a book of Mr. De Porpre, who

had been Governor of the Isle of France, who mentions it as growing

there and all along the coast of Africa successfully, and as having

been introduced from Cochin-China.  I was at that time (1784-89) in

France, and there happening to be there a Prince of Cochin-China, on

his travels, and then returning home, I obtained his promise to send

me some.  I never received it however, and mention it only as it may

have been sent, and furnished the ground for the inquiries of Dr. De

Carro, respecting my receiving it from China.  When at Havre on my

return from France, I found there Captain Nathaniel Cutting, who was

the ensuing spring to go on a voyage along the coast of Africa.  I

engaged him to inquire for this; he was there just after the harvest,

procured and sent me a thirty-gallon cask of it.  It arrived in time

the ensuing spring to be sown.  I divided it between the Agricultural

Society of Charleston and some private gentlemen of Georgia,

recommending it to their care, in the hope which had induced me to

endeavor to obtain it, that if it answered as well as the swamp rice,

it might rid them of that source of their summer diseases.  Nothing

came of the trials in South Carolina, but being carried into the

upper hilly parts of Georgia, it succeeded there perfectly, has

spread over the country, and is now commonly cultivated; still,

however, for family use chiefly, as they cannot make it for sale in

competition with the rice of the swamps.  The former part of these

details is written from memory, the papers being at Monticello which

would enable me to particularize exactly the dates of times and

places.  The latter part is from the late Mr.  Baldwin, one of those

whom I engaged in the distribution of the seed in Georgia, and who in

his annual attendance on Congress, gave me from time to time the

history of its progress.  It has got from Georgia into Kentucky,

where it is cultivated by many individuals for family use.  I

cultivated it two or three years at Monticello, and had good crops,

as did my neighbors, but not having conveniences for husking it, we

declined it.  I tried some of it in a pot, while I lived in

Philadelphia, and gave seed to Mr. Bartram.  It produced luxuriant

plants with us both, but no seed; nor do I believe it will ripen in

the United States as far north as Philadelphia.  Business and an

indisposition of some days must apologize for this delay in answering

your letter of October 24th, which I did not receive till the 6th of

November.  And permit me here to add my salutations and assurances of

esteem and respect.







        "LAST TRIAL FOR PEACE"




        _To James Monroe_

        _Washington, January 28, 1809_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favor of the 18th was received in due time,

and the answer has been delayed as well by a pressure of business, as

by the expectation of your absence from Richmond.




        The idea of sending a special mission to France or England is

not entertained at all here.  After so little attention to us from

the former, and so insulting an answer from Canning, such a mark of

respect as an extraordinary mission, would be a degradation against

which all minds revolt here.  The idea was hazarded in the House of

Representatives a few days ago, by a member, and an approbation

expressed by another, but rejected indignantly by every other person

who spoke, and very generally in conversation by all others; and I am

satisfied such a proposition would get no vote in the Senate.  The

course the Legislature means to pursue, may be inferred from the act

now passed for a meeting in May, and a proposition before them for

repealing the embargo in June, and then resuming and maintaining by

force our right of navigation.  There will be considerable opposition

to this last proposition, not only from the federalists, old and new,

who oppose everything, but from sound members of the majority.  Yet

it is believed it will obtain a good majority, and that it is the

only proposition which can be devised that could obtain a majority of

any kind.  Final propositions will, therefore, be soon despatched to

both the belligerents through the resident ministers, so that their

answers will be received before the meeting in May, and will decide

what is to be done.  This last trial for peace is not thought

desperate.  If, as is expected, Bonaparte should be successful in

Spain, however every virtuous and liberal sentiment revolts at it, it

may induce both powers to be more accommodating with us.  England

will see here the only asylum for her commerce and manufactures,

worth more to her than her orders of council.  And Bonaparte, having

Spain at his feet, will look immediately to the Spanish colonies, and

think our neutrality cheaply purchased by a repeal of the illegal

parts of his decrees, with perhaps the Floridas thrown into the

bargain.  Should a change in the aspect of affairs in Europe produce

this disposition in both powers, our peace and prosperity may be

revived and long continue.  Otherwise, we must again take the tented

field, as we did in 1776 under more inauspicious circumstances.




        There never has been a situation of the world before, in which

such endeavors as we have made would not have secured our peace.  It

is probable there never will be such another.  If we go to war now, I

fear we may renounce forever the hope of seeing an end of our

national debt.  If we can keep at peace eight years longer, our

income, liberated from debt, will be adequate to any war, without new

taxes or loans, and our position and increasing strength put us _hors

d'insulte_ from any nation.  I am now so near the moment of retiring,

that I take no part in affairs beyond the expression of an opinion.

I think it fair that my successor should now originate those measures

of which he will be charged with the execution and responsibility,

and that it is my duty to clothe them with the forms of authority.

Five weeks more will relieve me from a drudgery to which I am no

longer equal, and restore me to a scene of tranquillity, amidst my

family and friends, more congenial to my age and natural

inclinations.  In that situation, it will always be a pleasure to me

to see you, and to repeat to you the assurances of my constant

friendship and respect.







        THE REPUBLIC OF SCIENCE




        _To John Hollins_

        _Washington, February 19, 1809_




        DEAR SIR, -- A little transaction of mine, as innocent an one

as I ever entered into, and where an improper construction was never

less expected, is making some noise, I observe, in your city.  I beg

leave to explain it to you, because I mean to ask your agency in it.

The last year, the Agricultural Society of Paris, of which I am a

member, having had a plough presented to them, which, on trial with a

graduated instrument, did equal work with half the force of their

best ploughs, they thought it would be a benefit to mankind to

communicate it.  They accordingly sent one to me, with a view to its

being made known here, and they sent one to the Duke of Bedford also,

who is one of their members, to be made use of for England, although

the two nations were then at war.  By the Mentor, now going to

France, I have given permission to two individuals in Delaware and

New York, to import two parcels of Merino sheep from France, which

they have procured there, and to some gentlemen in Boston, to import

a very valuable machine which spins cotton, wool and flax equally.

The last spring, the Society informed me they were cultivating the

cotton of the Levant and other parts of the Mediterranean, and wished

to try also that of our southern States.  I immediately got a friend

to have two tierces of seed forwarded to me.  They were consigned to

Messrs. Falls and Brown of Baltimore, and notice of it being given

me, I immediately wrote to them to re-ship them to New York, to be

sent by the Mentor.  Their first object was to make a show of my

letter, as something very criminal, and to carry the subject into the

newspapers.  I had, on a like request, some time ago, (but before the

embargo) from the President of the Board of Agriculture of London, of

which I am also a member, to send them some of the genuine May wheat

of Virginia, forwarded to them two or three barrels of it.  General

Washington, in his time, received from the same Society the seed of

the perennial succory, which Arthur Young had carried over from

France to England, and I have since received from a member of it the

seed of the famous turnip of Sweden, now so well known here.  I

mention these things, to shew the nature of the correspondence which

is carried on between societies instituted for the benevolent purpose

of communicating to all parts of the world whatever useful is

discovered in any one of them.  These societies are always in peace,

however their nations may be at war.  Like the republic of letters,

they form a great fraternity spreading over the whole earth, and

their correspondence is never interrupted by any civilized nation.

Vaccination has been a late and remarkable instance of the liberal

diffusion of a blessing newly discovered.  It is really painful, it

is mortifying, to be obliged to note these things, which are known to

every one who knows any thing, and felt with approbation by every one

who has any feeling.  But we have a faction to whose hostile passions

the torture even of right into wrong is a delicious gratification.

Their malice I have long learned to disregard, their censure to deem

praise.  But I observe, that some republicans are not satisfied (even

while we are receiving liberally from others) that this small return

should be made.  They will think more justly at another day: but in

the mean time, I wish to avoid offence.  My prayer to you, therefore,

is, that you will be so good, under the inclosed order, as to receive

these two tierces of seed from Falls and Brown, and pay them their

disbursements for freight, &c. which I will immediately remit you on

knowing the amount.  Of the seed, when received, be so good as to

make manure for your garden.  When rotted with a due mixture of

stable manure or earth, it is the best in the world.  I rely on your

friendship to excuse this trouble, it being necessary I should not

commit myself again to persons of whose honor, or the want of it, I

know nothing.




        Accept the assurances of my constant esteem and respect.







        THE NEGRO RACE




        _To Henri Gregoire_

        _Washington, February 25, 1809_




        SIR, -- I have received the favor of your letter of August

17th, and with it the volume you were so kind as to send me on the

"Literature of Negroes." Be assured that no person living wishes more

sincerely than I do, to see a complete refutation of the doubts I

have myself entertained and expressed on the grade of understanding

allotted to them by nature, and to find that in this respect they are

on a par with ourselves.  My doubts were the result of personal

observation on the limited sphere of my own State, where the

opportunities for the development of their genius were not favorable,

and those of exercising it still less so.  I expressed them therefore

with great hesitation; but whatever be their degree of talent it is

no measure of their rights.  Because Sir Isaac Newton was superior to

others in understanding, he was not therefore lord of the person or

property of others.  On this subject they are gaining daily in the

opinions of nations, and hopeful advances are making towards their

re-establishment on an equal footing with the other colors of the

human family.  I pray you therefore to accept my thanks for the many

instances you have enabled me to observe of respectable intelligence

in that race of men, which cannot fail to have effect in hastening

the day of their relief; and to be assured of the sentiments of high

and just esteem and consideration which I tender to yourself with all

sincerity.







        "A PRISONER, RELEASED FROM HIS CHAINS"




        _To P. S. Dupont de Nemours_

        _Washington, March 2, 1809_




        DEAR SIR, -- My last to you was of May the 2nd; since which I

have received yours of May the 25th, June the 1st, July the 23rd,

24th, and September the 5th, and distributed the two pamphlets

according to your desire.  They are read with the delight which every

thing from your pen gives.




        After using every effort which could prevent or delay our being

entangled in the war of Europe, that seems now our only resource.

The edicts of the two belligerents, forbidding us to be seen on the

ocean, we met by an embargo.  This gave us time to call home our

seamen, ships and property, to levy men and put our sea ports into a

certain state of defence.  We have now taken off the embargo, except

as to France and England and their territories, because fifty

millions of exports, annually sacrificed, are the treble of what war

would cost us; besides, that by war we should take something, and

lose less than at present.  But to give you a true description of the

state of things here, I must refer you to Mr. Coles, the bearer of

this, my secretary, a most worthy, intelligent and well informed

young man, whom I recommend to your notice, and conversation on our

affairs.  His discretion and fidelity may be relied on.  I expect he

will find you with Spain at your feet, but England still afloat, and

a barrier to the Spanish colonies.  But all these concerns I am now

leaving to be settled by my friend Mr. Madison.  Within a few days I

retire to my family, my books and farms; and having gained the harbor

myself, I shall look on my friends still buffeting the storm, with

anxiety indeed, but not with envy.  Never did a prisoner, released

from his chains, feel such relief as I shall on shaking off the

shackles of power.  Nature intended me for the tranquil pursuits of

science, by rendering them my supreme delight.  But the enormities of

the times in which I have lived, have forced me to take a part in

resisting them, and to commit myself on the boisterous ocean of

political passions.  I thank God for the opportunity of retiring from

them without censure, and carrying with me the most consoling proofs

of public approbation.  I leave every thing in the hands of men so

able to take care of them, that if we are destined to meet

misfortunes, it will be because no human wisdom could avert them.

Should you return to the United States, perhaps your curiosity may

lead you to visit the hermit of Monticello.  He will receive you with

affection and delight; hailing you in the mean time with his

affectionate salutations, and assurances of constant esteem and

respect.




        P.S. If you return to us, bring a couple of pair of true-bred

shepherd's dogs.  You will add a valuable possession to a country now

beginning to pay great attention to the raising sheep.







        A PARTING BLESSING




        _To Mrs. Samuel H. Smith_

        _Washington, Mar. 6, 1809_




        Th: Jefferson presents his respectful salutations to mrs.

Smith, and sends her the Geranium she expressed a willingness to

receive. it is in very bad condition, having been neglected latterly,

as not intended to be removed. he cannot give it his parting blessing

more effectually than by consigning it to the nourishing hand of mrs.

Smith.  If plants have sensibility, as the analogy of their

organisation with ours seems to indicate, it cannot but be proudly

sensible of her fostering attentions. of his regrets at parting with

the society of Washington, a very sensible portion attaches to mrs.

Smith, whose friendship he has particularly valued. her promise to

visit Monticello is some consolation; and he can assure her she will

be received with open arms and hearts by the whole family. he prays

her to accept the homage of his affectionate attachment and respect.







        THE POTATO AND HARPER'S FERRY




        _To Horatio G. Spafford_

        _Monticello, May 14, 1809_




        SIR, -- I have duly received your favor of April 3d, with the

copy of your "General Geography," for which I pray you to accept my

thanks.  My occupations here have not permitted me to read it

through, which alone could justify any judgment expressed on the

work.  Indeed, as it appears to be an abridgment of several branches

of science, the scale of abridgment must enter into that judgment.

Different readers require different scales according to the time they

can spare, and their views in reading, and no doubt that the view of

the sciences which you have brought into the compass of a 12mo volume

will be accommodated to the time and object of many who may wish for

but a very general view of them




        In passing my eye rapidly over parts of the book, I was struck

with two passages, on which I will make observations, not doubting

your wish, in any future edition, to render the work as correct as

you can.  In page 186 you say the potatoe is a native of the United

States.  I presume you speak of the Irish potatoe.  I have inquired

much into the question, and think I can assure you that plant is not

a native of North America.  Zimmerman, in his "Geographical Zoology,"

says it is a native of Guiana; and Clavigero, that the Mexicans got

it from South America, _its native country._ The most probable

account I have been able to collect is, that a vessel of Sir Walter

Raleigh's, returning from Guiana, put into the west of Ireland in

distress, having on board some potatoes which they called

earth-apples.  That the season of the year, and circumstance of their

being already sprouted, induced them to give them all out there, and

they were no more heard or thought of, till they had been spread

considerably into that island, whence they were carried over into

England, and therefore called the Irish potatoe.  From England they

came to the United States, bringing their name with them.




        The other passage respects the description of the passage of

the Potomac through the Blue Ridge, in the Notes on Virginia.  You

quote from Volney's account of the United States what his words do

not justify.  His words are, "on coming from Fredericktown, one does

not see the rich perspective mentioned in the Notes of Mr. Jefferson.

On observing this to him a few days after, he informed me he had his

information from a French engineer who, during the war of

Independence, ascended the height of the hills, and I conceive that

at that elevation the perspective must be as imposing as a wild

country, whose horizon has no obstacles, may present." That the scene

described in the "Notes" is not visible from any part of the road

from Fredericktown to Harper's ferry is most certain.  That road

passes along the valley, nor can it be seen from the tavern after

crossing the ferry; and we may fairly infer that Mr. Volney did not

ascend the height back of the tavern from which alone it can be seen,

but that he pursued his journey from the tavern along the high road.

Yet he admits, that at the elevation of that height the perspective

may be as rich as a wild country can present.  But you make him

"surprised to find, _by a view of the spot_, that the description was

_amazingly exaggerated._" But it is evident that Mr.  Volney did not

ascend the hill to _get a view of the spot_, and that he supposed

that that height may present as imposing a view as such a country

admits.  But Mr. Volney was mistaken in saying I told him I had

received the description from a French engineer.  By an error of

memory he has misapplied to this scene what I mentioned to him as to

the Natural Bridge.  I told him I received a _drawing_ of that from a

French engineer sent there by the Marquis de Chastellux, and who has

published that drawing in his travels.  I could not tell him I had

the description of the passage of the Potomac from a French engineer,

because I never heard any Frenchman say a word about it, much less

did I ever receive a description of it from any mortal whatever.  I

visited the place myself in October 1783, wrote the description some

time after, and printed the work in Paris in 1784-5.  I wrote the

description from my own view of the spot, stated no fact but what I

saw, and can now affirm that no fact is exaggerated.  It is true that

the same scene may excite very different sensations in different

spectators, according to their different sensibilities.  The

sensations of some may be much stronger than those of others.  And

with respect to the Natural Bridge, it was not a description, but a

drawing only, which I received from the French engineer.  The

description was written before I ever saw him.  It is not from any

merit which I suppose in either of these descriptions, that I have

gone into these observations, but to correct the imputation of having

given to the world as my own, ideas, and false ones too, which I had

received from another.  Nor do I mention the subject to you with a

desire that it should be any otherwise noticed before the public than

by a more correct statement in any future edition of your work.




        You mention having enclosed to me some printed letters

announcing a design in which you ask my aid.  But no such letters

came to me.  Any facts which I possess, and which may be useful to

your views, shall be freely communicated, and I shall be happy to see

you at Monticello, should you come this way as you propose.  You will

find me engaged entirely in rural occupations, looking into the field

of science but occasionally and at vacant moments.




        I sowed some of the Benni seed the last year, and distributed

some among my neighbors; but the whole was killed by the September

frost.  I got a little again the last winter, but it was sowed before

I received your letter.  Colonel Fen of New York receives quantities

of it from Georgia, from whom you may probably get some through the

Mayor of New York.  But I little expect it can succeed with you.  It

is about as hardy as the cotton plant, from which you may judge of

the probability of raising it at Hudson.




        I salute you with great respect.







        CIRCULATING LIBRARIES




        _To John Wyche_

        _Monticello, May 19, 1809_




        SIR, -- Your favor of March 19th came to hand but a few days

ago, and informs me of the establishment of the Westward Mill Library

Society, of its general views and progress.  I always hear with

pleasure of institutions for the promotion of knowledge among my

countrymen.  The people of every country are the only safe guardians

of their own rights, and are the only instruments which can be used

for their destruction.  And certainly they would never consent to be

so used were they not deceived.  To avoid this, they should be

instructed to a certain degree.  I have often thought that nothing

would do more extensive good at small expense than the establishment

of a small circulating library in every county, to consist of a few

well-chosen books, to be lent to the people of the county, under such

regulations as would secure their safe return in due time.  These

should be such as would give them a general view of other history,

and particular view of that of their own country, a tolerable

knowledge of Geography, the elements of Natural Philosophy, of

Agriculture and Mechanics.  Should your example lead to this, it will

do great good.  Having had more favorable opportunities than fall to

every man's lot of becoming acquainted with the best books on such

subjects as might be selected, I do not know that I can be otherwise

useful to your society than by offering them any information

respecting these which they might wish.  My services in this way are

freely at their command, and I beg leave to tender to yourself my

salutations and assurances of respect.







        "THE SPIRIT OF MANUFACTURE"




        _To P. S. Dupont de Nemours_

        _Monticello, June 28, 1809_




        DEAR SIR, -- The interruption of our commerce with England,

produced by our embargo and non-intercourse law, and the general

indignation excited by her barefaced attempts to make us accessories

and tributaries to her usurpations on the high seas, have generated

in this country an universal spirit for manufacturing for ourselves,

and of reducing to a minimum the number of articles for which we are

dependent on her.  The advantages, too, of lessening the occasions of

risking our peace on the ocean, and of planting the consumer in our

own soil by the side of the grower of produce, are so palpable, that

no temporary suspension of injuries on her part, or agreements

founded on that, will now prevent our continuing in what we have

begun.  The spirit of manufacture has taken deep root among us, and

its foundations are laid in too great expense to be abandoned.  The

bearer of this, Mr. Ronaldson, will be able to inform you of the

extent and perfection of the works produced here by the late state of

things; and to his information, which is greatest as to what is doing

in the cities, I can add my own as to the country, where the

principal articles wanted in every family are now fabricated within

itself.  This mass of _household_ manufacture, unseen by the public

eye, and so much greater than what is seen, is such at present, that

let our intercourse with England be opened when it may, not one half

the amount of what we have heretofore taken from her will ever again

be demanded.  The great call from the country has hitherto been of

coarse goods.  These are now made in our families, and the advantage

is toosensible ever to be relinquished.  It is one of those obvious

improvements in our condition which needed only to be once forced on

our attention, never again to be abandoned.




        Among the arts which have made great progress among us is that

of printing.  Heretofore we imported our books, and with them much

political principle from England.  We now print a great deal, and

shall soon supply ourselves with most of the books of considerable

demand.  But the foundation of printing, you know, is the

type-foundry, and a material essential to that is antimony.

Unfortunately that mineral is not among those as yet found in the

United States, and the difficulty and dearness of getting it from

England, will force us to discontinue our type-founderies, and resort

to her again for our books, unless some new source of supply can be

found.  The bearer, Mr. Ronaldson, is of the concern of Binney &

Ronaldson, type-founders of Philadelphia.  He goes to France for the

purpose of opening some new source of supply, where we learn that

this article is abundant; the enhancement of the price in England has

taught us the fact, that its exportation thither from France must be

interrupted, either by the war or express prohibition.  Our

relations, however, with France, are too unlike hers with England, to

place us under the same interdiction.  Regulations for preventing the

transportation of the article to England, under the cover of supplies

to America, may be thought requisite.  The bearer, I am persuaded,

will readily give any assurances which may be required for this

object, and the wants of his own type-foundry here are a sufficient

pledge that what he gets is _bona fide_ to supply them.  I do not

know that there will be any obstacle to his bringing from France any

quantity of antimony he may have occasion for; but lest there should

be, I have taken the liberty of recommending him to your patronage.

I know your enlightened and liberal views on subjects of this kind,

and the friendly interest you take in whatever concerns our welfare.

I place Mr. Ronaldson, therefore, in your hands, and pray you to

advise him, and patronize the object which carries him to Europe, and

is so interesting to him and to our country.  His knowledge of what

is passing among us will be a rich source of information for you, and

especially as to the state and progress of our manufactures.  Your

kindness to him will confer an obligation on me, and will be an

additional title to the high and affectionate esteem and respect of

an ancient and sincere friend.







        AN EDITION OF WRITINGS




        _To John W. Campbell_

        _Monticello, September 3, 1809_




        SIR, -- Your letter of July 29th came to hand some time since,

but I have not sooner been able to acknowledge it.  In answer to your

proposition for publishing a complete edition of my different

writings, I must observe that no writings of mine, other than those

merely official, have been published, except the Notes on Virginia

and a small pamphlet under the title of a Summary View of the rights

of British America.  The Notes on Virginia, I have always intended to

revise and enlarge, and have, from time to time, laid by materials

for that purpose.  It will be long yet before other occupations will

permit me to digest them, and observations and inquiries are still to

be made, which will be more correct in proportion to the length of

time they are continued.  It is not unlikely that this may be through

my life.  I could not, therefore, at present, offer anything new for

that work.




        The Summary View was not written for publication.  It was a

draught I had prepared for a petition to the king, which I meant to

propose in my place as a member of the convention of 1774.  Being

stopped on the road by sickness, I sent it on to the Speaker, who

laid it on the table for the perusal of the members.  It was thought

too strong for the times, and to become the act of the convention,

but was printed by subscription of the members, with a short preface

written by one of them.  If it had any merit, it was that of first

taking our true ground, and that which was afterwards assumed and

maintained.




        I do not mention the Parliamentary Manual, published for the

use of the Senate of the United States, because it was a mere

compilation, into which nothing entered of my own but the

arrangement, and a few observations necessary to explain that and

some of the cases.




        I do not know whether your view extends to official papers of

mine which have been published.  Many of these would be like old

newspapers, materials for future historians, but no longer

interesting to the readers of the day.  They would consist of

reports, correspondences, messages, answers to addresses; a few of my

reports while Secretary of State, might perhaps be read by some as

essays on abstract subjects.  Such as the report on measures, weights

and coins, on the mint, on the fisheries, on commerce, on the use of

distilled sea-water, &c.  The correspondences with the British and

French ministers, Hammond and Genet, were published by Congress.  The

messages to Congress, which might have been interesting at the

moment, would scarcely be read a second time, and answers to

addresses are hardly read a first time.




        So that on a review of these various materials, I see nothing

encouraging a printer to a re-publication of them.  They would

probably be bought by those only who are in the habit of preserving

State papers, and who are not many.




        I say nothing of numerous draughts of reports, resolutions,

declarations, &c., drawn as a Member of Congress or of the

Legislature of Virginia, such as the Declaration of Independence,

Report on the Money Mint of the United States, the act of religious

freedom, &c., &c.; these having become the acts of public bodies,

there can be no personal claim to them, and they would no more find

readers now, than the journals and statute books in which they are

deposited.




        I have presented this general view of the subjects which might

have been within the scope of your contemplation, that they might be

correctly estimated before any final decision.  They belong mostly to

a class of papers not calculated for popular reading, and not likely

to offer profit, or even indemnification to the re-publisher.

Submitting it to your consideration, I tender you my salutations and

respects.







        INDIAN VOCABULARIES




        _To Dr. Benjamin S. Barton_

        _Monticello, September 21, 1809_




        DEAR SIR, -- I received last night your favor of the 14th, and

would with all possible pleasure have communicated to you any part or

the whole of the Indian vocabularies which I had collected, but an

irreparable misfortune has deprived me of them.  I have now been

thirty years availing myself of every possible opportunity of

procuring Indian vocabularies to the same set of words: my

opportunities were probably better than will ever occur again to any

person having the same desire.  I had collected about fifty, and had

digested most of them in collateral columns, and meant to have

printed them the last year of my stay in Washington.  But not having

yet digested Captain Lewis's collection, nor having leisure then to

do it, I put it off till I should return home.  The whole, as well

digest as originals, were packed in a trunk of stationary, and sent

round by water with about thirty other packages of my effects, from

Washington, and while ascending James river, this package, on account

of its weight and presumed precious contents, was singled out and

stolen.  The thief being disappointed on opening it, threw into the

river all its contents, of which he thought he could make no use.

Among these were the whole of the vocabularies.  Some leaves floated

ashore and were found in the mud; but these were very few, and so

defaced by the mud and water that no general use can ever be made of

them.  On the receipt of your letter I turned to them, and was very

happy to find, that the only morsel of an original vocabulary among

them, was Captain Lewis's of the Pani language, of which you say you

have not one word.  I therefore inclose it to you, as it is, and a

little fragment of some other, which I see is in his hand writing,

but no indication remains on it of what language it is.  It is a

specimen of the condition of the little which was recovered.  I am

the more concerned at this accident, as of the two hundred and fifty

words of my vocabularies, and the one hundred and thirty words of the

great Russian vocabularies of the languages of the other quarters of

the globe, severty-three were common to both, and would have

furnished materials for a comparison from which something might have

resulted.  Although I believe no general use can ever be made of the

wrecks of my loss, yet I will ask the return of the Pani vocabulary

when you are done with it.  Perhaps I may make another attempt to

collect, although I am too old to expect to make much progress in it.




        I learn, with pleasure, your acquisition of the pamphlet on the

astronomy of the antient Mexicans.  If it be antient and genuine, or

modern and rational, it will be of real value.  It is one of the most

interesting countries of our hemisphere, and merits every attention.




        I am thankful for your kind offer of sending the original

Spanish for my perusal.  But I think it a pity to trust it to the

accidents of the post, and whenever you publish the translation, I

shall be satisfied to read that which shall be given by your

translator, who is, I am sure, a greater adept in the language than I

am.




        Accept the assurances of my great esteem and respect.







        AMERICAN QUAKERISM




        _To Samuel Kercheval_

        _Monticello, January 19, 1810_




        SIR, -- Yours of the 7th instant has been duly received, with

the pamphlet inclosed, for which I return you my thanks.  Nothing can

be more exactly and seriously true than what is there stated; that

but a short time elapsed after the death of the great reformer of the

Jewish religion, before his principles were departed from by those

who professed to be his special servants, and perverted into an

engine for enslaving mankind, and aggrandising their oppressors in

Church and State; that the purest system of morals ever before

preached to man, has been adulterated and sophisticated by artificial

constructions, into a mere contrivance to filch wealth and power to

themselves; that rational men not being able to swallow their impious

heresies, in order to force them down their throats, they raise the

hue and cry of infidelity, while themselves are the greatest

obstacles to the advancement of the real doctrines of Jesus, and do

in fact constitute the real Anti-Christ.




        You expect that your book will have some effect on the

prejudices which the society of Friends entertain against the present

and late administrations.  In this I think you will be disappointed.

The Friends are men, formed with the same passions, and swayed by the

same natural principles and prejudices as others.  In cases where the

passions are neutral, men will display their respect for the

religious _professions_ of their sect.  But where their passions are

enlisted, these _professions_ are no obstacle.  You observe very

truly, that both the late and present administration conducted the

government on principles _professed_ by the Friends.  Our efforts to

preserve peace, our measures as to the Indians, as to slavery, as to

religious freedom, were all in consonance with their _professions_.

Yet I never expected we should get a vote from them, and in this I

was neither deceived nor disappointed.  There is no riddle in this,

to those who do not suffer themselves to be duped by the

_professions_ of religious sectaries.  The theory of American

Quakerism is a very obvious one.  The mother society is in England.

Its members are English by birth and residence, devoted to their own

country, as good citizens ought to be.  The Quakers of these States

are colonies or filiations from the mother society, to whom that

society sends its yearly lessons.  On these the filiated societies

model their opinions, their conduct, their passions and attachments.

A Quaker is, essentially, an Englishman, in whatever part of the

earth he is born or lives.  The outrages of Great Britain on our

navigation and commerce, have kept us in perpetual bickerings with

her.  The Quakers here have taken side against their own government;

not on their _profession_ of peace, for they saw that peace was our

object also; but from devotion to the views of the mother society.

In 1797 and 8, when an administration sought war with France, the

Quakers were the most clamorous for war.  Their principle of peace,

as a secondary one, yielded to the primary one of adherence to the

Friends in England, and what was patriotism in the original became

treason in the copy.  On that occasion, they obliged their good old

leader, Mr. Pemberton, to erase his name from a petition to Congress,

against war, which had been delivered to a Representative of

Pennsylvania, a member of the late and present administration.  He

accordingly permitted the old gentleman to erase his name.  You must

not, therefore, expect that your book will have any more effect on

the society of Friends here, than on the English merchants settled

among us.  I apply this to the Friends in general, not universally.

I know individuals among them as good patriots as we have.




        I thank you for the kind wishes and sentiments towards myself,

expressed in your letter, and sincerely wish to yourself the

blessings of health and happiness.







        NEPOTISM AND THE REPUBLIC




        _To John Garland Jefferson_

        _Monticello, January 25, 1810_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favor of December 12th was long coming to

hand.  I am much concerned to learn that any disagreeable impression

was made on your mind, by the circumstances which are the subject of

your letter.  Permit me first to explain the principles which I had

laid down for my own observance.  In a government like ours, it is

the duty of the Chief Magistrate, in order to enable himself to do

all the good which his station requires, to endeavor, by all

honorable means, to unite in himself the confidence of the whole

people.  This alone, in any case where the energy of the nation is

required, can produce a union of the powers of the whole, and point

them in a single direction, as if all constituted but one body and

one mind, and this alone can render a weaker nation unconquerable by

a stronger one.  Towards acquiring the confidence of the people, the

very first measure is to satisfy them of his disinterestedness, and

that he is directing their affairs with a single eye to their good,

and not to build up fortunes for himself and family, and especially,

that the officers appointed to transact their business, are appointed

because they are the fittest men, not because they are his relations.

So prone are they to suspicion, that where a President appoints a

relation of his own, however worthy, they will believe that favor and

not merit was the motive.  I therefore laid it down as a law of

conduct for myself, never to give an appointment to a relation.  Had

I felt any hesitation in adopting this rule, examples were not

wanting to admonish me what to do and what to avoid.  Still, the

expression of your willingness to act in any office for which you

were qualified, could not be imputed to you as blame.  It would not

readily occur that a person qualified for office ought to be rejected

merely because he was related to the President, and the then more

recent examples favored the other opinion.  In this light I

considered the case as presenting itself to your mind, and that the

application might be perfectly justifiable on your part, while, for

reasons occurring to none perhaps, but the person in my situation,

the public interest might render it unadvisable.  Of this, however,

be assured that I consider the proposition as innocent on your part,

and that it never lessened my esteem for you, or the interest I felt

in your welfare.




        My stay in Amelia was too short, (only twenty-four hours,) to

expect the pleasure of seeing you there.  It would be a happiness to

me any where, but especially here, from whence I am rarely absent.  I

am leading a life of considerable activity as a farmer, reading

little and writing less.  Something pursued with ardor is necessary

to guard us from the _tedium-vitae,_ and the active pursuits lessen

most our sense of the infirmities of age.  That to the health of

youth you may add an old age of vigor, is the sincere prayer of




                                         Yours, affectionately.







        PROSTRATION OF REASON




        _To Caesar A. Rodney_

        _Monticello, February 10, 1810_




        MY DEAR SIR, -- I have to thank you for your favor of the 31st

ultimo, which is just now received.  It has been peculiarly

unfortunate for us, personally, that the portion in the history of

mankind, at which we were called to take a share in the direction of

their affairs, was such an one as history has never before presented.

At any other period, the even-handed justice we have observed towards

all nations, the efforts we have made to merit their esteem by every

act which candor or liberality could exercise, would have preserved

our peace, and secured the unqualified confidence of all other

nations in our faith and probity.  But the hurricane which is now

blasting the world, physical and moral, has prostrated all the mounds

of reason as well as right.  All those calculations which, at any

other period, would have been deemed honorable, of the existence of a

moral sense in man, individually or associated, of the connection

which the laws of nature have established between his duties and his

interests, of a regard for honest fame and the esteem of our fellow

men, have been a matter of reproach on us, as evidences of

imbecility.  As if it could be a folly for an honest man to suppose

that others could be honest also, when it is their interest to be so.

And when is this state of things to end?  The death of Bonaparte

would, to be sure, remove the first and chiefest apostle of the

desolation of men and morals, and might withdraw the scourge of the

land.  But what is to restore order and safety on the ocean?  The

death of George III?  Not at all.  He is only stupid; and his

ministers, however weak and profligate in morals, are ephemeral.  But

his nation is permanent, and it is that which is the tyrant of the

ocean.  The principle that force is right, is become the principle of

the nation itself.  They would not permit an honest minister, were

accident to bring such an one into power, to relax their system of

lawless piracy.  These were the difficulties when I was with you.  I

know they are not lessened, and I pity you.




        It is a blessing, however, that our people are reasonable; that

they are kept so well informed of the state of things as to judge for

themselves, to see the true sources of their difficulties, and to

maintain their confidence undiminished in the wisdom and integrity of

their functionaries.  _Macte virtute_ therefore.  Continue to go

straight forward, pursuing always that which is right, as the only

clue which can lead us out of the labyrinth.  Let nothing be spared

of either reason or passion, to preserve the public confidence

entire, as the only rock of our safety.  In times of peace the people

look most to their representatives; but in war, to the executive

solely.  It is visible that their confidence is even now veering in

that direction; that they are looking to the executive to give the

proper direction to their affairs, with a confidence as auspicious as

it is well founded.




        I avail myself of this, the first occasion of writing to you,

to express all the depth of my affection for you; the sense I

entertain of your faithful co-operation in my late labors, and the

debt I owe for the valuable aid I received from you.  Though

separated from my fellow laborers in place and pursuit, my affections

are with you all, and I offer daily prayers that ye love one another,

as I love you.  God bless you.







        "THE BOOK OF KINGS"




        _To Governor John Langdon_

        _Monticello, March 5, 1810_




        Your letter, my dear friend, of the 18th ultimo, comes like the

refreshing dews of the evening on a thirsty soil.  It recalls antient

as well as recent recollections, very dear to my heart.  For five and

thirty years we have walked together through a land of tribulations.

Yet these have passed away, and so, I trust, will those of the

present day.  The toryism with which we struggled in '77, differed

but in name from the federalism of '99, with which we struggled also;

and the Anglicism of 1808, against which we are now struggling, is

but the same thing still, in another form.  It is a longing for a

King, and an English King rather than any other.  This is the true

source of their sorrows and wailings.




        The fear that Buonaparte will come over to us and conquer us

also, is too chimerical to be genuine.  Supposing him to have

finished Spain and Portugal, he has yet England and Russia to subdue.

The maxim of war was never sounder than in this case, not to leave an

enemy in the rear; and especially where an insurrectionary flame is

known to be under the embers, merely smothered, and ready to burst at

every point.  These two subdued, (and surely the Anglomen will not

think the conquest of England alone a short work) antient Greece and

Macedonia, the cradle of Alexander, his prototype, and

Constantinople, the seat of empire for the world, would glitter more

in his eye than our bleak mountains and rugged forests.  Egypt, too,

and the golden apples of Mauritania, have for more than half a

century fixed the longing eyes of France; and with Syria, you know,

he has an old affront to wipe out.  Then come `Pontus and Galatia,

Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia,' the fine countries on the Euphrates

and Tigris, the Oxus and Indus, and all beyond the Hyphasis, which

bounded the glories of his Macedonian rival; with the invitations of

his new British subjects on the banks of the Ganges, whom, after

receiving under his protection the mother country, he cannot refuse

to visit.  When all this is done and settled, and nothing of the old

world remains unsubdued, he may turn to the new one.  But will he

attack us first, from whom he will get but hard knocks and no money?

Or will he first lay hold of the gold and silver of Mexico and Peru,

and the diamonds of Brazil?  A _republican_ Emperor, from his

affection to republics, independent of motives of expediency, must

grant to ours the Cyclop's boon of being the last devoured.  While

all this is doing, we are to suppose the chapter of accidents read

out, and that nothing can happen to cut short or to disturb his

enterprises.




        But the Anglomen, it seems, have found out a much safer

dependance, than all these chances of death or disappointment.  That

is, that we should first let England plunder us, as she has been

doing for years, for fear Buonaparte should do it; and then ally

ourselves with her, and enter into the war.  A conqueror, whose

career England could not arrest when aided by Russia, Austria,

Prussia, Sweden, Spain and Portugal, she is now to destroy, with all

these on his side, by the aid of the United States alone.  This,

indeed, is making us a mighty people.  And what is to be our

security, that when embarked for her in the war, she will not make a

separate peace, and leave us in the lurch?  Her good faith!  The

faith of a nation of merchants!  The _Punica fides_ of modern

Carthage!  Of the friend and protectress of Copenhagen!  Of the

nation who never admitted a chapter of morality into her political

code!  And is now boldly avowing, that whatever power can make hers,

is hers of right.  Money, and not morality, is the principle of

commerce and commercial nations.  But, in addition to this, the

nature of the English government forbids, of itself, reliance on her

engagements; and it is well known she has been the least faithful to

her alliances of any nation of Europe, since the period of her

history wherein she has been distinguished for her commerce and

corruption, that is to say, under the houses of Stuart and Brunswick.

To Portugal alone she has steadily adhered, because, by her Methuin

treaty she had made it a colony, and one of the most valuable to her.

It may be asked, what, in the nature of her government, unfits

England for the observation of moral duties?  In the first place, her

King is a cypher; his only function being to name the oligarchy which

is to govern her.  The parliament is, by corruption, the mere

instrument of the will of the administration.  The real power and

property in the government is in the great aristocratical families of

the nation.  The nest of office being too small for all of them to

cuddle into at once, the contest is eternal, which shall crowd the

other out.  For this purpose, they are divided into two parties, the

Ins and the Outs, so equal in weight that a small matter turns the

balance.  To keep themselves in, when they are in, every stratagem

must be practised, every artifice used which may flatter thepride,

the passions or power of the nation.  Justice, honor, faith, must

yield to the necessity of keeping themselves in place.  The question

whether a measure is moral, is never asked; but whether it will

nourish the avarice of their merchants, or the piratical spirit of

their navy, or produce any other effect which may strengthen them in

their places.  As to engagements, however positive, entered into by

the predecessors of the Ins, why, they were their enemies; they did

every thing which was wrong; and to reverse every thing they did,

must, therefore, be right.  This is the true character of the English

government in practice, however different its theory; and it presents

the singular phenomenon of a nation, the individuals of which are as

faithful to their private engagements and duties, as honorable, as

worthy, as those of any nation on earth, and whose government is yet

the most unprincipled at this day known.  In an absolute government

there can be no such equiponderant parties.  The despot is the

government.  His power suppressing all opposition, maintains his

ministers firm in their places.  What he has contracted, therefore,

through them, he has the power to observe with good faith; and he

identifies his own honor and faith with that of his nation.




        When I observed, however, that the King of England was a

cypher, I did not mean to confine the observation to the mere

individual now on that throne.  The practice of Kings marrying only

into the families of Kings, has been that of Europe for some

centuries.  Now, take any race of animals, confine them in idleness

and inaction, whether in a stye, a stable, or a state room, pamper

them with high diet, gratify all their sexual appetites, immerse them

in sensualities, nourish their passions, let every thing bend before

them, and banish whatever might lead them to think, and in a few

generations they become all body and no mind: and this, too, by a law

of nature, by that very law by which we are in the constant practice

of changing the characters and propensities of the animals we raise

for our own purposes.  Such is the regimen in raising Kings, and in

this way they have gone on for centuries.  While in Europe, I often

amused myself with contemplating the characters of the then reigning

sovereigns of Europe.  Louis the XVI. was a fool, of my own

knowledge, and in despite of the answers made for him at his trial.

The King of Spain was a fool, and of Naples the same.  They passed

their lives in hunting, and despatched two couriers a week, one

thousand miles, to let each other know what game they had killed the

preceding days.  The King of Sardinia was a fool.  All these were

Bourbons.  The Queen of Portugal, a Braganza, was an idiot by nature.

And so was the King of Denmark.  Their sons, as regents, exercised

the powers of government.  The King of Prussia, successor to the

great Frederick, was a mere hog in body as well as in mind.  Gustavus

of Sweden, and Joseph of Austria, were really crazy, and George of

England you know was in a straight waistcoat.  There remained, then,

none but old Catherine, who had been too lately picked up to have

lost her common sense.  In this state Buonaparte found Europe; and it

was this state of its rulers which lost it with scarce a struggle.

These animals had become without mind and powerless; and so will

every hereditary monarch be after a few generations.  Alexander, the

grandson of Catherine, is as yet an exception.  He is able to hold

his own.  But he is only of the third generation.  His race is not

yet worn out.  And so endeth the book of Kings, from all of whom the

Lord deliver us, and have you, my friend, and all such good men and

true, in his holy keeping.







        "AN ACADEMICAL VILLAGE"




        _To Messrs. Hugh L. White and Others_

        _Monticello, May 6, 1810_




        GENTLEMEN, -- I received, some time ago, your letter of

February 28th, covering a printed scheme of a lottery for the benefit

of the East Tennessee College, and proposing to send tickets to me to

be disposed of.  It would be impossible for them to come to a more

inefficient hand.  I rarely go from home, and consequently see but a

few neighbors and friends, who occasionally call on me.  And having

myself made it a rule never to engage in a lottery or any other

adventure of mere chance, I can, with the less candor or effect, urge

it on others, however laudable or desirable its object may be.  No

one more sincerely wishes the spread of information among mankind

than I do, and none has greater confidence in its effect towards

supporting free and good government.  I am sincerely rejoiced,

therefore, to find that so excellent a fund has been provided for

this noble purpose in Tennessee.  Fifty-thousand dollars placed in a

safe bank, will give four thousand dollars a year, and even without

other aid, must soon accomplish buildings sufficient for the object

in its early stage.  I consider the common plan followed in this

country, but not in others, of making one large and expensive

building, as unfortunately erroneous.  It is infinitely better to

erect a small and separate lodge for each separate professorship,

with only a hall below for his class, and two chambers above for

himself; joining these lodges by barracks for a certain portion of

the students, opening into a covered way to give a dry communication

between all the schools.  The whole of these arranged around an open

square of grass and trees, would make it, what it should be in fact,

an academical village, instead of a large and common den of noise, of

filth and of fetid air.  It would afford that quiet retirement so

friendly to study, and lessen the dangers of fire, infection and

tumult.  Every professor would be the police officer of the students

adjacent to his own lodge, which should include those of his own

class of preference, and might be at the head of their table, if, as

I suppose, it can be reconciled with the necessary economy to dine

them in smaller and separate parties, rather than in a large and

common mess.  These separate buildings, too, might be erected

successively and occasionally, as the number of professorships and

students should be increased, or the funds become competent.




        I pray you to pardon me if I have stepped aside into the

province of counsel; but much observation and reflection on these

institutions have long convinced me that the large and crowded

buildings in which youths are pent up, are equally unfriendly to

health, to study, to manners, morals and order; and, believing the

plan I suggest to be more promotive of these, and peculiarly adapted

to the slender beginnings and progressive growth of our institutions,

I hoped you would pardon the presumption, in consideration of the

motive which was suggested by the difficulty expressed in your

letter, of procuring funds for erecting the building.  But, on

whatever plan you proceed, I wish it every possible success, and to

yourselves the reward of esteem, respect and gratitude due to those

who devote their time and efforts to render the youths of every

successive age fit governors for the next.  To these accept, in

addition, the assurances of mine.







        A PLAN FOR THE MERINOS




        _To the President of the United States_

        (James Madison)

        _Monticello, May 13, 1810_




        DEAR SIR, -- I thank you for your promised attention to my

portion of the Merinos, and if there be any expenses of

transportation, &c., and you will be so good as to advance my portion

of them with yours and notify the amount, it shall be promptly

remitted.  What shall we do with them?  I have been so disgusted with

the scandalous extortions lately practised in the sale of these

animals, and with the description of patriotism and praise to the

sellers, as if the thousands of dollars apiece they have not been

ashamed to receive were not reward enough, that I am disposed to

consider as right, whatever is the reverse of what they have done.

Since fortune has put the occasion upon us, is it not incumbent upon

us so to dispense this benefit to the farmers of our country, as to

put to shame those who, forgetting their own wealth and the honest

simplicity of the farmers, have thought them fit objects of the

shaving art, and to excite, by a better example, the condemnation due

to theirs?  No sentiment is more acknowledged in the family of

Agriculturists than that the few who can afford it should incur the

risk and expense of all new improvements, and give the benefit freely

to the many of more restricted circumstances.  The question then

recurs, What are we to do with them?  I shall be willing to concur

with you in any plan you shall approve, and in order that we may have

some proposition to begin upon, I will throw out a first idea, to be

modified or postponed to whatever you shall think better.




        Give all the full-blooded males we can raise to the different

counties of our State, one to each, as fast as we can furnish them.

And as there must be some rule of priority for the distribution, let

us begin with our own counties, which are contiguous and nearly

central to the State, and proceed, circle after circle, till we have

given a ram to every county.  This will take about seven years, if we

add to the full descendants those which will have past to the fourth

generation from common ewes, to make the benefit of a single male as

general as practicable to the county, we may ask some known character

in each county to have a small society formed which shall receive the

animal and prescribe rules for his care and government.  We should

retain ourselves all the full-blooded ewes, that they may enable us

the sooner to furnish a male to every county.  When all shall have

been provided with rams, we may, in a year or two more, be in a

condition to give an ewe also to every county, if it be thought

necessary.  But I suppose it will not, as four generations from their

full-blooded ram will give them the pure race from common ewes.




        In the meantime we shall not be without a profit indemnifying

our trouble and expense.  For if of our present stock of common ewes,

we place with the ram as many as he may be competent to, suppose

fifty, we may sell the male lambs of every year for such reasonable

price as in addition to the wool, will pay for the maintenance of the

flock.  The first year they will be half bloods, the second

three-quarters, the third seven-eights, and the fourth full-blooded,

if we take care in selling annually half the ewes also, to keep those

of highest blood, this will be a fund for kindnesses to our friends,

as well as for indemnification to ourselves; and our whole State may

thus, from this small stock, so dispersed, be filled in a very few

years with this valuable race, and more satisfaction result to

ourselves than money ever administered to the bosom of a shaver.

There will be danger that what is here proposed, though but an act of

ordinary duty, may be perverted into one of ostentation, but malice

will always find bad motives for good actions.  Shall we therefore

never do good?  It may also be used to commit us with those on whose

example it will truly be a reproof.  We may guard against this

perhaps by a proper reserve, developing our purpose only by its

execution.




        Vive, vale, et siquid novisti rectius istis

        Candidus imperti sinon, his ulere mecum.







        SCHOOLS AND "LITTLE REPUBLICS"




        _To John Tyler_

        _Monticello, May 26, 1810_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your friendly letter of the 12th has been duly

received.  Although I have laid it down as a law to myself, never to

embarrass the President with my solicitations, and have not till now

broken through it, yet I have made a part of yourletter the subject

of one to him, and have done it with all my heart, and in the full

belief that I serve him and the public in urging that appointment.

We have long enough suffered under the base prostitution of law to

party passions in one judge, and the imbecility of another.  In the

hands of one the law is nothing more than an ambiguous text, to be

explained by his sophistry into any meaning which may subserve his

personal malice.  Nor can any milk-and-water associate maintain his

own dependance, and by a firm pursuance of what the law really is,

extend its protection to the citizens or the public.  I believe you

will do it, and where you cannot induce your colleague to do what is

right, you will be firm enough to hinder him from doing what is

wrong, and by opposing sense to sophistry, leave the juries free to

follow their own judgment.




        I have long lamented with you the depreciation of law science.

The opinion seems to be that Blackstone is to us what the Alcoran is

to the Mahometans, that everything which is necessary is in him, and

what is not in him is not necessary.  I still lend my counsel and

books to such young students as will fix themselves in the

neighborhood.  Coke's institutes and reports are their first, and

Blackstone their last book, after an intermediate course of two or

three years.  It is nothing more than an elegant digest of what they

will then have acquired from the real fountains of the law.  Now men

are born scholars, lawyers, doctors; in our day this was confined to

poets.  You wish to see me again in the legislature, but this is

impossible; my mind is now so dissolved in tranquillity, that it can

never again encounter a contentious assembly; the habits of thinking

and speaking off-hand, after a disuse of five and twenty years, have

given place to the slower process of the pen.  I have indeed two

great measures at heart, without which no republic can maintain

itself in strength.  1. That of general education, to enable every

man to judge for himself what will secure or endanger his freedom.

2. To divide every county into hundreds, of such size that all the

children of each will be within reach of a central school in it.  But

this division looks to many other fundamental provisions.  Every

hundred, besides a school, should have a justice of the peace, a

constable and a captain of militia.  These officers, or some others

within the hundred, should be a corporation to manage all its

concerns, to take care of its roads, its poor, and its police by

patrols, &c., (as the select men of the Eastern townships.)  Every

hundred should elect one or two jurors to serve where requisite, and

all other elections should be made in the hundreds separately, and

the votes of all the hundreds be brought together.  Our present

Captaincies might be declared hundreds for the present, with a power

to the courts to alter them occasionally.  These little republics

would be the main strength of the great one.  We owe to them the

vigor given to our revolution in its commencement in the Eastern

States, and by them the Eastern States were enabled to repeal the

embargo in opposition to the Middle, Southern and Western States, and

their large and lubberly division into counties which can never be

assembled.  General orders are given out from a centre to the foreman

of every hundred, as to the sergeants of an army, and the whole

nation is thrown into energetic action, in the same direction in one

instant and as one man, and becomes absolutely irresistible.  Could I

once see this I should consider it as the dawn of the salvation of

the republic, and say with old Simeon, "nunc dimittas Domine." But

our children will be as wise as we are, and will establish in the

fulness of time those things not yet ripe for establishment.  So be

it, and to yourself health, happiness and long life.







        HUME AND MONTESQUIEU




        _To William Duane_

        _Monticello, August 12, 1810_




        SIR, -- Your letter of July 16th has been duly received, with

the paper it enclosed, for which accept my thanks, and especially for

the kind sentiments expressed towards myself.  These testimonies of

approbation, and friendly remembrance, are the highest gratifications

I can receive from any, and especially from those in whose principles

and zeal for the public good I have confidence.  Of that confidence

in yourself the military appointment to which you allude was

sufficient proof, as it was made, not on the recommendations of

others, but on our own knowledge of your principles and

qualifications.  While I cherish with feeling the recollections of my

friends, I banish from my mind all political animosities which might

disturb its tranquillity, or the happiness I derive from my present

pursuits.  I have thought it among the most fortunate circumstances

of my late administration that, during its eight years continuance,

it was conducted with a cordiality and harmony among all the members,

which never were ruffled on any, the greatest or smallest occasion.

I left my brethren with sentiments of sincere affection and

friendship, so rooted in the uniform tenor of a long and intimate

intercourse, that the evidence of my own senses alone ought to be

permitted to shake them.  Anxious, in my retirement, to enjoy

undisturbed repose, my knowledge of my successor and late coadjutors,

and my entire confidence in their wisdom and integrity, were

assurances to me that I might sleep in security with such watchmen at

the helm, and that whatever difficulties and dangers should assail

our course, they would do what could be done to avoid or surmount

them.  In this confidence I envelope myself, and hope to slumber on

to my last sleep.  And should difficulties occur which they cannot

avert, if we follow them in phalanx, we shall surmount them without

danger.




        I have been long intending to write to you as one of the

associated company for printing useful works.




        Our laws, language, religion, politics and manners are so

deeply laid in English foundations, that we shall never cease to

consider their history as a part of ours, and to study ours in that

as its origin.  Every one knows that judicious matter and charms of

style have rendered Hume's history the manual of every student.  I

remember well the enthusiasm with which I devoured it when young, and

the length of time, the research and reflection which were necessary

to eradicate the poison it had instilled into my mind.  It was

unfortunate that he first took up the history of the Stuarts, became

their apologist, and advocated all their enormities.  To support his

work, when done, he went back to the Tudors, and so selected and

arranged the materials of their history as to present their arbitrary

acts only, as the genuine samples of the constitutional power of the

crown, and, still writing backwards, he then reverted to the early

history, and wrote the Saxon and Norman periods with the same

perverted view.  Although all this is known, he still continues to be

put into the hands of all our young people, and to infect them with

the poison of his own principles of government.  It is this book

which has undermined the free principles of the English government,

has persuaded readers of all classes that these were usurpations on

the legitimate and salutary rights of the crown, and has spread

universal toryism over the land.  And the book will still continue to

be read here as well as there.  Baxter, one of Horne Tooke's

associates in persecution, has hit on the only remedy the evil

admits.  He has taken Hume's work, corrected in the text his

misrepresentations, supplied the truths which he suppressed, and yet

has given the mass of the work in Hume's own words.  And it is

wonderful how little interpolation has been necessary to make it a

sound history, and to justify what should have been its title, to

wit, "Hume's history of England abridged and rendered faithful to

fact and principle." I cannot say that his amendments are either in

matter or manner in the fine style of Hume.  Yet they are often

unperceived, and occupy so little of the whole work as not to

depreciate it.  Unfortunately he has _abridged_ Hume, by leaving out

all the less important details.  It is thus reduced to about one half

its original size.  He has also continued the history, but very

summarily, to 1801.  The whole work is of 834 quarto pages, printed

close, of which the continuation occupies 283.  I have read but

little of this part.  As far as I can judge from that little, it is a

mere chronicle, offering nothing profound.  This work is so

unpopular, so distasteful to the present Tory palates and principles

of England, that I believe it has never reached a second edition.  I

have often inquired for it in our book shops, but never could find a

copy in them, and I think it possible the one I imported may be the

only one in America.  Can we not have it re-printed here?  It would

be about four volumes 8vo.




        I have another enterprise to propose for some good printer.  I

have in my possession a MS. work in French, confided to me by a

friend, whose name alone would give it celebrity were it permitted to

be mentioned.  But considerations insuperable forbid that.  It is a

Commentary and Review of Montesquieu's Spirit of Laws.  The history

of that work is well known.  He had been a great reader, and had

commonplaced everything he read.  At length he wished to undertake

some work into which he could bring his whole commonplace book in a

digested form.  He fixed on the subject of his Spirit of Laws, and

wrote the book.  He consulted his friend Helvetius about publishing

it, who strongly dissuaded it.  He published it, however, and the

world did not confirm Helvetius' opinion.  Still, every man who

reflects as he reads, has considered it as a book of paradoxes;

having, indeed, much of truth and sound principle, but abounding also

with inconsistencies, apochryphal facts and false inferences.  It is

a correction of these which has been executed in the work I mention,

by way of commentary and review; not by criticising words or

sentences, but by taking a book at a time, considering its general

scope, and proceeding to confirm or confute it.  And much of

confutation there is, and of substitution of true for false

principle, and the true principle is ever that of republicanism.  I

will not venture to say that every sentiment in the book will be

approved, because, being in manuscript, and the French characters, I

have not read the whole, but so much only as might enable me to

estimate the soundness of the author's way of viewing his subject;

and, judging from that which I have read, I infer with confidence

that we shall find the work generally worthy of our high approbation,

and that it everywhere maintains the preeminence of representative

government, by showing that its foundations are laid in reason, in

right, and in general good.  I had expected this from my knowledge of

the other writings of the author, which have always a precision

rarely to be met with.  But to give you an idea of the manner of its

execution, I translate and enclose his commentary on Montesquieu's

eleventh book, which contains the division of the work.  I wish I

could have added his review at the close of the twelve first books,

as this would give a more complete idea of the extraordinary merit of

the work.  But it is too long to be copied.  I add from it, however,

a few extracts of his reviews of some of the books, as specimens of

his plan and principles.  If printed in French, it would be of about

180 pages 8vo, or 23 sheets.  If any one will undertake to have it

translated and printed on their own account, I will send on the MS.

by post, and they can take the copyright as of an original work,

which it ought to be understood to be.  I am anxious it should be

ably translated by some one who possesses style as well as capacity

to do justice to abstruse conceptions.  I would even undertake to

revise the translation if required.  The original sheets must be

returned to me, and I should wish the work to be executed with as

little delay as possible.




        I close this long letter with assurances of my great esteem and

respect.

