





        A LAW BEYOND THE CONSTITUTION




        _To John B. Colvin_

        _Monticello, September 20, 1810_




        SIR, -- Your favor of the 14th has been duly received, and I

have to thank you for the many obliging things respecting myself

which are said in it.  If I have left in the breasts of my fellow

citizens a sentiment of satisfaction with my conduct in the

transaction of their business, it will soften the pillow of my repose

through the residue of life.




        The question you propose, whether circumstances do not

sometimes occur, which make it a duty in officers of high trust, to

assume authorities beyond the law, is easy of solution in principle,

but sometimes embarrassing in practice.  A strict observance of the

written laws is doubtless _one_ of the high duties of a good citizen,

but it is not _the highest_.  The laws of necessity, of

self-preservation, of saving our country when in danger, are of

higher obligation.  To lose our country by a scrupulous adherence to

written law, would be to lose the law itself, with life, liberty,

property and all those who are enjoying them with us; thus absurdly

sacrificing the end to the means.  When, in the battle of Germantown,

General Washington's army was annoyed from Chew's house, he did not

hesitate to plant his cannon against it, although the property of a

citizen.  When he besieged Yorktown, he leveled the suburbs, feeling

that the laws of property must be postponed to the safety of the

nation.  While the army was before York, the Governor of Virginia

took horses, carriages, provisions and even men by force, to enable

that army to stay together till it could master the public enemy; and

he was justified.  A ship at sea in distress for provisions, meets

another having abundance, yet refusing a supply; the law of

self-preservation authorizes the distressed to take a supply by

force.  In all these cases, the unwritten laws of necessity, of

self-preservation, and of the public safety, control the written laws

of _meum_ and _tuum_.  Further to exemplify the principle, I will

state an hypothetical case.  Suppose it had been made known to the

Executive of the Union in the autumn of 1805, that we might have the

Floridas for a reasonable sum, that that sum had not indeed been so

appropriated by law, but that Congress were to meet within three

weeks, and might appropriate it on the first or second day of their

session.  Ought he, for so great an advantage to his country, to have

risked himself by transcending the law and making the purchase? The

public advantage offered, in this supposed case, was indeed immense;

but a reverence for law, and the probability that the advantage might

still be _legally_ accomplished by a delay of only three weeks, were

powerful reasons against hazarding the act.  But suppose it foreseen

that a John Randolph would find means to protract the proceeding on

it by Congress, until the ensuing spring, by which time new

circumstances would change the mind of the other party.  Ought the

Executive, in that case, and with that foreknowledge, to have secured

the good to his country, and to have trusted to their justice for the

transgression of the law? I think he ought, and that the act would

have been approved.  After the affair of the Chesapeake, we thought

war a very possible result.  Our magazineswere illy provided with

some necessary articles, nor had any appropriations been made for

their purchase.  We ventured, however, to provide them, and to place

our country in safety; and stating the case to Congress, they

sanctioned the act.




        To proceed to the conspiracy of Burr, and particularly to

General Wilkinson's situation in New Orleans.  In judging this case,

we are bound to consider the state of the information, correct and

incorrect, which he then possessed.  He expected Burr and his band

from above, a British fleet from below, and he knew there was a

formidable conspiracy within the city.Under these circumstances, was

he justifiable, 1st, in seizing notorious conspirators? On this there

can be but two opinions; one, of the guilty and their accomplices;

the other, that of all honest men.  2d. In sending them to the seat

of government, when the written law gave them a right to trial in the

territory? The danger of their rescue, of their continuing their

machinations, the tardiness and weakness of the law, apathy of the

judges, active patronage of the whole tribe of lawyers, unknown

disposition of the juries, an hourly expectation of the enemy,

salvation of the city, and of the Union itself, which would have been

convulsed to its centre, had that conspiracy succeeded; all these

constituted a law of necessity and self-preservation, and rendered

the _salus populi_ supreme over the written law.  The officer who is

called to act on this superior ground, does indeed risk himself on

the justice of the controlling powers of the constitution, and his

station makes it his duty to incur that risk.  But those controlling

powers, and his fellow citizens generally, are bound to judge

according to the circumstances under which he acted.  They are not to

transfer the information of this place or moment to the time and

place of his action; but to put themselves into his situation.  We

knew here that there never was danger of a British fleet from below,

and that Burr's band was crushed before it reached the Mississippi.

But General Wilkinson's information was very different, and he could

act on no other.




        From these examples and principles you may see what I think on

the question proposed.  They do not go to the case of persons charged

with petty duties, where consequences are trifling, and time allowed

for a legal course, nor to authorize them to take such cases out of

the written law.  In these, the example of overleaping the law is of

greater evil than a strict adherence to its imperfect provisions.  It

is incumbent on those only who accept of great charges, to risk

themselves on great occasions, when the safety of the nation, or some

of its very high interests are at stake.  An officer is bound to obey

orders; yet he would be a bad one who should do it in cases for which

they were not intended, and which involved the most important

consequences.  The line of discrimination between cases may be

difficult; but the good officer is bound to draw it at his own peril,

and throw himself on the justice of his country and the rectitude of

his motives.




        I have indulged freer views on this question, on your

assurances that they are for your own eye only, and that they will

not get into the hands of newswriters.  I met their scurrilities

without concern, while in pursuit of the great interests with which I

was charged.  But in my present retirement, no duty forbids my wish

for quiet.




        Accept the assurances of my esteem and respect.







        RELATIONS WITH ADAMS




        _To Dr. Benjamin Rush_

        _Monticello, January 16, 1811_




        DEAR SIR, -- I had been considering for some days, whether it

was not time by a letter, to bring myself to your recollection, when

I received your welcome favor of the 2d instant.  I had before heard

of the heart-rending calamity you mention, and had sincerely

sympathized with your afflictions.  But I had not made it the subject

of a letter, because I knew that condolences were but renewals of

grief.  Yet I thought, and still think, this is one of the cases

wherein we should "not sorrow, even as others who have no hope." I

have myself known so many cases of recovery from confirmed insanity,

as to reckon it ever among the recoverable diseases.  One of them was

that of a near relative and namesake of mine, who, after many years

of madness of the first degree, became entirely sane, and amused

himself to a good old age in keeping school; was an excellent teacher

and much valued citizen.




        You ask if I have read Hartley?  I have not.  My present course

of life admits less reading than I wish.  From breakfast, or noon at

latest, to dinner, I am mostly on horseback, attending to my farm or

other concerns, which I find healthful to my body, mind and affairs;

and the few hours I can pass in my cabinet, are devoured by

correspondences; not those with my intimate friends, with whom I

delight to interchange sentiments, but with others, who, writing to

me on concerns of their own in which I have had an agency, or from

motives of mere respect and approbation, are entitled to be answered

with respect and a return of good will.  My hope is that this

obstacle to the delights of retirement, will wear away with the

oblivion which follows that, and that I may at length be indulged in

those studious pursuits, from which nothing but revolutionary duties

would ever have called me.




        I shall receive your proposed publication and read it with the

pleasure which everything gives me from your pen.  Although much of a

sceptic in the practice of medicine, I read with pleasure its

ingenious theories.




        I receive with sensibility your observations on the

discontinuance of friendly correspondence between Mr. Adams and

myself, and the concern you take in its restoration.  This

discontinuance has not proceeded from me, nor from the want of

sincere desire and of effort on my part, to renew our intercourse.

You know the perfect coincidence of principle and of action, in the

early part of the Revolution, which produced a high degree of mutual

respect and esteem between Mr. Adams and myself.  Certainly no man

was ever truer than he was, in that day, to those principles of

rational republicanism which, after the necessity of throwing off our

monarchy, dictated all our efforts in the establishment of a new

government.  And although he swerved, afterwards, towards the

principles of the English constitution, our friendship did not abate

on that account.  While he was Vice President, and I Secretary of

State, I received a letter from President Washington, then at Mount

Vernon, desiring me to call together the Heads of departments, and to

invite Mr. Adams to join us (which, by-the-bye, was the only instance

of that being done) in order to determine on some measure which

required despatch; and he desired me to act on it, as decided,

without again recurring to him.  I invited them to dine with me, and

after dinner, sitting at our wine, having settled our question, other

conversation came on, in which a collision of opinion arose between

Mr. Adams and Colonel Hamilton, on the merits of the British

constitution, Mr. Adams giving it as his opinion, that, if some of

its defects and abuses were corrected, it would be the most perfect

constitution of government ever devised by man.  Hamilton, on the

contrary, asserted, that with its existing vices, it was the most

perfect model of government that could be formed; and that the

correction of its vices would render it an impracticable government.

And this you may be assured was the real line of difference between

the political principles of these two gentlemen.  Another incident

took place on the same occasion, which will further delineate Mr.

Hamilton's political principles.  The room being hung around with a

collection of the portraits of remarkable men, among them were those

of Bacon, Newton and Locke, Hamilton asked me who they were.  I told

him they were my trinity of the three greatest men the world had ever

produced, naming them.  He paused for some time: "the greatest man,"

said he, "that ever lived, was Julius Caesar."  Mr. Adams was honest

as a politician, as well as a man; Hamilton honest as a man, but, as

a politician, believing in the necessity of either force or

corruption to govern men.




        You remember the machinery which the federalists played off,

about that time, to beat down the friends to the real principles of

our constitution, to silence by terror every expression in their

favor, to bring us into war with France and alliance with England,

and finally to homologize our constitution with that of England.  Mr.

Adams, you know, was overwhelmed with feverish addresses, dictated by

the fear, and often by the pen, of the _bloody buoy_, and was seduced

by them into some open indications of his new principles of

government, and in fact, was so elated as to mix with his kindness a

little superciliousness towards me.  Even Mrs. Adams, with all her

good sense and prudence, was sensibly flushed.  And you recollect the

short suspension of our intercourse, and the circumstance which gave

rise to it, which you were so good as to bring to an early

explanation, and have set to rights, to the cordial satisfaction of

us all.  The nation at length passed condemnation on the political

principles of the federalists, by refusing to continue Mr. Adams in

the Presidency.  On the day on which we learned in Philadelphia the

vote of the city of New York, which it was well known would decide

the vote of the State, and that, again, the vote of the Union, I

called on Mr. Adams on some official business.  He was very sensibly

affected, and accosted me with these words: "Well, I understand that

you are to beat me in this contest, and I will only say that I will

be as faithful a subject as any you will have." "Mr. Adams," said I,

"this is no personal contest between you and me.  Two systems of

principles on the subject of government divide our fellow citizens

into two parties.  With one of these you concur, and I with the

other.  As we have been longer on the public stage than most of those

now living, our names happen to be more generally known.  One of

these parties, therefore, has put your name at its head, the other

mine.  Were we both to die to-day, to-morrow two other names would be

in the place of ours, without any change in the motion of the

machinery.  Its motion is from its principle, not from you or

myself." "I believe you are right," said he, "that we are but passive

instruments, and should not suffer this matter to affect our personal

dispositions." But he did not long retain this just view of the

subject.  I have always believed that the thousand calumnies which

the federalists, in bitterness of heart, and mortification at their

ejection, daily invented against me, were carried to him by their

busy intriguers, and made some impression.  When the election between

Burr and myself was kept in suspense by the federalists, and they

were mediating to place the President of the Senate at the head of

the government, I called on Mr. Adams with a view to have this

desperate measure prevented by his negative.  He grew warm in an

instant, and said with a vehemence he had not used towards me before,

"Sir, the event of the election is within your own power.  You have

only to say you will do justice to the public creditors, maintain the

navy, and not disturb those holding offices, and the government will

instantly be put into your hands.  We know it is the wish of the

people it should be so." "Mr. Adams," said I, "I know not what part

of my conduct, in either public or private life, can have authorized

a doubt of my fidelity to the public engagements.  I say, however, I

will not come into the government by capitulation.  I will not enter

on it, but in perfect freedom to follow the dictates of my own

judgment." I had before given the same answer to the same intimation

from Gouverneur Morris.  "Then," said he, "things must take their

course." I turned the conversation to something else, and soon took

my leave.  It was the first time in our lives we had ever parted with

anything like dissatisfaction.  And then followed those scenes of

midnight appointment, which have been condemned by all men.  The last

day of his political power, the last hours, and even beyond the

midnight, were employed in filling all offices, and especially

permanent ones, with the bitterest federalists, and providing for me

the alternative, either to execute the government by my enemies,

whose study it would be to thwart and defeat all my measures, or to

incur the odium of such numerous removals from office, as might bear

me down.  A little time and reflection effaced in my mind this

temporary dissatisfaction with Mr. Adams, and restored me to that

just estimate of his virtues and passions, which a long acquaintance

had enabled me to fix.  And my first wish became that of making his

retirement easy by any means in my power; for it was understood he

was not rich.  I suggested to some republican members of the

delegation from his State, the giving him, either directly or

indirectly, an office, the most lucrative in that State, and then

offered to be resigned, if they thought he would not deem it

affrontive.  They were of opinion he would take great offence at the

offer; and moreover, that the body of republicans would consider such

a step in the outset as arguing very ill of the course I meant to

pursue.  I dropped the idea, therefore, but did not cease to wish for

some opportunity of renewing our friendly understanding.




        Two or three years after, having had the misfortune to lose a

daughter, between whom and Mrs. Adams there had been a considerable

attachment, she made it the occasion of writing me a letter, in

which, with the tenderest expressions of concern at this event, she

carefully avoided a single one of friendship towards myself, and even

concluded it with the wishes "of her who _once_ took pleasure in

subscribing herself your friend, Abigail Adams." Unpromising as was

the complexion of this letter, I determined to make an effort towards

removing the cloud from between us.  This brought on a correspondence

which I now enclose for your perusal, after which be so good as to

return it to me, as I have never communicated it to any mortal

breathing, before.  I send it to you, to convince you I have not been

wanting either in the desire, or the endeavor to remove this

misunderstanding.  Indeed, I thoughtit highly disgraceful to us both,

as indicating minds notsufficiently elevated to prevent a public

competition fromaffecting our personal friendship.  I soon found from

thecorrespondence that conciliation was desperate, and yielding to an

intimation in her last letter, I ceased from further explanation.  I

have the same good opinion of Mr. Adams which I ever had.  I know him

to be an honest man, an able one with his pen, and he was a powerful

advocate on the floor of Congress.  He has been alienated from me, by

belief in the lying suggestions contrived for electioneering

purposes, that I perhaps mixed in the activity and intrigues of the

occasion.  My most intimate friends can testify that I was perfectly

passive.  They would sometimes, indeed, tell me what was going on;

but no man ever heard me take part in such conversations; and none

ever misrepresented Mr. Adams in my presence, without my asserting

his just character.  With very confidential persons I have doubtless

disapproved of the principles and practices of his administration.

This was unavoidable.  But never with those with whom it could do him

any injury.  Decency would have required this conduct from me, if

disposition had not; and I am satisfied Mr.  Adams' conduct was

equally honorable towards me.  But I think it part of his character

to suspect foul play in those of whom he is jealous, and not easily

to relinquish his suspicions.




        I have gone, my dear friend, into these details, that you might

know everything which had passed between us, might be fully possessed

of the state of facts and dispositions, and judge for yourself

whether they admit a revival of that friendly intercourse for which

you are so kindly solicitous.  I shall certainly not be wanting in

anything on my part which may second your efforts, which will be the

easier with me, inasmuch as I do not entertain a sentiment of Mr.

Adams, the expression of which could give him reasonable offence.

And I submit the whole to yourself, with the assurance, that whatever

be the issue, my friendship and respect for yourself will remain

unaltered and unalterable.







        "THE SEEDS OF CIVILIZATION"




        _To John Lynch_

        _Monticello, January 21, 1811_




        SIR, -- You have asked my opinion on the proposition of Mrs.

Mifflin, to take measures for procuring, on the coast of Africa, an

establishment to which the people of color of these States might,

from time to time, be colonized, under the auspices of different

governments.  Having long ago made up my mind on this subject, I have

no hesitation in saying that I have ever thought it the most

desirable measure which could be adopted, for gradually drawing off

this part of our population, most advantageously for themselves as

well as for us.  Going from a country possessing all the useful arts,

they might be the means of transplanting them among the inhabitants

of Africa, and would thus carry back to the country of their origin,

the seeds of civilization which might render their sojournment and

sufferings here a blessing in the end to that country.




        I received, in the first year of my coming into the

administration of the General Government, a letter from the Governor

of Virginia, (Colonel Monroe,) consulting me, at the request of the

Legislature of the State, on the means of procuring some such asylum,

to which these people might be occasionally sent.  I proposed to him

the establishment of Sierra Leone, to which a private company in

England had already colonized a number of negroes, and particularly

the fugitives from these States during the Revolutionary War; and at

the same time suggested, if this could not be obtained, some of the

Portuguese possessions in South America, as next most desirable.  The

subsequent Legislature approving these ideas, I wrote, the ensuing

year, 1802, to Mr. King, our Minister in London, to endeavor to

negotiate with the Sierra Leone company a reception of such of these

people as might be colonized thither.  He opened a correspondence

with Mr. Wedderburne and Mr. Thornton, secretaries of the company, on

the subject, and in 1803 I received through Mr. King the result,

which was that the colony was going on, but in a languishing

condition; that the funds of the company were likely to fail, as they

received no returns of profit to keep them up; that they were

therefore in treaty with their government to take the establishment

off their hands; but that in no event should they be willing to

receive more of these people from the United States, as it was

exactly that portion of their settlers which had gone from hence,

which, by their idleness and turbulence, had kept the settlement in

constant danger of dissolution, which could not have been prevented

but for the aid of the Maroon negroes from the West Indies, who were

more industrious and orderly than the others, and supported the

authority of the government and its laws.  I think I learned

afterwards that the British Government had taken the colony into its

own hands, and I believe it still exists.  The effort which I made

with Portugal, to obtain an establishment for them within their

claims in South America, proved also abortive.




        You inquire further, whether I would use my endeavors to

procure for such an establishment security against violence from

other powers, and particularly from France?  Certainly, I shall be

willing to do anything I can to give it effect and safety.  But I am

but a private individual, and could only use endeavors with private

individuals; whereas, the National Government can address themselves

at once to those of Europe to obtain the desired security, and will

unquestionably be ready to exert its influence with those nations for

an object so benevolent in itself, and so important to a great

portion of its constituents.  Indeed, nothing is more to be wished

than that the United States would themselves undertake to make such

an establishment on the coast of Africa.  Exclusive of motives of

humanity, the commercial advantages to be derived from it might repay

all its expenses.  But for this, the national mind is not yet

prepared.  It may perhaps be doubted whether many of these people

would voluntarily consent to such an exchange of situation, and very

certain that few of those advanced to a certain age in habits of

slavery, would be capable of self-government.  This should not,

however, discourage the experiment, nor the early trial of it; and

the proposition should be made with all the prudent cautions and

attentions requisite to reconcile it to the interests, the safety and

the prejudices of all parties.




        Accept the assurances of my respect and esteem.







        THE EXECUTIVE OFFICE




        _To A. L. C. Destutt de Tracy_

        _Monticello, January 26, 1811_




        SIR, -- The length of time your favor of June the 12th, 1809,

was on its way to me, and my absence from home the greater part of

the autumn, delayed very much the pleasure which awaited me of

reading the packet which accompanied it.  I cannot express to you the

satisfaction which I received from its perusal.  I had, with the

world, deemed Montesquieu's work of much merit; but saw in it, with

every thinking man, so much of paradox, of false principle and

misapplied fact, as to render its value equivocal on the whole.

Williams and others had nibbled only at its errors.  A radical

correction of them, therefore, was a great desideratum.  This want is

now supplied, and with a depth of thought, precision of idea, of

language and of logic, which will force conviction into every mind.

I declare to you, Sir, in the spirit of truth and sincerity, that I

consider it the most precious gift the present age has received.  But

what would it have been, had the author, or would the author, take up

the whole scheme of Montesquieu's work, and following the correct

analysis he has here developed, fill up all its parts according to

his sound views of them?  Montesquieu's celebrity would be but a

small portion of that which would immortalize the author.  And with

whom?  With the rational and high-minded spirits of the present and

all future ages.  With those whose approbation is both incitement and

reward to virtue and ambition.  Is then the hope desperate?  To what

object can the occupation of his future life be devoted so usefully

to the world, so splendidly to himself?  But I must leave to others

who have higher claims on his attention, to press these

considerations.




        My situation, far in the interior of the country, was not

favorable to the object of getting this work translated and printed.

Philadelphia is the least distant of the great towns of our States,

where there exists any enterprise in this way; and it was not till

the spring following the receipt of your letter, that I obtained an

arrangement for its execution.  The translation is just now

completed.  The sheets came to me by post, from time to time, for

revisal; but not being accompanied by the original, I could not judge

of verbal accuracies.  I think, however, it is substantially correct,

without being an adequate representation of the excellences of the

original; as indeed no translation can be.  I found it impossible to

give it the appearance of an original composition in our language.  I

therefore think it best to divert inquiries after the author towards

a quarter where he will not be found; and with this view, propose to

prefix the prefatory epistle, now enclosed.  As soon as a copy of the

work can be had, I will send it to you by duplicate.  The secret of

the author will be faithfully preserved during his and my joint

lives; and those into whose hands my papers will fall at my death,

will be equally worthy of confidence.  When the death of the author,

or his living consent shall permit the world to know their

benefactor, both his and my papers will furnish the evidence.  In the

meantime, the many important truths the work so solidly establishes,

will, I hope, make it the political rudiment of the young, and manual

of our older citizens.




        One of its doctrines, indeed, the preference of a plural over a

singular executive, will probably not be assented to here.  When our

present government was first established, we had many doubts on this

question, and many leanings towards a supreme executive council.  It

happened that at that time the experiment of such an one was

commenced in France, while the single executive was under trial here.

We watched the motions and effects of these two rival plans, with an

interest and anxiety proportioned to the importance of a choice

between them.  The experiment in France failed after a short course,

and not from any circumstance peculiar to the times or nation, but

from those internal jealousies and dissensions in the Directory,

which will ever arise among men equal in power, without a principal

to decide and control their differences.  We had tried a similar

experiment in 1784, by establishing a committee of the States,

composed of a member from every State, then thirteen, to exercise the

executive functions during the recess of Congress.  They fell

immediately into schisms and dissensions, which became at length so

inveterate as to render all co-operation among them impracticable:

they dissolved themselves, abandoning the helm of government, and it

continued without a head, until Congress met the ensuing winter.

This was then imputed to the temper of two or three individuals; but

the wise ascribed it to the nature of man.  The failure of the French

Directory, and from the same cause, seems to have authorized a belief

that the form of a plurality, however promising in theory, is

impracticable with men constituted with the ordinary passions.  While

the tranquil and steady tenor of our single executive, during a

course of twenty-two years of the most tempestuous times the history

of the world has ever presented, gives a rational hope that this

important problem is at length solved.  Aided by the counsels of a

cabinet of heads of departments, originally four, but now five, with

whom the President consults, either singly or altogether, he has the

benefit of their wisdom and information, brings their views to one

centre, and produces an unity of action and direction in all the

branches of the government.  The excellence of this construction of

the executive power has already manifested itself here under very

opposite circumstances.  During the administration of our first

President, his cabinet of four members was equally divided by as

marked an opposition of principle as monarchism and republicanism

could bring into conflict.  Had that cabinet been a directory, like

positive and negative quantities in algebra, the opposing wills would

have balanced each other and produceda state of absolute inaction.

But the President heard with calmness the opinions and reasons of

each, decided the course to be pursued, and kept the government

steadily in it, unaffected by the agitation.  The public knew well

the dissensions of the cabinet, but never had an uneasy thought on

their account, because they knew also they had provided a regulating

power which would keep the machine in steady movement.  I speak with

an intimate knowledge of these scenes, _quorum pars fui_; as I may of

others of a character entirely opposite.  The third administration,

which was of eight years, presented an example of harmony in a

cabinet of six person, to which perhaps history has furnished no

parallel.  There never arose, during the whole time, an instance of

an unpleasant thought or word between the members.  We sometimes met

under differences of opinion, but scarcely ever failed, by conversing

and reasoning, so to modify each other's ideas, as to produce an

unanimous result.  Yet, able and amicable as these members were, I am

not certain this would have been the case, had each possessed equal

and independent powers.  Ill-defined limits of their respective

departments, jealousies, trifling at first, but nourished and

strengthened by repetition of occasions, intrigues without doors of

designing persons to build an importance to themselves on the

divisions of others, might, from small beginnings, have produced

persevering oppositions.  But the power of decision in the President

left no object for internal dissension, and external intrigue was

stifled in embryo by the knowledge which incendiaries possessed, that

no division they could foment would change the course of the

executive power.  I am not conscious that my participations in

executive authority have produced any bias in favor of the single

executive; because the parts I have acted have been in the

subordinate, as well as superior stations, and because, if I know

myself, what I have felt, and what I have wished, I know that I have

never been so well pleased, as when I could shift power from my own,

on the shoulders of others; nor have I ever been able to conceive how

any rational being could propose happiness to himself from the

exercise of power over others.




        I am still, however, sensible of the solidity of your

principle, that, to insure the safety of the public liberty, its

depository should be subject to be changed with the greatest ease

possible, and without suspending or disturbing for a moment the

movements of the machine of government.  You apprehend that a single

executive, with eminence of talent, and destitution of principle,

equal to the object, might, by usurpation, render his powers

hereditary.  Yet I think history furnishes as many examples of a

single usurper arising out of a government by a plurality, as of

temporary trusts of power in a single hand rendered permanent by

usurpation.  I do not believe, therefore, that this danger is

lessened in the hands of a plural executive.  Perhaps it is greatly

increased, by the state of inefficiency to which they are liable from

feuds and divisions among themselves.  The conservative body you

propose might be so constituted, as, while it would be an admirable

sedative in a variety of smaller cases, might also be a valuable

sentinel and check on the liberticide views of an ambitious

individual.  I am friendly to this idea.  But the true barriers of

our liberty in this country are our State governments; and the wisest

conservative power ever contrived by man, is that of which our

Revolution and present government found us possessed.  Seventeen

distinct States, amalgamated into one as to their foreign concerns,

but single and independent as to their internal administration,

regularly organized with legislature and governor resting on the

choice of the people, and enlightened by a free press, can never be

so fascinated by the arts of one man, as to submit voluntarily to his

usurpation.  Nor can they be constrained to it by any force he can

possess.  While that may paralyze the single State in which it

happens to be encamped, sixteen others, spread over a country of two

thousand miles diameter, rise up on every side, ready organized for

deliberation by a constitutional legislature, and for action by their

governor, constitutionally the commander of the militia of the State,

that is to say, of every man in it able to bear arms; and that

militia, too, regularly formed into regiments and battalions, into

infantry, cavalry and artillery, trained under officers general and

subordinate, legally appointed, always in readiness, and to whom they

are already in habits of obedience.  The republican government of

France was lost without a struggle, because the party of _"un et

indivisible"_ had prevailed; no provincial organizations existed to

which the people might rally under authority of the laws, the seats

of the directory were virtually vacant, and a small force sufficed to

turn the legislature out of their chamber, and to salute its leader

chief of the nation.  But with us, sixteen out of seventeen States

rising in mass, under regular organization, and legal commanders,

united in object and action by their Congress, or, if that be in

_duresse_, by a special convention, present such obstacles to an

usurper as forever to stifle ambition in the first conception of that

object.




        Dangers of another kind might more reasonably be apprehended

from this perfect and distinct organization, civil and military, of

the States; to wit, that certain States from local and occasional

discontents, might attempt to secede from the Union.  This is

certainly possible; and would be befriended by this regular

organization.  But it is not probable that local discontents can

spread to such an extent, as to be able to face the sound parts of so

extensive an Union; and if ever they should reach the majority, they

would then become the regular government, acquire the ascendency in

Congress, and be able to redress their own grievances by laws

peaceably and constitutionally passed.  And even the States in which

local discontents might engender a commencement of fermentation,

would be paralyzed and self-checked by that very division into

parties into which we have fallen, into which all States must fall

wherein men are at liberty to think, speak, and act freely, according

to the diversities of their individual conformations, and which are,

perhaps, essential to preserve the purity of the government, by the

censorship which these parties habitually exercise over each other.




        You will read, I am sure, with indulgence, the explanations of

the grounds on which I have ventured to form an opinion differing

from yours.  They prove my respect for your judgment, and diffidence

in my own, which have forbidden me to retain, without examination, an

opinion questioned by you.  Permit me now to render my portion of the

general debt of gratitude, by acknowledgements in advance for the

singular benefaction which is the subject of this letter, to tender

my wishes for the continuance of a life so usefully employed, and to

add the assurances of my perfect esteem and respect.







        THE LATIN AMERICAN REVOLUTION




        _To Alexander von Humboldt_

        _Monticello, April 14, 1811_




        MY DEAR BARON, -- The interruption of our intercourse with

France for some time past, has prevented my writing to you.  A

conveyance now occurs, by Mr. Barlow or Mr. Warden, both of them

going in a public capacity.  It is the first safe opportunity offered

of acknowledging your favor of September 23d, and the receipt at

different times of the IIId part of your valuable work, 2d, 3d, 4th

and 5th livraisons, and the IVth part, 2d, 3d, and 4th livraisons,

with the _Tableaux de la nature_, and an interesting map of New

Spain.  For these magnificent and much esteemed favors, accept my

sincere thanks.  They give us a knowledge of that country more

accurate than I believe we possess of Europe, the seat of the science

of a thousand years.  It comes out, too, at a moment when those

countries are beginning to be interesting to the whole world.  They

are now becoming the scenes of political revolution, to take their

stations as integral members of the great family of nations.  All are

now in insurrection.  In several, the Independents are already

triumphant, and they will undoubtedly be so in all.  What kind of

government will they establish?  How much liberty can they bear

without intoxication?  Are their chiefs sufficiently enlightened to

form a well-guarded government, and their people to watch their

chiefs?  Have they mind enough to place their domesticated Indians on

a footing with the whites?  All these questions you can answer better

than any other.  I imagine they will copy our outlines of

confederation and elective government, abolish distinction of ranks,

bow the neck to their priests, and persevere in intolerantism.  Their

greatest difficulty will be in the construction of their executive.

I suspect that, regardless of the experiment of France, and of that

of the United States in 1784, they will begin with a directory, and

when the unavoidable schisms in that kind of executive shall drive

them to something else, their great question will come on whether to

substitute an executive elective for years, for life, or an

hereditary one.  But unless instruction can be spread among them more

rapidly than experience promises, despotism may come upon them before

they are qualified to save the ground they will have gained.  Could

Napoleon obtain, at the close of the present war, the independence of

all the West India islands, and their establishment in a separate

confederacy, our quarter of the globe would exhibit an enrapturing

prospect into futurity.  You will live to see much of this.  I shall

follow, however, cheerfully my fellow laborers, contented with having

borne a part in beginning this beatific reformation.




        I fear, from some expressions in your letter, that your

personal interests have not been duly protected, while you were

devoting your time, talents and labor for the information of mankind.

I should sincerely regret it for the honor of the governing powers,

as well as from affectionate attachment to yourself and the sincerest

wishes for your felicity, fortunes and fame.




        In sending you a copy of my Notes on Virginia, I do but obey

the desire you have expressed.  They must appear chetif enough to the

author of the great work on South America.  But from the widow her

mite was welcome, and you will add to this indulgence the acceptance

of my sincere assurances of constant friendship and respect.







        "A YOUNG GARDENER"




        _To Charles Willson Peale_

        _Poplar Forest, August 20, 1811_




        It is long, my dear Sir, since we have exchanged a letter.  Our

former correspondence had always some little matter of business

interspersed; but this being at an end, I shall still be anxious to

hear from you sometimes, and to know that you are well and happy.  I

know indeed that your system is that of contentment under any

situation.  I have heard that you have retired from the city to a

farm, and that you give your whole time to that.  Does not the museum

suffer?  And is the farm as interesting?  Here, as you know, we are

all farmers, but not in a pleasing style.  We have so little labor in

proportion to our land that, although perhaps we make more profit

from the same labor, we cannot give to our grounds that style of

beauty which satisfies the eye of the amateur.  Our rotations are

corn, wheat, and clover, or corn, wheat, clover and clover, or wheat,

corn, wheat, clover and clover; preceding the clover by a plastering.

But some, instead of clover substitute mere rest, and all are

slovenly enough.  We are adding the care of Merino sheep.  I have

often thought that if heaven had given me choice of my position and

calling, it should have been on a rich spot of earth, well watered,

and near a good market for the productions of the garden.  No

occupation is so delightful to me as the culture of the earth, and no

culture comparable to that of the garden.  Such a variety of

subjects, some one always coming to perfection, the failure of one

thing repaired by the success of another, and instead of one harvest

a continued one through the year.  Under a total want of demand

except for our family table, I am still devoted to the garden.  But

though an old man, I am but a young gardener.




        Your application to whatever you are engaged in I know to be

incessant.  But Sundays and rainy days are always days of writing for

the farmer.  Think of me sometimes when you have your pen in hand,

and give me information of your health and occupations; and be always

assured of my great esteem and respect.







        REPRISE: WEIGHTS, MEASURES, AND COINS




        _To Dr. Robert Patterson_

        _Monticello, November 10, 1811_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favor of September 23d came to hand in due

time, and I thank you for the nautical almanac it covered for the

year 1813.  I learn with pleasure that the Philosophical Society has

concluded to take into consideration the subject of a fixed standard

of measures, weights and coins, and you ask my ideas on it; insulated

as my situation is, I am sure I can offer nothing but what will occur

to the committee engaged on it, with the advantage on their part of

correction by an interchange of sentiments and observations among

themselves.  I will, however, hazard some general ideas because you

desire it, and if a single one be useful, the labor will not be lost.




        The subject to be referred to as a standard, whether it be

matter or motion, should be fixed by nature, invariable and

accessible to all nations, independently of others, and with a

convenience not disproportioned to its utility.  What subject in

nature fulfils best these conditions?  What system shall we propose

on this, embracing measures, weights and coins? and in what form

shall we present it to the world?  These are the questions before the

committee.




        Some other subjects have, at different times, been proposed as

standards, but two only have divided the opinions of men: first, a

direct admeasurement of a line on the earth's surface, or second, a

measure derived from its motion on its axis.  To measure directly

such a portion of the earth as would furnish an element of measure,

which might be found again with certainty in all future times, would

be too far beyond the competence of our means to be taken into

consideration.  I am free, at the same time, to say that if these

were within our power in the most ample degree, this element would

not meet my preference.  The admeasurement would of course be of a

portion of some great circle of the earth.  If of the equator, the

countries over which that passes, their character and remoteness,

render the undertaking arduous, and we may say impracticable for most

nations.  If of some meridian, the varying measures of its degrees

from the equator to the pole, require a mean to be sought, of which

some aliquot part may furnish what is desired.  For this purpose the

45th degree has been recurred to, and such a length of line on both

sides of it terminating at each end in the ocean, as may furnish a

satisfactory law for a deduction of the unmeasured part of the

quadrant.  The portion resorted to by the French philosophers, (and

there is no other on the globe under circumstances equally

satisfactory,) is the meridian passing through their country and a

portion of Spain, from Dunkirk to Barcelona.  The objections to such

an admeasurement as an element of measure, are the labor, the time,

the number of highly-qualified agents, and the great expense

required.  All this, too, is to be repeated whenever any accident

shall have destroyed the standard derived from it, or impaired its

dimensions.  This portion of that particular meridian is accessible

of right to no one nation on earth.  France, indeed, availing herself

of a moment of peculiar relation between Spain and herself, has

executed such an admeasurement.  But how would it be at this moment,

as to either France or Spain? and how is it at all times as to other

nations, in point either of right or of practice?  Must these go

through the same operation, or take their measures from the standard

prepared by France?  Neither case bears that character of

independence which the problem requires, and which neither the

equality nor convenience of nations can dispense with.  How would it

now be, were England the deposit of a standard for the world?  At war

with all the world, the standard would be inaccessible to all other

nations.  Against this, too, are the inaccuracies of admeasurements

over hills and valleys, mountains and waters, inaccuracies often

unobserved by the agent himself, and always unknown to the world.

The various results of the different measures heretofore attempted,

sufficiently prove the inadequacy of human means to make such an

admeasurement with the exactness requisite.




        Let us now see under what circumstances the pendulum offers

itself as an element of measure.  The motion of the earth on its axis

from noon to noon of a mean solar day, has been divided from time

immemorial, and by very general consent, into 86,400 portions of time

called seconds.  The length of a pendulum vibrating in one of these

portions, is determined by the laws of nature, is invariable under

the same parallel, and accessible independently to all men.  Like a

degree of the meridian, indeed, it varies in its length from the

equator to the pole, and like it, too, requires to be reduced to a

mean.  In seeking a mean in the first case, the 45th degree occurs

with unrivalled preferences.  It is the mid-way of the celestial ark

from the equator to the pole.  It is a mean between the two extreme

degrees of the terrestrial ark, or between any two equi-distant from

it, and it is also a mean value of all its degrees.  In like manner,

when seeking a mean for the pendulum, the same 45th degree offers

itself on the same grounds, its increments being governed by the same

laws which determine those of the different degrees of the meridian.




        In a pendulum loaded with a Bob, some difficulty occurs in

finding the centre of oscillation; and consequently the distance

between that and the point of suspension.  To lessen this, it has

been proposed to substitute for the pendulum, a cylindrical rod of

small diameter, in which the displacement of the centre of

oscillation would be lessened.  It has also been proposed to prolong

the suspending wire of the pendulum below the Bob, until their

centres of oscillation shall coincide.  But these propositions not

appearing to have received general approbation, we recur to the

pendulum, suspended and charged as has been usual.  And the rather as

the the laws which determine the centre of oscillation leave no room

for error in finding it, other than that minimum in practice to which

all operations are subject in their execution.  The other sources of

inaccuracy in the length of the pendulum need not be mentioned,

because easily guarded against.  But the great and decisive

superiority of the pendulum, as a standard of measure, is in its

accessibility to all men, at all times and in all places.  To obtain

the second pendulum for 45 degrees it is not necessary to go actually

to that latitude.  Having ascertained its length in our own parallel,

both theory and observation give us a law for ascertaining the

difference between that and the pendulum of any other.  To make a new

measure therefore, or verify an old one, nothing is necessary in any

place but a well-regulated time-piece, or a good meridian, and such a

knowledge of the subject as is common in all civilized nations.




 

        Those indeed who have preferred the other element, do justice

to the certainty, as well as superior facilities of the pendulum, by

proposing to recur to one of the length of their standard, and to

ascertain its number of vibrations in a day.  These being once known,

if any accident impair their standard it is to be recoved by means of

a pendulum which shall make the requisite number of vibrations in a

day.  And among the several commissions established by the Academy of

Sciences for the execution of the several branches of their work on

measures and weights, that respecting the pendulum was assigned to

Messrs. Borda, Coulomb & Cassini, the result of whose labors,

however, I have not learned.




        Let our unit of measures then be a pendulum of such length as

in the latitude of 45 degrees, in the level of the ocean, and in a

given temperature, shall perform its vibrations, in small and equal

arcs, in one second of mean time.




        What ratio shall we adopt for the parts and multiples of this

unit?  The decimal without a doubt.  Our arithmatic being founded in

a decimal numeration, the same numeration in a system of measures,

weights and coins, tallies at once with that.  On this question, I

believe, there has been no difference of opinion.




        In measures of length, then, the pendulum is our unit.  It is a

little more than our yard and less than the ell.  Its tenth or dime,

will not be quite .4 inches.  Its hundredth, or cent, not quite .4 of

an inch; its thousandth, or mill, not quite .04 of an inch, and so

on.  The traveller will count his road by a longer measure.  1,000

units, or a kiliad, will not be quite two-thirds of our present mile,

and more nearly a thousand paces than that.




        For measures of surface, the square unit, equal to about ten

square feet, or one-ninth more than a square yard, will be generally

convenient.  But for those of lands a larger measure will be wanted.

A kiliad would be not quite a rood, or quarter of an acre; a myriad

not quite 2 1/2 acres.




        For measures of capacity, wet and dry,




        The cubic Unit = .1 would be about .35 cubic feet, .28 bushels

dry, or 7/8 of a ton liquid.

        Dime = .1 would be about 3.5 cubic feet, 2.8 bushels, or about

7/8 of a barrel liquid.

        Cent = .01 about 50 cubic inches, or 7/8 of a quart.

        Mill = .001 = .5 of a cubic inch, or 2/3 of a gill.




        To incorporate into the same system our weights and coins, we

must recur to some natural substance, to be found everywhere, and of

a composition sufficiently uniform.  Water has been considered as the

most eligible substance, and rain-water more nearly uniform than any

other kind found in nature.  That circumstance renders it preferable

to distilled water, and its variations in weight may be called

insensible.




        The cubic unit of this = .1 would weigh about 2,165 lbs. or a

ton between the long and short.

                 The Dime = .1 a little more than 2. kentals.

                     Cent = .01 a little more than 20 lb.

                     Mill = .001 a little more than 2 lb.

                 Decimmil = .0001 about 3 1/2 oz. avoirdupoise.

                Centimmil = .00001 a little more than 6 dwt.

                Millionth = .000001 about 15 grains.

           Decimmillionth = .0000001 about 1 1/2 grains.

          Centimmillionth = .00000001 about .14 of a grain.

                Billionth = .000000001 about .014 of a grain.




        With respect to our coins, the pure silver in a dollar being

fixed by law at 347 1/4 grains, and all debts and contracts being

bottomed on that value, we can only state the pure silver in the

dollar, which would be very nearly 23 millionths.




        I have used loose and round numbers (the exact unit being yet

undetermined) merely to give a general idea of the measures and

weights proposed, when compared with those we now use.  And in the

names of the subdivisions I have followed the metrology of the

ordinance of Congress of 1786, which for their series below unit

adopted the Roman numerals.  For that above unit the Grecian is

convenient, and has been adopted in the new French system.




        We come now to our last question, in what form shall we offer

this metrical system to the world?  In some one which shall be

altogether unassuming; which shall not have the appearance of taking

the lead among our sister institutions in making a general

proposition.  So jealous is the spirit of equality in the republic of

letters, that the smallest excitement of that would mar our views,

however salutary for all.  We are in habits of correspondence with

some of these institutions, and identity of character and of object,

authorize our entering into correspondence with all.  Let us then

mature our system as far as can be done at present, by ascertaining

the length of the second pendulum of 45 degrees by forming two

tables, one of which shall give the equivalent of every different

denomination of measures, weights and coins in these States, in the

unit of that pendulum, its decimals and multiples; and the other

stating the equivalent of all the decimal parts and multiples of that

pendulum, in the several denominations of measures, weights and coins

of our existing system.  This done, we might communicate to one or

more of these institutions in every civilized country a copy of those

tables, stating as our motive, the difficulty we had experienced, and

often the impossibility of ascertaining the value of the measures,

weights and coins of other countries, expressed in any standard which

we possess; that desirous of being relieved from this, and of

obtaining information which could be relied on for the purposes of

science, as well as of business, we had concluded to ask it from the

learned societies of other nations, who are especially qualified to

give it with the requisite accuracy; that in making this request we

had thought it our duty first to do ourselves, and to offer to

others, what we meant to ask from them, by stating the value of our

own measures, weights and coins, in some unit of measure already

possessed, or easily obtainable, by all nations; that the pendulum

vibrating seconds of mean time, presents itself as such an unit; its

length being determined by the laws of nature, and easily

ascertainable at all times and places; that we have thought that of

45 degrees would be the most unexceptionable, as being a mean of all

other parallels, and open to actual trial in both hemispheres.  In

this, therefore, as an unit, and in its parts and multiples in the

decimal ratio, we have expressed, in the tables communicated, the

value of all the measures, weights and coins used in the United

States, and we ask in return from their body a table of the weights,

measures and coins in use within their country, expressed in the

parts and multiples of the same unit.  Having requested the same

favor from the learned societies of other nations, our object is,

with their assistance, to place within the reach of our fellow

citizens at large a perfect knowledge of the measures, weights and

coins of the countries with which they have commercial or friendly

intercourse; and should the societies of other countries interchange

their respective tables, the learned will be in possession of an

uniform language in measures, weights and coins, which may with time

become useful to other descriptions of their citizens, and even to

their governments.  This, however, will rest with their pleasure, not

presuming, in the present proposition, to extend our views beyond the

limits of our own nation.  I offer this sketch merely as the outline

of the kind of communication which I should hope would excite no

jealousy or repugnance.




        Peculiar circumstances, however, would require letters of a

more special character to the Institute of France, and the Royal

Society of England.  The magnificent work which France has executed

in the admeasurement of so large a portion of the meridian, has a

claim to great respect in our reference to it.  We should only ask a

communication of their metrical system, expressed in equivalent

values of the second pendulum of 45 degrees as ascertained by Messrs.

Borda, Coulomb and Cassini, adding, perhaps, the request of an actual

rod of the length of that pendulum.




        With England, our explanations will be much more delicate.

They are the older country, the mother country, more advanced in the

arts and sciences, possessing more wealth and leisure for their

improvement, and animated by a pride more than laudable (*).  It is

their measures, too, which we undertake to ascertain and communicate

to themselves.  The subject should therefore be opened to them with

infinite tenderness and respect, and in some way which might give

them due place in its agency.  The parallel of 45 degrees being

within our latitude and not within theirs, the actual experiments

under that would be of course assignable to us.  But as a corrective,

I would propose that they should ascertain the length of the pendulum

vibrating seconds in the city of London, or at the observatory of

Greenwich, while we should do the same in an equi-distant parallel to

the south of 45 degrees, suppose in 38 degrees 29'.We might ask of

them, too, as they are in possession of thestandards of Guildhall, of

which we can have but an unauthentic account, to make the actual

application of those standards to the pendulum when ascertained.  The

operation we should undertake under the 45th parallel, (about

Passama-quoddy,) would give us a happy occasion, too, of engaging our

sister society of Boston in our views, by referring to them the

execution of that part of the work.  For that of 38 degrees 29' we

should be at a loss.  It crosses the tide waters of the Potomac,

about Dumfries, and I do not know what our resources there would be

unless we borrow them from Washington, where there are competent

persons.




        (*) We are all occupied in industrious pursuits.  They abound

with persons living on the industry of their fathers, or on the

earnings of their fellow citizens, given away by their rulers in

sinecures and pensions.  Some of these, desirous of laudable

distinction, devote their time and means to the pursuits of science,

and become profitable members of society by an industry of a higher

order.










        Although I have not mentioned Philadelphia in these operations,

I by no means propose to relinquish the benefit of observations to be

made there.  Her science and perfection in the arts would be a

valuable corrective to the less perfect state of them in the other

places of observation.  Indeed, it is to be wished that Philadelphia

could be made the point of observation south of 45 degrees, and that

the Royal Society would undertake the counterpoint on the north,

which would be somewhere between the Lizard and Falmouth.  The actual

pendulums from both of our points of observation, and not merely the

measures of them, should be delivered to the Philosophical Society,

to be measured under their eye and direction.




        As this is really a work of common and equal interest to

England and the United States, perhaps it would be still more

respectful to make our proposition to her Royal Society in the

outset, and to agree with them on a partition of the work.  In this

case, any commencement of actual experiments on our part should be

provisional only, and preparatory to the ultimate results.  We might,

in the meantime, provisionally also, form a table adapted to the

length of the pendulum of 45 degrees, according to the most approved

estimates, including those of the French commissioners.  This would

serve to introduce the subject to the foreign societies, in the way

before proposed, reserving to ourselves the charge of communicating

to them a more perfect one, when that shall have been completed.




        We may even go a step further, and make a general table of the

measures, weights and coins of all nations, taking their value

hypothetically for the present, from the tables in the commercial

dictionary of the encyclopedia methodique, which are very extensive,

and have the appearance of being made with great labor and exactness.

To these I expect we must in the end recur, as a supplement for the

measures which we may fail to obtain from other countries directly.

Their reference is to the foot or inch of Paris, as a standard, which

we may convert into parts of the second pendulum of 45 degrees.




        I have thus, my dear sir, committed to writing my general ideas

on this subject, the more freely as they are intended merely as

suggestions for consideration.  It is not probable they offer

anything which would not have occurred to the committee itself.  My

apology on offering them must be found in your request.  My

confidence in the committee, of which I take for granted you are one,

is too entire to have intruded a single idea but on that ground.




        Be assured of my affectionate and high esteem and respect.







        RECONCILIATION




        _To John Adams_

        _Monticello, Jan. 21, 1812_




        DEAR SIR -- I thank you before hand (for they are not yet

arrived) for the specimens of homespun you have been so kind as to

forward me by post.  I doubt not their excellence, knowing how far

you are advanced in these things in your quarter.  Here we do little

in the fine way, but in coarse and midling goods a great deal.  Every

family in the country is a manufactory within itself, and is very

generally able to make within itself all the stouter and midling

stuffs for it's own cloathing and household use.  We consider a sheep

for every person in the family as sufficient to clothe it, in

addition to the cottom, hemp and flax which we raise ourselves.  For

fine stuff we shall depend on your Northern manufactures.  Of these,

that is to say, of company establishments, we have none.  We use

little machinery.  The Spinning Jenny and loom with the flying

shuttle can be managed in a family; but nothing more complicated.

The economy and thriftiness resulting from our household manufactures

are such that they will never again be laid aside; and nothing more

salutary for us has ever happened than the British obstructions to

our demands for their manufactures.  Restore free intercourse when

they will, their commerce with us will have totally changed it's

form, and the articles we shall in future want from them will not

exceed their own consumption of our produce.




        A letter from you calls up recollections very dear to my mind.

It carries me back to the times when, beset with difficulties and

dangers, we were fellow laborers in the same cause, struggling for

what is most valuable to man, his right of self-government.  Laboring

always at the same oar, with some wave ever ahead threatening to

overwhelm us and yet passing harmless under our bark, we knew not

how, we rode through the storm with heart and hand, and made a happy

port.  Still we did not expect to be without rubs and difficulties;

and we have had them.  First the detention of the Western posts: then

the coalition of Pilnitz, outlawing our commerce with France, and the

British enforcement of the outlawry.  In your day French

depredations: in mine English, and the Berlin and Milan decrees: now

the English orders of council, and the piracies they authorise: when

these shall be over, it will be the impressment of our seamen, or

something else: and so we have gone on, and so we shall go on,

puzzled and prospering beyond example in the history of man.  And I

do believe we shall continue to growl, [i.e., grow] to multiply and

prosper until we exhibit an association, powerful, wise and happy,

beyond what has yet been seen by men.  As for France and England,

with all their pre-eminence in science, the one is a den of robbers,

and the other of pirates.  And if science produces no better fruits

than tyranny, murder, rapine and destitution of national morality, I

would rather wish our country to be ignorant, honest and estimable as

our neighboring savages are.




 

        But whither is senile garrulity leading me?  Into politics, of

which I have taken final leave.  I think little of them, and say

less.  I have given up newspapers in exchange for Tacitus and

Thucydides, for Newton and Euclid; and I find myself much the

happier.  Sometimes indeed I look back to former occurrences, in

remembrance of our old friends and fellow laborers, who have fallen

before us.  Of the signers of the Declaration of Independance I see

now living not more than half a dozen on your side of the Potomak,

and, on this side, myself alone.  You and I have been wonderfully

spared, and myself with remarkable health, and a considerable

activity of body and mind.  I am on horseback 3. or 4. hours of every

day; visit 3. or 4. times a year a possession I have 90 miles

distance, performing the winter journey on horseback.  I walk little

however; a single mile being too much for me; and I live in the midst

of my grandchildren, one of whom has lately promoted me to be a great

grandfather.  I have heard with pleasure that you also retain good

health, and a greater power of exercise in walking than I do.  But I

would rather have heard this from yourself, and that, writing a

letter, like mine, full of egotisms, and of details of your health,

your habits, occupations and enjoyments, I should have the pleasure

of knowing that, in the race of life, you do not keep, in it's

physical decline, the same distance ahead of me which you have done

in political honors and atchievements.  No circumstances have

lessened the interest I feel in these particulars respecting

yourself; none have suspended for one moment my sincere esteem for

you; and I now salute you with unchanged affections and respect.







        CONCERNING THE INDIANS




        _To John Adams_

        _Monticello, June 11, 1812_




        DEAR SIR -- By our post preceding that which brought your

letter of May 21, I had recieved one from Mr. Malcolm on the same

subject with yours, and by the return of the post had stated to the

President my recollections of him.  But both of your letters were

probably too late; as the appointment had been already made, if we

may credit the newspapers.




        You ask if there is any book that pretends to give any account

of the traditions of the Indians, or how one can acquire an idea of

them?  Some scanty accounts of their traditions, but fuller of their

customs and characters are given us by most of the early travellers

among them.  These you know were chiefly French.  Lafitau, among

them, and Adair an Englishman, have written on this subject; the

former two volumes, the latter one, all in 4to [quarto].  But

unluckily Lafitau had in his head a preconcieved theory on the

mythology, manners, institutions and government of the antient

nations of Europe, Asia, and Africa, and seems to have entered on

those of America only to fit them into the same frame, and to draw

from them a confirmation of his general theory.  He keeps up a

perpetual parallel, in all those articles, between the Indians of

America, and the antients of the other quarters of the globe.  He

selects therefore all the facts, and adopts all the falsehoods which

favor his theory, and very gravely retails such absurdities as zeal

for a theory could alone swallow.  He was a man of much classical and

scriptural reading, and has rendered his book not unentertaining.  He

resided five years among the Northern Indians, as a Missionary, but

collects his matter much more from the writings of others, than from

his own observation.




        Adair too had his kink.  He believed all the Indians of

American to be descended from the Jews: the same laws, usages; rites

and ceremonies, the same sacrifices, priests, prophets, fasts and

festivals, almost the same religion, and that they all spoke Hebrew.

For altho he writes particularly of the Southern Indians only, the

Catawbas, Creeks, Cherokees, Chickasaws and Choctaws, with whom alone

he was personally acquainted, yet he generalises whatever he found

among them, and brings himself to believe that the hundred languages

of America, differing fundamentally every one from every other, as

much as Greek from Gothic, have yet all one common prototype.  He was

a trader, a man of learning, a self-taught Hebraist, a strong

religionist, and of as sound a mind as Don Quixot in whatever did not

touch his religious chivalry.  His book contains a great deal of real

instruction on it's subject, only requiring the reader to be

constantly on his guard against the wonderful obliquities of his

theory.




        The scope of your enquiry would scarcely, I suppose, take in

the three folio volumes of Latin by De Bry.  In these fact and fable

are mingled together, without regard to any favorite system.  They

are less suspicious therefore in their complexion, more original and

authentic, than those of Lafitau and Adair.  This is a work of great

curiosity, extremely rare, so as never to be bought in Europe, but on

the breaking up, and selling some antient library.  On one of these

occasions a bookseller procured me a copy, which, unless you have

one, is probably the only one in America.




        You ask further, if the Indians have any order of priesthood

among them, like the Druids, Bards or Minstrels of the Celtic

nations?  Adair alone, determined to see what he wished to see in

every object, metamorphoses their Conjurers into an order of priests,

and describes their sorceries as if they were the great religious

ceremonies of the nation.  Lafitau calls them by their proper names,

Jongleurs, Devins, Sortileges; De Bry praestigiatores, Adair himself

sometimes Magi, Archimagi, cunning men, Seers, rain makers, and the

modern Indian interpreters, call them Conjurers and Witches.  They

are persons pretending to have communications with the devil and

other evil spirits, to foretel future events, bring down rain, find

stolen goods, raise the dead, destroy some, and heal others by

enchantment, lay spells etc.  And Adair, without departing from his

parallel of the Jews and Indians, might have found their counterpart,

much more aptly, among the Soothsayers, sorcerers and wizards of the

Jews, their Jannes and Jambres, their Simon Magus, witch of Endor,

and the young damsel whose sorceries disturbed Paul so much; instead

of placing them in a line with their High-priest, their Chief

priests, and their magnificent hierarchy generally.  In the solemn

ceremonies of the Indians, the persons who direct or officiate, are

their chiefs, elders and warriors, in civil ceremonies or in those of

war; it is the Head of the Cabin, in their private or particular

feasts or ceremonies; and sometimes the Matrons, as in their Corn

feasts.  And, even here, Adair might have kept up his parallel, with

ennobling his Conjurers.  For the antient Patriarchs, the Noahs, the

Abrahams, Isaacs and Jacobs, and, even after the consecration of

Aaron, the Samuels and Elijahs, and we may say further every one for

himself, offered sacrifices on the altars.  The true line of

distinction seems to be, that solemn ceremonies, whether public or

private, addressed to the Great Spirit, are conducted by the worthies

of the nation, Men, or Matrons, while Conjurers are resorted to only

for the invocation of evil spirits.  The present state of the several

Indian tribes, without any public order of priests, is proof

sufficient that they never had such an order.  Their steady habits

permit no innovations, not even those which the progress of science

offers to increase the comforts, enlarge the understanding, and

improve the morality of mankind.  Indeed so little idea have they of

a regular order of priests, that they mistake ours for their

Conjurers, and call them by that name.




        So much in answer to your enquiries concerning Indians, a

people with whom, in the very early part of my life, I was very

familiar, and acquired impressions of attachment and commiseration

for them which have never been obliterated.  Before the revolution

they were in the habit of coming often, and in great numbers to the

seat of our government, where I was very much with them.  I knew much

the great Outassete [i.e., Outacity], the warrior and orator of the

Cherokees.  He was always the guest of my father, on his journeys to

and from Williamsburg.  I was in his camp when he made his great

farewell oration to his people, the evening before his departure for

England.  The moon was in full splendor, and to her he seemed to

address himself in his prayers for his own safety on the voyage, and

that of his people during his absence.  His sounding voice, distinct

articulation, animated actions, and the solemn silence of his people

at their several fires, filled me with awe and veneration, altho' I

did not understand a word he uttered.  That nation, consisting now of

about 2000. wariors, and the Creeks of about 3000. are far advanced

in civilisation.  They have good Cabins, inclosed fields, large herds

of cattle and hogs, spin and weave their own clothes of cotton, have

smiths and other of the most necessary tradesmen, write and read, are

on the increase in numbers, and a branch of the Cherokees is now

instituting a regular representative government.  Some other tribes

were advancing in the same line.  On those who have made any

progress, English seductions will have no effect.  But the backward

will yeild, and be thrown further back.  These will relapse into

barbarism and misery, lose numbers by war and want, and we shall be

obliged to drive them, with the beasts of the forest into the Stony

mountains.  They will be conquered however in Canada.  The possession

of that country secures our women and children for ever from the

tomahawk and scalping knife, by removing those who excite them: and

for this possession, orders I presume are issued by this time; taking

for granted that the doors of Congress will re-open with a

Declaration of war.  That this may end in indemnity for the past,

security for thefuture, and compleat emancipation from Anglomany,

Gallomany, and all the manias of demoralized Europe, and that you may

live in health and happiness to see all this, is the sincere prayer

of Yours affectionately.







        WAR WITH ENGLAND




        _To General Thaddeus Kosciusko_

        _Monticello, June 28, 1812_




        Nous voila donc, mon cher ami, en guerre avec l'Angleterre.

This was declared on the 18th instant, thirty years after the

signature of our peace in 1782.  Within these thirty years what a

vast course of growth and prosperity we have had!  It is not ten

years since Great Britain began a series of insults and injuries

which would have been met with war in the threshold by any European

power.  This course has been unremittingly followed up by increasing

wrongs, with glimmerings indeed of peaceable redress, just sufficient

to keep us quiet, till she has had the impudence at length to

extinguish even these glimmerings by open avowal.  This would not

have been borne so long, but that France has kept pace with England

in iniquity of principle, although not in the power of inflicting

wrongs on us.  The difficulty of selecting a foe between them has

spared us many years of war, and enabled us to enter into it with

less debt, more strength and preparation.  Our present enemy will

have the sea to herself, while we shall be equally predominant at

land, and shall strip her of all her possessions on this continent.

She may burn New York, indeed, by her ships and congreve rockets, in

which case we must burn the city of London by hired incendiaries, of

which her starving manufacturers will furnish abundance.  A people in

such desperation as to demand of their government _autparcem, aut

furcam_, either bread or the gallows, will not reject the same

alternative when offered by a foreign hand.  Hunger will make them

brave every risk for bread.  The partisans of England here have

endeavored much to goad us into the folly of choosing the ocean

instead of the land, for the theatre of war.  That would be to meet

their strength with our own weakness, instead of their weakness with

our strength.  I hope we shall confine ourselves to the conquest of

their possessions, and defence of our harbors, leaving the war on the

ocean to our privateers.  These will immediately swarm in every sea,

and do more injury to British commerce than the regular fleets of all

Europe would do.  The government of France may discontinue their

license trade.  Our privateers will furnish them much more abundantly

with colonial produce, and whatever the license trade has given them.

Some have apprehended we should be overwhelmed by the new

improvements of war, which have not yet reached us.  But the British

possess them very imperfectly, and what are these improvements?

Chiefly in the management of artillery, of which our country admits

little use.  We have nothing to fear from their armies, and shall put

nothing in prize to their fleets.  Upon the whole, I have known no

war entered into under more favorable auspices.




        Our manufacturers are now very nearly on a footing with those

of England.  She has not a single improvement which we do not

possess, and many of them better adapted by ourselves to our ordinary

use.  We have reduced the large and expensive machinery for most

things to the compass of a private family, and every family of any

size is now getting machines on a small scale for their household

purposes.  Quoting myself as an example, and I am much behind many

others in this business, my household manufactures are just getting

into operation on the scale of a carding machine costing 60 only,

which may be worked by a girl of twelve years old, a spinning

machine, which may be made for $10, carrying 6 spindles for wool, to

be worked by a girl also, another which can be made for $25, carrying

12 spindles for cotton, and a loom, with a flying shuttle, weaving

its twenty yards a day.  I need 2,000 yards of linen, cotton and

woollen yearly, to clothe my family, which this machinery, costing

$150 only, and worked by two women and two girls, will more than

furnish.  For fine goods there are numerous establishments at work in

the large cities, and many more daily growing up; and of merinos we

have some thousands, and these multiplying fast.  We consider a sheep

for every person as sufficient for their woollen clothing, and this

State and all to the north have fully that, and those to the south

and west will soon be up to it.  In other articles we are equally

advanced, so that nothing is more certain than that, come peace when

it will, we shall never again go to England for a shilling where we

have gone for a dollar's worth.  Instead of applying to her

manufacturers there, they must starve or come here to be employed.  I

give you these details of peaceable operations, because they are

within my present sphere.  Those of war are in better hands, who know

how to keep their own secrets.  Because, too, although a soldier

yourself, I am sure you contemplate the peaceable employment of man

in the improvement of his condition, with more pleasure than his

murders, rapine and devastations.




        Mr. Barnes, some time ago, forwarded you a bill of exchange for

5,500 francs, of which the enclosed is a duplicate.  Apprehending

that a war with England would subject the remittances to you to more

casualties, I proposed to Mr. Morson, of Bordeaux, to become the

intermediate for making remittances to you, which he readily acceded

to on liberal ideas arising from his personal esteem for you, and his

desire to be useful to you.  If you approve of this medium I am in

hopes it will shield you from the effect of the accidents to which

the increased dangers of the seas may give birth.  It would give me

great pleasure to hear from you oftener.  I feel great interest in

your health and happiness.  I know your feelings on the present state

of the world, and hope they will be cheered by the successful course

of our war, and the addition of Canada to our confederacy.  The

infamous intrigues of Great Britain to destroy our government (of

which Henry's is but one sample), and with the Indians to tomahawk

our women and children, prove that the cession of Canada, their

fulcrum for these Machiavelian levers, must be a _sine qua non_ at a

treaty of peace.  God bless you, and give you to see all these

things, and many and long years of health and happiness.







        "A RADICAL DIFFERENCE OF POLITICAL PRINCIPLE"




        _To John Melish_

        _Monticello, January 13, 1813_




        DEAR SIR, -- I received duly your favor of December the 15th,

and with it the copies of your map and travels, for which be pleased

to accept my thanks.  The book I have read with extreme satisfaction

and information.  As to the western States, particularly, it has

greatly edified me: for of the actual condition of that interesting

portion of our country, I had not an adequate idea.  I feel myself

now as familiar with it as with the condition of the maritime States.

I had no conception that manufactures had made such progress there,

and particularly of the number of carding and spinning machines

dispersed through the whole country.  We are but beginning here to

have them in our private families.  Small spinning jennies of from

half a dozen to twenty spindles, will soon, however, make their way

into the humblest cottages, as well as the richest houses; and

nothing is more certain, than that the coarse and middling clothing

for our families, will forever hereafter continue to be made within

ourselves.  I have hitherto myself depended entirely on foreign

manufactures; but I have now thirty-five spindles agoing, a hand

carding machine, and looms with the flying shuttle, for the supply of

my own farms, which will never be relinquished in my time.  The

continuance of the war will fix the habit generally, and out of the

evils of impressment and of the orders of council, a great blessing

for us will grow.  I have not formerly been an advocate for great

manufactories.  I doubted whether our labor, employed in agriculture,

and aided by the spontaneous energies of the earth, would not procure

us more than we could make ourselves of other necessaries.  But other

considerations entering into the question, have settled my doubts.




        The candor with which you have viewed the manners and condition

of our citizens, is so unlike the narrow prejudices of the French and

English travellers preceding you, who, considering each the manners

and habits of their own people as the only orthodox, have viewed

everything differing from that test as boorish and barbarous, that

your work will be read here extensively, and operate great good.




        Amidst this mass of approbation which is given to every other

part of the work, there is a single sentiment which I cannot help

wishing to bring to what I think the correct one; and, on a point so

interesting, I value your opinion too highly not to ambition its

concurrence with my own.  Stating in volume one, page sixty-three,

the principle of difference between the two great political parties

here, you conclude it to be, `whether the controlling power shall be

vested in this or that set of men.' That each party endeavors to get

into the administration of the government, and exclude the other from

power, is true, and may be stated as a motive of action: but this is

only secondary; the primary motive being a real and radical

difference of political principle.  I sincerely wish our differences

were but personally who should govern, and that the principles of our

constitution were those of both parties.  Unfortunately, it is

otherwise; and the question of preference between monarchy and

republicanism, which has so long divided mankind elsewhere, threatens

a permanent division here.




        Among that section of our citizens called federalists, there

are three shades of opinion.  Distinguishing between the _leaders_

and _people_ who compose it, the _leaders_ consider the English

constitution as a model of perfection, some, with a correction of its

vices, others, with all its corruptions and abuses.  This last was

Alexander Hamilton's opinion, which others, as well as myself, have

often heard him declare, and that a correction of what are called its

vices, would render the English an impracticable government.  This

government they wished to have established here, and only accepted

and held fast, _at first_, to the present constitution, as a

stepping-stone to the final establishment of their favorite model.

This party therefore always clung to England as their prototype, and

great auxiliary in promoting and effecting this change.  A weighty

MINORITY, however, of these _leaders_, considering the voluntary

conversion of our government into a monarchy as too distant, if not

desperate, wish to break off from our Union its eastern fragment, as

being, in truth, the hot-bed of American monarchism, with a view to a

commencement of their favorite government, from whence the other

States may gangrene by degrees, and the whole be thus brought finally

to the desired point.  For Massachusetts, the prime mover in this

enterprise, is the last State in the Union to mean a _final_

separation, as being of all the most dependent on the others.  Not

raising bread for the sustenance of her own inhabitants, not having a

stick of timber for the construction of vessels, her principal

occupation, nor an article to export in them, where would she be,

excluded from the ports of the other States, and thrown into

dependence on England, her direct and natural, but now insidious

rival?  At the head of this MINORITY is what is called the Essex

Junto of Massachusetts.  But the MAJORITY of these _leaders_ do not

aim at separation.  In this, they adhere to the known principle of

General Hamilton, never, under any views, to break the Union.

Anglomany, monarchy, and separation, then, are the principles of the

Essex federalists.  Anglomany and monarchy, those of the

Hamiltonians, and Anglomany alone, that of the portion among the

_people_ who call themselves federalists.  These last are as good

republicans as the brethren whom they oppose, and differ from them

only in their devotion to England and hatred of France which they

have imbibed from their leaders.  The moment that these leaders

should avowedly propose a separation of the Union, or the

establishment of regal government, their popular adherents would quit

them to a man, and join the republican standard; and the partisans of

this change, even in Massachusetts, would thus find themselves an

army of officers without a soldier.




        The party called republican is steadily for the support of the

present constitution.  They obtained at its commencement, all the

amendments to it they desired.  These reconciled them to it

perfectly, and if they have any ulterior view, it is only, perhaps,

to popularize it further, by shortening the Senatorial term, and

devising a process for the responsibility of judges, more practical

than that of impeachment.  They esteem the people of England and

France equally, and equally detest the governing powers of both.




        This I verily believe, after an intimacy of forty years with

the public councils and characters, is a true statement of the

grounds on which they are at present divided, and that it is not

merely an ambition for power.  An honest man can feel no pleasure in

the exercise of power over his fellow citizens.  And considering as

the only offices of power those conferred by the people directly,

that is to say, the executive and legislative functions of the

General and State governments, the common refusal of these and

multiplied resignations, are proofs sufficient that power is not

alluring to pure minds, and is not, with them, the primary principle

of contest.  This is my belief of it; it is that on which I have

acted; and had it been a mere contest who should be permitted to

administer the government according to its genuine republican

principles, there has never been a moment of my life in which I

should have relinquished for it the enjoyments of my family, my farm,

my friends and books.




        You expected to discover the difference of our party principles

in General Washington's valedictory, and my inaugural address.  Not

at all.  General Washington did not harbor one principle of

federalism.  He was neither an Angloman, a monarchist, nor a

separatist.  He sincerely wished the people to have as much

self-government as they were competent to exercise themselves.  The

only point on which he and I ever differed in opinion, was, that I

had more confidence than he had in the natural integrity and

discretion of the people, and in the safety and extent to which they

might trust themselves with a control over their government.  He has

asseverated to me a thousand times his determination that the

existing government should have a fair trial, and that in support of

it he would spend the last drop of his blood.  He did this the more

repeatedly, because he knew General Hamilton's political bias, and my

apprehensions from it.  It is a mere calumny, therefore, in the

monarchists, to associate General Washington with their principles.

But that may have happened in this case which has been often seen in

ordinary cases, that, by oft repeating an untruth, men come to

believe it themselves.  It is a mere artifice in this party to

bolster themselves up on the revered name of that first of our

worthies.  If I have dwelt longer on this subject than was necessary,

it proves the estimation in which I hold your ultimate opinions, and

my desire of placing the subject truly before them.  In so doing, I

am certain I risk no use of the communication which may draw me into

contention before the public.  Tranquillity is the _summum bonum_ of

a Septagenaire.




        To return to the merits of your work: I consider it as so

lively a picture of the real state of our country, that if I can

possibly obtain opportunities of conveyance, I propose to send a copy

to a friend in France, and another to one in Italy, who, I know, will

translate and circulate it as an antidote to the misrepresentations

of former travellers.  But whatever effect my profession of political

faith may have on your general opinion, a part of my object will be

obtained, if it satisfies you as to the principles of my own action,

and of the high respect and consideration with which I tender you my

salutations.







        TYRANTS OF LAND AND SEA




        _To Madame de Stael_

        _United States of America, May 24, 1813_




        I received with great pleasure, my dear Madam and friend, your

letter of November the 10th, from Stockholm, and am sincerely

gratified by the occasion it gives me of expressing to you the

sentiments of high respect and esteem which I entertain for you.  It

recalls to my remembrance a happy portion of my life, passed in your

native city; then the seat of the most amiable and polished society

of the world, and of which yourself and your venerable father were

such distinguished members.  But of what scenes has it since been the

theatre, and with what havoc has it overspread the earth!  Robespiere

met the fate, and his memory the execration, he so justly merited.

The rich were his victims, and perished by thousands.  It is by

millions that Buonaparte destroys the poor, and he is eulogised and

deified by the sycophants even of science.  These merit more than the

mere oblivion to which they will be consigned; and the day will come

when a just posterity will give to their hero the only pre-eminence

he has earned, that of having been the greatest of the destroyers of

the human race.  What year of his military life has not consigned a

million of human beings to death, to poverty and wretchedness!  What

field in Europe may not raise a monument of the murders, the

burnings, the desolations, the famines and miseries it has witnessed

from him!  And all this to acquire a reputation, which Cartouche

attained with less injury to mankind, of being fearless of God or

man.




        To complete and universalise the desolation of the globe, it

has been the will of Providence to raise up, at the same time, a

tyrant as unprincipled and as overwhelming, for the ocean.  Not in

the poor maniac George, but in his government and nation.  Buonaparte

will die, and his tyrannies with him.  But a nation never dies.  The

English government and its piratical principles and practices, have

no fixed term of duration.  Europe feels, and is writhing under the

scorpion whips of Buonaparte.  We are assailed by those of England.

The one continent thus placed under the gripe of England, and the

other of Buonaparte, each has to grapple with the enemy immediately

pressing on itself.  We must extinguish the fire kindled in our own

house, and leave to our friends beyond the water that which is

consuming theirs.  It was not till England had taken one thousand of

our ships, and impressed into her service more than six thousand of

our citizens; till she had declared, by the proclamation of her

Prince Regent, that she would not repeal her aggressive orders _as to

us_, until Buonaparte should have repealed his _as to all nations_;

till her minister, in formal conference with ours, declared, that no

proposition for protecting our seamen from being impressed, under

color of taking their own, was practicable or admissible; that, the

door to justice and to all amicable arrangement being closed, and

negotiation become both desperate and dishonorable, we concluded that

the war she had been for years waging against us, might as well

become a war on both sides.  She takes fewer vessels from us since

the declaration of war than before, because they venture more

cautiously; and we now make full reprisals where before we made none.

England is, in principle, the enemy of all maritime nations, as

Buonaparte is of the continental; and I place in the same line of

insult to the human understanding, the pretension of conquering the

ocean, to establish continental rights, as that of conquering the

continent, to restore maritime rights.  No, my dear Madam; the object

of England is the _permanent dominion of the ocean_, and the

_monopoly of the trade of the world_.  To secure this, she must keep

a larger fleet than her own resources will maintain.  The resources

of other nations, then, must be impressed to supply the deficiency of

her own.  This is sufficiently developed and evidenced by her

successive strides towards the usurpation of the sea.  Mark them,

from her first war after William Pitt the little, came into her

administration.  She first forbade to neutrals all trade with her

enemies in time of war, which they had not in time of peace.  This

deprived them of their trade from port to port of the same nation.

Then she forbade them to trade from the port of one nation to that of

any other at war with her, although a right fully exercised in time

of peace.  Next, instead of taking vessels only _entering_ a

blockaded port, she took them over the whole ocean, if destined to

that port, although ignorant of the blockade, and without intention

to violate it.  Then she took them returning from that port, as if

infected by previous infraction of blockade.  Then came her paper

blockades, by which she might shut up the whole world without sending

a ship to sea, except to take all those sailing on it, as they must,

of course, be bound to some port.  And these were followed by her

orders of council, forbidding every nation to go to the port of any

other, without coming first to some port of Great Britain, there

paying a tribute to her, regulated by the cargo, and taking from her

a license to proceed to the port of destination; which operation the

vessel was to repeat with the return cargo on its way home.

According to these orders, we could not send a vessel from St. Mary's

to St. Augustine, distant six hours' sail, on our own coast, without

crossing the Atlantic four times, twice with the outward cargo, and

twice with the inward.  She found this too daring and outrageous for

a single step, retracted as to certain articles of commerce, but left

it in force as to others which constitute important branches of our

exports.  And finally, that her views may no longer rest on

inference, in a recent debate, her minister declared in open

parliament, that the object of the present war is a _monopoly of

commerce_.




        In some of these atrocities, France kept pace with her fully in

speculative wrong, which her impotence only shortened in practical

execution.  This was called retaliation by both; each charging the

other with the initiation of the outrage.  As if two combatants might

retaliate on an innocent bystander, the blows they received from each

other.  To make war on both would have been ridiculous.  In order,

therefore, to single out any enemy, we offered to both, that if

either would revoke its hostile decrees, and the other should refuse,

we would interdict all intercourse whatever with that other; which

would be war of course, as being an avowed departure from neutrality.

France accepted the offer, and revoked her decrees as to us.  England

not only refused, but declared by a solemn proclamation of her Prince

Regent, that she would not revoke her orders _even as to us_, until

those of France should be annulled _as to the whole world_.  We

thereon declared war, and with abundant additional cause.




        In the mean time, an examination before parliament of the

ruinous effects of these orders on her own manufacturers, exposing

them to the nation and to the world, their Prince issued a palinodial

proclamation, _suspending_ the orders on certain conditions, but

claiming to renew them at pleasure, as a matter of right.  Even this

might have prevented the war, if done and known here before its

declaration.  But the sword being once drawn, the expense of arming

incurred, and hostilities in full course, it would have been unwise

to discontinue them, until effectual provision should be agreed to by

England, for protecting our citizens on the high seas from

impressment by her naval commanders, through error, voluntary or

involuntary; the fact being notorious, that these officers, entering

our ships at sea under pretext of searching for their seamen, (which

they have no right to do by the law or usage of nations, which they

neither do, nor ever did, as to any other nation but ours, and which

no nation ever before pretended to do in any case,) entering our

ships, I say, under pretext of searching for and taking out their

seamen, they took ours, native as well as naturalised, knowing them

to be ours, merely because they wanted them; insomuch, that no

American could safely cross the ocean, or venture to pass by sea from

one to another of our own ports.  It is not long since they impressed

at sea two nephews of General Washington, returning from Europe, and

put them, as common seamen, under the ordinary discipline of their

ships of war.  There are certainly other wrongs to be settled between

England and us; but of a minor character, and such as a proper spirt

of conciliation on both sides would not permit to continue them at

war.  The sword, however, can never again be sheathed, until the

personal safety of an American on the ocean, among the most important

and most vital of the rights we possess, is completely provided for.




        As soon as we heard of her partial repeal of her orders of

council, we offered instantly to suspend hostilities by an armistice,

if she would suspend her impressments, and meet us in arrangements

for securing our citizens against them.  She refused to do it,

because impracticable by any arrangement, as she pretends; but, in

truth, because a body of sixty to eighty thousand of the finest

seamen in the world, which we possess, is too great a resource for

manning her exaggerated navy, to be relinquished, as long as she can

keep it open.  Peace is in her hand, whenever she will renounce the

practice of aggression on the persons of our citizens.  If she thinks

it worth eternal war, eternal war we must have.  She alleges that the

sameness of language, of manners, of appearance, renders it

impossible to distinguish us from her subjects.  But because we speak

English, and look like them, are we to be punished?  Are free and

independent men to be submitted to their bondage?




        England has misrepresented to all Europe this ground of the

war.  She has called it a new pretension, set up since the repeal of

her orders of council.  She knows there has never been a moment of

suspension of our reclamations against it, from General Washington's

time inclusive, to the present day: and that it is distinctly stated

in our declaration of war, as one of its principal causes.  She has

pretended we have entered into the war to establish the principle of

`free bottoms, free goods,' or to protect her seamen against her own

right over them.  We contend for neither of these.  She pretends we

are partial to France; that we have observed a fraudulent and

unfaithful neutrality between her and her enemy.  She knows this to

be false, and that if there has been any inequality in our

proceedings towards the belligerents, it has been in her favor.  Her

ministers are in possession of full proofs of this.  Our accepting at

once, and sincerely, the mediation of the virtuous Alexander, their

greatest friend, and the most aggravated enemy of Buonaparte,

sufficiently proves whether we have partialities on the side of her

enemy.  I sincerely pray that this mediation may produce a just

peace.  It will prove that the immortal character, which has first

stopped by war the career of the destroyer of mankind, is the friend

of peace, of justice, of human happiness, and the patron of

unoffending and injured nations.  He is too honest and impartial to

countenance propositions of peace derogatory to the freedom of the

seas.




        Shall I apologise to you, my dear Madam, for this long

political letter?  But yours justifies the subject, and my feelings

must plead for the unreserved expression of them; and they have been

the less reserved, as being from a private citizen, retired from all

connection with the government of his country, and whose ideas,

expressed without communication with any one, are neither known, nor

imputable to them.




        The dangers of the sea are now so great, and the possibilities

of interception by sea and land such, that I shall subscribe no name

to this letter.  You will know from whom it comes, by its reference

to the date of time and place of yours, as well as by its subject in

answer to that.  This omission must not lessen in your view the

assurances of my great esteem, of my sincere sympathies for the share

which you bear in the afflictions of your country, and the

deprivations to which a lawless will has subjected you.  In return,

you enjoy the dignified satisfaction of having met them, rather than

be yoked with the abject, to his car; and that, in withdrawing from

oppression, you have followed the virtuous example of a father, whose

name will ever be dear to your country and to mankind.  With my

prayers that you may be restored to it, that you may see it

re-established in that temperate portion of liberty which does not

infer either anarchy or licentiousness, in that high degree of

prosperity which would be the consequence of such a government, in

that, in short, which the constitution of 1789 would have insured it,

if wisdom could have stayed at that point the fervid but imprudent

zeal of men, who did not know the character of their own countrymen,

and that you may long live in health and happiness under it, and

leave to the world a well educated and virtuous representative and

descendant of your honored father, is the ardent prayer of the

sincere and respectful friend who writes this letter.

