





        BACON, LOCKE, AND NEWTON




        _To John Trumbull_

        _Paris, Feb. 15, 1789_




        DEAR SIR, -- I have duly received your favor of the 5'th. inst.

With respect to the busts & pictures I will put off till my return

from America all of them except Bacon, Locke and Newton, whose

pictures I will trouble you to have copied for me: and as I consider

them as the three greatest men that have ever lived, without any

exception, and as having laid the foundation of those superstructures

which have been raised in the Physical & Moral sciences, I would wish

to form them into a knot on the same canvas, that they may not be

confounded at all with the herd of other great men.  To do this I

suppose we need only desire the copyist to draw the three busts in

three ovals all contained in a larger oval in some such form as this

each bust to be the size of life.




        xxx.  The large oval would I suppose be about between four &

five feet.  Perhaps you can suggest a better way of accomplishing my

idea.  In your hands be it, as well as the subaltern expences you

mention.  I trouble you with a letter to Mrs. Church.  We have no

important news here but of the revolution of Geneva which is not yet

sufficiently explained.  But they have certainly reformed their

government.  I am with great respect D'r. Sir Your affectionate

friend & humble serv't.







        "NEITHER FEDERALIST NOR ANTIFEDERALIST"




        _To Francis Hopkinson_

        _Paris, Mar. 13, 1789_




        DEAR SIR, -- Since my last, which was of Dec. 21. yours of Dec.

9. & 21. are received.  Accept my thanks for the papers and pamphlets

which accompanied them, and mine & my daughter's for the book of

songs.  I will not tell you how much they have pleased us, nor how

well the last of them merits praise for it's pathos, but relate a

fact only, which is that while my elder daughter was playing it on

the harpsichord, I happened to look towards the fire & saw the

younger one all in tears.  I asked her if she was sick?  She said

`no; but the tune was so mournful.' -- The Editor of the Encyclopedie

has published something as to an advanced price on his future

volumes, which I understand alarms the subscribers.  It was in a

paper which I do not take & therefore I have not yet seen it, nor can

say what it is. -- I hope that by this time you have ceased to make

wry faces about your vinegar, and that you have received it safe &

good.  You say that I have been dished up to you as an

antifederalist, and ask me if it be just.  My opinion was never

worthy enough of notice to merit citing; but since you ask it I will

tell it you.  I am not a Federalist, because I never submitted the

whole system of my opinions to the creed of any party of men whatever

in religion, in philosophy, in politics, or in anything else where I

was capable of thinking for myself.  Such an addiction is the last

degradation of a free and moral agent.  If I could not go to heaven

but with a party, I would not go there at all.  Therefore I protest

to you I am not of the party of federalists.  But I am much farther

from that of the Antifederalists.  I approved, from the first moment,

of the great mass of what is in the new constitution, the

consolidation of the government, the organization into Executive

legislative & judiciary, the subdivision of the legislative, the

happy compromise of interests between the great & little states by

the different manner of voting in the different houses, the voting by

persons instead of states, the qualified negative on laws given to

the Executive which however I should have liked better if associated

with the judiciary also as in New York, and the power of taxation.  I

thought at first that the latter might have been limited.  A little

reflection soon convinced me it ought not to be.  What I disapproved

from the first moment also was the want of a bill of rights to guard

liberty against the legislative as well as executive branches of the

government, that is to say to secure freedom in religion, freedom of

the press, freedom from monopolies, freedom from unlawful

imprisonment, freedom from a permanent military, and a trial by jury

in all cases determinable by the laws of the land.  I disapproved

also the perpetual reeligibility of the President.  To these points

of disapprobation I adhere.  My first wish was that the 9. first

conventions might accept the constitution, as the means of securing

to us the great mass of good it contained, and that the 4. last might

reject it, as the means of obtaining amendments.  But I was corrected

in this wish the moment I saw the much better plan of Massachusetts

and which had never occurred to me.  With respect to the declaration

of rights I suppose the majority of the United states are of my

opinion: for I apprehend all the antifederalists, and a very

respectable proportion of the federalists think that such a

declaration should now be annexed.  The enlightened part of Europe

have given us the greatest credit for inventing this instrument of

security for the rights of the people, and have been not a little

surprised to see us so soon give it up.  With respect to the

re-eligibility of the president, I find myself differing from the

majority of my countrymen, for I think there are but three states out

of the 11. which have desired an alteration of this.  And indeed,

since the thing is established, I would wish it not to be altered

during the life of our great leader, whose executive talents are

superior to those I believe of any man in the world, and who alone by

the authority of his name and the confidence reposed in his perfect

integrity, is fully qualified to put the new government so under way

as to secure it against the efforts of opposition.  But having

derived from our error all the good there was in it I hope we shall

correct it the moment we can no longer have the same name at the

helm.  These, my dear friend, are my sentiments, by which you will

see I was right in saying I am neither federalist nor antifederalist;

that I am of neither party, nor yet a trimmer between parties.  These

my opinions I wrote within a few hours after I had read the

constitution, to one or two friends in America.  I had not then read

one single word printed on the subject.  I never had an opinion in

politics or religion which I was afraid to own.  A costive reserve on

these subjects might have procured me more esteem from some people,

but less from myself.  My great wish is to go on in a strict but

silent performance of my duty; to avoid attracting notice & to keep

my name out of newspapers, because I find the pain of a little

censure, even when it is unfounded, is more acute than the pleasure

of much praise.  The attaching circumstance of my present office is

that I can do it's duties unseen by those for whom they are done.  --

You did not think, by so short a phrase in your letter, to have drawn

on yourself such an egotistical dissertation.







        A BILL OF RIGHTS




        _To James Madison_

        _Paris, Mar 15, 1789_




        DEAR SIR, -- I wrote you last on the 12th of Jan. since which I

have received yours of Octob 17, Dec 8 & 12.  That of Oct.  17.  came

to hand only Feb 23.  How it happened to be four months on the way, I

cannot tell, as I never knew by what hand it came.  Looking over my

letter of Jan 12th, I remark an error of the word "probable" instead

of "improbable," which doubtless however you had been able to

correct.  Your thoughts on the subject of the Declaration of rights

in the letter of Oct 17. I have weighed with great satisfaction.

Some of them had not occurred to me before, but were acknoleged just

in the moment they were presented to my mind.  In the arguments in

favor of a declaration of rights, you omit one which has great weight

with me, the legal check which it puts into the hands of the

judiciary.  This is a body, which if rendered independent & kept

strictly to their own department merits great confidence for their

learning & integrity.  In fact what degree of confidence would be too

much for a body composed of such men as Wythe, Blair & Pendleton?  On

characters like these the _"civium ardor prava jubentium"_ would make

no impression.  I am happy to find that on the whole you are a friend

to this amendment.  The Declaration of rights is like all other human

blessings alloyed with some inconveniences, and not accomplishing

fully it's object.  But the good in this instance vastly overweighs

the evil.  I cannot refrain from making short answers to the

objections which your letter states to have been raised.  1. That the

rights in question are reserved by the manner in which the federal

powers are granted.  Answer.  A constitutive act may certainly be so

formed as to need no declaration of rights.  The act itself has the

force of a declaration as far as it goes; and if it goes to all

material points nothing more is wanting.  In the draught of a

constitution which I had once a thought of proposing in Virginia, &

printed afterwards, I endeavored to reach all the great objects of

public liberty, and did not mean to add a declaration of rights.

Probably the object was imperfectly executed; but the deficiencies

would have been supplied by others, in the course of discussion.  But

in a constitutive act which leaves some precious articles unnoticed,

and raises implications against others, a declaration of rights

becomes necessary by way of supplement.  This is the case of our new

federal constitution.  This instrument forms us into one state as to

certain objects, and gives us a legislative & executive body for

these objects.  It should therefore guard us against their abuses of

power within the field submitted to them.  2.  A positive declaration

of some essential rights could not be obtained in the requisite

latitude.  Answer.  Half a loaf is better than no bread.  If we

cannot secure all our rights, let us secure what we can.  3.  The

limited powers of the federal government & jealousy of the

subordinate governments afford a security which exists in no other

instance.  Answer.  The first member of this seems resolvable into

the first objection before stated.  The jealousy of the subordinate

governments is a precious reliance.  But observe that those

governments are only agents.  They must have principles furnished

them whereon to found their opposition.  The declaration of rights

will be the text whereby they will try all the acts of the federal

government, In this view it is necessary to the federal government

also; as by the same text they may try the opposition of the

subordinate governments.  4. Experience proves the inefficacy of a

bill of rights.  True.  But tho it is not absolutely efficacious

under all circumstances, it is of great potency always, and rarely

inefficacious.  A brace the more will often keep up the building

which would have fallen with that brace the less.  There is a

remarkable difference between the characters of the Inconveniences

which attend a Declaration of rights, & those which attend the want

of it.  The inconveniences of the Declaration are that it may cramp

government in it's useful exertions.  But the evil of this is

short-lived, trivial & reparable.  The inconveniences of the want of

a Declaration are permanent, afflicting & irreparable.  They are in

constant progression from bad to worse.  The executive in our

governments is not the sole, it is scarcely the principal object of

my jealousy.  The tyranny of the legislatures is the most formidable

dread at present, and will be for long years.  That of the executive

will come in it's turn, but it will be at a remote period.  I know

there are some among us who would now establish a monarchy.  But they

are inconsiderable in number and weight of character.  The rising

race are all republicans.  We were educated in royalism; no wonder if

some of us retain that idolatry still.  Our young people are educated

in republicanism, an apostasy from that to royalism is unprecedented

& impossible.  I am much pleased with the prospect that a declaration

of rights will be added; and hope it will be done in that way which

will not endanger the whole frame of the government, or any essential

part of it.




        I have hitherto avoided public news in my letters to you,

because your situation insured you a communication of my letters to

Mr. Jay.  This circumstance being changed, I shall in future indulge

myself in these details to you.  There had been some slight hopes

that an accommodation might be affected between the Turks & two

empires but these hopes do not strengthen, and the season is

approaching which will put an end to them for another campaign at

least.  The accident to the King of England has had great influence

on the affairs of Europe.  His mediation joined with that of Prussia,

would certainly have kept Denmark quiet, and so have left the two

empires in the hands of the Turks & Swedes.  But the inactivity to

which England is reduced, leaves Denmark more free, and she will

probably go on in opposition to Sweden.  The K. of Prussia too had

advanced so far that he can scarcely retire.  This is rendered the

more difficult by the troubles he has excited in Poland.  He cannot

well abandon the party he had brought forward there so that it is

very possible he may be engaged in the ensuing campaign.  France will

be quiet this year, because this year at least is necessary for

settling her future constitution.  The States will meet the 27th of

April: and the public mind will I think by that time be ripe for a

just decision of the Question whether they shall vote by orders or

persons.  I think there is a majority of the nobles already for the

latter.  If so, their affairs cannot but go on well.  Besides

settling for themselves a tolerably free constitution, perhaps as

free a one as the nation is yet prepared to bear, they will fund

their public debts.  This will give them such a credit as will enable

them to borrow any money they may want, & of course to take the field

again when they think proper.  And I believe they mean to take the

field as soon as they can.  The pride of every individual in the

nation suffers under the ignominies they have lately been exposed to

and I think the states general will give money for a war to wipe off

the reproach.  There have arisen new bickerings between this court &

the Hague, and the papers which have passed shew the most bitter

acrimony rankling at the heart of this ministry.  They have recalled

their ambassador from the Hague without appointing a successor.  They

have given a note to the Diet of Poland which shews a disapprobation

of their measures.  The insanity of the King of England has been

fortunate for them as it gives them time to put their house in order.

The English papers tell you the King is well: and even the English

ministry say so.  They will naturally set the best foot foremost: and

they guard his person so well that it is difficult for the public to

contradict them.  The King is probably better, but not well by a

great deal.  1. He has been bled, and judicious physicians say that

in his exhausted state nothing could have induced a recurrence to

bleeding but symptoms of relapse.  2.  The Prince of Wales tells the

Irish deputation he will give them a definitive answer in some days;

but if the king had been well he could have given it at once.  3.

They talk of passing a standing law for providing a regency in

similar cases.  They apprehend then they are not yet clear of the

danger of wanting a regency.  4. They have carried the king to

church; but it was his private chapel.  If he be well why do not they

shew him publicly to the nation, & raise them from that consternation

into which they have been thrown by the prospect of being delivered

over to the profligate hands of the prince of Wales.  In short,

judging from little facts which are known in spite of their teeth the

King is better, but not well.  Possibly he is getting well, but

still, time will be wanting to satisfy even the ministry that it is

not merely a lucid interval.  Consequently they cannot interrupt

France this year in the settlement of her affairs, & after this year

it will be too late.




        As you will be in a situation to know when the leave of absence

will be granted me which I have asked, will you be so good as to

communicate it by a line to Mr. Lewis & Mr. Eppes?  I hope to see you

in the summer, and that if you are not otherwise engaged, you will

encamp with me at Monticello for awhile.







        SCIENCE AND LIBERTY




        _To Joseph Willard_

        _Paris, March 24, 1789_




        SIR, -- I have been lately honored with your letter of

September the 24th, 1788, accompanied by a diploma for a Doctorate of

Laws, which the University of Harvard has been pleased to confer on

me.  Conscious how little I merit it, I am the more sensible of their

goodness and indulgence to a stranger, who has had no means of

serving or making himself known to them.  I beg you to return them my

grateful thanks, and to assure them that this notice from so eminent

a seat of science, is very precious to me.




        The most remarkable publications we have had in France, for a

year or two past, are the following.  `Les voyages d'Anacharsis par

l'Abbe Barthelemi,' seven volumes, octavo.  This is a very elegant

digest of whatever is known of the Greeks; useless, indeed, to him

who has read the original authors, but very proper for one who reads

modern languages only.  The works of the King of Prussia.  The Berlin

edition is in sixteen volumes, octavo.  It is said to have been

gutted at Berlin; and here it has been still more mangled.  There are

one or two other editions published abroad, which pretend to have

rectified the maltreatment both of Berlin and Paris.  Some time will

be necessary to settle the public mind, as to the best edition.




        Montignot has given us the original Greek, and a French

translation of the seventh book of Potolemy's great work, under the

title of `Etat des etoiles fixes au second siecle,' in quarto.  He

has given the designation of the same stars by Flamstead and Beyer,

and their position in the year 1786.  A very remarkable work is the

`Mechanique Analytique,' of Le Grange, in quarto.  He is allowed to

be the greatest mathematician now living, and his personal worth is

equal to his science.  The object of his work is to reduce all the

principles of mechanics to the single one of the equilibrium, and to

give a simple formula applicable to them all.  The subject is treated

in the algebraic method, without diagrams to assist the conception.

My present occupations not permitting me to read any thing which

requires a long and undisturbed attention, I am not able to give you

the character of this work from my own examination.  It has been

received with great approbation in Europe.  In Italy, the works of

Spallanzani on digestion and generation, are valuable.  Though,

perhaps, too minute, and therefore tedious, he has developed some

useful truths, and his book is well worth attention; it is in four

volumes, octavo.  Clavigaro, an Italian also, who has resided

thirty-six years in Mexico, has given us a history of that country,

which certainly merits more respect than any other work on the same

subject.  He corrects many errors of Dr. Robertson; and though sound

philosophy will disapprove many of his ideas, we must still consider

it as an useful work, and assuredly the best we possess on the same

subject.  It is in four thin volumes, small quarto.  De la Land has

not yet published a fifth volume.




        The chemical dispute about the conversion and reconversion of

air and water, continues still undecided.  Arguments and authorities

are so balanced, that we may still safely believe, as our fathers did

before us, that these principles are distinct.  A schism of another

kind, has taken place among the chemists.  A particular set of them

here, have undertaken to remodel all the terms of the science, and to

give to every substance a new name, the composition, and especially

the termination of which, shall define the relation in which it

stands to other substances of the same family.  But the science seems

too much in its infancy as yet, for this reformation; because, in

fact, the reformation of this year must be reformed again the next

year, and so on, changing the names of substances as often as new

experiments develope properties in them undiscovered before.  The new

nomenclature has, accordingly, been already proved to need numerous

and important reformations.  Probably it will not prevail.  It is

espoused by the minority only here, and by very few, indeed, of the

foreign chemists.  It is particularly rejected in England.




        In the arts, I think two of our countrymen have presented the

most important inventions.  Mr. Paine, the author of Common Sense,

has invented an iron bridge, which promises to be cheaper by a great

deal than stone, and to admit of a much greater arch.  He supposes it

may be ventured for an arch of five hundred feet.  He has obtained a

patent for it in England, and is now executing the first experiment

with an arch of between ninety and one hundred feet.  Mr.  Rumsey has

also obtained a patent for his navigation by the force of steam, in

England, and is soliciting a similar one here.  His principal merit

is in the improvement of the boiler, and, instead of the complicated

machinery of oars and paddles, proposed by others, the substitution

of so simple a thing as the reaction of a stream of water on his

vessel.  He is building a sea vessel at this time in England, and she

will be ready for an experiment in May.  He has suggested a great

number of mechanical improvements in a variety of branches; and upon

the whole, is the most original and the greatest mechanical genius I

have ever seen.  The return of la Peyrouse (whenever that shall

happen) will probably add to our knowledge in Geography, Botany and

Natural History.  What a field have we at our doors to signalise

ourselves in!  The Botany of America is far from being exhausted, its

Mineralogy is untouched, and its Natural History or Zoology, totally

mistaken and misrepresented.  As far as I have seen, there is not one

single species of terrestrial birds common to Europe and America, and

I question if there be a single species of quadrupeds.  (Domestic

animals are to be excepted.) It is for such institutions as that over

which you preside so worthily, Sir, to do justice to our country, its

productions and its genius.  It is the work to which the young men,

whom you are forming, should lay their hands.  We have spent the

prime of our lives in procuring them the precious blessing of

liberty.  Let them spend theirs in shewing that it is the great

parent of _science_ and of virtue; and that a nation will be great in

both, always in proportion as it is free.  Nobody wishes more warmly

for the success of your good exhortations on this subject, than he

who has the honor to be, with sentiments of great esteem and respect,

Sir, your most obedient humble servant,







        A REPORT FROM VERSAILLES




        _To John Jay_

        _Paris, May 9, 1789_




        SIR, -- Since my letter of March the 1st, by the way of Havre,

and those of March the 12th and 15th, by the way of London, no

opportunity of writing has occurred, till the present to London.




        There are no symptoms of accommodation between the Turks and

two empires, nor between Russia and Sweden.  The Emperor was, on the

16th of the last month, expected to die, certainly; he was, however,

a little better when the last news came away, so that hopes were

entertained of him; but it is agreed that he cannot get the better of

his complaints ultimately, so that his life is not at all counted on.

The Danes profess, as yet, to do no more against Sweden than furnish

their stipulated aid.  The agitation of Poland is still violent,

though somewhat moderated by the late change in the demeanor of the

King of Prussia.  He is much less thrasonic than he was.  This is

imputed to the turn which the English politics may be rationally

expected to take.  It is very difficult to get at the true state of

the British King; but from the best information we can get, his

madness has gone off, but he is left in a state of imbecility and

melancholy.  They are going to carry him to Hanover, to see whether

such a journey may relieve him.  The Queen accompanies him.  If

England should, by this accident, be reduced to inactivity, the

southern countries of Europe may escape the present war.  Upon the

whole, the prospect for the present year, if no unforeseen accident

happens, is, certain peace for the powers not already engaged, a

probability that Denmark will not become a principal, and a mere

possibility that Sweden and Russia may be accommodated.  The interior

disputes of Sweden are so exactly detailed in the Leyden gazette,

that I have nothing to add on that subject.




        The revolution of this country has advanced thus far, without

encountering any thing which deserves to be called a difficulty.

There have been riots in a few instances, in three or four different

places, in which there may have been a dozen or twenty lives lost.

The exact truth is not to be got at.  A few days ago, a much more

serious riot took place in this city, in which it became necessary

for the troops to engage in regular action with the mob, and probably

about one hundred of the latter were killed.  Accounts vary from

twenty to two hundred.  They were the most abandoned banditti of

Paris, and never was a riot more unprovoked and unpitied.  They

began, under a pretence that a paper manufacturer had proposed in an

assembly, to reduce their wages to fifteen sous a day.  They rifled

his house, destroyed every thing in his magazines and shops, and were

only stopped in their career of mischief, by the carnage above

mentioned.  Neither this nor any other of the riots, have had a

professed connection with the great national reformation going on.

They are such as have happened every year since I have been here, and

as will continue to be produced by common incidents.  The States

General were opened on the 4th instant, by a speech from the throne,

one by the Garde des Sceaux, and one from Mr. Neckar.  I hope they

will be printed in time to send you herewith: lest they should not, I

will observe, that that of Mr. Neckar stated the real and ordinary

deficit to be fifty-six millions, and that he shewed that this could

be made up without a new tax, by economies and bonifications which he

specified.  Several articles of the latter are liable to the

objection, that they are proposed on branches of the revenue, of

which the nation has demanded a suppression.  He tripped too lightly

over the great articles of constitutional reformation, these being

not as clearly enounced in this discourse as they were in his

`Rapport au roy,' which I sent you some time ago.  On the whole, his

discourse has not satisfied the patriotic party.  It is now, for the

first time, that their revolution is likely to receive a serious

check, and begins to wear a fearful appearance.  The progress of

light and liberality in the order of the Noblesse, has equalled

expectation in Paris only, and its vicinities.  The great mass of

deputies of that order, which come from the country, shew that the

habits of tyranny over the people, are deeply rooted in them.  They

will consent, indeed, to equal taxation; but five-sixths of that

chamber are thought to be, decidedly, for voting by orders; so that,

had this great preliminary question rested on this body, which formed

heretofore the sole hope, that hope would have been completely

disappointed.  Some aid, however, comes in from a quarter whence none

was expected.  It was imagined the ecclesiastical elections would

have been generally in favor of the higher clergy; on the contrary,

the lower clergy have obtained five-sixths of these deputations.

These are the sons of peasants, who have done all the drudgery of the

service, for ten, twenty and thirty guineas a year, and whose

oppressions and penury, contrasted with the pride and luxury of the

higher clergy, have rendered them perfectly disposed to humble the

latter.  They have done it, in many instances, with a boldness they

were thought insusceptible of.  Great hopes have been formed, that

these would concur with the Tiers Etat, in voting by persons.  In

fact, about half of them seem as yet so disposed; but the bishops are

intriguing, and drawing them over with the address which has ever

marked ecclesiastical intrigue.  The deputies of the Tiers Etat seem,

almost to a man, inflexibly determined against the vote by orders.

This is the state of parties, as well as can be judged from

conversation only, during the fortnight they have been now together.

But as no business has been yet begun, no votes as yet taken, this

calculation cannot be considered as sure.  A middle proposition is

talked of, to form the two privileged orders into one chamber.  It is

thought more possible to bring them into it, than the Tiers Etat.

Another proposition is, to distinguish questions, referring those of

certain descriptions to a vote by persons, others to a vote by

orders.  This seems to admit of endless altercation, and the Tiers

Etat manifest no respect for that, or any other modification

whatever.  Were this single question accommodated, I am of opinion,

there would not occur the least difficulty in the great and essential

points of constitutional reformation.  But on this preliminary

question the parties are so irreconcilable, that it is impossible to

foresee what issue it will have.  The Tiers Etat, as constituting the

nation, may propose to do the business of the nation, either with or

without the minorities in the Houses of Clergy and Nobles, which side

with them.  In that case, if the King should agree to it, the

majorities in those two Houses would secede, and might resist the tax

gatherers.  This would bring on a civil war.  On the other hand, the

privileged orders, offering to submit to equal taxation, may propose

to the King to continue the government in its former train, resuming

to himself the power of taxation.  Here, the tax gatherers might be

resisted by the people.  In fine, it is but too possible, that

between parties so animated, the King may incline the balance as he

pleases.  Happy that he is an honest, unambitious man, who desires

neither money nor power for himself; and that his most operative

minister, though he has appeared to trim a little, is still, in the

main, a friend to public liberty.




        I mentioned to you in a former letter, the construction which

our bankers at Amsterdam had put on the resolution of Congress,

appropriating the last Dutch loan, by which the money for our

captives would not be furnished till the end of the year 1790.

Orders from the board of treasury, have now settled this question.

The interest of the next month is to be first paid, and after that,

the money for the captives and foreign officers is to be furnished,

before any other payment of interest.  This insures it when the next

February interest becomes payable.  My representations to them, on

account of the contracts I had entered into for making the medals,

have produced from them the money for that object, which is lodged in

the hands of Mr. Grand.




        Mr. Neckar, in his discourse, proposes among his bonifications

of revenue, the suppression of our two free ports of Bayonne and

L'Orient, which he says, occasion a loss of six hundred thousand

livres annually, to the crown, by contraband.  (The speech being not

yet printed, I state this only as it struck my ear when he delivered

it.  If I have mistaken it, I beg you to receive this as my apology,

and to consider what follows, as written on that idea only.) I have

never been able to see that these free ports were worth one copper to

us.  To Bayonne our trade never went, and it is leaving L'Orient.

Besides, the right of entrepot is a perfect substitute for the right

of free port.  The latter is a little less troublesome only, to the

merchants and captains.  I should think, therefore, that a thing so

useless to us and prejudicial to them might be relinquished by us, on

the common principles of friendship.  I know the merchants of these

ports will make a clamour, because the franchise covers their

contraband with all the world.  Has Monsieur de Moustier said any

thing to you on this subject?  It has never been mentioned to me.  If

not mentioned in either way, it is rather an indecent proceeding,

considering that this right of free port is founded in treaty.  I

shall ask of M. de Montmorin, on the first occasion, whether he has

communicated this to you through his minister; and if he has not, I

will endeavor to notice the infraction to him in such manner, as

neither to reclaim nor abandon the right of free port, but leave our

government free to do either.




        The gazettes of France and Leyden, as usual, will accompany

this.  I am in hourly expectation of receiving from you my leave of

absence, and keep my affairs so arranged, that I can leave Paris

within eight days after receiving the permission.  I have the honor

to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir,

your most obedient and most humble servant,







        A CHARTER FOR FRANCE




        _To Rabout de St. Etienne, with Draft of a Charter of Rights_

        _Paris, June 3, 1789_




        SIR, -- After you quitted us yesterday evening, we continued

our conversation (Monsr. de la Fayette, Mr. Short & myself) on the

subject of the difficulties which environ you.  The desirable object

being to secure the good which the King has offered & to avoid the

ill which seems to threaten, an idea was suggested, which appearing

to make an impression on Monsr. de la Fayette, I was encouraged to

pursue it on my return to Paris, to put it into form, & now to send

it to you & him.  It is this, that the King, in a _seance royale_

should come forward with a Charter of Rights in his hand, to be

signed by himself & by every member of the three orders.  This

charter to contain the five great points which the Resultat of

December offered on the part of the King, the abolition of pecuniary

privileges offered by the privileged orders, & the adoption of the

National debt and a grant of the sum of money asked from the nation.

This last will be a cheap price for the preceding articles, and let

the same act declare your immediate separation till the next

anniversary meeting.  You will carry back to your constituents more

good than ever was effected before without violence, and you will

stop exactly at the point where violence would otherwise begin.  Time

will be gained, the public mind will continue to ripen & to be

informed, a basis of support may be prepared with the people

themselves, and expedients occur for gaining still something further

at your next meeting, & for stopping again at the point of force.  I

have ventured to send to yourself & Monsieur de la Fayette a sketch

of my ideas of what this act might contain without endangering any

dispute.  But it is offered merely as a canvas for you to work on, if

it be fit to work on at all.  I know too little of the subject, & you

know too much of it to justify me in offering anything but a hint.  I

have done it too in a hurry: insomuch that since committing it to

writing it occurs to me that the 5'th. article may give alarm, that

it is in a good degree included in the 4'th., and is therefore

useless.  But after all what excuse can I make, Sir, for this

presumption.  I have none but an unmeasureable love for your nation

and a painful anxiety lest Despotism, after an unaccepted offer to

bind it's own hands, should seize you again with tenfold fury.

Permit me to add to these very sincere assurances of the sentiments

of esteem & respect with which I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most

obed't. & most humble serv't.




        _A Charter of Rights, solemnly established by the King and

Nation._

 

        1. The States General shall assemble, uncalled, on the first

day of November, annually, and shall remain together so long as they

shall see cause.  They shall regulate their own elections and

proceedings, and until they shall ordain otherwise, their elections

shall be in the forms observed in the present year, and shall be

triennial.




        2. The States General alone shall levy money on the nation, and

shall appropriate it.




        3. Laws shall be made by the States General only, with the

consent of the King.




        4. No person shall be restrained of his liberty, but by regular

process from a court of justice, authorized by a general law.

(Except that a Noble may be imprisoned by order of a court of

justice, on the prayer of twelve of his nearest relations.) On

complaint of an unlawful imprisonment, to any judge whatever, he

shall have the prisoner immediately brought before him, and shall

discharge him, if his imprisonment be unlawful.  The officer in whose

custody the prisoner is, shall obey the orders of the judge; and both

judge and officer shall be responsible, civilly and criminally, for a

failure of duty herein.




        5. The military shall be subordinate to the civil authority.




        6. Printers shall be liable to legal prosecution for printing

and publishing false facts, injurious to the party prosecuting; but

they shall be under no other restraint.




        7. All pecuniary privileges and exemptions, enjoyed by any

description of persons, are abolished.




        8. All debts already contracted by the King, are hereby made

the debts of the nation; and the faith thereof is pledged for their

payment in due time.




        9. Eighty millions of livres are now granted to the King, to be

raised by loan, and reimbursed by the nation; and the taxes

heretofore paid, shall continue to be paid to the end of the present

year, and no longer.




        10. The States General shall now separate, and meet again on

the 1st day of November next.




        Done, on behalf of the whole nation, by the King and their

representatives in the States General, at Versailles, this -- day of

June, 1789.




        Signed by the King, and by every member individually, and in

his presence.







        "THE FIRST CHAPTER . . . OF EUROPEAN LIBERTY"




        _To Diodati_

        _a Paris, ce 3'me. Aout 1789_




        Je viens de recevoir, mon chere Monsieur, l'honneur de votre

lettre du 24. Juillet.  La peine avec laquelle je m'exprime en

Fransois feroit que ma reponse seroit bien courte s'il ne m'etoit pas

permis de repondre que dans cette langue.  Mais je ssais qu'avec

quelque connoissance de la langue Angloise vous meme, vous aurez une

aide tres suffisante dans Madame la comtesse que j'ose prier

d'ajouter a ses amities multipliees devers moi celle de devenir

l'interprete de ce que vais ecrire en ma propre langue, et qu'elle

embellira en la rendant en Fransois.




        I presume that your correspondents here have given you a

history of all the events which have happened.  The Leyden gazette,

tho' it contains several inconsiderable errors, gives on the whole a

just enough idea.  It is impossible to conceive a greater

fermentation than has worked in Paris, nor do I believe that so great

a fermentation ever produced so little injury in any other place.  I

have been thro' it daily, have observed the mobs with my own eyes in

order to be satisfied of their objects, and declare to you that I saw

so plainly the legitimacy of them, that I have slept in my house as

quietly thro' the whole as I ever did in the most peaceable moments.

So strongly fortified was the despotism of this government by long

possession, by the respect & the fears of the people, by possessing

the public force, by the imposing authority of forms and of faste,

that had it held itself on the defensive only, the national assembly

with all their good sense, would probably have only obtained a

considerable improvement of the government, not a total revision of

it.  But, ill informed of the spirit of their nation, the despots

around the throne had recourse to violent measures, the forerunners

of force.  In this they have been completely overthrown, & the nation

has made a total resumption of rights, which they had certainly never

before ventured even to think of.  The National assembly have now as

clean a canvas to work on here as we had in America.  Such has been

the firmness and wisdom of their proceedings in moments of adversity

as well as prosperity, that I have the highest confidence that they

will use their power justly.  As far as I can collect from

conversation with their members, the constitution they will propose

will resemble that of England in it's outlines, but not in it's

defects.  They will certainly leave the king possessed completely of

the Executive powers, & particularly of the public force.  Their

legislature will consist of one order only, & not of two as in

England: the representation will be equal & not abominably partial as

that of England: it will be guarded against corruption, instead of

having a majority sold to the king, & rendering his will absolute:

whether it will be in one chamber, or broke into two cannot be

foreseen.  They will meet at certain epochs & sit as long as they

please, instead of meeting only when, & sitting only as long as the

king pleases as in England.  There is a difference of opinion whether

the king shall have an absolute, or only a qualified Negative on

their acts.  The parliaments will probably be suppressed; & juries

provided in criminal cases perhaps even in civil ones.  This is what

appears probable at present.  The Assembly is this day discussing the

question whether they will have a declaration of rights.  Paris has

been led by events to assume the government of itself.  It has

hitherto worn too much the appearance of conformity to continue thus

independently of the will of the nation.  Reflection will probably

make them sensible that the security of all depends on the dependance

of all on the national legislature.  I have so much confidence on the

good sense of man, and his qualifications for self-government, that I

am never afraid of the issue where reason is left free to exert her

force; and I will agree to be stoned as a false prophet if all does

not end well in this country.  Nor will it end with this country.

Hers is but the first chapter of the history of European liberty.




        The capture of the Baron Besenval is very embarrassing for the

States general.  They are principled against retrospective laws, &

will make it one of the corner stones of their new building.  But it

is very doubtful whether the antient laws will condemn him, and

whether the people will permit him to be acquitted.  The Duke de la

Vauguyon also & his son are taken at Havre.  -- In drawing the

parallel between what England is, & what France is to be I forgot to

observe that the latter will have a real constitution, which cannot

be changed by the ordinary legislature; whereas England has no

constitution at all: that is to say there is not one principle of

their government which the parliament does not alter at pleasure.

The omnipotence of parliament is an established principle with them.

-- Postponing my departure to America till the end of September I

shall hope to have the pleasure of seeing you at Paris before I go, &

of renewing in person to yourself & Madame la Comtesse assurances of

those sentiments of respect & attachment with which I have the honor

to be Dear Sir your most obedient humble serv't.




 

        P. S. It is rumored & beleived in Paris that the English have

fomented with money the tumults of this place, & that they are arming

to attack France.  I have never seen any reason to believe either of

these rumors.







        "THE EARTH BELONGS TO THE LIVING"




        _To James Madison_

        _Paris, September 6, 1789_




        DEAR SIR, -- I sit down to write to you without knowing by what

occasion I shall send my letter.  I do it because a subject comes

into my head which I would wish to develope a little more than is

practicable in the hurry of the moment of making up general

despatches.




        The question Whether one generation of men has a right to bind

another, seems never to have been started either on this or our side

of the water.  Yet it is a question of such consequences as not only

to merit decision, but place also, among the fundamental principles

of every government.  The course of reflection in which we are

immersed here on the elementary principles of society has presented

this question to my mind; and that no such obligation can be

transmitted I think very capable of proof.  I set out on this ground

which I suppose to be self evident, "_that the earth belongs in

usufruct to the living_;" that the dead have neither powers nor

rights over it.  The portion occupied by an individual ceases to be

his when himself ceases to be, and reverts to the society.  If the

society has formed no rules for the appropriation of its lands in

severalty, it will be taken by the first occupants.  These will

generally be the wife and children of the decedent.  If they have

formed rules of appropriation, those rules may give it to the wife

and children, or to some one of them, or to the legatee of the

deceased.  So they may give it to his creditor.  But the child, the

legatee or creditor takes it, not by any natural right, but by a law

of the society of which they are members, and to which they are

subject.  Then no man can by _natural right_ oblige the lands he

occupied, or the persons who succeed him in that occupation, to the

paiment of debts contracted by him.  For if he could, he might during

his own life, eat up the usufruct of the lands for several

generations to come, and then the lands would belong to the dead, and

not to the living, which would be reverse of our principle.  What is

true of every member of the society individually, is true of them all

collectively, since the rights of the whole can be no more than the

sum of the rights of individuals.  To keep our ideas clear when

applying them to a multitude, let us suppose a whole generation of

men to be born on the same day, to attain mature age on the same day,

and to die on the same day, leaving a succeeding generation in the

moment of attaining their mature age all together.  Let the ripe age

be supposed of 21. years, and their period of life 34. years more,

that being the average term given by the bills of mortality to

persons who have already attained 21. years of age.  Each successive

generation would, in this way, come on and go off the stage at a

fixed moment, as individuals do now.  Then I say the earth belongs to

each of these generations during it's course, fully, and in their own

right.  The 2d. generation receives it clear of the debts and

incumbrances of the 1st., the 3d. of the 2d. and so on.  For if the

1st. could charge it with a debt, then the earth would belong to the

dead and not the living generation.  Then no generation can contract

debts greater than may be paid during the course of it's own

existence.  At 21. years of age they may bind themselves and their

lands for 34. years to come: at 22. for 33: at 23 for 32. and at 54

for one year only; because these are the terms of life which remain

to them at those respective epochs.  But a material difference must

be noted between the succession of an individual and that of a whole

generation.  Individuals are parts only of a society, subject to the

laws of a whole.  These laws may appropriate the portion of land

occupied by a decedent to his creditor rather than to any other, or

to his child, on condition he satisfies his creditor.  But when a

whole generation, that is, the whole society dies, as in the case we

have supposed, and another generation or society succeeds, this forms

a whole, and there is no superior who can give their territory to a

third society, who may have lent money to their predecessors beyond

their faculty of paying.




        What is true of a generation all arriving to self-government on

the same day, and dying all on the same day, is true of those on a

constant course of decay and renewal, with this only difference.  A

generation coming in and going out entire, as in the first case,

would have a right in the 1st year of their self dominion to contract

a debt for 33. years, in the 10th. for 24. in the 20th.  for 14. in

the 30th. for 4. whereas generations changing daily, by daily deaths

and births, have one constant term beginning at the date of their

contract, and ending when a majority of those of full age at that

date shall be dead.  The length of that term may be estimated from

the tables of mortality, corrected by the circumstances of climate,

occupation &c. peculiar to the country of the contractors.  Take, for

instance, the table of M. de Buffon wherein he states that 23,994

deaths, and the ages at which they happened.  Suppose a society in

which 23,994 persons are born every year and live to the ages stated

in this table.  The conditions of that society will be as follows.

1st. it will consist constantly of 617,703 persons of all ages. 2dly.

of those living at any one instant of time, one half will be dead in

24. years 8. months. 3dly. 10,675 will arrive every year at the age

of 21. years complete. 4thly. it will constantly have 348,417 persons

of all ages above 21. years. 5ly. and the half of those of 21. years

and upwards living at any one instant of time will be dead in 18.

years 8. months, or say 19. years as the nearest integral number.

Then 19. years is the term beyond which neither the representatives

of a nation, nor even the whole nation itself assembled, can validly

extend a debt.




        To render this conclusion palpable by example, suppose that

Louis XIV. and XV. had contracted debts in the name of the French

nation to the amount of 10.000 milliards of livres and that the whole

had been contracted in Genoa.  The interest of this sum would be 500

milliards, which is said to be the whole rent-roll, or nett proceeds

of the territory of France.  Must the present generation of men have

retired from the territory in which nature produced them, and ceded

it to the Genoese creditors?  No.  They have the same rights over the

soil on which they were produced, as the preceding generations had.

They derive these rights not from their predecessors, but from

nature.  They then and their soil are by nature clear of the debts of

their predecessors.  Again suppose Louis XV. and his contemporary

generation had said to the money lenders of Genoa, give us money that

we may eat, drink, and be merry in our day; and on condition you will

demand no interest till the end of 19. years, you shall then forever

after receive an annual interest of (*) 12.'5 per cent.  The money is

lent on these conditions, is divided among the living, eaten, drank,

and squandered.  Would the present generation be obliged to apply the

produce of the earth and of their labour to replace their

dissipations?  Not at all.




        (*) 100 pound at a compound interest of 6 per cent makes at the

end of 19 years an aggregate of principal and interest of pound

252.14 the interest of which is a pound 12 degrees degrees.  12".

7'd. which is nearly 12". p'r. cent on the first capital of pound

100.




        I suppose that the received opinion, that the public debts of

one generation devolve on the next, has been suggested by our seeing

habitually in private life that he who succeeds to lands is required

to pay the debts of his ancestor or testator, without considering

that this requisition is municipal only, not moral, flowing from the

will of the society which has found it convenient to appropriate the

lands become vacant by the death of their occupant on the condition

of a paiment of his debts; but that between society and society, or

generation and generation there is no municipal obligation, no umpire

but the law of nature.  We seem not to have perceived that, by the

law of nature, one generation is to another as one independant nation

to another."




        The interest of the national debt of France being in fact but a

two thousandth part of it's rent-roll, the paiment of it is

practicable enough; and so becomes a question merely of honor or

expediency.  But with respect to future debts; would it not be wise

and just for that nation to declare in the constitution they are

forming that neither the legislature, nor the nation itself can

validly contract more debt, than they may pay within their own age,

or within the term of 19. years?  And that all future contracts shall

be deemed void as to what shall remain unpaid at the end of 19. years

from their date?  This would put the lenders, and the borrowers also,

on their guard.  By reducing too the faculty of borrowing within its

natural limits, it would bridle the spirit of war, to which too free

a course has been procured by the inattention of money lenders to

this law of nature, that succeeding generations are not responsible

for the preceding.




        On similar ground it may be proved that no society can make a

perpetual constitution, or even a perpetual law.  The earth belongs

always to the living generation.  They may manage it then, and what

proceeds from it, as they please, during their usufruct.  They are

masters too of their own persons, and consequently may govern them as

they please.  But persons and property make the sum of the objects of

government.  The constitution and the laws of their predecessors

extinguished them, in their natural course, with those whose will

gave them being.  This could preserve that being till it ceased to be

itself, and no longer.  Every constitution, then, and every law,

naturally expires at the end of 19. years.  If it be enforced longer,

it is an act of force and not of right.




        It may be said that the succeeding generation exercising in

fact the power of repeal, this leaves them as free as if the

constitution or law had been expressly limited to 19. years only.  In

the first place, this objection admits the right, in proposing an

equivalent.  But the power of repeal is not an equivalent.  It might

be indeed if every form of government were so perfectly contrived

that the will of the majority could always be obtained fairly and

without impediment.  But this is true of no form.  The people cannot

assemble themselves; their representation is unequal and vicious.

Various checks are opposed to every legislative proposition.

Factions get possession of the public councils.  Bribery corrupts

them.  Personal interests lead them astray from the general interests

of their constituents; and other impediments arise so as to prove to

every practical man that a law of limited duration is much more

manageable than one which needs a repeal.




        This principle that the earth belongs to the living and not to

the dead is of very extensive application and consequences in every

country, and most especially in France.  It enters into the

resolution of the questions Whether the nation may change the descent

of lands holden in tail?  Whether they may change the appropriation

of lands given antiently to the church, to hospitals, colleges,

orders of chivalry, and otherwise in perpetuity? whether they may

abolish the charges and privileges attached on lands, including the

whole catalogue ecclesiastical and feudal? it goes to hereditary

offices, authorities and jurisdictions; to hereditary orders,

distinctions and appellations; to perpetual monopolies in commerce,

the arts or sciences; with a long train of _et ceteras_: and it

renders the question of reimbursement a question of generosity and

not of right.  In all these cases the legislature of the day could

authorize such appropriations and establishments for their own time,

but no longer; and the present holders, even where they or their

ancestors have purchased, are in the case of _bona fide_ purchasers

of what the seller had no right to convey.




        Turn this subject in your mind, my Dear Sir, and particularly

as to the power of contracting debts, and develope it with that

perspicuity and cogent logic which is so peculiarly yours.  Your

station in the councils of our country gives you an opportunity of

producing it to public consideration, of forcing it into discussion.

At first blush it may be rallied as a theoretical speculation; but

examination will prove it to be solid and salutary.  It would furnish

matter for a fine preamble to our first law for appropriating the

public revenue; and it will exclude, at the threshold of our new

government the contagious and ruinous errors of this quarter of the

globe, which have armed despots with means not sanctioned by nature

for binding in chains their fellow-men.  We have already given, in

example one effectual check to the Dog of war, by transferring the

power of letting him loose from the executive to the Legislative

body, from those who are to spend to those who are to pay.  I should

be pleased to see this second obstacle held out by us also in the

first instance.  No nation can make a declaration against the

validity of long-contracted debts so disinterestedly as we, since we

do not owe a shilling which may not be paid with ease principal and

interest, within the time of our own lives.  Establish the principle

also in the new law to be passed for protecting copy rights and new

inventions, by securing the exclusive right for 19. instead of 14.

years _[a line entirely faded]_ an instance the more of our taking

reason for our guide instead of English precedents, the habit of

which fetters us, with all the political herecies of a nation,

equally remarkable for it's encitement from some errors, as long

slumbering under others.  I write you no news, because when an

occasion occurs I shall write a separate letter for that.







        ADIEU TO FRANCE




        _To Madame d'Enville_

        _New York, April 2, 1790_




        I had hoped, Madame la Duchesse, to have again had the honor of

paying my respects to you in Paris, but the wish of our government

that I should take a share in its administration, has become a law to

me.  Could I have persuaded myself that public offices were made for

private convenience, I should undoubtedly have preferred a

continuance in that which placed me nearer to you; but believing on

the contrary that a good citizen should take his stand where the

public authority marshals him, I have acquiesced.  Among the

circumstances which reconcile me to my new position the most powerful

is the opportunities it will give me of cementing the friendship

between our two nations.  Be assured that to do this is the first

wish of my heart.  I have but one system of ethics for men & for

nations -- to be grateful, to be faithful to all engagements and

under all circumstances, to be open & generous, promotes in the long

run even the interests of both; and I am sure it promotes their

happiness.  The change in your government will approximate us to one

another.  You have had some checks, some horrors since I left you;

but the way to heaven, you know, has always been said to be strewed

with thorns.  Why your nation have had fewer than any other on earth,

I do not know, unless it be that it is the best on earth.  If I

assure you, Madam, moreover, that I consider yourself personally as

with the foremost of your nation in every virtue, it is not flattery,

my heart knows not that, it is a homage to sacred truth, it is a

tribute I pay with cordiality to a character in which I saw but one

error; it was that of treating me with a degree of favor I did not

merit.  Be assured I shall ever retain a lively sense of all your

goodness to me, which was a circumstance of principal happiness to me

during my stay in Paris.  I hope that by this time you have seen that

my prognostications of a successful issue to your revolution have

been verified.  I feared for you during a short interval; but after

the declaration of the army, tho' there might be episodes of

distress, the denoument was out of doubt.  Heaven send that the

glorious example of your country may be but the beginning of the

history of European liberty, and that you may live many years in

health & happiness to see at length that heaven did not make man in

it's wrath.  Accept the homage of those sentiments of sincere and

respectfull esteem with which I have the honor to be, Madame la

Duchesse, your most affectionate & obedient humble servant.







        READING THE LAW




        _To John Garland Jefferson_

        _New York, June 11, 1790_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your uncle mr Garland informs me, that, your

education being finished, you are desirous of obtaining some

clerkship or something else under government whereby you may turn

your talents to some account for yourself and he had supposed it

might be in my power to provide you with some such office.  His

commendations of you are such as to induce me to wish sincerely to be

of service to you.  But there is not, and has not been, a single

vacant office at my disposal.  Nor would I, as your friend, ever

think of putting you into the petty clerkships in the several

offices, where you would have to drudge through life for a miserable

pittance, without a hope of bettering your situation.  But he tells

me you are also disposed to the study of the law.  This therefore

brings it more within my power to serve you.  It will be necessary

for you in that case to go and live somewhere in my neighborhood in

Albemarle.  The inclosed letter to Colo. Lewis near Charlottesville

will show you what I have supposed could be best done for you there.

It is a general practice to study the law in the office of some

lawyer.  This indeed gives to the student the advantage of his

instruction.  But I have ever seen that the services expected in

return have been more than the instructions have been worth.  All

that is necessary for a student is access to a library, and

directions in what order the books are to be read.  This I will take

the liberty of suggesting to you, observing previously that as other

branches of science, and especially history, are necessary to form a

lawyer, these must be carried on together.  I will arrange the books

to be read into three columns, and propose that you should read those

in the first column till 12. oclock every day: those in the 2d.  from

12. to 2. those in the 3d. after candlelight, leaving all the

afternoon for exercise and recreation, which are as necessary as

reading: I will rather say more necessary, because health is worth

more than learning.

 

        1st.

 

        Coke on Littleton

 

        Coke's 2d. 3d. & 4th.

        institutes.

 

        Coke's reports.




        Vaughan's do

        Salkeld's




        Ld. Raymond's




        Strange's.




        Burrows's




        Kaim's Principles of equity.




        Vernon's reports.




        Peere Williams.




        Precedents in Chancery.




        Tracy Atheyns.




        Verey.




        Hawkin's Pleas of the crown.




        Blackstone.




        Virginia laws.







        2d.




        Dalrymple's feudal system.




        Hale's history of the Com. law.




        Gilbert on Devises

                Uses.

                Tenures.

                Rents.

                Distresses.

                Ejectments.

                Executions.

                Evidence.




        Sayer's law of costs.




        Lambard's circonantia.




        Bacon. voce Pleas & Pleadings.




        Cunningham's law of bills.




        Molloy de jure maritimo.




        Locke on government.




        Montesquieu's Spirit of law.




        Smith's wealth of nations.




        Beccaria.




        Kaim's moral essays.




        Vattel's law of nations.







        3d.




        Mallet's North antiquit'.




        History of England in 3.  vols folio compiled by Kennet.




        Ludlow's memoirs




        Burnet's history.




        Ld. Orrery's history.




        Burke's George III.




        Robertson's hist. of Scotl'd

 

        Robertson's hist. of America.




        Other American histories.




        Voltaire's historical works.




        Should there be any little intervals in the day not otherwise

occupied fill them up by reading Lowthe's grammar, Blair's lectures

on rhetoric, Mason on poetic & prosaic numbers, Bolingbroke's works

for the sake of the stile, which is declamatory & elegant, the

English poets for the sake of the style also.




        As mr Peter Carr in Goochland is engaged in a course of law

reading, and has my books for that purpose, it will be necessary for

you to go to mrs Carr's, and to receive such as he shall be then done

with, and settle with him a plan of receiving from him regular the

before mentioned books as fast as he shall get through them.  The

losses I have sustained by lending my books will be my apology to you

for asking your particular attention to the replacing them in the

presses as fast as you finish them, and not to lend them to any body

else, nor suffer anybody to have a book out of the Study under cover

of your name.  You will find, when you get there, that I have had

reason to ask this exactness.




        I would have you determine beforehand to make yourself a

thorough lawyer, & not be contented with a mere smattering.  It is

superiority of knowledge which can alone lift you above the heads of

your competitors, and ensure you success.  I think therefore you must

calculate on devoting between two & three years to this course of

reading, before you think of commencing practice.  Whenever that

begins, there is an end of reading.




        I shall be glad to hear from you from time to time, and shall

hope to see you in the fall in Albemarle, to which place I propose a

visit in that season.  In the mean time wishing you all the industry

of patient perseverance which this course of reading will require I

am with great esteem Dear Sir Your most obedient friend & servant.







        WHIPPOORWILLS AND STRAWBERRIES




        _To Mary Jefferson_

        _New York, June 13, 1790_




        MY DEAR MARIA -- I have recieved your letter of May 23. which

was in answer to mine of May 2. but I wrote you also on the 23d. of

May, so that you still owe me an answer to that, which I hope is now

on the road.  In matters of correspondence as well as of money you

must never be in debt.  I am much pleased with the account you give

me of your occupations, and the making the pudding is as good an

article of them as any.  When I come to Virginia I shall insist on

eating a pudding of your own making, as well as on trying other

specimens of your skill.  You must make the most of your time while

you are with so good an aunt who can learn you every thing.  We had

not peas nor strawberries here till the 8th. day of this month.  On

the same day I heard the first Whip-poor-will whistle.  Swallows and

martins appeared here on the 21st. of April.  When did they appear

with you?  And when had you peas, strawberries, and whip-poor-wills

in Virginia?  Take notice hereafter whether the whip-poor-wills

always come with the strawberries and peas.  Send me a copy of the

maxims I gave you, also a list of the books I promised you.  I have

had a long touch of my periodical headach, but a very moderate one.

It has not quite left me yet.  Adieu, my dear, love your uncle, aunt

and cousins, and me more than all.  Your's affectionately,







        RICE FROM TIMOR AND AFRICA




        _To Samuel Vaughan, Jr._

        _Philadelphia, Nov. 27, 1790_




        DEAR SIR -- I feel myself much indebted to Mr. Vaughan your

father for the opportunity he has furnished me of a direct

correspondence with you, and also to yourself for the seeds of the

Mountain rice you have been so good as to send me.  I had before

received from your brother in London some of the same parcel brought

by Capt. Bligh; but it was so late in the spring of the present year

that tho the plants came up and grew luxuriantly, they did not

produce seed.  Your present will enable me to enlarge the experiment

I propose for the next year, and for which I had still reserved a few

seeds of the former parcel.  About two months ago I was fortunate

enough to recieve a cask of mountain rice from the coast of Africa.

This has enabled me to engage so many persons in the experiment as to

be tolerably sure it will be fairly made by some of them.  It will

furnish also a comparison with that from Timor.  I have the success

of this species of rice at heart, because it will not only enable

other states to cultivate rice which have not lands susceptible of

inundation but because also if the rice be as good as is said, it may

take place of the wet rice in the Southern states, & by superseding

the necessity of overflowing their lands, save them from the

pestilential & mortal fevers brought on by that operation.




        We have lately had introduced a plant of the Melon species

which, from it's external resemblance to the pumpkin, we have called

a pumpkin, distinguishing it specifically as the _potatoe-pumpkin_,

on account of the extreme resemblance of it's taste to that of the

sweet-potatoe.  It is as yet but little known, is well esteemed at

our table, and particularly valued by our negroe's.  Coming much

earlier than the real potatoe, we are so much the sooner furnished

with a substitute for that root.  I know not from whence it came; so

that perhaps it may be originally from your islands.  In that case

you will only have the trouble of throwing away the few seeds I

enclose you herewith.  On the other hand, if unknown with you, I

think it will probably succeed in the islands, and may add to the

catalogue of plants which will do as substitutes for bread.  I have

always thought that if in the experiments to introduce or to

communicate new plants, one species in an hundred is found useful &

succeeds, the ninety nine found otherwise are more than paid for.  My

present situation & occupations are not friendly to agricultural

experiments, however strongly I am led to them by inclination.  I

will ask permission to address myself to you for such seeds as might

be worth trying from your quarter, freely offering you reciprocal

services in the same or any other line in which you will be so good

as to command them.  I have the honor to be with great respect &

esteem, Sir Your most obedt. & most humble servt,







        "A SCOLDING LETTER"




        _To Martha Jefferson Randolph_

        _Philadelphia, Dec. 23, 1790_




        MY DEAR DAUGHTER -- This is a scolding letter for you all. I

have not recieved a scrip of a pen from home since I left it which is

now eleven weeks. I think it so easy for you to write me one letter

every week, which will be but once in three weeks for each of you,

when I write one every week who have not one moment's repose from

business from the first to the last moment of the week. Perhaps you

think you have nothing to say to me. It is a great deal to say you

are all well, or that one has a cold, another a fever &c., besides

that there is not a sprig of grass that shoots uninteresting to me,

nor any thing that moves, from yourself down to Bergere or Grizzle.

Write then my dear daughter punctually on your day, and Mr.  Randolph

and Polly on theirs. I suspect you may have news to tell me of

yourself of the most tender interest to me. Why silent then?




        I am still without a house, and consequently without a place to

open my furniture. This has prevented my sending you what I was to

send for Monticello. In the mean time the river is frozen up so as

that no vessel can get out, nor probably will these two months: so

that you will be much longer without them than I had hoped. I know

how inconvenient this will be and am distressed at it; but there is

no help. I send a pamphlet for Mr. Randolph. My best affections to

him, Polly and yourself. Adieu my dear,







        A HERETICAL SECT




        _To George Mason_

        _Philadelphia, Feb. 4, 1791_




        DEAR SIR, -- I am to make you my acknowledgments for your favor

of Jan. 10, & the information from France which it contained.  It

confirmed what I had heard more loosely before, and accounts still

more recent are to the same effect.  I look with great anxiety for

the firm establishment of the new government in France, being

perfectly convinced that if it takes place there, it will spread

sooner or later all over Europe.  On the contrary a check there would

retard the revival of liberty in other countries.  I consider the

establishment and success of their government as necessary to stay up

our own, and to prevent it from falling back to that kind of Half-way

house, the English constitution.  It cannot be denied that we have

among us a sect who believe that to contain whatever is perfect in

human institutions; that the members of this sect have, many of them,

names & offices which stand high in the estimation of our countrymen.

I still rely that the great mass of our community is untainted with

these heresies, as is it's head.  On this I build my hope that we

have not laboured in vain, and that our experiment will still prove

that men can be governed by reason.  You have excited my curiosity in

saying "there is a particular circumstance, little attended to, which

is continually sapping the republicanism of the United States." What

is it? What is said in our country of the fiscal arrangements now

going on? I really fear their effect when I consider the present

temper of the Southern states.  Whether these measures be right or

wrong abstractedly, more attention should be paid to the general

opinion.  However, all will pass -- the excise will pass -- the bank

will pass.  The only corrective of what is corrupt in our present

form of government will be the augmentation of the numbers in the

lower house, so as to get a more agricultural representation, which

may put that interest above that of the stock-jobbers.




        I had no occasion to sound Mr. Madison on your fears expressed

in your letter.  I knew before, as possessing his sentiments fully on

that subject, that his value for you was undiminished.  I have always

heard him say that though you and he appeared to differ in your

systems, yet you were in truth nearer together than most persons who

were classed under the same appellation.  You may quiet yourself in

the assurance of possessing his complete esteem.  I have been

endeavoring to obtain some little distinction for our useful

customers, the French.  But there is a particular interest opposed to

it, which I fear will prove too strong.  We shall soon see.  I will

send you a copy of a report I have given in, as soon as it is

printed.  I know there is one part of it contrary to your sentiments;

yet I am not sure you will not become sensible that a change should

be slowly preparing.  Certainly, whenever I pass your road, I shall

do myself the pleasure of turning into it.  Our last year's

experiment, however, is much in favor of that by Newgate.







        MONUMENTS OF THE PAST




        _To Ebenezer Hazard_

        _Philadelphia, February 18, 1791_




        SIR, -- I return you the two volumes of records, with thanks

for the opportunity of looking into them.  They are curious monuments

of the infancy of our country.  I learn with great satisfaction that

you are about committing to the press the valuable historical and

State papers you have been so long collecting.  Time and accident are

committing daily havoc on the originals deposited in our public

offices.  The late war has done the work of centuries in this

business.  The last cannot be recovered, but let us save what

remains; not by vaults and locks which fence them from the public eye

and use in consigning them to the waste of time, but by such a

multiplication of copies, as shall place them beyond the reach of

accident.  This being the tendency of your undertaking, be assured

there is no one who wishes it more success than, Sir, your most

obedient and most humble servant.







        MEMORIES OF FRANKLIN




        _To the Rev. William Smith_

        _Philadelphia, Feb. 19, 1791_




        DEAR SIR, -- I feel both the wish & the duty to communicate, in

compliance with your request, whatever, within my knowledge, might

render justice to the memory of our great countryman, D'r Franklin,

in whom Philosophy has to deplore one of it's principal luminaries

extinguished.  But my opportunities of knowing the interesting facts

of his life have not been equal to my desire of making them known.  I

could indeed relate a number of those bon mots, with which he used to

charm every society, as having heard many of them.  But these are not

your object.  Particulars of greater dignity happened not to occur

during his stay of nine months, after my arrival in France.




        A little before that, Argand had invented his celebrated lamp,

in which the flame is spread into a hollow cylinder, & thus brought

into contact with the air within as well as without.  Doct'r Franklin

had been on the point of the same discovery.  The idea had occurred

to him; but he had tried a bull-rush as a wick, which did not

succeed.  His occupations did not permit him to repeat & extend his

trials to the introduction of a larger column of air than could pass

through the stem of a bull-rush.




        The animal magnetism too of the maniac Mesmer, had just

received its death wound from his hand in conjunction with his

brethren of the learned committee appointed to unveil that compound

of fraud & folly.  But, after this, nothing very interesting was

before the public, either in philosophy or politics, during his stay;

& he was principally occupied in winding up his affairs there.




        I can only therefore testify in general that there appeared to

me more respect & veneration attached to the character of Doctor

Franklin in France, than to that of any other person in the same

country, foreign or native.  I had opportunities of knowing

particularly how far these sentiments were felt by the foreign

ambassadors & ministers at the court of Versailles.  The fable of his

capture by the Algerines, propagated by the English newspapers,

excited no uneasiness; as it was seen at once to be a dish cooked up

to the palate of their readers.  But nothing could exceed the anxiety

of his diplomatic brethren, on a subsequent report of his death,

which, tho' premature, bore some marks of authenticity.




        I found the ministers of France equally impressed with the

talents & integrity of Doct'r Franklin.  The C't de Vergennes

particularly gave me repeated and unequivocal demonstrations of his

entire confidence in him.




        When he left Passy, it seemed as if the village had lost its

patriarch.  On taking leave of the court, which he did by letter, the

King ordered him to be handsomely complimented, & furnished him with

a litter & mules of his own, the only kind of conveyance the state of

his health could bear.




        No greater proof of his estimation in France can be given than

the late letters of condolence on his death, from the National

Assembly of that country, & the Community of Paris, to the President

of the United States, & to Congress, and their public mourning on

that event.  It is, I believe, the first instance of that homage

having been paid by a public body of one nation to a private citizen

of another.




        His death was an affliction which was to happen to us at some

time or other.  We have reason to be thankful he was so long spared;

that the most useful life should be the longest also; that it was

protracted so far beyond the ordinary span allotted to man, as to

avail us of his wisdom in the establishment of our own freedom, & to

bless him with a view of its dawn in the east, where they seemed,

till now, to have learned everything, but how to be free.




        The succession to D'r Franklin, at the court of France, was an

excellent school of humility.  On being presented to any one as the

minister of America, the commonplace question used in such cases was

_"c'est vous, Monsieur, qui remplace le Docteur Franklin?"_ "it is

you, Sir, who replace Doctor Franklin?" I generally answered, "no one

can replace him, Sir: I am only his successor."




        These small offerings to the memory of our great & dear friend,

whom time will be making greater while it is spunging us from it's

records, must be accepted by you, Sir, in that spirit of love &

veneration for him, in which they are made; and not according to

their insignificance in the eyes of a world, who did not want this

mite to fill up the measure of his worth.







        CAPITOL ON THE POTOMAC




        _To Major L'Enfant_

        _Philadelphia, April 10, 1791_




        SIR, -- I am favored with your letter of the 4th instant, and

in compliance with your request, I have examined my papers, and found

the plans of Frankfort-on-the-Mayne, Carlsruhe, Amsterdam, Strasburg,

Paris, Orleans, Bordeaux, Lyons, Montpelier, Marseilles, Turin, and

Milan, which I send in a roll by the post.  They are on large and

accurate scales, having been procured by me while in those respective

cities myself.  As they are connected with the notes I made in my

travels, and often necessary to explain them to myself, I will beg

your care of them, and to return them when no longer useful to you,

leaving you absolutely free to keep them as long as useful.  I am

happy that the President has left the planning of the town in such

good hands, and have no doubt it will be done to general

satisfaction.  Considering that the grounds to be reserved for the

public are to be paid for by the acre, I think very liberal

reservations should be made for them; and if this be about the Tyber

and on the back of the town, it will be of no injury to the commerce

of the place, which will undoubtedly establish itself on the deep

waters towards the eastern branch and mouth of Rock Creek; the water

about the mouth of the Tyber not being of any depth.  Those connected

with the government will prefer fixing themselves near the public

grounds in the centre, which will also be convenient to be resorted

to as walks from the lower and upper town.  Having communicated to

the President, before he went away, such general ideas on the subject

of the town as occurred to me, I make no doubt that, in explaining

himself to you on the subject, he has interwoven with his own ideas,

such of mine as he approved.  For fear of repeating therefore what he

did not approve, and having more confidence in the unbiassed state of

his mind, than in my own, I avoided interfering with what he may have

expressed to you.  Whenever it is proposed to prepare plans for the

Capitol, I should prefer the adoption of some one of the models of

antiquity, which have had the approbation of thousands of years; and

for the President's house, I should prefer the celebrated fronts of

modern buildings, which have already received the approbation of all

good judges.  Such are the Galerie du Louire, the Gardes meubles, and

two fronts of the Hotel de Salm.  But of this it is yet time enough

to consider.  In the meantime I am, with great esteem, Sir, your most

obedient humble servant.







        A NOTE ON INDIAN POLICY




        _To Charles Carroll_

        _Philadelphia, April 15, 1791_




        DEAR SIR, -- I received last night your favor of the 10th, with

Mr. Brown's receipt, and thank you for the trouble you have been so

kind as to take in this business.




 

        Our news from the westward is disagreeable.  Constant murders

committing by the Indians, and their combination threatens to be more

and more extensive.  I hope we shall give them a thorough drubbing

this summer, and then change our tomahawk into a golden chain of

friendship.  The most economical as well as most humane conduct

towards them is to bribe them into peace, and to retain them in peace

by eternal bribes.  The expedition this year would have served for

presents on the most liberal scale for one hundred years; nor shall

we otherwise ever get rid of any army, or of our debt.  The least rag

of Indian depredation will be an excuse to raise troops for those who

love to have troops, and for those who think that a public debt is a

good thing.  Adieu, my dear Sir.  Yours affectionately.







        BURKE, PAINE, AND MR. ADAMS




        _To the President of the United States_

        (GEORGE WASHINGTON)




        _Philadelphia, May 8, 1791_




        SIR, -- The last week does not furnish one single public event

worthy communicating to you: so that I have only to say "all is

well." Paine's answer to Burke's pamphlet begins to produce some

squibs in our public papers.  In Fenno's paper they are Burkites, in

the others, Painites.  One of Fenno's was evidently from the author

of the discourses on Davila.  I am afraid the indiscretion of a

printer has committed me with my friend Mr. Adams, for whom, as one

of the most honest & disinterested men alive, I have a cordial

esteem, increased by long habits of concurrence in opinion in the

days of his republicanism; and even since his apostacy to hereditary

monarchy & nobility, tho' we differ, we differ as friends should do.

Beckley had the only copy of Paine's pamphlet, & lent it to me,

desiring when I should have read it, that I would send it to a Mr. J.

B. Smith, who had asked it for his brother to reprint it.  Being an

utter stranger to J. B. Smith, both by sight & character I wrote a

note to explain to him why I (a stranger to him) sent him a pamphlet,

to wit, that Mr. Beckley had desired it; & to take off a little of

the dryness of the note, I added that I was glad to find it was to be

reprinted, that something would at length be publicly said against

the political heresies which had lately sprung up among us, & that I

did not doubt our citizens would rally again round the standard of

common sense.  That I had in my view the Discourses on Davila, which

have filled Fenno's papers, for a twelvemonth, without contradiction,

is certain, but nothing was ever further from my thoughts than to

become myself the contradictor before the public.  To my great

astonishment however, when the pamphlet came out, the printer had

prefixed my note to it, without having given me the most distant hint

of it.  Mr. Adams will unquestionably take to himself the charge of

political heresy, as conscious of his own views of drawing the

present government to the form of the English constitution, and, I

fear will consider me as meaning to injure him in the public eye.  I

learn that some Anglo men have censured it in another point of view,

as a sanction of Paine's principles tends to give offence to the

British government.  Their real fear however is that this popular &

republican pamphlet, taking wonderfully, is likely at a single stroke

to wipe out all the unconstitutional doctrines which their

bell-weather Davila has been preaching for a twelvemonth.  I

certainly never made a secret of my being anti-monarchical, &

anti-aristocratical; but I am sincerely mortified to be thus brought

forward on the public stage, where to remain, to advance or to

retire, will be equally against my love of silence & quiet, & my

abhorrence of dispute.  -- I do not know whether you recollect that

the records of Virginia were destroyed by the British in the year

1781.  Particularly the transactions of the revolution before that

time.  I am collecting here all the letters I wrote to Congress while

I was in the administration there, and this being done I shall then

extend my views to the transactions of my predecessors, in order to

replace the whole in the public offices in Virginia.  I think that

during my administration, say between June 1. 1779. & June 1. 1781.

I had the honor of writing frequent letters to you on public affairs,

which perhaps may be among your papers at Mount Vernon.  Would it be

consistent with any general resolution you have formed as to your

papers, to let my letters of the above period come here to be copied,

in order to make them a part of the records I am endeavoring to

restore for the state? or would their selection be too troublesome?

if not, I would beg the loan of them, under an assurance that they

shall be taken the utmost care of, & safely returned to their present

deposit.




        The quiet & regular movements of our political affairs leaves

nothing to add but constant prayers for your health & welfare and

assurances of the sincere respect & attachment of Sir Your most

obedient, & most humble servt.







        A NORTHERN TOUR




        _To Thomas Mann Randolph_

        _Bennington, in Vermont, June 5, 1791_




        DEAR SIR, -- Mr. Madison & myself are so far on the tour we had

projected.  We have visited in the course of it the principal scenes

of Genl. Burgoyne's misfortunes to wit the grounds at Stillwater

where the action of that name was fought, & particularly the

breastworks which cost so much blood to both parties, the encampments

at Saratoga & ground where the British piled their arms, the field of

the battle of Bennington about 9 miles from this place.  We have also

visited Forts Wm. Henry & George, Ticonderoga, Crown point, &c. which

have been scenes of blood from a very early part of our history.  We

were more pleased however with the botanical objects which

continually presented themselves.  Those either unknown or rare in

Virgna were the Sugar maple in vast abundance, the Silver fir, White

pine, Pitch pine, Spruce pine, a shrub with decumbent stems which

they call Juniper, an azalea very different from the nudiflora, with

very large clusters of flowers, more thickly set on the branches, of

a deeper red, & high pink-fragrance.  It is the richest shrub I have

seen.  The honeysuckle of the gardens growing wild on the banks' of

L. George, the paper-birch, an Aspen with a velvet leaf, a

shrub-willow with downy catkins, a wild gooseberry, the wild cherry

with single fruit (not the bunch cherry) strawberries in abundance.

From the Highlands to the lakes it is a limestone country.  It is in

vast quantities on the Eastern sides of the lakes, but none on the

Western sides.  The Sandy hill falls & Wing's falls, two very

remarkable cataracts of the Hudson of about 35 f. or 40 f. each

between F. Edward & F. George are of limestone, in horizontal strata.

Those of the Cohoes, on the W. side of the Hudson, & of 70 f. height,

we thought not of limestone.  We have met with a small red squirrel

of the color of our fox-squirrel, with a black stripe on each side,

weighing about 6 oz. generally, and in such abundance on L. Champlain

particularly as that twenty odd were killed at the house we lodged in

opposite Crown point the morning we arrived there, without going 10

yards from the door.  We killed 3 crossing the lakes, one of them

just as he was getting ashore where it was 3 miles wide, & where with

the high wind then blowing he must have made it 5 or 6 miles.




        I think I asked the favr. of you to send for Anthony in the

season for inoculn, as well as to do what is necessary in the

orchard, as to pursue the object of inoculating all the Spontaneous

cherry trees in the fields with good fruit.




        We have now got over about 400 miles of our tour and have still

about 450 more to go over.  Arriving here on the Saturday evening,

and the laws of the state not permitting us to travel on the Sunday,

has given me time to write to you from hence.  I expect to be at

Philadelphia by the 20th or 21st.  I am, with great & sincere esteem

Dear Sir yours affectionately.







        BREACH OF A FRIENDSHIP




        _To John Adams_

        _Philadelphia, July 17, 1791_




        DEAR SIR -- I have a dozen times taken up my pen to write to

you and as often laid it down again, suspended between opposing

considerations.  I determine however to write from a conviction that

truth, between candid minds, can never do harm.




        The first of Paine's pamphlets on the Rights of man, which came

to hand here, belonged to Mr. Beckley.  He lent it to Mr.  Madison

who lent it to me; and while I was reading it Mr. Beckley called on

me for it, and, as I had not finished it, he desired me, as soon as I

should have done so, to send it to Mr. Jonathan B. Smith, whose

brother meant to reprint it.  I finished reading it, and, as I had no

acquaintance with Mr. Jonathan B. Smith, propriety required that I

should explain to him why I, a stranger to him, sent him the

pamphlet.  I accordingly wrote a note of compliment informing him

that I did it at the desire of Mr. Beckley, and, to take off a little

of the dryness of the note, I added that I was glad it was to be

reprinted here, and that something was to be publicly said against

the political heresies which had sprung up among us etc.  I thought

so little of this note that I did not even keep a copy of it: nor

ever heard a tittle more of it till, the week following, I was

thunderstruck with seeing it come out at the head of the pamphlet.  I

hoped however it would not attract notice.  But I found on my return

from a journey of a month that a writer came forward under the

signature of Publicola, attacking not only the author and principles

of the pamphlet, but myself as it's sponsor, by name.  Soon after

came hosts of other writers defending the pamphlet and attacking you

by name as the writer of Publicola.  Thus were our names thrown on

the public stage as public antagonists.  That you and I differ in our

ideas of the best form of government is well known to us both: but we

have differed as friends should do, respecting the purity of each

other's motives, and confining our difference of opinion to private

conversation.  And I can declare with truth in the presence of the

almighty that nothing was further from my intention or expectation

than to have had either my own or your name brought before the public

on this occasion.  The friendship and confidence which has so long

existed between us required this explanation from me, and I know you

too well to fear any misconstruction of the motives of it.  Some

people here who would wish me to be, or to be thought, guilty of

improprieties, have suggested that I was Agricola, that I was Brutus

etc. etc.  I never did in my life, either by myself or by any other,

have a sentence of mine inserted in a newspaper without putting my

name to it; and I believe I never shall.




 

        While the empress is refusing peace under a mediation unless

Oczakow and it's territory be ceded to her, she is offering peace on

the perfect statu quo to the Porte, if they will conclude it without

a mediation.  France has struck a severe blow at our navigation by a

difference of duty on tob[acc]o carried in our and their ships, and

by taking from foreign built ships the capability of naturalization.

She has placed our whale oil on rather a better footing than ever by

consolidating the duties into a single one of 6. livres.  They

amounted before to some sous over that sum.  I am told (I know not

how truly) that England has prohibited our spermaceti oil altogether,

and will prohibit our wheat till the price there is 52/ the quarter,

which it almost never is.  We expect hourly to hear the true event of

Genl. Scott's expedition.  Reports give favorable hopes of it.  Be so

good as to present my respectful compliments to Mrs. Adams and to

accept assurances of the sentiments of sincere esteem and respect

with which I am Dear Sir Your friend and servant.

