




        SOME THOUGHTS ON TREATIES



        _To James Monroe_

        _Paris, June 17, 1785_



        DEAR SIR, -- I received three days ago your favor of Apr. 12.

You therein speak of a former letter to me, but it has not come to

hand, nor any other of later date than the 14th of December.  My last

letter to you was of the 11th of May by Mr. Adams who went in the

packet of that month.  These conveiances are now becoming deranged.

We have had expectations of their coming to Havre which would

infinitely facilitate the communication between Paris & Congress: but

their deliberations on the subject seem to be taking another turn.

They complain of the expence, and that their commerce with us is too

small to justify it.  They therefore talk of sending a packet every

six weeks only.  The present one therefore, which should have sailed

about this time, will not sail until the 1st of July.  However the

whole matter is as yet undecided.  I have hoped that when Mr. St.

John arrives from N. York he will get them replaced on their monthly

system.  By the bye what is the meaning of a very angry resolution of

Congress on this subject?  I have it not by me and therefore cannot

cite it by date, but you will remember it, and will oblige me by

explaining it's foundation.  This will be handed you by Mr.  Otto who

comes to America as Charge des Affaires in the room of Mr.  Marbois

promoted to the Intendancy of Hispaniola, which office is next to

that of Governor.  He becomes the head of the civil as the Governor

is of the military department.  I am much pleased with Otto's

appointment.  He is good humored, affectionate to America, will see

things in a friendly light when they admit of it, in a rational one

always, and will not pique himself on writing every trifling

circumstance of irritation to his court.  I wish you to be acquainted

with him, as a friendly intercourse between individuals who do

business together produces a mutual spirit of accommodation useful to

both parties.  It is very much our interest to keep up the affection

of this country for us, which is considerable.  A court has no

affections, but those of the people whom they govern influence their

decisions even in the most arbitrary governments. -- The negociations

between the Emperor & Dutch are spun out to an amazing length.  At

present there is no apprehension but that they will terminate in

peace.  This court seems to press it with ardour and the Dutch are

averse considering the terms cruel & unjust as they evidently are.

The present delays therefore are imputed to their coldness & to their

forms.  In the mean time the Turk is delaying the demarcation of

limits between him and the emperor, is making the most vigorous

preparations for war, and has composed his ministry of war-like

characters deemed personally hostile to the emperor.  Thus time seems

to be spinning outboth by the Dutch & Turks, & time is wanting for

France.  Every year's delay is a great thing to her.  It is not

impossible therefore but that she may secretly encourage the delays

of the Dutch & hasten the preparations of the Porte while she is

recovering vigour herself and, in order to be able to present such a

combination to the emperor as may dictate to him to be quiet.  But

the designs of these courts are inscrutable.  It is our interest to

pray that this country may have no continental war till our peace

with England is perfectly settled.  The merchants of this country

continue as loud & furious as ever against the Arret of August 1784,

permitting our commerce with their islands to a certain degree.  Many

of them have actually abandoned their trade.  The Ministry are

disposed to be firm, but there is a point at which they will give

way, that is if the clamours should become such as to endanger their

places.  It is evident that nothing can be done by us, at this time,

if we may hope it hereafter.  I like your removal to N. York, and

hope Congress will continue there and never execute the idea of

building their federal town.  Before it could be finished a change of

Members in Congress or the admission of new states would remove them

somewhere else.  It is evident that when a sufficient number of the

Western states come in they will remove it to George town.  In the

mean time it is our interest that it should remain where it is, and

give no new pretensions to any other place.  I am also much pleased

with the proposition to the states to invest Congress with the

regulation of their trade, reserving it's revenue to the states.  I

think it a happy idea, removing the only objection which could have

been justly made to the proposition.  The time too is the present,

before the admission of the Western states.  I am very differently

affected towards the new plan of opening our land office by dividing

the lands among the states and selling them at vendue.  It separates

still more the interests of the states which ought to be made joint

in every possible instance in order to cultivate the idea of our

being one nation, and to multiply the instances in which the people

shall look up to Congress as their head.  And when the states get

their portions they will either fool them away, or make a job of it

to serve individuals.  Proofs of both these practices have been

furnished, and by either of them that invaluable fund is lost which

ought to pay our public debt.  To sell them at vendue, is to give

them to the bidders of the day be they many or few.  It is ripping up

the hen which lays golden eggs.  If sold in lots at a fixed price as

first proposed, the best lots will be sold first.  As these become

occupied it gives a value to the interjacent ones, and raises them,

tho' of inferior quality, to the price of the first.  I send you by

Mr. Otto a copy of my book.  Be so good as to apologize to Mr.

Thomson for my not sending him one by this conveiance.  I could not

burthen Mr. Otto with more on so long a road as that from here to

l'Orient.  I will send him one by a Mr. Williams who will go ere

long.  I have taken measures to prevent it's publication.  My reason

is that I fear the terms in which I speak of slavery and of our

constitution may produce an irritation which will revolt the minds of

our countrymen against reformation in these two articles, and thus do

more harm than good.  I have asked of Mr. Madison to sound this

matter as far as he can, and if he thinks it will not produce that

effect, I have then copies enough printed to give one to each of the

young men at the college, and to my friends in the country.



        _I am sorry_ to see a possibility of _A. L.'s being put into_

the _Treasury.  He_ has no _talents_ for the _office_, and what _he

has_ will be _employed_ in _rummaging old accounts_ to _involve_ you

in _eternal war with R. M._ and _he_ will in a short time _introduce_

such _dissensions_ into the _Commission_ as to _break it up_.  If _he

goes_ on the _other appointment to Kaskaskia he will produce a

revolt_ of that _settlement from_ the _U. S. I thank you_ for _your

attention_ to _my outfit.  For_ the _articles_ of _household

furniture_, _clothes_, and a _carriage_, _I have already paid 28,000

livres_ and _have_ still _more_ to _pay._ For the _greatest part_ of

_this I_ have _been obliged_ to _anticipate my salary_ from which

_however I_ shall never be able to _repay_ it.  _I find_ that by a

_rigid economy_, _bordering_ however on _meanness I_ can _save_

perhaps _$500_ a _month_, at _least_ in _the summer._ The _residue_

goes for _expences_ so much of _course_ & of _necessity that I_

cannot _avoid_ them _without abandoning all respect_ to _my public

character.  Yet I_ will _pray you to touch_ this _string_, which _I

know to be a tender one_ with _Congress_ with the utmost _delicacy.

I_ had _rather be ruined_ in _my fortune_, than in their _esteem._ If

they _allow me half_ a _year's salary_ as an _outfit I_ can _get

through my debts in time.  If they raise_ the _salary_ to what _it


was, or even pay our house rent_ & _taxes, I_ can _live with more

decency.  I trust_ that _Mr. A.'s house_ at _the Hague_ & _Dr. F.'s

at Passy_ the _rent_ of which had been always _allowed him_ will

_give just expectations_ of the _same allowance_ to _me.  Mr. Jay_

however did not _charge it.  But he lived oeconomically_ and _laid up

money._ I will take the liberty of hazarding to you some thoughts on

the policy of entering into treaties with the European nations, and

the nature of them.  I am not wedded to these ideas, and therefore

shall relinquish them chearfully when Congress shall adopt others,

and zealously endeavor to carry theirs into effect.  First as to the

policy of making treaties.  Congress, by the Confederation have no

original and inherent power over the commerce of the states.  But by

the 9'th. article they are authorized to enter into treaties of

commerce.  The moment these treaties are concluded the jurisdiction

of Congress over the commerce of the states springs into existence,

and that of the particular states is superseded so far as the

articles of the treaty may have taken up the subject.  There are two

restrictions only on the exercise of the power of treaty by Congress.

1'st. that they shall not by such treaty restrain the legislatures of

the states from imposing such duties on foreigners as their own

people are subject to. 2'dly. nor from prohibiting the exportation or

importation of any particular species of goods.  Leaving these two

points free, Congress may by treaty establish any system of commerce

they please.  But, as I before observed, it is by treaty alone they

can do it.  Though they may exercise their other powers by resolution

or ordinance, those over commerce can only be exercised by forming a

treaty, and this probably by an accidental wording of our

Confederation.  If therefore it is better for the states that

Congress should regulate their commerce, it is proper that they

should form treaties with all nations with whom we may possibly

trade.  You see that my primary object in the formation of treaties

is to take the commerce of the states out of the hands of the states,

and to place it under the superintendence of Congress, so far as the

imperfect provisions of our constitution will admit, and until the

states shall by new compact make them more perfect.  I would say then

to every nation on earth, _by treaty_, your people shall trade freely

with us, & ours with you, paying no more than the most favoured

nation, in order to put an end to the right of individual states

acting by fits and starts to interrupt our commerce or to embroil us

with any nation.  As to the terms of these treaties, the question

becomes more difficult.  I will mention three different plans.  1.

that no duties shall be laid by either party on the productions of

the other.  2. that each may be permitted to equalize their duties to

those laid by the other.  3. that each shall pay in the ports of the

other such duties only as the most favoured nations pay.  1. Were the

nations of Europe as free and unembarrassed of established system as

we are, I do verily believe they would concur with us in the first

plan.  But it is impossible.  These establishments are fixed upon

them, they are interwoven with the body of their laws & the

organization of their government & they make a great part of their

revenue; they cannot then get rid of them.  2. The plan of equal

imposts presents difficulties insurmountable.  For how are the equal

imposts to be effected?  Is it by laying in the ports of A. an equal

percent on the goods of B. with that which B.  has laid in his ports

on the goods of A.?  But how are we to find what is that percent?

For this is not the usual form of imposts.  They generally pay by the

ton, by the measure, by the weight, & not by the value.  Besides if

A. sends a million's worth of goods to B. & takes back but the half

of that, and each pays the same percent, it is evident that A. pays

the double of what he recovers in the same way with B.  This would be

our case with Spain.  Shall we endeavour to effect equality then by

saying A. may levy so much on the sum of B.'s importations into his

ports, as B. does on the sum of A's importations into the ports of

B.?  But how find out that sum?  Will either party lay open their

custom house books candidly to evince this sum?  Does either keep

their books so exactly as to be able to do it?  This proposition was

started in Congress when our institutions were formed, as you may

remember, and the impossibility of executing it occasioned it to be

disapproved.  Besides who should have a right of deciding when the

imposts were equal.  A. would say to B. my imposts do not raise so

much as yours; I raise them therefore. B. would then say you have

made them greater than mine, I will raise mine, and thus a kind of

auction would be carried on between them, and a mutual imitation,

which would end in anything sooner than equality, and right.  3. I

confess then to you that I see no alternative left but that which

Congress adopted, of each party placing the other on the footing of

the most favoured nation.  If the nations of Europe from their actual

establishments are not at liberty to say to America that she shall

trade in their ports duty free they may say she may trade there

paying no higher duties than the most favoured nation.  And this is

valuable in many of these countries where a very great difference is

made between different nations.  There is no difficulty in the

execution of this contract, because there is not a merchant who does

not know, or may not know, the duty paid by every nation on every

article.  This stipulation leaves each party at liberty to regulate

their own commerce by general rules; while it secures the other from

partial and oppressive discriminations.  The difficulty which arises

in our case is, with the nations having American territory.  Access

to the West Indies is indispensably necessary to us.  Yet how to gain

it, when it is the established system of these nations to exclude all

foreigners from their colonies.  The only chance seems to be this,

our commerce to the mother countries is valuable to them.  We must

endeavor then to make this the price of an admission into their West

Indies, and to those who refuse the admission we must refuse our

commerce or load theirs by odious discriminations in our ports.  We

have this circumstance in our favour too, that what one grants us in

their islands, the others will not find it worth their while to

refuse.  The misfortune is that with this country we gave this price

for their aid in the war, and we have now nothing more to offer.  She

being withdrawn from the competition leaves Gr. Britain much more at

liberty to hold out against us.  This is the difficult part of the

business of treaty, and I own it does not hold out the most

flattering prospect.  -- I wish you would consider this subject and

write me your thoughts on it.  Mr. Gherry wrote me on the same

subject.  Will you give me leave to impose on you the trouble of

communicating this to him?  It is long, and will save me much labour

in copying.  I hope he will be so indulgent as to consider it as an

answer to that part of his letter, and will give me his further

thoughts on it.



        Shall I send you so much of the Encyclopedia as is already

published or reserve it here till you come?  It is about 40 vols.

which probably is about half the work.  Give yourself no uneasiness

about the money.  Perhaps I may find it convenient to ask you to pay

trifles occasionally for me in America.  I sincerely wish you may

find it convenient to come here.  The pleasure of the trip will be

less than you expect but the utility greater.  It will make you adore

your own country, it's soil, it's climate, it's equality, liberty,

laws, people & manners.  My God! how little do my country men know

what precious blessings they are in possession of, and which no other

people on earth enjoy.  I confess I had no idea of it myself.  While

we shall see multiplied instances of Europeans going to live in

America, I will venture to say no man now living will ever see an

instance of an American removing to settle in Europe & continuing

there.  Come then & see the proofs of this, and on your return add

your testimony to that of every thinking American, in order to

satisfy our countrymen how much it is their interest to preserve

uninfected by contagion those peculiarities in their government &

manners to which they are indebted for these blessings.  Adieu, my

dear friend.  Present me affectionately to your collegues.  If any of

them think me worth writing to, they may be assured that in the

epistolary account I will keep the debit side against them.  Once

more adieu.



        June 19. Since writing the above we receive the following

account.  Mons. Pilatre de Rosiere, who has been waiting some months

at Boulogne for a fair wind to cross the channel, at length took his

ascent with a companion.  The wind changed after a while and brought

him back on the French coast.  Being at a height of about 6000 f.

some accident happened to his baloon of inflammable air.  It burst,

they fell from that height & were crushed to atoms.  There was a

Montgolfier combined with the baloon of inflammable air.  It is

suspected the heat of the Montgolfier rarified too much the

inflammable air of the other & occasioned it to burst.  The

Montgolfier came down in good order.





        ROYAL SCANDAL AND THIRD-RANK BIRDS



        _To Abigail Adams_

        _Paris, June 21, 1785_



        DEAR MADAM -- I have received duly the honor of your letter,

and am now to return you thanks for your condescension in having

taken the first step for settling a correspondence which I so much

desired; for I now consider it as _settled_ and proceed accordingly.

I have always found it best to remove obstacles first.  I will do so

therefore in the present case by telling you that I consider your

boasts of the splendour of your city and of it's superb hackney

coaches as a flout, and declaring that I would not give the polite,

self-denying, feeling, hospitable, goodhumoured people of this

country and their amability in every point of view, (tho' it must be

confessed our streets are somewhat dirty, and our fiacres rather

indifferent) for ten such races of rich, proud, hectoring, swearing,

squibbing, carnivorous animals as those among whom you are; and that

I do love this _people_ with all my heart, and think that with a

better religion and a better form of government and their present

governors their condition and country would be most enviable.  I pray

you to observe that I have used the term _people_ and that this is a

noun of the masculine as well as feminine gender.  I must add too

that we are about reforming our fiacres, and that I expect soon an

Ordonance that all their drivers shall wear breeches unless any

difficulty should arise whether this is a subject for the police or

for the general legislation of the country, to take care of.  We have

lately had an incident of some consequence, as it shews a spirit of

treason, and audaciousness which was hardly thought to exist in this

country.  Some eight or ten years ago a Chevalier --- was sent on a

message of state to the princess of --- of --- of (before I proceed

an inch further I must confess my profound stupidity; for tho' I have

heard this story told fifty times in all it's circumstances, I

declare I am unable to recollect the name of the ambassador, the name

of the princess, and the nation he was sent to; I must therefore

proceed to tell you the naked story, shorn of all those precious

circumstances) some chevalier or other was sent on some business or

other to some princess or other.  Not succeeding in his negociation,

he wrote on his return the following song.



        Ennivre du brillant poste

        Que j'occupe recemment,

        Dans une chaise de poste

        Je me campe fierement:

        Et je vais en ambassade

        Au nom de mon souverain

        Dire que je suis malade,

        Et que lui se porte bien.

 

        Avec une joue enflee

        Je debarque tout honteux:

        La princesse boursoufflee,

        Au lieu d'une, en avoit deux;

        Et son altesse sauvage

        Sans doute a trouve mauvais

        Que j'eusse sur mon visage

        La moitie de ses attraits.

 

        Princesse, le roi mon maitre

        M'a pris pour Ambassadeur;

        Je viens vous faire connoitre

        Quelle est pour vous son ardeur.

        Quand vous seriez sous le chaume,

        Il donneroit, m'a-t-il dit,

        La moitie de son royaume

        Pour celle de votre lit.



 

        La princesse a son pupitre

        Compose un remerciment:

        Elle me donne une epitre

        Que j'emporte lestement,

        Et je m'en vais dans la rue

        Fort satisfait d'ajouter

        A l'honneur de l'avoir vue

        Le plaisir de la quitter.

 

        This song run through all companies and was known to every

body.  A book was afterwards printed, with a regular license, called

`Les quatres saisons litteraires' which being a collection of little

things, contained this also and all the world bought it or might buy

it if they would, the government taking no notice of it.  It being

the office of the Journal de Paris to give an account and criticism

of new publications, this book came in turn to be criticised by the

redacteur, and he happened to select and print in his journal this

song as a specimen of what the collection contained.  He was seised

in his bed that night and has been never since heard of.  Our

excellent journal de Paris then is suppressed and this bold traitor

has been in jail now three weeks, and for ought any body knows will

end his days there.  Thus you see, madam, the value of energy in

government; our feeble republic would in such a case have probably

been wrapt in the flames of war and desolation for want of a power

lodged in a single hand to punish summarily those who write songs.

The fate of poor Pilatre de Rosiere will have reached you before this

does, and with more certainty than we yet know it.  This will damp

for a while the ardor of the Phaetons of our race who are endeavoring

to learn us the way to heaven on wings of our own.  I took a trip

yesterday to Sannois and commenced an acquaintance with the old

Countess d'Hocquetout.  I received much pleasure from it and hope it

has opened a door of admission for me to the circle of literati with

which she is environed.  I heard there the Nightingale in all it's

perfection: and I do not hesitate to pronounce that in America it

would be deemed a bird of the third rank only, our mockingbird, and

fox-coloured thrush being unquestionably superior to it.  The squibs

against Mr. Adams are such as I expected from the polished, mild

tempered, truth speaking people he is sent to.  It would be ill

policy to attempt to answer or refute them.  But counter-squibs I

think would be good policy.  Be pleased to tell him that as I had

before ordered his Madeira and Frontignac to be forwarded, and had

asked his orders to Mr. Garvey as to the residue, which I doubt not

he has given, I was afraid to send another order about the Bourdeaux

lest it should produce confusion.  In stating my accounts with the

United states, I am at a loss whether to charge house rent or not.

It has always been allowed to Dr. Franklin.  Does Mr. Adams mean to

charge this for Auteuil and London? Because if he does, I certainly

will, being convinced by experience that my expences here will

otherwise exceed my allowance.  I ask this information of you, Madam,

because I think you know better than Mr. Adams what may be necessary

and right for him to do in occasions of this class.  I will beg the

favor of you to present my respects to Miss Adams.  I have no secrets

to communicate to her in cypher at this moment, what I write to Mr.

Adams being mere commonplace stuff, not meriting a communication to

the Secretary.  I have the honour to be with the most perfect esteem

Dr. Madam Your most obedient and most humble servt.,





        A STATUE OF WASHINGTON



        _To the Virginia Delegates in Congress_

        _Paris, July 12, 1785_



        GENTLEMEN, -- In consequence of the orders of the Legislative &

Executive bodies of Virginia, I have engaged Monsr. Houdon to make

the Statue of Genl. Washington.  For this purpose it is necessary for

him to see the General.  He therefore goes with Doctr.  Franklin, &

will have the honor of delivering you this himself.  As his journey

is at the expence of the State according to our contract, I will pray

you to favor him with your patronage & counsels, and to protect him

as much as possible from those impositions to which strangers are but

too much exposed.  I have advised him to proceed in the stages to the

General's.  I have also agreed, if he can see General Greene & Gates,

whose busts he has a desire to make, that he may make a moderate

deviation for this purpose, after he is done with General Washington.



        But the most important object with him is to be employed to

make General Washington's equestrian statue for Congress.  Nothing

but the expectation of this could have engaged him to have undertaken

this voyage.  The pedestrian statue for Virginia will not make it

worth the business he loses by absenting himself.  I was therefore

obliged to assure him of my recommendations for this greater work.

Having acted in this for the state, you will I hope think yourselves

in some measure bound to patronize & urge his being employed by

Congress.  I would not have done this myself, nor asked you to do it,

did I not see that it would be better for Congress to put this

business into his hands, than those of any other person living, for

these reasons: 1. he is without rivalship the first statuary of this

age; as a proof of which he receives orders from every other country

for things intended to be capital: 2. he will have seen General

Washington, have taken his measures in every part, and of course

whatever he does of him will have the merit of being original, from

which other workmen can only furnish copies.  3. He is in possession

of the house, the furnaces, & all the apparatus provided for making

the statue of Louis XV.  If any other workman is employed, this will

all be to be provided anew and of course to be added to the price of

the statue, for no man can ever expect to make two equestrian

statues.  The addition which this would be to the price will much

exceed the expectation of any person who has not seen that apparatus.

In truth it is immense.  As to the price of the work it will be much

greater than Congress is aware of, probably.  I have enquired

somewhat into this circumstance, and find the prices of those made

for two centuries past have been from 120.000 guineas down to 16.000

guineas, according to the size.  And as far as I have seen, the

smaller they are, the more agreeable.  The smallest yet made is

infinitely above the size of the life, and they all appear outree and

monstrous.  That of Louis XV. is probably the best in the world, and

it is the smallest here.  Yet it is impossible to find a point of

view from which it does not appear a monster, unless you go so far as

to lose sight of the features and finer lineaments of the face and

body.  A statue is not made, like a mountain, to be seen at a great

distance.  To perceive those minuter circumstances which constitute

its beauty you must be near it, and, in that case, it should be so

little above the size of the life, as to appear actually of that size

from your point of view.  I should not therefore fear to propose that

the one intended by Congress should be considerably smaller than any

of those to be seen here; as I think it will be more beautiful, and

also cheaper.  I have troubled you with these observations as they

have been suggested to me from an actual sight of works in this kind,

& supposed they might assist you in making up your minds on this

subject.  In making a contract with Monsr. Houdon it would not be

proper to advance money, but as his disbursements and labour advance.

As it is a work of many years, this will render the expence

insensible.  The pedestrian statue of marble is to take three years.

The equestrian of course much more.  Therefore the sooner it is begun

the better.





        "AN HONEST HEART. . . A KNOWING HEAD"



        _To Peter Carr_

        _Paris, August 19, 1785_



        DEAR PETER, -- I received, by Mr. Mazzei, your letter of April

the 20th.  I am much mortified to hear that you have lost so much

time; and that when you arrived in Williamsburg, you were not at all

advanced from what you were when you left Monticello.  Time now

begins to be precious to you.  Every day you lose, will retard a day

your entrance on that public stage whereon you may begin to be useful

to yourself.  However, the way to repair the loss is to improve the

future time.  I trust, that with your dispositions, even the

acquisition of science is a pleasing employment.  I can assure you,

that the possession of it is, what (next to an honest heart) will

above all things render you dear to your friends, and give you fame

and promotion in your own country.  When your mind shall be well

improved with science, nothing will be necessary to place you in the

highest points of view, but to pursue the interests of your country,

the interests of your friends, and your own interests also, with the

purest integrity, the most chaste honor.  The defect of these virtues

can never be made up by all the other acquirements of body and mind.

Make these then your first object.  Give up money, give up fame, give

up science, give the earth itself and all it contains, rather than do

an immoral act.  And never suppose, that in any possible situation,

or under any circumstances, it is best for you to do a dishonorable

thing, however slightly so it may appear to you.  Whenever you are to

do a thing, though it can never be known but to yourself, ask

yourself how you would act were all the world looking at you, and act

accordingly.  Encourage all your virtuous dispositions, and exercise

them whenever an opportunity arises; being assured that they will

gain strength by exercise, as a limb of the body does, and that

exercise will make them habitual.  From the practice of the purest

virtue, you may be assured you will derive the most sublime comforts

in every moment of life, and in the moment of death.  If ever you

find yourself environed with difficulties and perplexing

circumstances, out of which you are at a loss how to extricate

yourself, do what is right, and be assured that that will extricate

you the best out of the worst situations.  Though you cannot see,

when you take one step, what will be the next, yet follow truth,

justice, and plain dealing, and never fear their leading you out of

the labyrinth, in the easiest manner possible.  The knot which you

thought a Gordian one, will untie itself before you.  Nothing is so

mistaken as the supposition, that a person is to extricate himself

from a difficulty, by intrigue, by chicanery, by dissimulation, by

trimming, by an untruth, by an injustice.  This increases the

difficulties ten fold; and those who pursue these methods, get

themselves so involved at length, that they can turn no way but their

infamy becomes more exposed.  It is of great importance to set a

resolution, not to be shaken, never to tell an untruth.  There is no

vice so mean, so pitiful, so contemptible; and he who permits himself

to tell a lie once, finds it much easier to do it a second and third

time, till at length it becomes habitual; he tells lies without

attending to it, and truths without the world's believing him.  This

falsehood of the tongue leads to that of the heart, and in time

depraves all its good dispositions.



        An honest heart being the first blessing, a knowing head is the

second.  It is time for you now to begin to be choice in your

reading; to begin to pursue a regular course in it; and not to suffer

yourself to be turned to the right or left by reading any thing out

of that course.  I have long ago digested a plan for you, suited to

the circumstances in which you will be placed.  This I will detail to

you, from time to time, as you advance.  For the present, I advise

you to begin a course of antient history, reading every thing in the

original and not in translations.  First read Goldsmith's history of

Greece.  This will give you a digested view of that field.  Then take

up antient history in the detail, reading the following books, in the

following order: Herodotus, Thucydides, Xenophontis Hellenica,

Xenophontis Anabasis, Arrian, Quintus Curtius, Diodorus Siculus,

Justin.  This shall form the first stage of your historical reading,

and is all I need mention to you now.  The next, will be of Roman

history (*).  From that, we will come down to modern history.  In

Greek and Latin poetry, you have read or will read at school, Virgil,

Terence, Horace, Anacreon, Theocritus, Homer, Euripides, Sophocles.

Read also Milton's Paradise Lost, Shakspeare, Ossian, Pope's and

Swift's works, in order to form your style in your own language.  In

morality, read Epictetus, Xenophontis Memorabilia, Plato's Socratic

dialogues, Cicero's philosophies, Antoninus, and Seneca.  In order to

assure a certain progress in this reading, consider what hours you

have free from the school and the exercises of the school.  Give

about two of them, every day, to exercise; for health must not be

sacrificed to learning.  A strong body makes the mind strong.  As to

the species of exercise, I advise the gun.  While this gives a

moderate exercise to the body, it gives boldness, enterprise, and

independence to the mind.  Games played with the ball, and others of

that nature, are too violent for the body, and stamp no character on

the mind.  Let your gun therefore be the constant companion of your

walks.  Never think of taking a book with you.  The object of walking

is to relax the mind.  You should therefore not permit yourself even

to think while you walk; but divert your attention by the objects

surrounding you.  Walking is the best possible exercise.  Habituate

yourself to walk very far.  The Europeans value themselves on having

subdued the horse to the uses of man; but I doubt whether we have not

lost more than we have gained, by the use of this animal.  No one has

occasioned so much, the degeneracy of the human body.  An Indian goes

on foot nearly as far in a day, for a long journey, as an enfeebled

white does on his horse; and he will tire the best horses.  There is

no habit you will value so much as that of walking far without

fatigue.  I would advise you to take your exercise in the afternoon:

not because it is the best time for exercise, for certainly it is

not; but because it is the best time to spare from your studies; and

habit will soon reconcile it to health, and render it nearly as

useful as if you gave to that the more precious hours of the day.  A

little walk of half an hour, in the morning, when you first rise, is

advisable also.  It shakes off sleep, and produces other good effects

in the animal economy.  Rise at a fixed and an early hour, and go to

bed at a fixed and early hour also.  Sitting up late at night is

injurious to the health, and not useful to the mind.  Having ascribed

proper hours to exercise, divide what remain, (I mean of your vacant

hours) into three portions.  Give the principal to History, the other

two, which should be shorter, to Philosophy and Poetry.  Write to me

once every month or two, and let me know the progress you make.  Tell

me in what manner you employ every hour in the day.  The plan I have

proposed for you is adapted to your present situation only.  When

that is changed, I shall propose a corresponding change of plan.  I

have ordered the following books to be sent to you from London, to

the care of Mr. Madison.  Herodotus, Thucydides, Xenophon's

Hellenics, Anabasis and Memorabilia, Cicero's works, Baretti's

Spanish and English Dictionary, Martin's Philosophical Grammar, and

Martin's Philosophia Britannica.  I will send you the following from

hence.  Bezout's Mathematics, De la Lande's Astronomy, Muschenbrock's

Physics, Quintus Curtius, Justin, a Spanish Grammar, and some Spanish

books.  You will observe that Martin, Bezout, De la Lande, and

Muschenbrock are not in the preceding plan.  They are not to be

opened till you go to the University.  You are now, I expect,

learning French.  You must push this; because the books which will be

put into your hands when you advance into Mathematics, Natural

philosophy, Natural history, &c. will be mostly French, these

sciences being better treated by the French than the English writers.

Our future connection with Spain renders that the most necessary of

the modern languages, after the French.  When you become a public

man, you may have occasion for it, and the circumstance of your

possessing that language, may give you a preference over other

candidates.  I have nothing further to add for the present, but

husband well your time, cherish your instructors, strive to make

every body your friend; and be assured that nothing will be so

pleasing, as your success, to, Dear Peter,



        Your's affectionately,



        (*) Livy, Sullust, Caesar, Cicero's epistles, Suetonius,

Tacitus, Gibbon.







        COMMERCE AND SEA POWER



        _To John Jay_

        _Paris, Aug. 23, 1785_



        DEAR SIR, -- I shall sometimes ask your permission to write you

letters, not official but private.  The present is of this kind, and

is occasioned by the question proposed in yours of June 14. "whether

it would be useful to us to carry all our own productions, or none?"

Were we perfectly free to decide this question, I should reason as

follows.  We have now lands enough to employ an infinite number of

people in their cultivation.  Cultivators of the earth are the most

valuable citizens.  They are the most vigorous, the most independant,

the most virtuous, & they are tied to their country & wedded to it's

liberty & interests by the most lasting bonds.  As long therefore as

they can find employment in this line, I would not convert them into

mariners, artisans or anything else.  But our citizens will find

employment in this line till their numbers, & of course their

productions, become too great for the demand both internal & foreign.

This is not the case as yet, & probably will not be for a

considerable time.  As soon as it is, the surplus of hands must be

turned to something else.  I should then perhaps wish to turn them to

the sea in preference to manufactures, because comparing the

characters of the two classes I find the former the most valuable

citizens.  I consider the class of artificers as the panders of vice

& the instruments by which the liberties of a country are generally

overturned.  However we are not free to decide this question on

principles of theory only.  Our people are decided in the opinion

that it is necessary for us to take a share in the occupation of the

ocean, & their established habits induce them to require that the sea

be kept open to them, and that that line of policy be pursued which

will render the use of that element as great as possible to them.  I

think it a duty in those entrusted with the administration of their

affairs to conform themselves to the decided choice of their

constituents: and that therefore we should in every instance preserve

an equality of right to them in the transportation of commodities, in

the right of fishing, & in the other uses of the sea.  But what will

be the consequence?  Frequent wars without a doubt.  Their property

will be violated on the sea, & in foreign ports, their persons will

be insulted, imprisoned &c. for pretended debts, contracts, crimes,

contraband, &c., &c.  These insults must be resented, even if we had

no feelings, yet to prevent their eternal repetition, or in other

words, our commerce on the ocean & in other countries must be paid

for by frequent war.  The justest dispositions possible in ourselves

will not secure us against it.  It would be necessary that all other

nations were just also.  Justice indeed on our part will save us from

those wars which would have been produced by a contrary disposition.

But to prevent those produced by the wrongs of other nations?  By

putting ourselves in a condition to punish them.  Weakness provokes

insult & injury, while a condition to punish it often prevents it.

This reasoning leads to the necessity of some naval force, that being

the only weapon with which we can reach an enemy.  I think it to our

interest to punish the first insult; because an insult unpunished is

the parent of many others.  We are not at this moment in a condition

to do it, but we should put ourselves into it as soon as possible.

If a war with England should take place, it seems to me that the

first thing necessary would be a resolution to abandon the carrying

trade because we cannot protect it.  Foreign nations must in that

case be invited to bring us what we want & to take our productions in

their own bottoms.  This alone could prevent the loss of those

productions to us & the acquisition of them to our enemy.  Our seamen

might be employed in depredations on their trade.  But how dreadfully

we shall suffer on our coasts, if we have no force on the water,

former experience has taught us.  Indeed I look forward with horror

to the very possible case of war with an European power, & think

there is no protection against them but from the possession of some

force on the sea.  Our vicinity to their West India possessions & to

the fisheries is a bridle which a small naval force on our part would

hold in the mouths of the most powerful of these countries.  I hope

our land office will rid us of our debts, & that our first attention

then will be to the beginning a naval force of some sort.  This alone

can countenance our people as carriers on the water, & I suppose them

to be determined to continue such.



        I wrote you two public letters on the 14th inst., since which I

have received yours of July 13.  I shall always be pleased to receive

from you in a private way such communications as you might not chuse

to put into a public letter.





        BOOKS FOR A STATESMAN



        _To James Madison_

        _Paris, September 1, 1785_



        DEAR SIR, -- My last to you by Monsieur de Doradour, was dated

May the 11th.  Since that, I have received yours of January the 22nd,

with six copies of the revisal, and that of April the 27th, by Mr.

Mazzei.



        All is quiet here.  The Emperor and Dutch have certainly

agreed, though they have not published their agreement.  Most of his

schemes in Germany must be postponed, if they are not prevented, by

the confederacy of many of the Germanic body, at the head of which is

the King of Prussia, and to which the Elector of Hanover is supposed

to have acceded.  The object of the league is to preserve the members

of the empire in their present state.  I doubt whether the jealousy

entertained of this prince, and which is so fully evidenced by this

league, may not defeat the election of his nephew to be King of the

Romans, and thus produce an instance of breaking the lineal

succession.  Nothing is as yet done between him and the Turks.  If

any thing is produced in that quarter, it will not be for this year.

The court of Madrid has obtained the delivery of the crew of the brig

Betsey, taken by the Emperor of Morocco.  The Emperor had treated

them kindly, new clothed them, and delivered them to the Spanish

minister, who sent them to Cadiz.  This is the only American vessel

ever taken by the Barbary States.  The Emperor continues to give

proofs of his desire to be in friendship with us, or, in other words,

of receiving us into the number of his tributaries.  Nothing further

need be feared from him.  I wish the Algerines may be as easily dealt

with.  I fancy the peace expected between them and Spain, is not

likely to take place.  I am well informed that the late proceedings

in America, have produced a wonderful sensation in England in our

favor.  I mean the disposition which seems to be becoming general, to

invest Congress with the regulation of our commerce, and, in the mean

time, the measures taken to defeat the avidity of the British

government, grasping at our carrying business.  I can add with truth,

that it was not till these symptoms appeared in America, that I have

been able to discover the smallest token of respect towards the

United States, in any part of Europe.  There was an enthusiasm

towards us, all over Europe, at the moment of the peace.  The torrent

of lies published unremittingly, in every day's London paper, first

made an impression, and produced a coolness.  The republication of

these lies in most of the papers of Europe, (done probably by

authority of the governments, to discourage emigrations) carried them

home to the belief of every mind.  They supposed every thing in

America was anarchy, tumult, and civil war.  The reception of the

Marquis Fayette gave a check to these ideas.  The late proceedings

seem to be producing a decisive vibration in our favor.  I think it

possible that England may ply before them.  It is a nation which

nothing but views of interest can govern.  If they produce us good

there, they will here also.  The defeat of the Irish propositions is

also in our favor.



        I have at length made up the purchase of books for you, as far

as it can be done at present.  The objects which I have not yet been

able to get, I shall continue to seek for.  Those purchased, are

packed this morning in two trunks, and you have the catalogue and

prices herein enclosed.  The future charges of transportation shall

be carried into the next bill.  The amount of the present is 1154

livres 13 sous, which, reckoning the French crown of six livres at

six shillings and eight pence, Virginia money, is pound 64, 3s.

which sum you will be so good as to keep in your hands, to be used

occasionally in the education of my nephews, when the regular

resources disappoint you.  To the same use I would pray you to apply

twenty-five guineas, which I have lent the two Mr. Fitzhughs of

Marmion, and which I have desired them to repay into your hands.  You

will of course deduct the price of the revisals, and of any other

articles you may have been so kind as to pay for me.  Greek and Roman

authors are dearer here, than, I believe, any where in the world.

Nobody here reads them; wherefore they are not reprinted.  Don Ulloa,

in the original, is not to be found.  The collection of tracts on the

economies of different nations, we cannot find; nor Amelot's travels

into China.  I shall send these two trunks of books to Havre, there

to wait a conveyance to America; for as to the fixing the packets

there, it is as uncertain as ever.  The other articles you mention,

shall be procured as far as they can be.  Knowing that some of them

would be better got in London, I commissioned Mr. Short, who was

going there, to get them.  He has not yet returned.  They will be of

such a nature, as that I can get some gentleman who may be going to

America, to take them in his portmanteau.  Le Maire being now able to

stand on his own legs, there will be no necessity for your advancing

him the money I desired, if it is not already done.  I am anxious to

hear from you on the subject of my Notes on Virginia.  I have been

obliged to give so many of them here, that I fear their getting

published.  I have received an application from the Directors of the

public buildings, to procure them a plan for their capitol.  I shall

send them one taken from the best morsel of antient architecture now

remaining.  It has obtained the approbation of fifteen or sixteen

centuries, and is, therefore, preferable to any design which might be

newly contrived.  It will give more room, be more convenient, and

cost less, than the plan they sent me.  Pray encourage them to wait

for it, and to execute it.  It will be superior in beauty to any

thing in America, and not inferior to any thing in the world.  It is

very simple.  Have you a copying press?  If you have not, you should

get one.  Mine (exclusive of paper which costs a guinea a ream) has

cost me about fourteen guineas.  I would give ten times that sum, to

have had it from the date of the stamp act.  I hope you will be so

good as to continue your communications, both of the great and small

kind, which are equally useful to me.  Be assured of the sincerity

with which I am, Dear Sir,

        your friend and servant,



        ENCLOSURE



                                                      _livres  sous  den_

      Dictionnaire de Trevoux. 5 vol. fol. , 5f12 . . .    28  -   0  -  0

      La Conquista di Mexico. De Solis. fol. 7f10.

        relieure 7f . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    14  -  10

      Traite de morale et de bonheur. 12mo. 2 v. in 1.      2  -   8

      Wicquefort de l'Ambassadeur. 2. v. 4to. . . . . .     7  -   4

      Burlamaqui. Principes du droit Politique 4to.

        3f12 relieure 2f5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     5  -  17

      Conquista de la China por el Tartaro por Palafox.

        12mo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     3  -

      Code de l'humanite de Felice. 13. v. 4to. . . . .   104  -   0

      13. first livrasons of the Encyclopedie 47. vols.

        4to. (being 48f less than subscription) . . . .   348  -   0

      14th. livraison of do. 4. v. 4to. . . . . . . . .    24  -   0

      Peyssonel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     2  -   0

      Bibliotheque physico-oeconomique. 4. v. 12mo.

        10f4. rel. 3f . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    13  -   4

      Cultivateur Americain. 2. v. 8vo. 7f17. rel. 2f10.   10  -   7

      Mirabeau sur l'ordre des Cincinnati. 10f10. rel. 1f5

        (prohibited). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    11  -  15

      Coutumes Amglo-Normads de Houard. 4. v.

        4to. 40f rel. 10f . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    50  -   0

      Memories sur l'Amerique 4 v. 4to. . . . . . . . .    24  -   0

      Tott sur les Turcs. 4. v. in 2. 8vo. 10f. rel. 2f10  12  -  10

      Neckar sur l'Administration des Finances de

        France. 3. v. 12mo. 7f10 rel. 2f5 . . . . . . .     9  -  15

      le bon-sens. 12mo. 6f rel. 15s (prohibited). . .      6  -  15



                                                     _livres  sous  den_

      Mably. Princess de morale.

           1. V. 12mo.    .   .   .   . 3  12 }

         etude de l'histoire 1.       . 2  10 }

         maniere d'ecrire

              l'histoire 1.   .   .   . 2   8 }

         constitution

              d'Amerique 1.   .   .   . 1  16 }  relieure de

         sur l'histoire de                       II vols. ,

              France. 2. v.   .   .   . 6     }  15s. 8f5  41  -  1

         droit de l'Europe

              3.v.  .  .  .   .   .   . 7  10 }

         ordres des societies .   .   . 2     }

         principes des

              negotiations.   .   .   . 2  10 }

         entretiens de Phocion    .   . 2     }

         des Romains  .   .   .   .   . 2  10 }

                                        -------

                                        32  16

 

      Wanting to complete Mably's works which I have

        not been able to procure

          les principes de legislation

          sur les Grecs

          sur la Pologne.

      Chronologie des empires anciennes

          de la Combe.                                      5  -  0  -  0

        de l'histoire universelle

          de Hornot. . 1. v. 8vo.4f                         4  -  0  -  0

        de l'histoire universelle

          de Berlie. . 1.v. 8vo. 2f10 rel. 1f5              3  - 15

        des empereurs Romains

          par Richer. . 2. v. 8vo. 8f rel. 2f10            10  - 10

        des Juifs . . . 1. v. 8vo. 3f10 rel. 1f5            4  - 15

        de l'histoire universelle

          par Du Fresnoy. 2. v. 8vo. 13f rel. 2f10         15  - 10

        de l'histoire du Nord.

          par La Combe .2. v. 8vo. 10f. rel. 2f10          12  - 10

        de France. par

          Henault. . . 3. v. 8vo. 12f. rel. 5f          15  - 15

 

                                                       _livres  sous  den_

      Memories de Voltaire. 2. v. in 1. 2f10 rel. 15s. .     3  -  5  -  0

      Linnaei Philosophia Botanica. 1. v. 8vo. 7f rel. 1f5   8  -  5

        Genera plantarum 1. v. 8vo. 8f rel. 1f5  . . . . .   9  -  5

        Species plantarum. 4. v. 8vo. 32f rel. 5f  . . . .  37  -  0

        Systema naturae 4. v. 8vo. 26f rel. 5f . . . . . .  31  -  0

      Clayton. Flora Virginica. 4to. 12f. rel. 2f10. . . .  14  - 10

      D'Albon sur l'interet de plusieurs nations. 4. v.

        12mo. 12f. rel. 3f.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15  -  0

      Systeme de la nature de Diderot. 3. v. 8vo. 21f

        (prohibited) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21  -  0

      Coussin histoire Romaine.

            2.v.in 1. 12mo.               }

        de Constantinople 8. v. in 10.    }   16. vols.

        de l'empire de l'Occident 2. v.   }       12mo.     36  -  0  -  0

        de l'eglise. 5. v. in 3.          }

      Droit de la Nature. por Wolff. 6. v. 12mo. 15f rel.

        4f10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19  - 10

      Voyage de Paget 8vo. 3. v. in 1. . . . . . . . . . .   9

      Mirabeau. Ami des hommes 5. v. 12mo.   }

        Theorie de l'import 2. v. in 1. 12mo.}              12

      BUFFON. SUPPLEMENT II. 12. Oiseaux 17. 18.

        Mineraux 1. 2. 3. 4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24.

      Lettres de Pascal. 12mo. 2f. rel. 15s. . . . . . . .   2  - 15

      Le sage a la cour et le roi voiageur (prohibited). .  10  - 15

      Principles de legislation universelle 2. v. 8vo. . .  12  -  0

      Ordonnances de la Marine par Valin. 2. v. 4to. . . .  22

      Diderot sur les sourds and muets }

        12mo. 3f12. sur les            }  4. v. 12mo.       13  -  7

       aveugles 3f. sur la nature 3f.  }

        sur la morale 3f15          }

      Mariana's history of Spain II. v. 12mo.. . . . . . .  21

      2 trunks & packing paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43  -  0

                                                           ----------

                                                          1154  - 13



        CLIMATE AND AMERICAN CHARACTER



        _To Chastellux_

        _Paris, Sep. 2, 1785_



        DEAR SIR, -- You were so kind as to allow me a fortnight to

read your journey through Virginia. but you should have thought of

this indulgence while you were writing it, and have rendered it less

interesting if you meant that your readers should have been longer

engaged with it. in fact I devoured it at a single meal, and a second

reading scarce allowed me sang-froid enough to mark a few errors in

the names of persons and places which I note on a paper herein

inclosed, with an inconsiderable error or two in facts which I have

also noted because I supposed you wished to state them correctly.

from this general approbation however you must allow me to except

about a dozen pages in the earlier part of the book which I read with

a continued blush from beginning to end, as it presented me a lively

picture of what I wish to be, but am not. no, my dear Sir, the

thousand millionth part of what you there say, is more than I

deserve. it might perhaps have passed in Europe at the time you wrote

it, and the exaggeration might not have been detected. but consider

that the animal is now brought there, and that every one will take

his dimensions for himself. the friendly complexion of your mind has

betrayed you into a partiality of which the European spectator will

be divested. respect to yourself therefore will require indispensably

that you expunge the whole of those pages except your own judicious

observations interspersed among them on animal and physical subjects.

with respect to my countrymen there is surely nothing which can

render them uneasy, in the observations made on them. they know that

they are not perfect, and will be sensible that you have viewed them

with a philanthropic eye. you say much good of them, and less ill

than they are conscious may be said with truth.  I have studied their

character with attention.  I have thought them, as you found them,

aristocratical, pompous, clannish, indolent, hospitable, and I should

have added, disinterested, but you say attached to their interest.

this is the only trait in their character wherein our observations

differ. I have always thought them so careless of their interests, so

thoughtless in their expences and in all their transactions of

business that I had placed it among the vices of their character, as

indeed most virtues when carried beyond certain bounds degenerate

into vices.  I had even ascribed this to it's cause, to that warmth

of their climate which unnerves and unmans both body and mind. while

on this subject I will give you my idea of the characters of the

several states.



      In the north they are               In the south they are

      cool                                fiery

      sober                               voluptuary

      laborious                           indolent

      persevering                         unsteady

      independant                         independant

      jealous of their own liberties,     zealous for their own liberties,

      and just to those of others          but trampling on those of

                                           others.

      interested                          generous

      chicaning                           candid

      superstitious and hypocritical in   without attachment or

                                                        pretensions

      their religion                      to any religon but that

                                          of the heart.



        these characteristics grow weaker and weaker by gradation from

North to South and South to North, insomuch that an observing

traveller, without the aid of the quadrant may always know his

latitude by the character of the people among whom he finds himself.

it is in Pennsylvania that the two characters seem to meet and blend,

and form a people free from the extremes both of vice and virtue.

peculiar circumstances have given to New York the character which

climate would have given had she been placed on the South instead of

the north side of Pennsylvania. perhaps too other circumstances may

have occasioned in Virginia a transplantation of a particular vice

foreign to it's climate. you could judge of this with more

impartiality than I could, and the probability is that your estimate

of them is the most just.  I think it for their good that the vices

of their character should be pointed out to them that they may amend

them; for a malady of either body or mind once known is half cured.

I wish you would add to this piece your letter to mr. Madison on the

expediency of introducing the arts into America.  I found in that a

great deal of matter, very many observations, which would be useful

to the legislators of America, and to the general mass of citizens.

I read it with great pleasure and analysed it's contents that I might

fix them in my own mind.



        I have the honor to be with very sincere esteem, dear Sir, your

most obedient and most humble servt.
