




        "A REAL CHRISTIAN"




        _To Charles Thomson_

        _Monticello, January 9, 1816_




        MY DEAR AND ANCIENT FRIEND, -- An acquaintance of fifty-two

years, for I think ours dates from 1764, calls for an interchange of

notice now and then, that we remain in existence, the monuments of

another age, and examples of a friendship unaffected by the jarring

elements by which we have been surrounded, of revolutions of

government, of party and of opinion.  I am reminded of this duty by

the receipt, through our friend Dr. Patterson, of your synopsis of

the four Evangelists.  I had procured it as soon as I saw it

advertised, and had become familiar with its use; but this copy is

the more valued as it comes from your hand.  This work bears the

stamp of that accuracy which marks everything from you, and will be

useful to those who, not taking things on trust, recur for themselves

to the fountain of pure morals.  I, too, have made a wee-little book

from the same materials, which I call the Philosophy of Jesus; it is

a paradigma of his doctrines, made by cutting the texts out of the

book, and arranging them on the pages of a blank book, in a certain

order of time or subject.  A more beautiful or precious morsel of

ethics I have never seen; it is a document in proof that _I_ am a

_real Christian_, that is to say, a disciple of the doctrines of

Jesus, very different from the Platonists, who call _me_ infidel and

_themselves_ Christians and preachers of the gospel, while they draw

all their characteristic dogmas from what its author never said nor

saw.  They have compounded from the heathen mysteries a system beyond

the comprehension of man, of which the great reformer of the vicious

ethics and deism of the Jews, were he to return on earth, would not

recognize one feature.  If I had time I would add to my little book

the Greek, Latin and French texts, in columns side by side.  And I

wish I could subjoin a translation of Gosindi's Syntagma of the

doctrines of Epicurus, which, notwithstanding the calumnies of the

Stoics and caricatures of Cicero, is the most rational system

remaining of the philosophy of the ancients, as frugal of vicious

indulgence, and fruitful of virtue as the hyperbolical extravagances

of his rival sects.




        I retain good health, am rather feeble to walk much, but ride

with ease, passing two or three hours a day on horseback, and every

three or four months taking in a carriage a journey of ninety miles

to a distant possession, where I pass a good deal of my time.  My

eyes need the aid of glasses by night, and with small print in the

day also; my hearing is not quite so sensible as it used to be; no

tooth shaking yet, but shivering and shrinking in body from the cold

we now experience, my thermometer having been as low as 12 degrees

this morning.  My greatest oppression is a correspondence

afflictingly laborious, the extent of which I have been long

endeavoring to curtail.  This keeps me at the drudgery of the

writing-table all the prime hours of the day, leaving for the

gratification of my appetite for reading, only what I can steal from

the hours of sleep.  Could I reduce this epistolary corvee within the

limits of my friends and affairs, and give the time redeemed from it

to reading and reflection, to history, ethics, mathematics, my life

would be as happy as the infirmities of age would admit, and I should

look on its consummation with the composure of one _"qui summum nec

me tuit diem nec optat."_




        So much as to myself, and I have given you this string of

egotisms in the hope of drawing a similar one from yourself.  I have

heard from others that you retain your health, a good degree of

activity, and all the vivacity and cheerfulness of your mind, but I

wish to learn it more minutely from yourself.  How has time affected

your health and spirits?  What are your amusements, literary and

social?  Tell me everything about yourself, because all will be

interesting to me who retains for you ever the same constant and

affectionate friendship and respect.







        YOUR PROPHECY AND MINE




        _To John Adams_

        _Monticello, Jan. 11, 1816_




        DEAR SIR -- Of the last five months I have past four at my

other domicil, for such it is in a considerable degree.  No letters

are forwarded to me there, because the cross post to that place is

circuitous and uncertain.  During my absence therefore they are

accumulating here, and awaiting acknolegments.  This has been the

fate of your favor of Nov. 13.




        I agree with you in all it's eulogies on the 18th. century.  It

certainly witnessed the sciences and arts, manners and morals,

advanced to a higher degree than the world had ever before seen.  And

might we not go back to the aera of the Borgias, by which time the

barbarous ages had reduced national morality to it's lowest point of

depravity, and observe that the arts and sciences, rising from that

point, advanced gradually thro' all the 16th. 17th. and 18th.

centuries, softening and correcting the manners and morals of man?  I

think too we may add, to the great honor of science and the arts,

that their natural effect is, by illuminating public opinion, to

erect it into a Censor, before which the most exalted tremble for

their future, as well as present fame.  With some exceptions only,

through the 17th. and 18th. centuries morality occupied an honorable

chapter in the political code of nations.  You must have observed

while in Europe, as I thought I did, that those who administered the

governments of the greater powers at least, had a respect to faith,

and considered the dignity of their government as involved in it's

integrity.  A wound indeed was inflicted on this character of honor

in the 18th. century by the partition of Poland.  But this was the

atrocity of a barbarous government chiefly, in conjunction with a

smaller one still scrambling to become great, while one only of those

already great, and having character to lose, descended to the

baseness of an accomplice in the crime.  France, England, Spain

shared in it only inasmuch as they stood aloof and permitted it's

perpetration.  How then has it happened that these nations, France

especially and England, so great, so dignified, so distinguished by

science and the arts, plunged at once into all the depths of human

enormity, threw off suddenly and openly all the restraints of

morality, all sensation to character, and unblushingly avowed and

acted on the principle that power was right?  Can this sudden

apostacy from national rectitude be accounted for?  The treaty of

Pilnitz seems to have begun it, suggested perhaps by the baneful

precedent of Poland.  Was it from the terror of monarchs, alarmed at

the light returning on them from the West, and kindling a Volcano

under their thrones?  Was it a combination to extinguish that light,

and to bring back, as their best auxiliaries, those enumerated by

you, the Sorbonne, the Inquisition, the Index expurgatorius, and the

knights of Loyola?  Whatever it was, the close of the century saw the

moral world thrown back again to the age of the Borgias, to the point

from which it had departed 300. years before.  France, after crushing

and punishing the conspiracy of Pilnitz, went herself deeper and

deeper into the crimes she had been chastising.  I say France, and

not Bonaparte; for altho' he was the head and mouth, the nation

furnished the hands which executed his enormities.  England, altho'

in opposition, kept full pace with France, not indeed by the manly

force of her own arms, but by oppressing the weak, and bribing the

strong.  At length the whole choir joined and divided the weaker

nations among them.  Your prophecies to Dr. Price proved truer than

mine; and yet fell short of the fact, for instead of a million, the

destruction of 8. or 10. millions of human beings has probably been

the effect of these convulsions.  I did not, in 89. believe they

would have lasted so long, nor have cost so much blood.  But altho'

your prophecy has proved true so far, I hope it does not preclude a

better final result.  That same light from our West seems to have

spread and illuminated the very engines employed to extinguish it.

It has given them a glimmering of their rights and their power.  The

idea of representative government has taken root and growth among

them.  Their masters feel it, and are saving themselves by timely

offers of this modification of their own powers.  Belguim, Prussia,

Poland, Lombardy etc. are now offered a representative organization:

illusive probably at first, but it will grow into power in the end.

Opinion is power, and that opinion will come.  Even France will yet

attain representative government.  You observe it makes the basis of

every constitution which has been demanded or offered: of that

demanded by their Senate; of that offered by Bonaparte; and of that

granted by Louis XVIII.  The idea then is rooted, and will be

established, altho' rivers of blood may yet flow between them and

their object.  The allied armies now couching upon them are first to

be destroyed, and destroyed they will surely be.  A nation united can

never be conquered.  We have seen what the ignorant bigotted and

unarmed Spaniards could do against the disciplined veterans of their

invaders.  What then may we not expect from the power and character

of the French nation?  The oppressors may cut off heads after heads,

but like those of the Hydra, they multiply at every stroke.  The

recruits within a nation's own limits are prompt and without number;

while those of their invaders from a distance are slow, limited, and

must come to an end.  I think too we percieve that all these allies

do not see the same interest in the annihilation of the power of

France.  There are certainly some symptoms of foresight in Alexander

that France might produce a salutary diversion of force were Austria

and Prussia to become her enemies.  France too is the natural ally of

the Turk, as having no interfering interests, and might be useful in

neutralizing and perhaps turning that power on Austria.  That a

re-acting jealousy too exists with Austria and Prussia I think their

late strict alliance indicates; and I should not wonder if Spain

should discover a sympathy with them.  Italy is so divided as to be

nothing.  Here then we see new coalitions in embrio which after

France shall in turn have suffered a just punishment for her crimes,

will not only raise her from the earth on which she is prostrate, but

give her an opportunity to establish a government of as much liberty

as she can bear, enough to ensure her happiness and prosperity.  When

insurrection begins, be it where it will, all the partitioned

countries will rush to arms, and Europe again become an Arena of

gladiators.  And what is the definite object they will propose?  A

restoration certainly of the status quo prius, of the state of

possession of 89.  I see no other principle on which Europe can ever

again settle down in lasting peace.  I hope your prophecies will go

thus far, as my wishes do, and that they, like the former, will prove

to have been the sober dictates of a superior understanding, and a

sound calculation of effects from causes well understood.  Some

future Morgan will then have an opportunity of doing you justice, and

of counterbalancing the breach of confidence of which you so justly

complain, and in which no one has had more frequent occasion of

fellow-feeling than myself.  Permit me to place here my affectionate

respects to Mrs. Adams, and to add for yourself the assurances of

cordial friendship and esteem.







        THE WARD SYSTEM




        _To Joseph C. Cabell_

        _Monticello, February 2, 1816_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favors of the 23d and 24th ult., were a week

coming to us.  I instantly enclosed to you the deeds of Capt. Miller,

but I understand that the Post Master, having locked his mail before

they got to the office, would not unlock it to give them a passage.




        Having been prevented from retaining my collection of the acts

and journals of our legislature by the lumping manner in which the

Committee of Congress chose to take my library, it may be useful to

our public bodies to know what acts and journals I had, and where

they can now have access to them.  I therefore enclose you a copy of

my catalogue, which I pray you to deposit in the council office for

public use.  It is in the eighteenth and twenty-fourth chapters they

will find what is interesting to them.  The form of the catalogue has

been much injured in the publication; for although they have

preserved my division into chapters, they have reduced the books in

each chapter to alphabetical order, instead of the chronological or

analytical arrangements I had given them.  You will see sketches of

what were my arrangements at the heads of some of the chapters.




        The bill on the obstructions in our navigable waters appears to

me proper; as do also the amendments proposed.  I think the State

should reserve a right to the use of the waters for navigation, and

that where an individual landholder impedes that use, he shall remove

that impediment, and leave the subject in as good a state as nature

formed it.  This I hold to be the true principle; and to this Colonel

Green's amendments go.  All I ask in my own case is, that the

legislature will not take from me _my own works_.  I am ready to cut

my dam in any place, and at any moment requisite, so as to remove

that impediment, if it be thought one, and to leave those interested

to make the most of the natural circumstances of the place.  But I

hope they will never take from me my canal, made through the body of

my own lands, at an expense of twenty thousand dollars, and which is

no impediment to the navigation of the river.  I have permitted the

riparian proprietors above (and they not more than a dozen or twenty)

to use it gratis, and shall not withdraw the permission unless they

so use it as to obstruct too much the operations of my mills, of

which there is some likelihood.




        Doctor Smith, you say, asks what is the best elementary book on

the principles of government?  None in the world equal to the Review

of Montesquieu, printed at Philadelphia a few years ago.  It has the

advantage, too, of being equally sound and corrective of the

principles of political economy; and all within the compass of a thin

8vo.  Chipman's and Priestley's Principles of Government, and the

Federalists, are excellent in many respects, but for fundamental

principles not comparable to the Review.  I have no objections to the

printing my letter to Mr. Carr, if it will promote the interests of

science; although it was not written with a view to its publication.




        My letter of the 24th ult. conveyed to you the grounds of the

two articles objected to the College bill.  Your last presents one of

them in a new point of view, that of the commencement of the ward

schools as likely to render the law unpopular to the country.  It

must be a very inconsiderate and rough process of execution that

would do this.  My idea of the mode of carrying it into execution

would be this: Declare the county _ipso facto_ divided into wards for

the present, by the boundaries of the militia captaincies; somebody

attend the ordinary muster of each company, having first desired the

captain to call together a full one.  There explain the object of the

law to the people of the company, put to their vote whether they will

have a school established, and the most central and convenient place

for it; get them to meet and build a log school-house; have a roll

taken of the children who would attend it, and of those of them able

to pay.  These would probably be sufficient to support a common

teacher, instructing gratis the few unable to pay.  If there should

be a deficiency, it would require too trifling a contribution from

the county to be complained of; and especially as the whole county

would participate, where necessary, in the same resource.  Should the

company, by its vote, decide that it would have no school, let them

remain without one.  The advantages of this proceeding would be that

it would become the duty of the alderman elected by the county, to

take an active part in pressing the introduction of schools, and to

look out for tutors.  If, however, it is intended that the State

government shall take this business into its own hands, and provide

schools for every county, then by all means strike out this provision

of our bill.  I would never wish that it should be placed on a worse

footing than the rest of the State.  But if it is believed that these

elementary schools will be better managed by the governor and

council, the commissioners of the literary fund, or any other general

authority of the government, than by the parents within each ward, it

is a belief against all experience.  Try the principle one step

further, and amend the bill so as to commit to the governor and

council the management of all our farms, our mills, and merchants'

stores.  No, my friend, the way to have good and safe government, is

not to trust it all to one, but to divide it among the many,

distributing to every one exactly the functions he is competent to.

Let the national government be entrusted with the defence of the

nation, and its foreign and federal relations; the State governments

with the civil rights, laws, police, and administration of what

concerns the State generally; the counties with the local concerns of

the counties, and each ward direct the interests within itself.  It

is by dividing and subdividing these republics from the great

national one down through all its subordinations, until it ends in

the administration of every man's farm by himself; by placing under

every one what his own eye may superintend, that all will be done for

the best.  What has destroyed liberty and the rights of man in every

government which has ever existed under the sun?  The generalizing

and concentrating all cares and powers into one body, no matter

whether of the autocrats of Russia or France, or of the aristocrats

of a Venetian senate.  And I do believe that if the Almighty has not

decreed that man shall never be free, (and it is a blasphemy to

believe it,) that the secret will be found to be in the making

himself the depository of the powers respecting himself, so far as he

is competent to them, and delegating only what is beyond his

competence by a synthetical process, to higher and higher orders of

functionaries, so as to trust fewer and fewer powers in proportion as

the trustees become more and more oligarchical.  The elementary

republics of the wards, the county republics, the States republics,

and the republic of the Union, would form a gradation of authorities,

standing each on the basis of law, holding every one its delegated

share of powers, and constituting truly a system of fundamental

balances and checks for the government.  Where every man is a sharer

in the direction of his ward-republic, or of some of the higher ones,

and feels that he is a participator in the government of affairs, not

merely at an election one day in the year, but every day; when there

shall not be a man in the State who will not be a member of some one

of its councils, great or small, he will let the heart be torn out of

his body sooner than his power be wrested from him by a Caesar or a

Bonaparte.  How powerfully did we feel the energy of this

organization in the case of embargo?  I felt the foundations of the

government shaken under my feet by the New England townships.  There

was not an individual in their States whose body was not thrown with

all its momentum into action; and although the whole of the other

States were known to be in favor of the measure, yet the organization

of this little selfish minority enabled it to overrule the Union.

What would the unwieldy counties of the middle, the south, and the

west do?  Call a county meeting, and the drunken loungers at and

about the court houses would have collected, the distances being too

great for the good people and the industrious generally to attend.

The character of those who really met would have been the measure of

the weight they would have had in the scale of public opinion.  As

Cato, then, concluded every speech with the words, _"Carthago delenda

est,"_ so do I every opinion, with the injunction, "divide the

counties into wards." Begin them only for a single purpose; they will

soon show for what others they are the best instruments.  God bless

you, and all our rulers, and give them the wisdom, as I am sure they

have the will, to fortify us against the degeneracy of one

government, and the concentration of all its powers in the hands of

the one, the few, the well-born or the many.







        "HOPE IN THE HEAD . . . FEAR ASTERN"




        _To John Adams_

        _Monticello, Apr. 8, 1816_




        DEAR SIR -- I have to acknolege your two favors of Feb. 16. and

Mar. 2. and to join sincerely in the sentiment of Mrs. Adams, and

regret that distance separates us so widely.  An hour of conversation

would be worth a volume of letters.  But we must take things as they

come.




        You ask if I would agree to live my 70. or rather 73. years

over again?  To which I say Yea.  I think with you that it is a good

world on the whole, that it has been framed on a principle of

benevolence, and more pleasure than pain dealt out to us.  There are

indeed (who might say Nay) gloomy and hypocondriac minds, inhabitants

of diseased bodies, disgusted with the present, and despairing of the

future; always counting that the worst will happen, because it may

happen.  To these I say How much pain have cost us the evils which

have never happened?  My temperament is sanguine.  I steer my bark

with Hope in the head, leaving Fear astern.  My hopes indeed

sometimes fail; but not oftener than the forebodings of the gloomy.

There are, I acknolege, even in the happiest life, some terrible

convulsions, heavy set-offs against the opposite page of the account.

I have often wondered for what good end the sensations of Grief could

be intended.  All our other passions, within proper bounds, have an

useful object.  And the perfection of the moral character is, not in

a Stoical apathy, so hypocritically vaunted, and so untruly too,

because impossible, but in a just equilibrium of all the passions.  I

wish the pathologists then would tell us what is the use of grief in

the economy, and of what good it is the cause, proximate or remote.




        Did I know Baron Grimm while at Paris?  Yes, most intimately.

He was the pleasantest, and most conversible member of the diplomatic

corps while I was there: a man of good fancy, acuteness, irony,

cunning, and egoism: no heart, not much of any science, yet enough of

every one to speak it's language.  His fort was Belles-lettres,

painting and sculpture.  In these he was the oracle of the society,

and as such was the empress Catharine's private correspondent and

factor in all things not diplomatic.  It was thro' him I got her

permission for poor Ledyard to go to Kamschatka, and cross over

thence to the Western coast of America, in order to penetrate across

our continent in the opposite direction to that afterwards adopted

for Lewis and Clarke: which permission she withdrew after he had got

within 200. miles of Kamschatska, had him siesed, brought back and

set down in Poland.  Altho' I never heard Grimm express the opinion,

directly, yet I always supposed him to be of the school of Diderot,

D'Alembert, D'Holbach, the first of whom committed their system of

atheism to writing in `Le bon sens,' and the last in his `Systeme de

la Nature.' It was a numerous school in the Catholic countries, while

the infidelity of the Protestant took generally the form of Theism.

The former always insisted that it was a mere question of definition

between them, the hypostasis of which on both sides was `Nature' or

`the Universe:' that both agreed in the order of the existing system,

but the one supposed it from eternity, the other as having begun in

time.  And when the atheist descanted on the unceasing motion and

circulation of matter thro' the animal vegetable and mineral

kingdoms, never resting, never annihilated, always changing form, and

under all forms gifted with the power of reproduction; the Theist

pointing `to the heavens above, and to the earth beneath, and to the

waters under the earth,' asked if these did not proclaim a first

cause, possessing intelligence and power; power in the production,

and intelligence in the design and constant preservation of the

system; urged the palpable existence of final causes, that the eye

was made to see, and the ear to hear, and not that we see because we

have eyes, and hear because we have ears; an answer obvious to the

senses, as that of walking across the room was to the philosopher

demonstrating the nonexistence of motion.  It was in D'Holbach's

conventicles that Rousseau imagined all the machinations against him

were contrived; and he left, in his Confessions the most biting

anecdotes of Grimm.  These appeared after I left France; but I have

heard that poor Grimm was so much afflicted by them, that he kept his

bed several weeks.  I have never seen these Memoirs of Grimm.  Their

volume has kept them out of our market.




        I have been lately amusing myself with Levi's book in answer to

Dr. Priestley.  It is a curious and tough work.  His style is

inelegant and incorrect, harsh and petulent to his adversary, and his

reasoning flimsey enough.  Some of his doctrines were new to me,

particularly that of his two resurrections: the first a particular

one of all the dead, in body as well as soul, who are to live over

again, the Jews in a state of perfect obedience to god, the other

nations in a state of corporeal punishment for the sufferings they

have inflicted on the Jews.  And he explains this resurrection of

bodies to be only of the original stamen of Leibnitz, or the

homunculus in semine masculino, considering that as a mathematical

point, insusceptible of separation, or division.  The second

resurrection a general one of souls and bodies, eternally to enjoy

divine glory in the presence of the supreme being.  He alledges that

the Jews alone preserve the doctrine of the unity of god.  Yet their

god would be deemed a very indifferent man with us: and it was to

correct their Anamorphosis of the deity that Jesus preached, as well

as to establish the doctrine of a future state.  However Levi insists

that that was taught in the old testament, and even by Moses himself

and the prophets.  He agrees that an anointed prince was prophecied

and promised: but denies that the character and history of Jesus has

any analogy with that of the person promised.  He must be fearfully

embarrassing to the Hierophants of fabricated Christianity; because

it is their own armour in which he clothes himself for the attack.

For example, he takes passages of Scripture from their context (which

would give them a very different meaning) strings them together, and

makes them point towards what object he pleases; he interprets them

figuratively, typically, analogically, hyperbolically; he calls in

the aid of emendation, transposition, ellipsis, metonymy, and every

other figure of rhetoric; the name of one man is taken for another,

one place for another, days and weeks for months and years; and

finally avails himself of all his advantage over his adversaries by

his superior knolege of the Hebrew, speaking in the very language of

the divine communication, while they can only fumble on with

conflicting and disputed translations.  Such is this war of giants.

And how can such pigmies as you and I decide between them?  For

myself I confess that my head is not formed tantas componere lites.

And as you began your Mar. 2. with a declaration that you were about

to write me the most frivolous letter I had ever read, so I will

close mine by saying I have written you a full match for it, and by

adding my affectionate respects to Mrs. Adams, and the assurance of

my constant attachment and consideration for yourself.







        "CONSTITUTIONALLY AND CONSCIENTIOUSLY DEMOCRATS"




        _To P. S. Dupont de Nemours_

        _Poplar Forest, April 24, 1816_




        I received, my dear friend, your letter covering the

constitution for your Equinoctial republsetting out for this place.

I brought it with me, and have read it with great satisfaction.  I

suppose it well formed for those for whom it was intended, and the

excellence of every government is its adaptation to the state of

those to be governed by it.  For us it would not do.  Distinguishing

between the structure of the government and the moral principles on

which you prescribe its administration, with the latter we concur

cordially, with the former we should not.  We of the United States,

you know, are constitutionally and conscientiously democrats.  We

consider society as one of the natural wants with which man has been

created; that he has been endowed with faculties and qualities to

effect its satisfaction by concurrence of others having the same

want; that when, by the exercise of these faculties, he has procured

a state of society, it is one of his acquisitions which he has a

right to regulate and control, jointly indeed with all those who have

concurred in the procurement, whom he cannot exclude from its use or

direction more than they him.  We think experience has proved it

safer, for the mass of individuals composing the society, to reserve

to themselves personally the exercise of all rightful powers to which

they are competent, and to delegate those to which they are not

competent to deputies named, and removable for unfaithful conduct, by

themselves immediately.  Hence, with us, the people (by which is

meant the mass of individuals composing the society) being competent

to judge of the facts occurring in ordinary life, they have retained

the functions of judges of facts, under the name of jurors; but being

unqualified for the management of affairs requiring intelligence

above the common level, yet competent judges of human character, they

chose, for their management, representatives, some by themselves

immediately, others by electors chosen by themselves.  Thus our

President is chosen by ourselves, directly in _practice_, for we vote

for A as elector only on the condition he will vote for B, our

representatives by ourselves immediately, our Senate and judges of

law through electors chosen by ourselves.  And we believe that this

proximate choice and power of removal is the best security which

experience has sanctioned for ensuring an honest conduct in the

functionaries of society.  Your three or four alembications have

indeed a seducing appearance.  We should conceive _prima facie_, that

the last extract would be the pure alcohol of the substance, three or

four times rectified.  But in proportion as they are more and more

sublimated, they are also farther and farther removed from the

control of the society; and the human character, we believe, requires

in general constant and immediate control, to prevent its being

biased from right by the seductions of self-love.  Your process

produces therefore a structure of government from which the

fundamental principle of ours is excluded.  You first set down as

zeros all individuals not having lands, which are the greater number

in every society of long standing.  Those holding lands are permitted

to manage in person the small affairs of their commune or

corporation, and to elect a deputy for the canton; in which election,

too, every one's vote is to be an unit, a plurality, or a fraction,

in proportion to his landed possessions.  The assemblies of cantons,

then, elect for the districts; those of districts for circles; and

those of circles for the national assemblies.  Some of these highest

councils, too, are in a considerable degree self-elected, the regency

partially, the judiciary entirely, and some are for life.  Whenever,

therefore, an _esprit de corps_, or of party, gets possession of

them, which experience shows to be inevitable, there are no means of

breaking it up, for they will never elect but those of their own

spirit.  Juries are allowed in criminal cases only.  I acknowledge

myself strong in affection to our own form, yet both of us act and

think from the same motive, we both consider the people as our

children, and love them with parental affection.  But you love them

as infants whom you are afraid to trust without nurses; and I as

adults whom I freely leave to self-government.  And you are right in

the case referred to you; my criticism being built on a state of

society not under your contemplation.  It is, in fact, like a critic

on Homer by the laws of the Drama.




        But when we come to the moral principles on which the

government is to be administered, we come to what is proper for all

conditions of society.  I meet you there in all the benevolence and

rectitude of your native character; and I love myself always most

where I concur most with you.  Liberty, truth, probity, honor, are

declared to be the four cardinal principles of your society.  I

believe with you that morality, compassion, generosity, are innate

elements of the human constitution; that there exists a right

independent of force; that a right to property is founded in our

natural wants, in the means with which we are endowed to satisfy

these wants, and the right to what we acquire by those means without

violating the similar rights of other sensible beings; that no one

has a right to obstruct another, exercising his faculties innocently

for the relief of sensibilities made a part of his nature; that

justice is the fundamental law of society; that the majority,

oppressing an individual, is guilty of a crime, abuses its strength,

and by acting on the law of the strongest breaks up the foundations

of society; that action by the citizens in person, in affairs within

their reach and competence, and in all others by representatives,

chosen immediately, and removable by themselves, constitutes the

essence of a republic; that all governments are more or less

republican in proportion as this principle enters more or less into

their composition; and that a government by representation is capable

of extension over a greater surface of country than one of any other

form.  These, my friend, are the essentials in which you and I agree;

however, in our zeal for their maintenance, we may be perplexed and

divaricate, as to the structure of society most likely to secure

them.




        In the constitution of Spain, as proposed by the late Cortes,

there was a principle entirely new to me, and not noticed in yours,

that no person, born after that day, should ever acquire the rights

of citizenship until he could read and write.  It is impossible

sufficiently to estimate the wisdom of this provision.  Of all those

which have been thought of for securing fidelity in the

administration of the government, constant ralliance to the

principles of the constitution, and progressive amendments with the

progressive advances of the human mind, or changes in human affairs,

it is the most effectual.  Enlighten the people generally, and

tyranny and oppressions of body and mind will vanish like evil

spirits at the dawn of day.  Although I do not, with some

enthusiasts, believe that the human condition will ever advance to

such a state of perfection as that there shall no longer be pain or

vice in the world, yet I believe it susceptible of much improvement,

and most of all, in matters of government and religion; and that the

diffusion of knowledge among the people is to be the instrument by

which it is to be effected.  The constitution of the Cortes had

defects enough; but when I saw in it this amendatory provision, I was

satisfied all would come right in time, under its salutary operation.

No people have more need of a similar provision than those for whom

you have felt so much interest.  No mortal wishes them more success

than I do.  But if what I have heard of the ignorance and bigotry of

the mass be true, I doubt their capacity to understand and to support

a free government; and fear that their emancipation from the foreign

tyranny of Spain, will result in a military despotism at home.

Palacios may be great; others may be great; but it is the multitude

which possess force: and wisdom must yield to that.  For such a

condition of society, the constitution you have devised is probably

the best imaginable.  It is certainly calculated to elicit the best

talents; although perhaps not well guarded against the egoism of its

functionaries.  But that egoism will be light in comparison with the

pressure of a military despot, and his army of Janissaries.  Like

Solon to the Athenians, you have given to your Columbians, not the

best possible government, but the best they can bear.  By-the-bye, I

wish you had called them the Columbian republics, to distinguish them

from our American republics.  Theirs would be the most honorable

name, and they best entitled to it; for Columbus discovered their

continent, but never saw ours.




        To them liberty and happiness; to you the meed of wisdom and

goodness in teaching them how to attain them, with the affectionate

respect and friendship of,







        CAPTAIN LEWIS'S PAPERS




        _To Correa da Serra_

        _Poplar Forest, April 26, 1816_




        DEAR SIR -- Your favor of Mar. 29. was recieved just as I was

setting out for this place.  I brought it with me to be answered

hence.  Since you are so kind as to interest yourself for Capt.

Lewis's papers, I will give you a full statement of them.




 

        1. Ten or twelve such pocket volumes, Morocco bound, as that

you describe, in which, in his own hand writing, he had journalised

all occurences, day by day, as he travelled.  They were small 8vos

and opened at the end for more convenient writing.  Every one had

been put into a separate tin case, cemented to prevent injury from

wet.  But on his return the cases, I presume, had been taken from

them, as he delivered me the books uncased.  There were in them the

figures of some animals drawn with the pen while on his journey.  The

gentlemen who published his travels must have had these Ms. volumes,

and perhaps now have them, or can give some account of them.




        2. Descriptions of animals and plants.  I do not recollect

whether there was such a book or collection of papers, distinct from

his journal; altho' I am inclined to think there was one: because his

travels as published, do not contain all the new animals of which he

had either descriptions or specimens.  Mr. Peale, I think, must know

something of this, as he drew figures of some of the animals for

engraving, and some were actually engraved.  Perhaps Conrad, his

bookseller, who was to have published the work, can give an account

of these.




        3. Vocabularies.  I had myself made a collection of about 40.

vocabularies of the Indians on this side of the Missisipi, and Capt.

Lewis was instructed to take those of every tribe beyond, which he

possibly could: the intention was to publish the whole, and leave the

world to search for affinities between these and the languages of

Europe and Asia.  He was furnished with a number of printed

vocabularies of the same words and form I had used, with blank spaces

for the Indian words.  He was very attentive to this instruction,

never missing an opportunity of taking a vocabulary.  After his

return, he asked me if I should have any objection to the printing

his separately, as mine were not yet arranged as I intended.  I

assured him I had not the least; and I am certain he contemplated

their publication.  But whether he had put the papers out of his own

hand or not, I do not know.  I imagine he had not: and it is probable

that Doctr. Barton, who was particularly curious on this subject, and

published on it occasionally, would willingly recieve and take care

of these papers after Capt. Lewis's death, and that they are now

among his papers.




 

        4. His observations of longitude and latitude.  He was

instructed to send these to the war-office, that measures might be

taken to have the calculations made.  Whether he delivered them to

the war-office, or to Dr. Patterson, I do not know; but I think he

communicated with Dr. Patterson concerning them.  These are

all-important: because altho', having with him the Nautical almanacs,

he could & did calculate some of his latitudes, yet the longitudes

were taken merely from estimates by the log-line, time and course.

So that it is only as to latitudes that his map may be considered as

tolerably correct; not as to its longitudes.




        5. His Map.  This was drawn on sheets of paper, not put

together, but so marked that they could be joined together with the

utmost accuracy; not as one great square map, but ramifying with the

courses of the rivers.  The scale was very large, and the sheets

numerous, but in perfect preservation.  This was to await

publication, until corrected by the calculations of longitude and

latitude.  I examined these sheets myself minutely, as spread on the

floor, and the originals must be in existence, as the Map published

with his travels must have been taken from them.




        These constitute the whole.  They are the property of the

government, the fruits of the expedition undertaken at such expense

of money and risk of valuable lives.  They contain exactly the whole

of the information which it was our object to obtain for the benefit

of our own country and of the world.  But we were willing to give to

Lewis and Clarke whatever pecuniary benefits might be derived from

the publication, and therefore left the papers in their hands, taking

for granted that their interests would produce a speedy publication,

which would be better if done under their direction.  But the death

of Capt. Lewis, the distance and occupations of General Clarke, and

the bankruptcy of their bookseller, have retarded the publication,

and rendered necessary that the government should attend to the

reclamation & security of their papers.  Their recovery is now become

an imperious duty.  Their safest deposit as fast as they can be

collected, will be the Philosophical Society, who no doubt will be so

kind as to receive and preserve them, subject to the orders of

government; and their publication, once effected in any way, the

originals will probably be left in the same deposit.  As soon as I

can learn their present situation, I will lay the matter before the

government to take such order as they think proper.  As to any claims

of individuals to these papers, it is to be observed that, as being

the property of the public, we are certain neither Lewis nor Clarke

would undertake to convey away the right to them, and that they could

not convey them, had they been capable of intending it.  Yet no

interest of that kind is meant to be disturbed, if the individual can

give satisfactory assurance that he will promptly & properly publish

them.  Otherwise they must be restored to the government, & the

claimant left to settle with those on whom he has any claim.  My

interference will, I trust, be excused, not only from the portion

which every citizen has in whatever is public, but from the peculiar

part I have had in the design and execution of this expedition.




        To you, my friend, apology is due for involving you in the

trouble of this inquiry.  It must be found in the interest you take

in whatever belongs to science, and in your own kind offers to me of

aid in this research.  Be assured always of my affectionate

friendship and respect.







        THE TEST OF REPUBLICANISM




        _To John Taylor_

        _Monticello, May 28, 1816_




        DEAR SIR, -- On my return from a long journey and considerable

absence from home, I found here the copy of your "Enquiry into the

principles of our government," which you had been so kind as to send

me; and for which I pray you to accept my thanks.  The difficulties

of getting new works in our situation, inland and without a single

bookstore, are such as had prevented my obtaining a copy before; and

letters which had accumulated during my absence, and were calling for

answers, have not yet permitted me to give to the whole a thorough

reading; yet certain that you and I could not think differently on

the fundamentals of rightful government, I was impatient, and availed

myself of the intervals of repose from the writing table, to obtain a

cursory idea of the body of the work.




 

        I see in it much matter for profound reflection; much which

should confirm our adhesion, in practice, to the good principles of

our constitution, and fix our attention on what is yet to be made

good.  The sixth section on the good moral principles of our

government, I found so interesting and replete with sound principles,

as to postpone my letter-writing to its thorough perusal and

consideration.  Besides much other good matter, it settles

unanswerably the right of instructing representatives, and their duty

to obey.  The system of banking we have both equally and ever

reprobated.  I contemplate it as a blot left in all our

constitutions, which, if not covered, will end in their destruction,

which is already hit by the gamblers in corruption, and is sweeping

away in its progress the fortunes and morals of our citizens.

Funding I consider as limited, rightfully, to a redemption of the

debt within the lives of a majority of the generation contracting it;

every generation coming equally, by the laws of the Creator of the

world, to the free possession of the earth he made for their

subsistence, unincumbered by their predecessors, who, like them, were

but tenants for life.  You have successfully and completely

pulverized Mr. Adams' system of orders, and his opening the mantle of

republicanism to every government of laws, whether consistent or not

with natural right.  Indeed, it must be acknowledged, that the term

_republic_ is of very vague application in every language.  Witness

the self-styled republics of Holland, Switzerland, Genoa, Venice,

Poland.  Were I to assign to this term a precise and definite idea, I

would say, purely and simply, it means a government by its citizens

in mass, acting directly and personally, according to rules

established by the majority; and that every other government is more

or less republican, in proportion as it has in its composition more

or less of this ingredient of the direct action of the citizens.

Such a government is evidently restrained to very narrow limits of

space and population.  I doubt if it would be practicable beyond the

extent of a New England township.  The first shade from this pure

element, which, like that of pure vital air, cannot sustain life of

itself, would be where the powers of the government, being divided,

should be exercised each by representatives chosen either _pro hac

vice_, or for such short terms as should render secure the duty of

expressing the will of their constituents.  This I should consider as

the nearest approach to a pure republic, which is practicable on a

large scale of country or population.  And we have examples of it in

some of our States constitutions, which, if not poisoned by

priest-craft, would prove its excellence over all mixtures with other

elements; and, with only equal doses of poison, would still be the

best.  Other shades of republicanism may be found in other forms of

government, where the executive, judiciary and legislative functions,

and the different branches of the latter, are chosen by the people

more or less directly, for longer terms of years or for life, or made

hereditary; or where there are mixtures of authorities, some

dependent on, and others independent of the people.  The further the

departure from direct and constant control by the citizens, the less

has the government of the ingredient of republicanism; evidently none

where the authorities are hereditary, as in France, Venice, &c., or

self-chosen, as in Holland; and little, where for life, in proportion

as the life continues in being after the act of election.




        The purest republican feature in the government of our own

State, is the House of Representatives.  The Senate is equally so the

first year, less the second, and so on.  The Executive still less,

because not chosen by the people directly.  The Judiciary seriously

anti-republican, because for life; and the national arm wielded, as

you observe, by military leaders irresponsible but to themselves.

Add to this the vicious constitution of our county courts (to whom

the justice, the executive administration, the taxation, police, the

military appointments of the county, and nearly all our daily

concerns are confided), self-appointed, self-continued, holding their

authorities for life, and with an impossibility of breaking in on the

perpetual succession of any faction once possessed of the bench.

They are in truth, the executive, the judiciary, and the military of

their respective counties, and the sum of the counties makes the

State.  And add, also, that one half of our brethren who fight and

pay taxes, are excluded, like Helots, from the rights of

representation, as if society were instituted for the soil, and not

for the men inhabiting it; or one half of these could dispose of the

rights and the will of the other half, without their consent.




 

                "What constitutes a State?

        Not high-raised battlements, or labor'd mound,

                Thick wall, or moated gate;

        Not cities proud, with spires and turrets crown'd;

                No: men, high minded men;

                Men, who their duties know;

        But know their rights; and knowing, dare maintain.

                These constitute a State."




        In the General Government, the House of Representatives is

mainly republican; the Senate scarcely so at all, as not elected by

the people directly, and so long secured even against those who do

elect them; the Executive more republican than the Senate, from its

shorter term, its election by the people, in _practice_, (for they

vote for A only on an assurance that he will vote for B,) and

because, _in practice also_, a principle of rotation seems to be in a

course of establishment; the judiciary independent of the nation,

their coercion by impeachment being found nugatory.




        If, then, the control of the people over the organs of their

government be the measure of its republicanism, and I confess I know

no other measure, it must be agreed that our governments have much

less of republicanism than ought to have been expected; in other

words, that the people have less regular control over their agents,

than their rights and their interests require.  And this I ascribe,

not to any want of republican dispositions in those who formed these

constitutions, but to a submission of true principle to European

authorities, to speculators on government, whose fears of the people

have been inspired by the populace of their own great cities, and

were unjustly entertained against the independent, the happy, and

therefore orderly citizens of the United States.  Much I apprehend

that the golden moment is past for reforming these heresies.  The

functionaries of public power rarely strengthen in their dispositions

to abridge it, and an unorganized call for timely amendment is not

likely to prevail against an organized opposition to it.  We are

always told that things are going on well; why change them?  _"Chi

sta bene, non si muove,"_ said the Italian, "let him who stands well,

stand still." This is true; and I verily believe they would go on

well with us under an absolute monarch, while our present character

remains, of order, industry and love of peace, and restrained, as he

would be, by the proper spirit of the people.  But it is while it

remains such, we should provide against the consequences of its

deterioration.  And let us rest in the hope that it will yet be done,

and spare ourselves the pain of evils which may never happen.




        On this view of the import of the term _republic_, instead of

saying, as has been said, "that it may mean anything or nothing," we

may say with truth and meaning, that governments are more or less

republican as they have more or less of the element of popular

election and control in their composition; and believing, as I do,

that the mass of the citizens is the safest depository of their own

rights, and especially, that the evils flowing from the duperies of

the people, are less injurious than those from the egoism of their

agents, I am a friend to that composition of government which has in

it the most of this ingredient.  And I sincerely believe, with you,

that banking establishments are more dangerous than standing armies;

and that the principle of spending money to be paid by posterity,

under the name of funding, is but swindling futurity on a large

scale.




        I salute you with constant friendship and respect.







        REFORM OF THE VIRGINIA CONSTITUTION




        _To Samuel Kercheval_

        _Monticello, July 12, 1816_




        SIR, -- I duly received your favor of June the 13th, with the

copy of the letters on the calling a convention, on which you are

pleased to ask my opinion.  I have not been in the habit of

mysterious reserve on any subject, nor of buttoning up my opinions

within my own doublet.  On the contrary, while in public service

especially, I thought the public entitled to frankness, and

intimately to know whom they employed.  But I am now retired: I

resign myself, as a passenger, with confidence to those at present at

the helm, and ask but for rest, peace and good will.  The question

you propose, on equal representation, has become a party one, in

which I wish to take no public share.  Yet, if it be asked for your

own satisfaction only, and not to be quoted before the public, I have

no motive to withhold it, and the less from you, as it coincides with

your own.  At the birth of our republic, I committed that opinion to

the world, in the draught of a constitution annexed to the "Notes on

Virginia," in which a provision was inserted for a representation

permanently equal.  The infancy of the subject at that moment, and

our inexperience of self-government, occasioned gross departures in

that draught from genuine republican canons.  In truth, the abuses of

monarchy had so much filled all the space of political contemplation,

that we imagined everything republican which was not monarchy.  We

had not yet penetrated to the mother principle, that "governments are

republican only in proportion as they embody the will of their

people, and execute it." Hence, our first constitutions had really no

leading principles in them.  But experience and reflection have but

more and more confirmed me in the particular importance of the equal

representation then proposed.  On that point, then, I am entirely in

sentiment with your letters; and only lament that a copy-right of

your pamphlet prevents their appearance in the newspapers, where

alone they would be generally read, and produce general effect.  The

present vacancy too, of other matter, would give them place in every

paper, and bring the question home to every man's conscience.




        But inequality of representation in both Houses of our

legislature, is not the only republican heresy in this first essay of

our revolutionary patriots at forming a constitution.  For let it be

agreed that a government is republican in proportion as every member

composing it has his equal voice in the direction of its concerns

(not indeed in person, which would be impracticable beyond the limits

of a city, or small township, but) by representatives chosen by

himself, and responsible to him at short periods, and let us bring to

the test of this canon every branch of our constitution.




        In the legislature, the House of Representatives is chosen by

less than half the people, and not at all in proportion to those who

do choose.  The Senate are still more disproportionate, and for long

terms of irresponsibility.  In the Executive, the Governor is

entirely independent of the choice of the people, and of their

control; his Council equally so, and at best but a fifth wheel to a

wagon.  In the Judiciary, the judges of the highest courts are

dependent on none but themselves.  In England, where judges were

named and removable at the will of an hereditary executive, from

which branch most misrule was feared, and has flowed, it was a great

point gained, by fixing them for life, to make them independent of

that executive.  But in a government founded on the public will, this

principle operates in an opposite direction, and against that will.

There, too, they were still removable on a concurrence of the

executive and legislative branches.  But we have made them

independent of the nation itself.  They are irremovable, but by their

own body, for any depravities of conduct, and even by their own body

for the imbecilities of dotage.  The justices of the inferior courts

are self-chosen, are for life, and perpetuate their own body in

succession forever, so that a faction once possessing themselves of

the bench of a county, can never be broken up, but hold their county

in chains, forever indissoluble.  Yet these justices are the real

executive as well as judiciary, in all our minor and most ordinary

concerns.  They tax us at will; fill the office of sheriff, the most

important of all the executive officers of the county; name nearly

all our military leaders, which leaders, once named, are removable

but by themselves.  The juries, our judges of all fact, and of law

when they choose it, are not selected by the people, nor amenable to

them.  They are chosen by an officer named by the court and

executive.  Chosen, did I say?  Picked up by the sheriff from the

loungings of the court yard, after everything respectable has retired

from it.  Where then is our republicanism to be found?  Not in our

constitution certainly, but merely in the spirit of our people.  That

would oblige even a despot to govern us republicanly.  Owing to this

spirit, and to nothing in the form of our constitution, all things

have gone well.  But this fact, so triumphantly misquoted by the

enemies of reformation, is not the fruit of our constitution, but has

prevailed in spite of it.  Our functionaries have done well, because

generally honest men.  If any were not so, they feared to show it.




        But it will be said, it is easier to find faults than to amend

them.  I do not think their amendment so difficult as is pretended.

Only lay down true principles, and adhere to them inflexibly.  Do not

be frightened into their surrender by the alarms of the timid, or the

croakings of wealth against the ascendency of the people.  If

experience be called for, appeal to that of our fifteen or twenty

governments for forty years, and show me where the people have done

half the mischief in these forty years, that a single despot would

have done in a single year; or show half the riots and rebellions,

the crimes and the punishments, which have taken place in any single

nation, under kingly government, during the same period.  The true

foundation of republican government is the equal right of every

citizen, in his person and property, and in their management.  Try by

this, as a tally, every provision of our constitution, and see if it

hangs directly on the will of the people.  Reduce your legislature to

a convenient number for full, but orderly discussion.  Let every man

who fights or pays, exercise his just and equal right in their

election.  Submit them to approbation or rejection at short

intervals.  Let the executive be chosen in the same way, and for the

same term, by those whose agent he is to be; and leave no screen of a

council behind which to skulk from responsibility.  It has been

thought that the people are not competent electors of judges _learned

in the law_.  But I do not know that this is true, and, if doubtful,

we should follow principle.  In this, as in many other elections,

they would be guided by reputation, which would not err oftener,

perhaps, than the present mode of appointment.  In one State of the

Union, at least, it has long been tried, and with the most

satisfactory success.  The judges of Connecticut have been chosen by

the people every six months, for nearly two centuries, and I believe

there has hardly ever been an instance of change; so powerful is the

curb of incessant responsibility.  If prejudice, however, derived

from a monarchical institution, is still to prevail against the vital

elective principle of our own, and if the existing example among

ourselves of periodical election of judges by the people be still

mistrusted, let us at least not adopt the evil, and reject the good,

of the English precedent; let us retain amovability on the

concurrence of the executive and legislative branches, and nomination

by the executive alone.  Nomination to office is an executive

function.  To give it to the legislature, as we do, is a violation of

the principle of the separation of powers.  It swerves the members

from correctness, by temptations to intrigue for office themselves,

and to a corrupt barter of votes; and destroys responsibility by

dividing it among a multitude.  By leaving nomination in its proper

place, among executive functions, the principle of the distribution

of power is preserved, and responsibility weighs with its heaviest

force on a single head.




        The organization of our county administrations may be thought

more difficult.  But follow principle, and the knot unties itself.

Divide the counties into wards of such size as that every citizen can

attend, when called on, and act in person.  Ascribe to them the

government of their wards in all things relating to themselves

exclusively.  A justice, chosen by themselves, in each, a constable,

a military company, a patrol, a school, the care of their own poor,

their own portion of the public roads, the choice of one or more

jurors to serve in some court, and the delivery, within their own

wards, of their own votes for all elective officers of higher sphere,

will relieve the county administration of nearly all its business,

will have it better done, and by making every citizen an acting

member of the government, and in the offices nearest and most

interesting to him, will attach him by his strongest feelings to the

independence of his country, and its republican constitution.  The

justices thus chosen by every ward, would constitute the county

court, would do its judiciary business, direct roads and bridges,

levy county and poor rates, and administer all the matters of common

interest to the whole country.  These wards, called townships in New

England, are the vital principle of their governments, and have

proved themselves the wisest invention ever devised by the wit of man

for the perfect exercise of self-government, and for its

preservation.  We should thus marshal our government into, 1, the

general federal republic, for all concerns foreign and federal; 2,

that of the State, for what relates to our own citizens exclusively;

3, the county republics, for the duties and concerns of the county;

and 4, the ward republics, for the small, and yet numerous and

interesting concerns of the neighborhood; and in government, as well

as in every other business of life, it is by division and subdivision

of duties alone, that all matters, great and small, can be managed to

perfection.  And the whole is cemented by giving to every citizen,

personally, a part in the administration of the public affairs.




        The sum of these amendments is, 1. General Suffrage.  2. Equal

representation in the legislature.  3. An executive chosen by the

people.  4. Judges elective or amovable.  5. Justices, jurors, and

sheriffs elective.  6. Ward divisions.  And 7. Periodical amendments

of the constitution.




        I have thrown out these as loose heads of amendment, for

consideration and correction; and their object is to secure

self-government by the republicanism of our constitution, as well as

by the spirit of the people; and to nourish and perpetuate that

spirit.  I am not among those who fear the people.  They, and not the

rich, are our dependence for continued freedom.  And to preserve

their independence, we must not let our rulers load us with perpetual

debt.  We must make our election between _economy and liberty_, or

_profusion and servitude_.  If we run into such debts, as that we

must be taxed in our meat and in our drink, in our necessaries and

our comforts, in our labors and our amusements, for our callings and

our creeds, as the people of England are, our people, like them, must

come to labor sixteen hours in the twenty-four, give the earnings of

fifteen of these to the government for their debts and daily

expenses; and the sixteenth being insufficient to afford us bread, we

must live, as they now do, on oatmeal and potatoes; have no time to

think, no means of calling the mismanagers to account; but be glad to

obtain subsistence by hiring ourselves to rivet their chains on the

necks of our fellow-sufferers.  Our landholders, too, like theirs,

retaining indeed the title and stewardship of estates called theirs,

but held really in trust for the treasury, must wander, like theirs,

in foreign countries, and be contented with penury, obscurity, exile,

and the glory of the nation.  This example reads to us the salutary

lesson, that private fortunes are destroyed by public as well as by

private extravagance.  And this is the tendency of all human

governments.  A departure from principle in one instance becomes a

precedent for a second; that second for a third; and so on, till the

bulk of the society is reduced to be mere automatons of misery, and

to have no sensibilities left but for sinning and suffering.  Then

begins, indeed, the _bellum omnium in omnia_, which some philosophers

observing to be so general in this world, have mistaken it for the

natural, instead of the abusive state of man.  And the fore horse of

this frightful team is public debt.  Taxation follows that, and in

its train wretchedness and oppression.




        Some men look at constitutions with sanctimonious reverence,

and deem them like the arc of the covenant, too sacred to be touched.

They ascribe to the men of the preceding age a wisdom more than

human, and suppose what they did to be beyond amendment.  I knew that

age well; I belonged to it, and labored with it.  It deserved well of

its country.  It was very like the present, but without the

experience of the present; and forty years of experience in

government is worth a century of book-reading; and this they would

say themselves, were they to rise from the dead.  I am certainly not

an advocate for frequent and untried changes in laws and

constitutions.  I think moderate imperfections had better be borne

with; because, when once known, we accommodate ourselves to them, and

find practical means of correcting their ill effects.  But I know

also, that laws and institutions must go hand in hand with the

progress of the human mind.  As that becomes more developed, more

enlightened, as new discoveries are made, new truths disclosed, and

manners and opinions change with the change of circumstances,

institutions must advance also, and keep pace with the times.  We

might as well require a man to wear still the coat which fitted him

when a boy, as civilized society to remain ever under the regimen of

their barbarous ancestors.  It is this preposterous idea which has

lately deluged Europe in blood.  Their monarchs, instead of wisely

yielding to the gradual change of circumstances, of favoring

progressive accommodation to progressive improvement, have clung to

old abuses, entrenched themselves behind steady habits, and obliged

their subjects to seek through blood and violence rash and ruinous

innovations, which, had they been referred to the peaceful

deliberations and collected wisdom of the nation, would have been put

into acceptable and salutary forms.  Let us follow no such examples,

nor weakly believe that one generation is not as capable as another

of taking care of itself, and of ordering its own affairs.  Let us,

as our sister States have done, avail ourselves of our reason and

experience, to correct the crude essays of our first and

unexperienced, although wise, virtuous, and well-meaning councils.

And lastly, let us provide in our constitution for its revision at

stated periods.  What these periods should be, nature herself

indicates.  By the European tables of mortality, of the adults living

at any one moment of time, a majority will be dead in about nineteen

years.  At the end of that period, then, a new majority is come into

place; or, in other words, a new generation.  Each generation is as

independent as the one preceding, as that was of all which had gone

before.  It has then, like them, a right to choose for itself the

form of government it believes most promotive of its own happiness;

consequently, to accommodate to the circumstances in which it finds

itself, that received from its predecessors; and it is for the peace

and good of mankind, that a solemn opportunity of doing this every

nineteen or twenty years, should be provided by the constitution; so

that it may be handed on, with periodical repairs, from generation to

generation, to the end of time, if anything human can so long endure.

It is now forty years since the constitution of Virginia was formed.

The same tables inform us, that, within that period, two-thirds of

the adults then living are now dead.  Have then the remaining third,

even if they had the wish, the right to hold in obedience to their

will, and to laws heretofore made by them, the other two-thirds, who,

with themselves, compose the present mass of adults?  If they have

not, who has?  The dead?  But the dead have no rights.  They are

nothing; and nothing cannot own something.  Where there is no

substance, there can be no accident.  This corporeal globe, and

everything upon it, belong to its present corporeal inhabitants,

during their generation.  They alone have a right to direct what is

the concern of themselves alone, and to declare the law of that

direction; and this declaration can only be made by their majority.

That majority, then, has a right to depute representatives to a

convention, and to make the constitution what they think will be the

best for themselves.  But how collect their voice?  This is the real

difficulty.  If invited by private authority, or county or district

meetings, these divisions are so large that few will attend; and

their voice will be imperfectly, or falsely pronounced.  Here, then,

would be one of the advantages of the ward divisions I have proposed.

The mayor of every ward, on a question like the present, would call

his ward together, take the simple yea or nay of its members, convey

these to the county court, who would hand on those of all its wards

to the proper general authority; and the voice of the whole people

would be thus fairly, fully, and peaceably expressed, discussed, and

decided by the common reason of the society.  If this avenue be shut

to the call of sufferance, it will make itself heard through that of

force, and we shall go on, as other nations are doing, in the endless

circle of oppression, rebellion, reformation; and oppression,

rebellion, reformation, again; and so on forever.




        These, Sir, are my opinions of the governments we see among

men, and of the principles by which alone we may prevent our own from

falling into the same dreadful track.  I have given them at greater

length than your letter called for.  But I cannot say things by

halves; and I confide them to your honor, so to use them as to

preserve me from the gridiron of the public papers.  If you shall

approve and enforce them, as you have done that of equal

representation, they may do some good.  If not, keep them to yourself

as the effusions of withered age and useless time.  I shall, with not

the less truth, assure you of my great respect and consideration.







        "NEVER AN INFIDEL, IF NEVER A PRIEST"




        _To Mrs. Samuel H. Smith_

        _Monticello, August 6, 1816_




        I have received, dear Madam, your very friendly letter of July

21st, and assure you that I feel with deep sensibility its kind

expressions towards myself, and the more as from a person than whom

no others could be more in sympathy with my own affections.  I often

call to mind the occasions of knowing your worth, which the societies

of Washington furnished; and none more than those derived from your

much valued visit to Monticello.  I recognize the same motives of

goodness in the solicitude you express on the rumor supposed to

proceed from a letter of mine to Charles Thomson, on the subject of

the Christian religion.  It is true that, in writing to the

translator of the Bible and Testament, that subject was mentioned;

but equally so that no adherence to any particular mode of

Christianity was there expressed, nor any change of opinions

suggested.  A change from what? the priests indeed have heretofore

thought proper to ascribe to me religious, or rather anti-religious

sentiments, of their own fabric, but such as soothed their

resentments against the act of Virginia for establishing religious

freedom.  They wished him to be thought atheist, deist, or devil, who

could advocate freedom from their religious dictations.  But I have

ever thought religion a concern purely between our God and our

consciences, for which we were accountable to him, and not to the

priests.  I never told my own religion, nor scrutinized that of

another.  I never attempted to make a convert, nor wished to change

another's creed.  I have ever judged of the religion of others by

their lives, and by this test, my dear Madam, I have been satisfied

yours must be an excellent one, to have produced a life of such

exemplary virtue and correctness.  For it is in our lives, and not

from our words, that our religion must be read.  By the same test the

world must judge me.  But this does not satisfy the priesthood.  They

must have a positive, a declared assent to all their interested

absurdities.  My opinion is that there would never have been an

infidel, if there had never been a priest.  The artificial structures

they have built on the purest of all moral systems, for the purpose

of deriving from it pence and power, revolts those who think for

themselves, and who read in that system only what is really there.

These, therefore, they brand with such nick-names as their enmity

chooses gratuitously to impute.  I have left the world, in silence,

to judge of causes from their effects; and I am consoled in this

course, my dear friend, when I perceive the candor with which I am

judged by your justice and discernment; and that, notwithstanding the

slanders of the saints, my fellow citizens have thought me worthy of

trusts.  The imputations of irreligion having spent their force; they

think an imputation of change might now be turned to account as a

holster for their duperies.  I shall leave them, as heretofore, to

grope on in the dark.




 

        Our family at Monticello is all in good health; Ellen speaking

of you with affection, and Mrs. Randolph always regretting the

accident which so far deprived her of the happiness of your former

visit.  She still cherishes the hope of some future renewal of that

kindness; in which we all join her, as in the assurances of

affectionate attachment and respect.







        HORIZONTAL PLOUGHING




        _To Tristam Dalton_

        _Monticello, May 2, 1817_




        DEAR SIR, -- I am indebted to you for your favor of Apr. 22,

and for the copy of the Agricultural magazine it covered, which is

indeed a very useful work.  While I was an amateur in Agricultural

science (for practical knolege my course of life never permitted me)

I was very partial to the drilled husbandry of Tull, and thought

still better of it when reformed by Young to 12 rows.  But I had not

time to try it while young, and now grown old I have not the

requisite activity either of body or mind.




        With respect to field culture of vegetables for cattle, instead

of the carrot and potato recommended by yourself and the magazine, &

the best of others, we find the Jerusalem artichoke best for winter,

& the Succory for Summer use.  This last was brought over from France

to England by Arthur Young, as you will see in his travels thro'

France, & some of the seed sent by him to Genl. Washington, who

spared me a part of it.  It is as productive as the Lucerne, without

its laborious culture, & indeed without any culture except the

keeping it clean the first year.  The Jerusalem artichoke far exceeds

the potato in produce, and remains in the ground thro' the winter to

be dug as wanted.  A method of ploughing over hill sides

horizontally, introduced into the most hilly part of our country by

Colo. T. M. Randolph, my son in law, may be worth mentioning to you.

He has practised it a dozen or 15 years, and it's advantages were so

immediately observed that it has already become very general, and has

entirely changed and renovated the face of our country.  Every rain,

before that, while it gave a temporary refreshment, did permanent

evil by carrying off our soil: and fields were no sooner cleared than

wasted.  At present we may say that we lose none of our soil, the

rain not absorbed in the moment of it's fall being retained in the

hollows between the beds until it can be absorbed.  Our practice is

when we first enter on this process, with a rafter level of 10 f.

span, to lay off guide lines conducted horizontally around the hill

or valley from one end to the other of the field, and about 30 yards

apart.  The steps of the level on the ground are marked by a stroke

of a hoe, and immediately followed by a plough to preserve the trace.

A man or a lad, with the level, and two small boys, the one with

sticks, the other with the hoe, will do an acre of this in an hour,

and when once done it is forever done.  We generally level a field

the year it is put into Indian corn laying it into beds of 6 ft.

wide, with a large water furrow between the beds, until all the

fields have been once leveled.  The intermediate furrows are run by

the eye of the ploughman governed by these guide lines, & occasion

gores which are thrown into short beds.  As in ploughing very steep

hill sides horizontally the common ploughman can scarcely throw the

furrow uphill, Colo. Randolph has contrived a very simple alteration

of the share, which throws the furrow down hill both going and

coming.  It is as if two shares were welded together at their

straight side, and at a right angle with each other.  This turns on

it's bar as on a pivot, so as to lay either share horizontal, when

the other becoming verticle acts as a mould board.  This is done by

the ploughman in an instant by a single motion of the hand, at the

end of every furrow.  I enclose a bit of paper cut into the form of

the double share, which being opened at the fold to a right angle,

will give an idea of it's general principle.  Horizontal and deep

ploughing, with the use of plaister and clover, which are but

beginning to be used here will, as we believe, restore this part of

our country to it's original fertility, which was exceeded by no

upland in the state.  Believing that some of these things might be

acceptable to you I have hazarded them as testimonials of my great

esteem & respect.







        ERA OF GOOD FEELINGS




        _To Lafayette_

        _Monticello, May 14, 1817_




        Although, dear Sir, much retired from the world, and meddling

little in its concerns, yet I think it almost a religious duty to

salute at times my old friends, were it only to say and to know that

"all's well." Our hobby has been politics; but all here is so quiet,

and with you so desperate, that little matter is furnished us for

active attention.  With you too, it has long been forbidden ground,

and therefore imprudent for a foreign friend to tread, in writing to

you.  But although our speculations might be intrusive, our prayers

cannot but be acceptable, and mine are sincerely offered for the

well-being of France.  What government she can bear, depends not on

the state of science, however exalted, in a select band of

enlightened men, but on the condition of the general mind.  That, I

am sure, is advanced and will advance; and the last change of

government was fortunate, inasmuch as the new will be less

obstructive to the effects of that advancement.  For I consider your

foreign military oppressions as an ephemeral obstacle only.




        Here all is quiet.  The British war has left us in debt; but

that is a cheap price for the good it has done us.  The establishment

of the necessary manufactures among ourselves, the proof that our

government is solid, can stand the shock of war, and is superior even

to civil schism, are precious facts for us; and of these the

strongest proofs were furnished, when, with four eastern States tied

to us, as dead to living bodies, all doubt was removed as to the

achievements of the war, had it continued.  But its best effect has

been the complete suppression of party.  The federalists who were

truly American, and their great mass was so, have separated from

their brethren who were mere Anglomen, and are received with

cordiality into the republican ranks.  Even Connecticut, as a State,

and the last one expected to yield its steady habits (which were

essentially bigoted in politics as well as religion), has chosen a

republican governor, and republican legislature.  Massachusetts

indeed still lags; because most deeply involved in the parricide

crimes and treasons of the war.  But her gangrene is contracting, the

sound flesh advancing on it, and all there will be well.  I mentioned

Connecticut as the most hopeless of our States.  Little Delaware had

escaped my attention.  That is essentially a Quaker State, the

fragment of a religious sect which, there, in the other States, in

England, are a homogeneous mass, acting with one mind, and that

directed by the mother society in England.  Dispersed, as the Jews,

they still form, as those do, one nation, foreign to the land they

live in.  They are Protestant Jesuits, implicitly devoted to the will

of their superior, and forgetting all duties to their country in the

execution of the policy of their order.  When war is proposed with

England, they have religious scruples; but when with France, these

are laid by, and they become clamorous for it.  They are, however,

silent, passive, and give no other trouble than of whipping them

along.  Nor is the election of Monroe an inefficient circumstance in

our felicities.  Four and twenty years, which he will accomplish, of

administration in republican forms and principles, will so consecrate

them in the eyes of the people as to secure them against the danger

of change.  The evanition of party dissensions has harmonized

intercourse, and sweetened society beyond imagination.  The war then

has done us all this good, and the further one of assuring the world,

that although attached to peace from a sense of its blessings, we

will meet war when it is made necessary.




        I wish I could give better hopes of our southern brethren.  The

achievement of their independence of Spain is no longer a question.

But it is a very serious one, what will then become of them?

Ignorance and bigotry, like other insanities, are incapable of

self-government.  They will fall under military despotism, and become

the murderous tools of the ambition of their respective Bonapartes;

and whether this will be for their greater happiness, the rule of one

only has taught you to judge.  No one, I hope, can doubt my wish to

see them and all mankind exercising self-government, and capable of

exercising it.  But the question is not what we wish, but what is

practicable?  As their sincere friend and brother then, I do believe

the best thing for them, would be for themselves to come to an accord

with Spain, under the guarantee of France, Russia, Holland, and the

United States, allowing to Spain a nominal supremacy, with authority

only to keep the peace among them, leaving them otherwise all the

powers of self-government, until their experience in them, their

emancipation from their priests, and advancement in information,

shall prepare them for complete independence.  I exclude England from

this confederacy, because her selfish principles render her incapable

of honorable patronage or disinterested co-operation; unless, indeed,

what seems now probable, a revolution should restore to her an honest

government, one which will permit the world to live in peace.

Portugal, grasping at an extension of her dominion in the south, has

lost her great northern province of Pernambuco, and I shall not

wonder if Brazil should revolt in mass, and send their royal family

back to Portugal.  Brazil is more populous, more wealthy, more

energetic, and as wise as Portugal.  I have been insensibly led, my

dear friend, while writing to you, to indulge in that line of

sentiment in which we have been always associated, forgetting that

these are matters not belonging to my time.  Not so with you, who

have still many years to be a spectator of these events.  That these

years may indeed be many and happy, is the sincere prayer of your

affectionate friend.







        "THE FLATTERIES OF HOPE"




        _To Fransois de Marbois_

        _Monticello, June 14, 1817_




        I thank you, dear Sir, for the copy of the interesting

narrative of the Complet d'Arnold, which you have been so kind as to

send me.  It throws light on that incident of history which we did

not possess before.  An incident which merits to be known as a lesson

to mankind, in all its details.  This mark of your attention recalls

to my mind the earlier period of life at which I had the pleasure of

your personal acquaintance, and renews the sentiments of high respect

and esteem with which that acquaintance inspired me.  I had not

failed to accompany your personal sufferings during the civil

convulsions of your country, and had sincerely sympathized with them.

An awful period, indeed, has passed in Europe since our first

acquaintance.  When I left France at the close of '89, your

revolution was, as I thought, under the direction of able and honest

men.  But the madness of some of their successors, the vices of

others, the malicious intrigues of an envious and corrupting

neighbor, the tracasserie of the Directory, the usurpations, the

havoc, and devastations of your Attila, and the equal usurpations,

depredations and oppressions of your hypocritical deliverers, will

form a mournful period in the history of man, a period of which the

last chapter will not be seen in your day or mine, and one which I

still fear is to be written in characters of blood.  Had Bonaparte

reflected that such is the moral construction of the world, that no

national crime passes unpunished in the long run, he would not now be

in the cage of St. Helena; and were your present oppressors to

reflect on the same truth, they would spare to their own countries

the penalties on their present wrongs which will be inflicted on them

on future times.  The seeds of hatred and revenge which they are now

sowing with a large hand, will not fail to produce their fruits in

time.  Like their brother robbers on the highway, they suppose the

escape of the moment a final escape, and deem infamy and future risk

countervailed by present gain.  Our lot has been happier.  When you

witnessed our first struggles in the war of independence, you little

calculated, more than we did, on the rapid growth and prosperity of

this country; on the practical demonstration it was about to exhibit,

of the happy truth that man is capable of self-government, and only

rendered otherwise by the moral degradation designedly superinduced

on him by the wicked acts of his tyrants.




        I have much confidence that we shall proceed successfully for

ages to come, and that, contrary to the principle of Montesquieu, it

will be seen that the larger the extent of country, the more firm its

republican structure, if founded, not on conquest, but in principles

of compact and equality.  My hope of its duration is built much on

the enlargement of the resources of life going hand in hand with the

enlargement of territory, and the belief that men are disposed to

live honestly, if the means of doing so are open to them.  With the

consolation of this belief in the future result of our labors, I have

that of other prophets who foretell distant events, that I shall not

live to see it falsified.  My theory has always been, that if we are

to dream, the flatteries of hope are as cheap, and pleasanter than

the gloom of despair.  I wish to yourself a long life of honors,

health and happiness.
