





        "THIS BEAUTIFUL ART"



        _To James Madison_

        _Paris, September 20, 1785_



        DEAR SIR, -- By Mr. Fitzhugh, you will receive my letter of the

first instant.  He is still here, and gives me an opportunity of

again addressing you much sooner than I should have done, but for the

discovery of a great piece of inattention.  In that letter I send you

a detail of the cost of your books, and desire you to keep the amount

in your hands, as if I had forgot that a part of it was in fact your

own, as being a balance of what I had remained in your debt.  I

really did not attend to it in the moment of writing, and when it

occurred to me, I revised my memorandum book from the time of our

being in Philadelphia together, and stated our account from the

beginning, lest I should forget or mistake any part of it.  I enclose

you this statement.  You will always be so good as to let me know,

from time to time, your advances for me.  Correct with freedom all my

proceedings for you, as, in what I do, I have no other desire than

that of doing exactly what will be most pleasing to you.



        I received this summer a letter from Messrs. Buchanan and Hay,

as Directors of the public buildings, desiring I would have drawn for

them, plans of sundry buildings, and, in the first place, of a

capitol.  They fixed, for their receiving this plan, a day which was

within about six weeks of that on which their letter came to my hand.

I engaged an architect of capital abilities in this business.  Much

time was requsite, after the external form was agreed on, to make the

internal distribution convenient for the three branches of

government.  This time was much lengthened by my avocations to other

objects, which I had no right to neglect.  The plan however was

settled.  The gentlemen had sent me one which they had thought of.

The one agreed on here, is more convenient, more beautiful, gives

more room, and will not cost more than two thirds of what that would.

We took for our model what is called the Maison quarree of Nismes,

one of the most beautiful, if not the most beautiful and precious

morsel of architecture left us by antiquity.  It was built by Caius

and Lucius Caesar, and repaired by Louis XIV., and has the suffrage

of all the judges of architecture, who have seen it, as yielding to

no one of the beautiful monuments of Greece, Rome, Palmyra, and

Balbec, which late travellers have communicated to us.  It is very

simple, but it is noble beyond expression, and would have done honor

to our country, as presenting to travellers a specimen of taste in

our infancy, promising much for our maturer age.  I have been much

mortified with information, which I received two days ago from

Virginia, that the first brick of the capitol would be laid within a

few days.  But surely, the delay of this piece of a summer would have

been repaired by the savings in the plan preparing here, were we to

value its other superiorities as nothing.  But how is a taste in this

beautiful art to be formed in our countrymen, unless we avail

ourselves of every occasion when public buildings are to be erected,

of presenting to them models for their study and imitation?  Pray try

if you can effect the stopping of this work.  I have written also to

E. R. on the subject.  The loss will be only of the laying the bricks

already laid, or a part of them.  The bricks themselves will do again

for the interior walls, and one side wall and one end wall may

remain, as they will answer equally well for our plan.  This loss is

not to be weighed against the saving of money which will arise,

against the comfort of laying out the public money for something

honorable, the satisfaction of seeing an object and proof of national

good taste, and the regret and mortification of erecting a monument

of our barbarism, which will be loaded with execrations as long as it

shall endure.  The plans are in good forwardness, and I hope will be

ready within three or four weeks.  They could not be stopped now, but

on paying their whole price, which will be considerable.  If the

undertakers are afraid to undo what they have done, encourage them to

it by a recommendation from the Assembly.  You see I am an enthusiast

on the subject of the arts.  But it is an enthusiasm of which I am

not ashamed, as its object is to improve the taste of my countrymen,

to increase their reputation, to reconcile to them the respect of the

world, and procure them its praise.



        I shall send off your books, in two trunks, to Havre, within

two or three days, to the care of Mr. Limozin, American agent there.

I will advise you, as soon as I know by what vessel he forwards them.

Adieu.



        Your's affectionately,





        MARS AND MINERVA



        _To Abigail Adams_

        _Paris, Sep. 25, 1785_



        DEAR MADAM -- Mr. Short's return the night before last availed

me of your favour of Aug. 12.  I immediately ordered the shoes you

desired which will be ready tomorrow.  I am not certain whether this

will be in time for the departure of Mr. Barclay or of Colo. Franks,

for it is not yet decided which of them goes to London.  I have also

procured for you three plateaux de dessert with a silvered

ballustrade round them, and four figures of Biscuit.  The former cost

192't, the latter 12't each, making together 240 livres or 10. Louis.

The merchant undertakes to send them by the way of Rouen through the

hands of Mr. Garvey and to have them delivered in London.  There will

be some additional expences of packing, transportation and duties

here.  Those in England I imagine you can save.  When I know the

amount I will inform you of it, but there will be no occasion to

remit it here.  With respect to the figures I could only find three

of those you named, matched in size.  These were Minerva, Diana, and

Apollo.  I was obliged to add a fourth, unguided by your choice.

They offered me a fine Venus; but I thought it out of taste to have

two at table at the same time.  Paris and Helen were presented.  I

conceived it would be cruel to remove them from their peculiar

shrine.  When they shall pass the Atlantic, it will be to sing a

requiem over our freedom and happiness.  At length a fine Mars was

offered, calm, bold, his faulchion not drawn, but ready to be drawn.

This will do, thinks I, for the table of the American Minister in

London, where those whom it may concern may look and learn that

though Wisdom is our guide, and the Song and Chase our supreme

delight, yet we offer adoration to that tutelar god also who rocked

the cradle of our birth, who has accepted our infant offerings, and

has shewn himself the patron of our rights and avenger of our wrongs.

The groupe then was closed, and your party formed.  Envy and malice

will never be quiet.  I hear it already whispered to you that in

admitting Minerva to your table I have departed from the principle

which made me reject Venus: in plain English that I have paid a just

respect to the daughter but failed to the mother.  No Madam, my

respect to both is sincere.  Wisdom, I know, is social.  She seeks

her fellows.  But Beauty is jealous, and illy bears the presence of a

rival -- but, Allons, let us turn over another leaf, and begin the

next chapter.  I receive by Mr. Short a budget of London papers.

They teem with every horror of which human nature is capable.

Assassinations, suicides, thefts, robberies, and, what is worse than

assassination, theft, suicide or robbery, the blackest slanders!

Indeed the man must be of rock, who can stand all this; to Mr. Adams

it will be but one victory the more.  It would have illy suited me.

I do not love difficulties.  I am fond of quiet, willing to do my

duty, but irritable by slander and apt to be forced by it to abandon

my post.  These are weaknesses from which reason and your counsels

will preserve Mr. Adams.  I fancy it must be the quantity of animal

food eaten by the English which renders their character insusceptible

of civilisation.  I suspect it is in their kitchens and not in their

churches that their reformation must be worked, and that Missionaries

of that description from hence would avail more than those who should

endeavor to tame them by precepts of religion or philosophy.  But

what do the foolish printers of America mean by retailing all this

stuff in our papers?  As if it was not enough to be slandered by

one's enemies without circulating the slanders among his friends

also.



        To shew you how willingly I shall ever receive and execute your

commissions, I venture to impose one on you.  From what I recollect

of the diaper and damask we used to import from England I think they

were better and cheaper than here.  You are well acquainted with

those of both countries.  If you are of the same opinion I would

trouble you to send me two sets of table cloths and napkins for 20

covers each, by Colo. Franks or Mr. Barclay who will bring them to

me.  But if you think they can be better got here I would rather

avoid the trouble this commission will give.  I inclose you a

specimen of what is offered me at 100. livres for the table cloth and

12 napkins.  I suppose that, of the same quality, a table cloth 2.

aunes wide and 4. aunes long, and 20 napkins of 1. aune each, would

cost 7. guineas. -- I shall certainly charge the publick my house

rent and court taxes.  I shall do more.  I shall charge my outfit.

Without this I can never get out of debt.  I think it will be

allowed.  Congress is too reasonable to expect, where no imprudent

expences are incurred, none but those which are required by a decent

respect to the mantle with which they cover the public servants, that

such expences should be left as a burthen on our private fortunes.

But when writing to you, I fancy myself at Auteuil, and chatter on

till the last page of my paper awakes me from my reverie, and tells

me it is time to assure you of the sincere respect and esteem with

which I have the honour to be Dear Madam your most obedient and most

humble servt.,



        P.S.  The cask of wine at Auteuil, I take chearfully.  I

suppose the seller will apply to me for the price.  Otherwise, as I

do not know who he is, I shall not be able to find him out.





        THE VAUNTED SCENE



        _To Charles Bellini_

        _Paris, September 30, 1785_



        DEAR SIR, -- Your estimable favor, covering a letter to Mr.

Mazzei, came to hand on the 26th instant.  The letter to Mr. Mazzei

was put into his hands in the same moment, as he happened to be

present.  I leave to him to convey to you all his complaints, as it

will be more agreeable to me to express to you the satisfaction I

received, on being informed of your perfect health.  Though I could

not receive the same pleasing news of Mrs. Bellini, yet the

philosophy with which I am told she bears the loss of health, is a

testimony the more, how much she deserved the esteem I bear her.

Behold me at length on the vaunted scene of Europe!  It is not

necessary for your information, that I should enter into details

concerning it.  But you are, perhaps, curious to know how this new

scene has struck a savage of the mountains of America.  Not

advantageously, I assure you.  I find the general fate of humanity

here, most deplorable.  The truth of Voltaire's observation, offers

itself perpetually, that every man here must be either the hammer or

the anvil.  It is a true picture of that country to which they say we

shall pass hereafter, and where we are to see God and his angels in

splendor, and crowds of the damned trampled under their feet.  While

the great mass of the people are thus suffering under physical and

moral oppression, I have endeavored to examine more nearly the

condition of the great, to appreciate the true value of the

circumstances in their situation, which dazzle the bulk of

spectators, and, especially, to compare it with that degree of

happiness which is enjoyed in America, by every class of people.

Intrigues of love occupy the younger, and those of ambition, the

elder part of the great.  Conjugal love having no existence among

them, domestic happiness, of which that is the basis, is utterly

unknown.  In lieu of this, are substituted pursuits which nourish and

invigorate all our bad passions, and which offer only moments of

ecstacy, amidst days and months of restlessness and torment.  Much,

very much inferior, this, to the tranquil, permanent felicity with

which domestic society in America, blesses most of its inhabitants;

leaving them to follow steadily those pursuits which health and

reason approve, and rendering truly delicious the intervals of those

pursuits.



        In science, the mass of the people is two centuries behind

ours; their literati, half a dozen years before us.  Books, really

good, acquire just reputation in that time, and so become known to

us, and communicate to us all their advances in knowledge.  Is not

this delay compensated, by our being placed out of the reach of that

swarm of nonsensical publications, which issues daily from a thousand

presses, and perishes almost in issuing?  With respect to what are

termed polite manners, without sacrificing too much the sincerity of

language, I would wish my countrymen to adopt just so much of

European politeness, as to be ready to make all those little

sacrifices of self, which really render European manners amiable, and

relieve society from the disagreeable scenes to which rudeness often

subjects it.  Here, it seems that a man might pass a life without

encountering a single rudeness.  In the pleasures of the table they

are far before us, because, with good taste they unite temperance.

They do not terminate the most sociable meals by transforming

themselves into brutes.  I have never yet seen a man drunk in France,

even among the lowest of the people.  Were I to proceed to tell you

how much I enjoy their architecture, sculpture, painting, music, I

should want words.  It is in these arts they shine.  The last of

them, particularly, is an enjoyment, the deprivation of which with

us, cannot be calculated.  I am almost ready to say, it is the only

thing which from my heart I envy them, and which, in spite of all the

authority of the Decalogue, I do covet.  But I am running on in an

estimate of things infinitely better known to you than to me, and

which will only serve to convince you, that I have brought with me

all the prejudices of country, habit and age.  But whatever I may

allow to be charged to me as prejudice, in every other instance, I

have one sentiment at least, founded in reality: it is that of the

perfect esteem which your merit and that of Mrs. Bellini have

produced, and which will for ever enable me to assure you of the

sincere regard, with which I am, Dear Sir,

                                 your friend and servant,





        BRITISH HOSTILITY, AMERICAN COMMERCE



        _To G. K. van Hogendorp_

        _Paris, Oct. 13, 1785_



        DEAR SIR, -- Having been much engaged lately, I have been

unable sooner to acknolege the receipt of your favor of Sep. 8.  What

you are pleased to say on the subject of my Notes is more than they

deserve.  The condition in which you first saw them would prove to

you how hastily they had been originally written; as you may remember

the numerous insertions I had made in them from time to time, when I

could find a moment for turning to them from other occupations.  I

have never yet seen Monsr. de Buffon.  He has been in the country all

the summer.  I sent him a copy of the book, & have only heard his

sentiments on one particular of it, that of the identity of the

Mammoth & Elephant.  As to this he retains his opinion that they are

the same.  If you had formed any considerable expectations from our

Revised code of laws you will be much disappointed.  It contains not

more than three or four laws which could strike the attention of the

foreigner.  Had it been a digest of all our laws, it would not have

been comprehensible or instructive but to a native.  But it is still

less so, as it digests only the British statutes & our own acts of

assembly, which are but a supplementary part of our law.  The great

basis of it is anterior to the date of the Magna charta, which is the

oldest statute extant.  The only merit of this work is that it may

remove from our book shelves about twenty folio volumes of our

statutes, retaining all the parts of them which either their own

merit or the established system of laws required.



        You ask me what are those operations of the British nation

which are likely to befriend us, and how they will produce this

effect?  The British government as you may naturally suppose have it

much at heart to reconcile their nation to the loss of America.  This

is essential to the repose, perhaps even to the safety of the King &

his ministers.  The most effectual engines for this purpose are the

public papers.  You know well that that government always kept a kind

of standing army of news writers who without any regard to truth, or

to what should be like truth, invented & put into the papers whatever

might serve the minister.  This suffices with the mass of the people

who have no means of distinguishing the false from the true

paragraphs of a newspaper.  When forced to acknolege our independance

they were forced to redouble their efforts to keep the nation quiet.

Instead of a few of the papers formerly engaged, they now engaged

every one.  No paper therefore comes out without a dose of paragraphs

against America.  These are calculated for a secondary purpose also,

that of preventing the emigrations of their people to America.  They

dwell very much on American bankruptcies.  To explain these would

require a long detail, but would shew you that nine tenths of these

bankruptcies are truly English bankruptcies in no wise chargeable on

America.  However they have produced effects the most desirable of

all others for us.  They have destroyed our credit & thus checked our

disposition to luxury; & forcing our merchants to buy no more than

they have ready money to pay for, they force them to go to those

markets where that ready money will buy most.  Thus you see they

check our luxury, they force us to connect ourselves with all the

world, & they prevent foreign emigrations to our country all of which

I consider as advantageous to us.  They are doing us another good

turn.  They attempt without disguise to possess themselves of the

carriage of our produce, & to prohibit our own vessels from

participating of it.  This has raised a general indignation in

America.  The states see however that their constitutions have

provided no means of counteracting it.  They are therefore beginning

to invest Congress with the absolute power of regulating their

commerce, only reserving all revenue arising from it to the state in

which it is levied.  This will consolidate our federal building very

much, and for this we shall be indebted to the British.



        You ask what I think on the expediency of encouraging our

states to be commercial?  Were I to indulge my own theory, I should

wish them to practise neither commerce nor navigation, but to stand

with respect to Europe precisely on the footing of China.  We should

thus avoid wars, and all our citizens would be husbandmen.  Whenever

indeed our numbers should so increase as that our produce would

overstock the markets of those nations who should come to seek it,

the farmers must either employ the surplus of their time in

manufactures, or the surplus of our hands must be employed in

manufactures, or in navigation.  But that day would, I think be

distant, and we should long keep our workmen in Europe, while Europe

should be drawing rough materials & even subsistence from America.

But this is theory only, & a theory which the servants of America are

not at liberty to follow.  Our people have a decided taste for

navigation & commerce.  They take this from their mother country: &

their servants are in duty bound to calculate all their measures on

this datum: we wish to do it by throwing open all the doors of

commerce & knocking off its shackles.  But as this cannot be done for

others, unless they will do it for us, & there is no great

probability that Europe will do this, I suppose we shall be obliged

to adopt a system which may shackle them in our ports as they do us

in theirs.



        With respect to the sale of our lands, that cannot begin till a

considerable portion shall have been surveyed.  They cannot begin to

survey till the fall of the leaf of this year, nor to sell probably

till the ensuing spring.  So that it will be yet a twelve-month

before we shall be able to judge of the efficacy of our land office

to sink our national debt.  It is made a fundamental that the

proceeds shall be solely & sacredly applied as a sinking fund to

discharge the capital only of the debt.  It is true that the tobaccos

of Virginia go almost entirely to England.  The reason is that they

owe a great debt there which they are paying as fast as they can.  --

I think I have now answered your several queries, & shall be happy to

receive your reflections on the same subjects, & at all times to hear

of your welfare & to give you assurances of the esteem with which I

have the honor to be Dear Sir your most obedient & most humble

servant.





        ON EUROPEAN EDUCATION



        _To John Banister, Jr._

        _Paris, October 15, 1785_



        DEAR SIR, -- I should sooner have answered the paragraph in

your letter, of September the 19th, respecting the best seminary for

the education of youth, in Europe, but that it was necessary for me

to make inquiries on the subject.  The result of these has been, to

consider the competition as resting between Geneva and Rome.  They

are equally cheap, and probably are equal in the course of education

pursued.  The advantage of Geneva, is, that students acquire there

the habit of speaking French.  The advantages of Rome, are, the

acquiring a local knowledge of a spot so classical and so celebrated;

the acquiring the true pronunciation of the Latin language; a just

taste in the fine arts, more particularly those of painting,

sculpture, architecture, and music; a familiarity with those objects

and processes of agriculture, which experience has shewn best adapted

to a climate like ours; and lastly, the advantage of a fine climate

for health.  It is probable, too, that by being boarded in a French

family, the habit of speaking that language may be obtained.  I do

not count on any advantage to be derived in Geneva, from a familiar

acquaintance with the principles of that government.  The late

revolution has rendered it a tyrannical aristocracy, more likely to

give ill, than good ideas to an American.  I think the balance in

favor of Rome.  Pisa is sometimes spoken of, as a place of education.

But it does not offer the first and third of the advantages of Rome.

But why send an American youth to Europe for education?  What are the

objects of an useful American education?  Classical knowledge, modern

languages, chiefly French, Spanish and Italian; Mathematics, Natural

philosophy, Natural history, Civil history, and Ethics.  In Natural

philosophy, I mean to include Chemistry and Agriculture, and in

Natural history, to include Botany, as well as the other branches of

those departments.  It is true that the habit of speaking the modern

languages, cannot be so well acquired in America; but every other

article can be as well acquired at William and Mary college, as at

any place in Europe.  When college education is done with, and a

young man is to prepare himself for public life, he must cast his

eyes (for America) either on Law or Physic.  For the former, where

can he apply so advantageously as to Mr. Wythe?  For the latter, he

must come to Europe: the medical class of students, therefore, is the

only one which need come to Europe.  Let us view the disadvantages of

sending a youth to Europe.  To enumerate them all, would require a

volume.  I will select a few.  If he goes to England, he learns

drinking, horse racing and boxing.  These are the peculiarities of

English education.  The following circumstances are common to

education in that, and the other countries of Europe.  He acquires a

fondness for European luxury and dissipation, and a contempt for the

simplicity of his own country; he is fascinated with the privileges

of the European aristocrats, and sees, with abhorrence, the lovely

equality which the poor enjoy with the rich, in his own country; he

contracts a partiality for aristocracy or monarchy; he forms foreign

friendships which will never be useful to him, and loses the season

of life for forming in his own country, those friendships, which, of

all others, are the most faithful and permanent; he is led by the

strongest of all the human passions, into a spirit for female

intrigue, destructive of his own and others' happiness, or a passion

for whores, destructive of his health, and, in both cases, learns to

consider fidelity to the marriage bed as an ungentlemanly practice,

and inconsistent with happiness; he recollects the voluptuary dress

and arts of the European women, and pities and despises the chaste

affections and simplicity of those of his own country; he retains,

through life, a fond recollection, and a hankering after those

places, which were the scenes of his first pleasures and of his first

connections; he returns to his own country, a foreigner, unacquainted

with the practices of domestic economy, necessary to preserve him

from ruin, speaking and writing his native tongue as a foreigner, and

therefore unqualified to obtain those distinctions, which eloquence

of the pen and tongue ensures in a free country; for I would observe

to you, that what is called style in writing or speaking, is formed

very early in life, while the imagination is warm, and impressions

are permament.  I am of opinion, that there never was an instance of

a man's writing or speaking his native tongue with elegance, who

passed from fifteen to twenty years of age, out of the country where

it was spoken.  Thus, no instance exists of a person's writing two

languages perfectly.  That will always appear to be his native

language, which was most familiar to him in his youth.  It appears to

me then, that an American coming to Europe for education, loses in

his knowledge, in his morals, in his health, in his habits, and in

his happiness.  I had entertained only doubts on this head, before I

came to Europe: what I see and hear, since I came here, proves more

than I had even suspected.  Cast your eye over America: who are the

men of most learning, of most eloquence, most beloved by their

countrymen, and most trusted and promoted by them?  They are those

who have been educated among them, and whose manners, morals and

habits, are perfectly homogeneous with those of the country.



 

        Did you expect by so short a question, to draw such a sermon on

yourself?  I dare say you did not.  But the consequences of foreign

education are alarming to me, as an American.  I sin, therefore,

through zeal, whenever I enter on the subject.  You are sufficiently

American to pardon me for it.  Let me hear of your health, and be

assured of the esteem with which I am, Dear Sir,

        your friend and servant,






        PROPERTY AND NATURAL RIGHT




        _To James Madison_

        _Fontainebleau, Oct. 28, 1785_




        DEAR SIR, -- Seven o'clock, and retired to my fireside, I have

determined to enter into conversation with you.  This is a village of

about 15,000 inhabitants when the court is not here, and 20,000 when

they are, occupying a valley through which runs a brook and on each

side of it a ridge of small mountains, most of which are naked rock.

The King comes here, in the fall always, to hunt.  His court attend

him, as do also the foreign diplomatic corps; but as this is not

indispensably required and my finances do not admit the expense of a

continued residence here, I propose to come occasionally to attend

the King's levees, returning again to Paris, distant forty miles.

This being the first trip, I set out yesterday morning to take a view

of the place.  For this purpose I shaped my course towards the

highest of the mountains in sight, to the top of which was about a

league.




        As soon as I had got clear of the town I fell in with a poor

woman walking at the same rate with myself and going the same course.

Wishing to know the condition of the laboring poor I entered into

conversation with her, which I began by enquiries for the path which

would lead me into the mountain: and thence proceeded to enquiries

into her vocation, condition and circumstances.  She told me she was

a day laborer at 8 sous or 4d. sterling the day: that she had two

children to maintain, and to pay a rent of 30 livres for her house

(which would consume the hire of 75 days), that often she could no

employment and of course was without bread.  As we had walked

together near a mile and she had so far served me as a guide, I gave

her, on parting, 24 sous.  She burst into tears of a gratitude which

I could perceive was unfeigned because she was unable to utter a

word.  She had probably never before received so great an aid.  This

little _attendrissement_, with the solitude of my walk, led me into a

train of reflections on that unequal division of property which

occasions the numberless instances of wretchedness which I had

observed in this country and is to be observed all over Europe.




        The property of this country is absolutely concentred in a very

few hands, having revenues of from half a million of guineas a year

downwards.  These employ the flower of the country as servants, some

of them having as many as 200 domestics, not laboring.  They employ

also a great number of manufacturers and tradesmen, and lastly the

class of laboring husbandmen.  But after all there comes the most

numerous of all classes, that is, the poor who cannot find work.  I

asked myself what could be the reason so many should be permitted to

beg who are willing to work, in a country where there is a very

considerable proportion of uncultivated lands?  These lands are

undisturbed only for the sake of game.  It should seem then that it

must be because of the enormous wealth of the proprietors which

places them above attention to the increase of their revenues by

permitting these lands to be labored.  I am conscious that an equal

division of property is impracticable, but the consequences of this

enormous inequality producing so much misery to the bulk of mankind,

legislators cannot invent too many devices for subdividing property,

only taking care to let their subdivisions go hand in hand with the

natural affections of the human mind.  The descent of property of

every kind therefore to all the children, or to all the brothers and

sisters, or other relations in equal degree, is a politic measure and

a practicable one.  Another means of silently lessening the

inequality of property is to exempt all from taxation below a certain

point, and to tax the higher portions or property in geometrical

progression as they rise.  Whenever there are in any country

uncultivated lands and unemployed poor, it is clear that the laws of

property have been so far extended as to violate natural right.  The

earth is given as a common stock for man to labor and live on.  If

for the encouragement of industry we allow it to be appropriated, we

must take care that other employment be provided to those excluded

from the appropriation.  If we do not, the fundamental right to labor

the earth returns to the unemployed.  It is too soon yet in our

country to say that every man who cannot find employment, but who can

find uncultivated land, shall be at liberty to cultivate it, paying a

moderate rent.  But it is not too soon to provide by every possible

means that as few as possible shall be without a little portion of

land.  The small landholders are the most precious part of a state.




        The next object which struck my attention in my walk was the

deer with which the wood abounded.  They were of the kind called

"Cerfs," and not exactly of the same species with ours.  They are

blackish indeed under the belly, and not white as ours, and they are

more of the chestnut red; but these are such small differences as

would be sure to happen in two races from the same stock breeding

separately a number of ages.  Their hares are totally different from

the animals we call by that name; but their rabbit is almost exactly

like him.  The only difference is in their manners; the land on which

I walked for some time being absolutely reduced to a honeycomb by

their burrowing.  I think there is no instance of ours burrowing.

After descending the hill again I saw a man cutting fern.  I went to

him under pretence of asking the shortest road to town, and

afterwards asked for what use he was cutting fern.  He told me that

this part of the country furnished a great deal of fruit to Paris.

That when packed in straw it acquired an ill taste, but that dry fern

preserved it perfectly without communicating any taste at all.




        I treasured this observation for the preservation of my apples

on my return to my own country.  They have no apples here to compare

with our Redtown pippin.  They have nothing which deserves the name

of a peach; there being not sun enough to ripen the plum-peach and

the best of their soft peaches being like our autumn peaches.  Their

cherries and strawberries are fair, but I think lack flavor.  Their

plums I think are better; so also their gooseberries, and the pears

infinitely beyond anything we possess.  They have nothing better than

our sweet-water; but they have a succession of as good from early in

the summer till frost.  I am to-morrow to get [to] M.  Malsherbes (an

uncle of the Chevalier Luzerne's) about seven leagues from hence, who

is the most curious man in France as to his trees.  He is making for

me a collection of the vines from which the Burgundy, Champagne,

Bordeaux, Frontignac, and other of the most valuable wines of this

country are made.  Another gentleman is collecting for me the best

eating grapes, including what we call the raisin.  I propose also to

endeavor to colonize their hare, rabbit, red and grey partridge,

pheasants of different kinds, and some other birds.  But I find that

I am wandering beyond the limits of my walk and will therefore bid

you adieu.  Yours affectionately.







        "OUR CONFEDERACY . . . THE NEST"




        _To Archibald Stuart_

        _Paris, Jan. 25, 1786_




        DEAR SIR, -- I have received your favor of the 17th of October,

which though you mention as the third you have written me, is the

first which has come to hand.  I sincerely thank you for the

communications it contains.  Nothing is so grateful to me at this

distance as details both great & small of what is passing in my own

country.  Of the latter we receive little here, because they either

escape my correspondents or are thought unworthy notice.  This

however is a very mistaken opinion, as every one may observe by

recollecting that when he has been long absent from his neighborhood

the small news of that is the most pleasing and occupies his first

attention either when he meets with a person from thence, or returns

thither himself.  I shall hope therefore that the letter in which you

have been so good as to give me the minute occurrences in the

neighborhood of Monticello may yet come to hand.  And I venture to

rely on the many proofs of friendship I have received from you, for a

continuance of your favors.  This will be the most meritorious as I

have nothing to give you in exchange.  The quiet of Europe at this

moment furnishes little which can attract your notice.  Nor will that

quiet be soon disturbed, at least for the current year.  Perhaps it

hangs on the life of the K. of Prussia, and that hangs by a very

slender thread.  American reputation in Europe is not such as to be

flattering to its citizens.  Two circumstances are particularly

objected to us, the nonpaiment of our debts, and the want of energy

in our government.  These discourage a connection with us.  I own it

to be my opinion that good will arise from the destruction of our

credit.  I see nothing else which can restrain our disposition to

luxury, and the loss of those manners which alone can preserve

republican government.  As it is impossible to prevent credit, the

best way would be to cure it's ill effects by giving an instantaneous

recovery to the creditor; this would be reducing purchases on credit

to purchases for ready money.  A man would then see a poison painted

on everything he wished but had not ready money to pay for.  I fear

from an expression in your letter that the people of Kentucke think

of separating not only from Virginia (in which they are right) but

also from the confederacy.  I own I should think this a most

calametous event, and such an one as every good citizen on both sides

should set himself against.  Our present federal limits are not too

large for good government, nor will the increase of votes in Congress

produce any ill effect.  On the contrary it will drown the little

divisions at present existing there.  Our confederacy must be viewed

as the nest from which all America, North & South is to be peopled.

We should take care too, not to think it for the interest of that

great continent to press too soon on the Spaniards.  Those countries

cannot be in better hands.  My fear is that they are too feeble to

hold them till our population can be sufficiently advanced to gain it

from them piece by piece.  The navigation of the Mississippi we must

have.  This is all we are as yet ready to receive.  I have made

acquaintance with a very sensible candid gentleman here who was in

South America during the revolt which took place there while our

revolution was working.  He says that those disturbances (of which we

scarcely heard anything) cost on both sides an hundred thousand

lives.  -- I have made a particular acquaintance here with Monsieur

de Buffon, and have a great desire to give him the best idea I can of

our elk.  Perhaps your situation may enable you to aid me in this.

Were it possible, you could not oblige me more than by sending me the

horns, skeleton, & skin of an elk.  The most desireable form of

receiving them would be to have the skin slit from the under paw

along the belly to the tail, & down the thighs to the knee, to take

the animal out, leaving the legs and hoofs, the bones of the head, &

the horns attached to the skin by sewing up the belly & shipping the

skin it would present the form of the animal.  However as an

opportunity of doing this is scarcely expected I shall be glad to

receive them detached, packed in a box, & sent to Richmond to the

care of Doctor Currie.  Every thing of this kind is precious here,

and to prevent my adding to your trouble I must close my letter with

assurances of the esteem & attachment with which I am Dr Sir Your

friend & servt.




        P. S. I must add a prayer for some Peccan nuts, 100, if

possible, to be packed in a box of sand and sent me.  They might come

either directly or via N. York.







        A ROMAN TEMPLE FOR VIRGINA




        _To William Buchanan and James Hay_

        _Paris, January 26, 1786_




        GENTLEMEN, -- I had the honor of writing to you, on the receipt

of your orders to procure draughts for the public buildings, and

again, on the 13th of August.  In the execution of these orders, two

methods of proceeding presented themselves to my mind.  The one was,

to leave to some architect to draw an external according to his

fancy, in which way, experience shews, that, about once in a thousand

times, a pleasing form is hit upon; the other was, to take some model

already devised, and approved by the general suffrage of the world.

I had no hesitation in deciding that the latter was best, nor after

the decision, was there any doubt what model to take.  There is at

Nismes, in the south of France, a building called the Maison quarree,

erected in the time of the Caesars, and which is allowed, without

contradiction, to be the most perfect and precious remain of

antiquity in existence.  Its superiority over any thing at Rome, in

Greece, at Balbec or Palmyra, is allowed on all hands; and this

single object has placed Nismes in the general tour of travellers.

Having not yet had leisure to visit it, I could only judge of it from

drawings, and from the relation of numbers who had been to see it.  I

determined, therefore, to adopt this model, and to have all its

proportions justly observed.  As it was impossible for a foreign

artist to know, what number and sizes of apartments would suit the

different corps of our government, nor how they should be connected

with one another, I undertook to form that arrangement, and this

being done, I committed them to an architect (Monsieur Clerissault)

who had studied this art twenty years in Rome, who had particularly

studied and measured the Maison quarree of Nismes, and had published

a book containing most excellent plans, descriptions, and

observations on it.  He was too well acquainted with the merit of

that building, to find himself restrained by my injunctions not to

depart from his model.  In one instance, only, he persuaded me to

admit of this.  That was, to make the portico two columns deep only,

instead of three, as the original is.  His reason was, that this

latter depth would too much darken the apartments.  Economy might be

added, as a second reason.  I consented to it, to satisfy him, and

the plans are so drawn.  I knew that it would still be easy to

execute the building with a depth of three columns, and it is what I

would certainly recommend.  We know that the Maison quarree has

pleased, universally, for near two thousand years.  By leaving out a

column, the proportions will be changed, and perhaps the effect may

be injured more than is expected.  What is good, is often spoiled by

trying to making it better.




        The present is the first opportunity which has occurred of

sending the plans.  You will, accordingly, receive herewith the

ground plan, the elevation of the front, and the elevation of the

side.  The architect having been much busied, and knowing that this

was all which would be necessary in the beginning, has not yet

finished the sections of the building.  They must go by some future

occasion, as well as the models of the front and side, which are

making in plaister of Paris.  These were absolutely necessary for the

guide of workmen, not very expert in their art.  It will add

considerably to the expense, and I would not have incurred it, but

that I was sensible of its necessity.  The price of the model will be

fifteen guineas.  I shall know in a few days, the cost of the

drawings, which probably will be the triple of the model: however,

this is but conjecture.  I will make it as small as possible, pay it,

and render you an account in my next letter.  You will find, on

examination, that the body of this building covers an area, but two

fifths of that which is proposed and begun; of course, it will take

but about one half the bricks; and, of course, this circumstance will

enlist all the workmen, and people of the art against the plan.

Again, the building begun, is to have four porticoes; this but one.

It is true that this will be deeper than those were probably

proposed, but even if it be made three columns deep, it will not take

half the number of columns.  The beauty of this is insured by

experience, and by the suffrage of the whole world: the beauty of

that is problematical, as is every drawing, however well it looks on

paper, till it be actually executed: and though I suppose there is

more room in the plan begun, than in that now sent, yet there is

enough in this for all the three branches of government, and more

than enough is not wanted.  This contains sixteen rooms; to wit, four

on the first floor, for the General Court, Delegates, lobby, and

conference.  Eight on the second floor, for the Executive, the

Senate, and six rooms for committees and juries: and over four of

these smaller rooms of the second floor, are four mezzininos or

entresols, serving as offices for the clerks of the Executive, the

Senate, the Delegates, and the Court in actual session.  It will be

an objection, that the work is begun on the other plan.  But the

whole of this need not be taken to pieces, and of what shall be taken

to pieces, the bricks will do for inner work.  Mortar never becomes

so hard and adhesive to the bricks, in a few months, but that it may

be easily chipped off.  And upon the whole, the plan now sent will

save a great proportion of the expense.




        Hitherto, I have spoken of the capitol only.  The plans for the

prison, also, accompany this.  They will explain themselves.  I send,

also, the plan of the prison proposed at Lyons, which was sent me by

the architect, and to which we are indebted for the fundamental idea

of ours.  You will see, that of a great thing a very small one is

made.  Perhaps you may find it convenient to build, at first, only

two sides, forming an L; but of this, you are the best judges.  It

has been suggested to me, that fine gravel, mixed in the mortar,

prevents the prisoners from cutting themselves out, as that will

destroy their tools.  In my letter of August the 13th, I mentioned

that I could send workmen from hence.  As I am in hopes of receiving

your orders precisely, in answer to that letter, I shall defer

actually engaging any, till I receive them.  In like manner, I shall

defer having plans drawn for a Governor's house, &c., till further

orders; only assuring you, that the receiving and executing these

orders, will always give me a very great pleasure, and the more,

should I find that what I have done meets your approbation.




        I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect

esteem, gentlemen,




        your most obedient and

        most humble servant,







        THE NOTES, HOUDON, AND THE ENCYCLOPEDIE




        _To James Madison_

        _Paris, Feb. 8, 1786_




        DEAR SIR, -- My last letters have been of the 1st & 20th of

Sep. and the 28th of Oct.  Yours unacknowledged are of Aug. 20, Oct.

3, & Nov. 15.  I take this the first safe opportunity of enclosing to

you the bills of lading for your books, & two others for your

namesake of Williamsburgh & for the attorney which I will pray you to

forward.  I thank you for the communication of the remonstrance

against the assessment.  Mazzei who is now in Holland promised me to

have it published in the Leyden gazette.  It will do us great honour.

I wish it may be as much approved by our assembly as by the wisest

part of Europe.  I have heard with great pleasure that our assembly

have come to the resolution of giving the regulation of their

commerce to the federal head.  I will venture to assert that there is

not one of it's opposers who, placed on this ground, would not see

the wisdom of this measure.  The politics of Europe render it

indispensably necessary that with respect to everything external we

be one nation only, firmly hooped together.  Interior government is

what each state should keep to itself.  If it could be seen in Europe

that all our states could be brought to concur in what the Virginia

assembly has done, it would produce a total revolution in their

opinion of us, and respect for us.  And it should ever be held in

mind that insult & war are the consequences of a want of

respectability in the national character.  As long as the states

exercise separately those acts of power which respect foreign

nations, so long will there continue to be irregularities committing

by some one or other of them which will constantly keep us on an ill

footing with foreign nations.




        I thank you for your information as to my Notes.  The copies I

have remaining shall be sent over to be given to some of my friends

and to select subjects in the college.  I have been unfortunate here

with this trifle.  I gave out a few copies only, & to confidential

persons, writing in every copy a restraint against it's publication.

Among others I gave a copy to a Mr. Williamos.  He died.  I

immediately took every precaution I could to recover this copy.  But

by some means or other a bookseller had got hold of it.  He employed

a hireling translator and was about publishing it in the most

injurious form possible.  An Abbe Morellet, a man of letters here to

whom I had given a copy, got notice of this.  He had translated some

passages for a particular purpose: and he compounded with the

bookseller to translate & give him the whole, on his declining the

first publication.  I found it necessary to confirm this, and it will

be published in French, still mutilated however in it's freest parts.

I am now at a loss what to do as to England.  Everything, good or

bad, is thought worth publishing there; and I apprehend a translation

back from the French, and a publication there.  I rather believe it

will be most eligible to let the original come out in that country;

but am not yet decided.




        I have purchased little for you in the book way, since I sent

the catalogue of my former purchases.  I wish first to have your

answer to that, and your information what parts of those purchases

went out of your plan.  You can easily say buy more of this kind,

less of that &c.  My wish is to conform myself to yours.  I can get

for you the original Paris edition in folio of the Encyclopedie for

620 livres, 35. vols.; a good edn in 39 vols, 4to, for 380#; and a

good one in 39 vols 8vo, for 280#.  The new one will be superior in

far the greater number of articles: but not in all.  And the

possession of the ancient one has moreover the advantage of supplying

present use.  I have bought one for myself, but wait your orders as

to you.  I remember your purchase of a watch in Philadelphia.  If it

should not have proved good, you can probably sell her.  In that case

I can get for you here, one made as perfect as human art can make it

for about 24 louis.  I have had such a one made by the best & most

faithful hand in Paris.  It has a second hand, but no repeating, no

day of the month, nor other useless thing to impede and injure the

movements which are necessary.  For 12 louis more you can have in the

same cover, but on the back side & absolutely unconnected with the

movements of the watch, a pedometer which shall render you an exact

account of the distances you walk.  Your pleasure hereon shall be

awaited.




        Houdon is returned.  He called on me the other day to

remonstrate against the inscription proposed for Genl W.'s statue.

He says it is too long to be put on the pedestal.  I told him I was

not at liberty to permit any alteration, but I would represent his

objection to a friend who could judge of it's validity, and whether a

change could be authorized.  This has been the subject of

conversations here, and various devices & inscriptions have been

suggested.  The one which has appeared best to me may be translated

as follows: "Behold, Reader, the form of George Washington.  For his

worth, ask History: that will tell it, when this stone shall have

yielded to the decays of time.  His country erects this monument:

Houdon makes it." This for one side.  On the 2d represent the

evacuation of Boston with the motto "Hostibus primum fugatis." On the

3d the capture of the Hessians with "Hostibus iterum devictis." On

the 4th the surrender of York, with "Hostibus ultimum debellatis."

This is seizing the three most brilliant actions of his military

life.  By giving out here a wish of receiving mottos for this statue,

we might have thousands offered, of which still better might be

chosen.  The artist made the same objection of length to the

inscription for the bust of the M. de la Fayette.  An alteration of

that might come in time still, if an alteration was wished.  However

I am not certain that it is desirable in either case.  The state of

Georgia has given 20.000 acres of land to the Count d' Estaing.  This

gift is considered here as very honourable to him, and it has

gratified him much.  I am persuaded that a gift of lands by the state

of Virginia to the Marquis de la Fayette would give a good opinion

here of our character, and would reflect honour on the Marquis.  Nor

am I sure that the day will not come when it might be an useful

asylum to him.  The time of life at which he visited America was too

well adapted to receive good & lasting impressions to permit him ever

to accommodate himself to the principles of monarchical government;

and it will need all his own prudence & that of his friends to make

this country a safe residence for him.  How glorious, how comfortable

in reflection will it be to have prepared a refuge for him in case of

a reverse.  In the meantime he could settle it with tenants from the

freest part of this country, Bretagny.  I have never suggested the

smallest idea of this kind to him: because the execution of it should

convey the first notice.  If the state has not a right to give him

lands with their own officers, they could buy up at cheap prices the

shares of others.  I am not certain however whether in the public or

private opinion, a similar gift to Count Rochambeau could be

dispensed with.  If the state could give to both, it would be better:

but in any event, I think they should to the Marquis.  C. Rochambeau

too has really deserved more attention than he has received.  Why not

set up his bust, that of Gates, Greene, Franklin in your new capitol?

A propos of the Capitol.  Do my dear friend exert yourself to get the

plan begun on set aside, & that adopted which was drawn here.  It was

taken from a model which has been the admiration of 16. centuries,

which has been the object of as many pilgrimages as the tomb of

Mahomet: which will give unrivalled honour to our state, and furnish

a model whereon to form the taste of our young men.  It will cost

much less too than the one begun, because it does not cover one half

the Area.  Ask, if you please, a sight of my letter of Jan. 26 to

Messrs.  Buchanan & Hay, which will spare me the repeating its

substance here.




 

        Everything is quiet in Europe.  I recollect but one new

invention in the arts which is worth mentioning.  It is a mixture of

the arts of engraving & printing, rendering both cheaper.  Write or

draw anything on a plate of brass with the ink of the inventor, and

in half an hour he gives you engraved copies of it so perfectly like

the original that they could not be suspected to be copies.  His

types for printing a whole page are all in one solid piece.  An

author therefore only prints a few copies of his work from time to

time as they are called for.  This saves the loss of printing more

copies than may possibly be sold, and prevents an edition from being

ever exhausted.




        I am with a lively esteem Dear Sir, your sincere friend &

servant.




        P. S. Could you procure & send me an hundred or two nuts of the

peccan? they would enable me to oblige some characters here whom I

should be much gratified to oblige.  They should come packed in sand.

The seeds of the sugar maple too would be a great present.







        BRITISH ARTS AND BRITISH HATRED




        _To John Page_

        _Paris, May 4, 1786_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your two favours of Mar 15 and Aug 23, 1785, by

Monsieur de la Croix came to hand on the 15th of November.  His

return gives me an opportunity of sending you a copy of the nautical

almanacs for 1786, 7, 8, 9.  There is no late and interesting

publication here, or I would send it by the same conveiance.  With

these almanacs I pack a copy of some Notes I wrote for Monsr de

Marbois in the year 1781, of which I had a few printed here.  They

were written in haste & for his private inspection.  A few friends

having asked copies I found it cheaper to print than to write them.

One of these got into the hands of a bookseller who getting a bad

translation of them made, obliged me to consent that they should

appear on condition of their being translated by a better hand.  I

apprehend therefore they will get further than I intended: tho' as

yet they are in few hands.  They will offer nothing new to you, not

even as an oblation of my friendship for you which is as old almost

as we are ourselves.  Mazzei brought me your favor of Apr 28.  I

thank you much for your communications.  Nothing can be more grateful

at such a distance.  It is unfortunate that most people think the

occurrences passing daily under their eyes, are either known to all

the world, or not worth being known.  They therefore do not give them

place in their letters.  I hope you will be so good as to continue

your friendly information.  The proceedings of our public bodies, the

progress of the public mind on interesting questions, the casualties

which happen among our private friends, and whatever is interesting

to yourself and family will always be anxiously received by me.

There is one circumstance in the work you were concerned in which has

not yet come to my knowledge, to wit how far Westward from Fort Pitt

does the Western boundary of Pennsylvania pass, and where does it

strike the Ohio?  The proposition you mention from Mr.  Anderson on

the purchase of tobacco, I would have made use of, but that I have

engaged the abuses of the tobacco trade on a more general scale.  I

confess their redress does not appear with any certainty: but till I

see all hope of removing the evil by the roots, I cannot propose to

prune it's branches.




        I returned but three or four days ago from a two months trip to

England.  I traversed that country much, and own both town & country

fell short of my expectations.  Comparing it with this, I found a

much greater proportion of barrens, a soil in other parts not

naturally so good as this, not better cultivated, but better manured,

& therefore more productive.  This proceeds from the practice of long

leases there, and short ones here.  The labouring people here are

poorer than in England.  They pay about one half their produce in

rent, the English in general about a third.  The gardening in that

country is the article in which it surpasses all the earth.  I mean

their pleasure gardening.  This indeed went far beyond my ideas.  The

city of London, tho' handsomer than Paris, is not so handsome as

Philadelphia.  Their architecture is in the most wretched stile I

ever saw, not meaning to except America where it is bad, nor even

Virginia where it is worse than in any other part of America, which I

have seen.  The mechanical arts in London are carried to a wonderful

perfection.  But of these I need not speak, because of them my

countrymen have unfortunately too many samples before their eyes.  I

consider the extravagance which has seized them as a more baneful

evil than toryism was during the war.  It is the more so as the

example is set by the best and most amiable characters among us.

Would that a missionary appear who would make frugality the basis of

his religious system, and go thro the land preaching it up as the

only road to salvation, I would join his school tho' not generally

disposed to seek my religion out of the dictates of my own reason &

feelings of my own heart.  These things have been more deeply

impressed on my mind by what I have heard & seen in England.  That

nation hates us, their ministers hate us, and their King more than

all other men.  They have the impudence to avow this, tho' they

acknolege our trade important to them.  But they say we cannot

prevent our countrymen from bringing that into their laps.  A

conviction of this determines them to make no terms of commerce with

us.  They say they will pocket our carrying trade as well as their

own.  Our overtures of commercial arrangement have been treated with

a derision which shows their firm persuasion that we shall never

unite to suppress their commerce or even to impede it.  I think their

hostility towards us is much more deeply rooted at present than

during the war.  In the arts the most striking thing I saw there,

new, was the application of the principle of the steam-engine to

grist mills.  I saw 8 pr. of stones which are worked by steam, and

they are to set up 30 pair in the same house.  A hundred bushels of

coal a day are consumed at present.  I do not know in what proportion

the consumption will be increased by the additional geer.




        Be so good as to present my respects to Mrs. Page & your

family, to W. Lewis, F. Willis & their families and to accept

yourself assurances of the sincere regard with which I am Dr Sir your

affectionate friend & servt.




        P. S. Mazzei is still here and will publish soon a book on the

subject of America.







        WAR ON BARBARY




        _To John Adams_

        _Paris, July 11, 1786_




        DEAR SIR -- Our instructions relative to the Barbary states

having required us to proceed by way of negotiation to obtain their

peace, it became our duty to do this to the best of our power.

Whatever might be our private opinions, they were to be suppressed,

and the line marked out to us, was to be followed.  It has been so

honestly, and zealously.  It was therefore never material for us to

consult together on the best plan of conduct towards these states.  I

acknolege I very early thought it would be best to effect a peace

thro' the medium of war.  Tho' it is a question with which we have

nothing to do, yet as you propose some discussion of it I shall

trouble you with my reasons.  Of the 4. positions laid down in your

letter of the 3d. instant, I agree to the three first, which are in

substance that the good offices of our friends cannot procure us a

peace without paying it's price, that they cannot materially lessen

that price, and that paying it, we can have the peace in spight of

the intrigues of our enemies.  As to the 4th. that the longer the

negotiation is delayed the larger will be the demand, this will

depend on the intermediate captures: if they are many and rich the

price may be raised; if few and poor it will be lessened.  However if

it is decided that we shall buy a peace, I know no reason for

delaying the operation, but should rather think it ought to be

hastened.  But I should prefer the obtaining it by war.  1. Justice

is in favor of this opinion.  2. Honor favors it.  3. It will procure

us respect in Europe, and respect is a safe-guard to interest.  4. It

will arm the federal head with the safest of all the instruments of

coercion over their delinquent members and prevent them from using

what would be less safe.  I think that so far you go with me.  But in

the next steps we shall differ.  5. I think it least expensive.  6.

Equally effectual.  I ask a fleet of 150. guns, the one half of which

shall be in constant cruise.  This fleet built, manned and victualled

for 6. months will cost 450,000 pound sterling.  It's annual expence

is 300 pound sterl. a gun, including every thing: this will be 45,000

pound sterl. a year.  I take British experience for the basis of my

calculations, tho' we know, from our own experience, that we can do,

in this way, for pounds lawful, what costs them pounds sterling.

Were we to charge all this to the Algerine war it would amount to

little more than we must pay if we buy peace.  But as it is proper

and necessary that we should establish a small marine force (even

were we to buy a peace from the Algerines,) and as that force laid up

in our dockyards would cost us half as much annually as if kept in

order for service, we have a right to say that only 22,500 pound

sterl.  per ann. should be charged to the Algerine war.  6. It will

be as effectual.  To all the mismanagements of Spain and Portugal

urged to shew that war against those people is ineffectual, I urge a

single fact to prove the contrary where there is any management.

About 40.  year ago, the Algerines having broke their treaty with

France, this court sent Monsr. de Massac with one large and two small

frigates, he blockaded the harbour of Algiers three months, and they

subscribed to the terms he dictated.  If it be admitted however that

war, on the fairest prospects, is still exposed to incertainties, I

weigh against this the greater incertainty of the duration of a peace

bought with money, from such a people, from a Dey 80. years old, and

by a nation who, on the hypothesis of buying peace, is to have no

power on the sea to enforce an observance of it.




        So far I have gone on the supposition that the whole weight of

this war would rest on us.  But 1. Naples will join us.  The

character of their naval minister (Acton), his known sentiments with

respect to the peace Spain is officiously trying to make for them,

and his dispositions against the Algerines give the greatest reason

to believe it.  2. Every principle of reason tells us Portugal will

join us.  I state this as taking for granted, what all seem to

believe, that they will not be at peace with Algiers.  I suppose then

that a Convention might be formed between Portugal, Naples and the

U.S. by which the burthen of the war might be quotaed on them

according to their respective wealth, and the term of it should be

when Algiers should subscribe to a peace with all three on equal

terms.  This might be left open for other nations to accede to, and

many, if not most of the powers of Europe (except France, England,

Holland and Spain if her peace be made) would sooner or later enter

into the confederacy, for the sake of having their peace with the

Pyratical states guarantied by the whole.  I suppose that in this

case our proportion of force would not be the half of what I first

calculated on.




        These are the reasons which have influenced my judgment on this

question.  I give them to you to shew you that I am imposed on by a

semblance of reason at least, and not with an expectation of their

changing your opinion.  You have viewed the subject, I am sure in all

it's bearings.  You have weighed both questions with all their

circumstances.  You make the result different from what I do.  The

same facts impress us differently.  This is enough to make me suspect

an error in my process of reasoning tho' I am not able to detect it.

It is of no consequence; as I have nothing to say in the decision,

and am ready to proceed heartily on any other plan which may be

adopted, if my agency should be thought useful.  With respect to the

dispositions of the states I am utterly uninformed.  I cannot help

thinking however that on a view of all circumstances, they might be

united in either of the plans.




        Having written this on the receipt of your letter, without

knowing of any opportunity of sending it, I know not when it will go:

I add nothing therefore on any other subject but assurances of the

sincere esteem and respect with which I am Dear Sir your friend and

servant,







        "A CRUSADE AGAINST IGNORANCE"




        _To George Wythe_

        _Paris, August 13, 1786_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favors of Jan. 10 & Feb. 10, came to hand on

the 20th & 2d of May.  I availed myself of the first opportunity

which occurred, by a gentleman going to England, of sending to Mr.

Joddrel a copy of the Notes on our country, with a line informing him

that it was you who had emboldened me to take that liberty.  Madison,

no doubt, informed you of the reason why I had sent only a single


copy to Virginia.  Being assured by him that they will not do the

harm I had apprehended, but on the contrary may do some good, I

propose to send thither the copies remaining on hand, which are fewer

than I had intended.  But of the numerous corrections they need,

there are one or two so essential that I must have them made, by

printing a few new leaves & substituting them for the old.  This will

be done while they are engraving a map which I have constructed of

the country from Albemarle sound to Lake Erie, & which will be

inserted in the book.  A bad French translation which is getting out

here, will probably oblige me to publish the original more freely,

which it neither deserved nor was ever intended.  Your wishes, which

are laws to me, will justify my destining a copy for you, otherwise I

should as soon have thought of sending you a hornbook; for there is

no truth there that which is not familiar to you, and it's errors I

should hardly have proposed to treat you with.




        Immediately on the receipt of your letter, I wrote to a

correspondent at Florence to inquire after the family of Tagliaferro

as you desired.  I received his answer two days ago, a copy of which

I now inclose.  The original shall be sent by some other occasion.  I

will have the copper-plate immediately engraved.  This may be ready

within a few days, but the probability is that I shall be long

getting an opportunity of sending it to you, as these rarely occur.

You do not mention the size of the plate but, presuming it is

intended for labels for the inside of books, I shall have it made of

a proper size for that.  I shall omit the word _agisos_, according to

the license you allow me, because I think the beauty of a motto is to

condense much matter in as few words as possible.  The word omitted

will be supplied by every reader.  The European papers have announced

that the assembly of Virginia were occupied on the revisal of their

code of laws.  This, with some other similar intelligence, has

contributed much to convince the people of Europe, that what the

English papers are constantly publishing of our anarchy, is false; as

they are sensible that such a work is that of a people only who are

in perfect tranquillity.  Our act for freedom of religion is

extremely applauded.  The ambassadors & ministers of the several

nations of Europe resident at this court have asked of me copies of

it to send to their sovereigns, and it is inserted at full length in

several books now in the press; among others, in the new

Encyclopedie.  I think it will produce considerable good even in

these countries where ignorance, superstition, poverty, & oppression

of body & mind in every form, are so firmly settled on the mass of

the people, that their redemption from them can never be hoped.  If

the Almighty had begotten a thousand sons, instead of one, they would

not have sufficed for this task.  If all the sovereigns of Europe

were to set themselves to work to emancipate the minds of their

subjects from their present ignorance & prejudices, & that as

zealously as they now endeavor the contrary, a thousand years would

not place them on that high ground on which our common people are now

setting out.  Ours could not have been so fairly put into the hands

of their own common sense had they not been separated from their

parent stock & kept from contamination, either from them, or the

other people of the old world, by the intervention of so wide an

ocean.  To know the worth of this, one must see the want of it here.

I think by far the most important bill in our whole code is that for

the diffusion of knowlege among the people.  No other sure foundation

can be devised, for the preservation of freedom and happiness.  If

anybody thinks that kings, nobles, or priests are good conservators

of the public happiness send them here.  It is the best school in the

universe to cure them of that folly.  They will see here with their

own eyes that these descriptions of men are an abandoned confederacy

against the happiness of the mass of the people.  The omnipotence of

their effect cannot be better proved than in this country

particularly, where notwithstanding the finest soil upon earth, the

finest climate under heaven, and a people of the most benevolent, the

most gay and amiable character of which the human form is

susceptible, where such a people I say, surrounded by so many

blessings from nature, are yet loaded with misery by kings, nobles

and priests, and by them alone.  Preach, my dear Sir, a crusade

against ignorance; establish & improve the law for educating the

common people.  Let our countrymen know that the people alone can

protect us against these evils, and that the tax which will be paid

for this purpose is not more than the thousandth part of what will be

paid to kings, priests & nobles who will rise up among us if we leave

the people in ignorance.  The people of England, I think, are less

oppressed than here.  But it needs but half an eye to see, when among

them, that the foundation is laid in their dispositions for the

establishment of a despotism.  Nobility, wealth & pomp are the

objects of their adoration.  They are by no means the free-minded

people we suppose them in America.  Their learned men too are few in

number, and are less learned and infinitely less emancipated from

prejudice than those of this country.  An event too seems to be

preparing, in the order of things, which will probably decide the

fate of that country.  It is no longer doubtful that the harbour of

Cherburg will be complete, that it will be a most excellent one, &

capacious enough to hold the whole navy of France.  Nothing has ever

been wanting to enable this country to invade that, but a naval force

conveniently stationed to protect the transports.  This change of

situation must oblige the English to keep up a great standing army,

and there is no King, who, with sufficient force, is not always ready

to make himself absolute.  My paper warns me it is time to recommend

myself to the friendly recollection of Mrs. Wythe, of Colo.

Tagliaferro & his family & particularly of Mr. R. T.; and to assure

you of the affectionate esteem with which I am Dear Sir your friend

and servt.







        EDUACTION OF A FUTURE SON-IN-LAW




        _To Thomas Mann Randolph, Jr._

        _Paris, Aug. 27, 1786_




        DEAR SIR, -- I am honoured with your favour of the 16th

instant, and desirous, without delay, of manifesting my wishes to be

useful to you I shall venture to you some thoughts on the course of

your studies, which must be submitted to the better choice with which

you are surrounded.  A longer race through life may have entitled me

to seize some truths which have not yet been presented to your

observation & more intimate knowledge of the country in which you are

to live & of the circumstances in which you will be placed, may

enable me to point your attention to the branches of science which

will administer the most to your happiness there.  The foundations

which you have laid in languages and mathematics are proper for every

superstructure.  The former exercises our memory while that and no

other faculty is yet matured & prevents our acquiring habits of

idleness.  The latter gives exercise to our reason, as soon as that

has acquired a certain degree of strength, and stores the mind with

truths which are useful in other branches of science.  At this moment

then a second order of preparation is to commence.  I shall propose

to you that it be extensive, comprehending Astronomy, Natural

Philosophy (or Physics), Natural History, Anatomy, Botany &

Chemistry.  No inquisitive mind will be content to be ignorant of any

of these branches.  But I would advise you to be contented with a

course of lectures in most of them, without attempting to make

yourself master of the whole.  This is more than any genius joined to

any length of life is equal to.  You will find among them some one

study to which your mind will more particularly attach itself.  This

then I would pursue & propose to attain eminence in.  Your own

country furnishes the most aliment for Natural History, Botany &

Physics & as you express a fondness for the former you might make it

your principal object, endeavoring however to make yourself more

acquainted with the two latter than with other branches likely to be

less useful.  In fact you will find botany offering it's charms to

you at every step -- during summer & Physics in every season.  All

these branches of science will be better attained by attending

courses of lectures in them.  You are now in a place where the best

courses upon earth are within your reach and being delivered in your

native language -- you lose no part of their benefit.  Such an

opportunity you will never again have.  I would therefore strongly

press on you to fix no other limit to your stay in Edinborough than

your having got thro this whole course.  The omission of any one part

of it will be an affliction & loss to you as long as you live.

Beside the comfort of knowledge, every science is auxiliary to every

other.  While you are attending these courses you can proceed by

yourself in a regular series of historical reading.  It would be a

waste of time to attend a professor of this.  It is to be acquired

from books and if you pursue it by yourself you can accommodate it to

your other reading so as to fill up those chasms of time not

otherwise appropriated.  There are portions of the day too when the

mind should be eased, particularly after dinner it should be applied

to lighter occupation: history is of this kind.  It exercises

principally the memory.  Reflection also indeed is necessary but not

generally in a laborious degree.  To conduct yourself in this branch

of science you have only to consider what aeras of it merit a grasp &

what a particular attention, & in each aera also to distinguish

between the countries the knowledge of whose history will be useful &

those where it suffices only to be not altogether ignorant.  Having

laid down your plan as to the branches of history you would pursue,

the order of time will be your sufficient guide.  After what you have

read in antient history I should suppose Millot's digest would be

useful & sufficient.  The histories of Greece and Rome are worthy a

good degree of attention, they should be read in the original

authors.  The transition from antient to modern history will be best

effected by reading Gibbon's.  Then a general history of the

principal states of Europe, but particular ones of England.  Here too

the original writers are to be preferred.  Kennet published a

considerable collection of these in 3 vols. folio, but there are some

others not in his collection well worth being read.  After the

history of England that of America will claim your attention.  Here

too original authors & not compilers are best.  An author who writes

of his own times or of times near his own presents in his own ideas &

manner the best picture of the moment of which he writes.  History

need not be hurried but may give way to the other sciences because

history can be pursued after you shall have left your present

situation as well as while you remain in it.  When you shall have got

thro this second order of preparation the study of the law is to be

begun.  This like history is to be acquired from books.  All the aid

you will want will be a catalogue of the books to be read & the order

in which they are to be read.  It being absolutely indifferent in

what place you carry on this reading I should propose your doing it

in France.  The advantages of this will be that you will at the same

time acquire the habit of speaking French which is the object of a

year or two.  You may be giving attention to such of the fine arts as

your turn may lead you to & you will be forming an acquaintance with

the individuals & characters of a nation with whom we must long

remain in the closest intimacy & to whom we are bound by the strong

ties of gratitude and policy.  A nation in short of the most amiable

dispositions on earth, the whole mass of which is penetrated with an

affection for us.  You might before you return to your own country

make a visit to Italy also.




        I should have performed the office of but half a friend were I

to confine myself to the improvement of the mind only.  Knowledge

indeed is a desirable, a lovely possession, but I do not scruple to

say that health is more so.  It is of little consequence to store the

mind with science if the body be permitted to become debilitated.  If

the body be feeble, the mind will not be strong -- the sovereign

invigorator of the body is exercise, and of all exercises walking is

best.  A horse gives but a kind of half exercise, and a carriage is

no better than a cradle.  No one knows, till he tries, how easily a

habit of walking is acquired.  A person who never walked three miles

will in the course of a month become able to walk 15 or 20 without

fatigue.  I have known some great walkers & had particular accounts

of many more: and I never knew or heard of one who was not healthy &

long lived.  This species of exercise therefore is much to be

advised.  Should you be disposed to try it, as your health has been

feeble, it will be necessary for you to begin with a little, & to

increase it by degrees.  For the same reason you must probably at

first ascribe to it the hours most precious for study, I mean those

about the middle of the day.  But when you shall find yourself strong

you may venture to take your walks in the evening after the digestion

of the dinner is pretty well over.  This is making a compromise

between health & study.  The latter would be too much interrupted

were you to take from it the early hours of the day and habit will

soon render the evening's exercise as salutary as that of the

morning.  I speak this from my own experience having, from an

attachment to study, very early in life, made this arrangement of my

time, having ever observed it, & still observing it, & always with

perfect success.  Not less than two hours a day should be devoted to

exercise, and the weather should be little regarded.  A person not

sick will not be injured by getting wet.  It is but taking a cold

bath which never gives a cold to any one.  Brute animals are the most

healthy, & they are exposed to all weather and, of men, those are

healthiest who are the most exposed.  The recipe of those two

descriptions of beings is simple diet, exercise and the open air, be

it's state what it will; and we may venture to say that this recipe

will give health & vigor to every other description.  -- By this time

I am sure you will think I have sermonized enough.  I have given you

indeed a lengthy lecture.  I have been led through it by my zeal to

serve you; if in the whole you find one useful counsel, that will be

my reward, & a sufficient one.  Few persons in your own country have

started from as advantageous ground as that whereon you will be

placed.  Nature and fortune have been liberal to you.  Every thing

honourable or profitable there is placed within your own reach, and

will depend on your own efforts.  If these are exerted with

assiduity, and guided by unswerving honesty, your success is

infallible: and that it may be as great as you wish is the sincere

desire of Dear Sir, your most affectionate humble servant.




        P.S. Be so good as to present me affectionately to your brother

& cousin.

