




        FEMALE EDUCATION




        _To Nathaniel Burwell_

        _Monticello, March 14, 1818_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your letter of February 17th found me suffering

under an attack of rheumatism, which has but now left me at

sufficient ease to attend to the letters I have received.  A plan of

female education has never been a subject of systematic contemplation

with me.  It has occupied my attention so far only as the education

of my own daughters occasionally required.  Considering that they

would be placed in a country situation, where little aid could be

obtained from abroad, I thought it essential to give them a solid

education, which might enable them, when become mothers, to educate

their own daughters, and even to direct the course for sons, should

their fathers be lost, or incapable, or inattentive.  My surviving

daughter accordingly, the mother of many daughters as well as sons,

has made their education the object of her life, and being a better

judge of the practical part than myself, it is with her aid and that

of one of her eleves that I shall subjoin a catalogue of the books

for such a course of reading as we have practiced.




        A great obstacle to good education is the inordinate passion

prevalent for novels, and the time lost in that reading which should

be instructively employed.  When this poison infects the mind, it

destroys its tone and revolts it against wholesome reading.  Reason

and fact, plain and unadorned, are rejected.  Nothing can engage

attention unless dressed in all the figments of fancy, and nothing so

bedecked comes amiss.  The result is a bloated imagination, sickly

judgment, and disgust towards all the real businesses of life.  This

mass of trash, however, is not without some distinction; some few

modelling their narratives, although fictitious, on the incidents of

real life, have been able to make them interesting and useful

vehicles of sound morality.  Such, I think, are Marmontel's new moral

tales, but not his old ones, which are really immoral.  Such are the

writings of Miss Edgeworth, and some of those of Madame Genlis.  For

a like reason, too, much poetry should not be indulged.  Some is

useful for forming style and taste.  Pope, Dryden, Thompson,

Shakspeare, and of the French, Moliere, Racine, the Corneilles, may

be read with pleasure and improvement.




        The French language, become that of the general intercourse of

nations, and from their extraordinary advances, now the depository of

all science, is an indispensable part of education for both sexes.

In the subjoined catalogue, therefore, I have placed the books of

both languages indifferently, according as the one or the other

offers what is best.




        The ornaments too, and the amusements of life, are entitled to

their portion of attention.  These, for a female, are dancing,

drawing, and music.  The first is a healthy exercise, elegant and

very attractive for young people.  Every affectionate parent would be

pleased to see his daughter qualified to participate with her

companions, and without awkwardness at least, in the circles of

festivity, of which she occasionally becomes a part.  It is a

necessary accomplishment, therefore, although of short use, for the

French rule is wise, that no lady dances after marriage.  This is

founded in solid physical reasons, gestation and nursing leaving

little time to a married lady when this exercise can be either safe

or innocent.  Drawing is thought less of in this country than in

Europe.  It is an innocent and engaging amusement, often useful, and

a qualification not to be neglected in one who is to become a mother

and an instructor.  Music is invaluable where a person has an ear.

Where they have not, it should not be attempted.  It furnishes a

delightful recreation for the hours of respite from the cares of the

day, and lasts us through life.  The taste of this country, too,

calls for this accomplishment more strongly than for either of the

others.




        I need say nothing of household economy, in which the mothers

of our country are generally skilled, and generally careful to

instruct their daughters.  We all know its value, and that diligence

and dexterity in all its processes are inestimable treasures.  The

order and economy of a house are as honorable to the mistress as

those of the farm to the master, and if either be neglected, ruin

follows, and children destitute of the means of living.




        This, Sir, is offered as a summary sketch on a subject on which

I have not thought much.  It probably contains nothing but what has

already occurred to yourself, and claims your acceptance on no other

ground than as a testimony of my respect for your wishes, and of my

great esteem and respect.







        THE CLASSICAL PRESS




        _To Wells and Lilly_

        _Monticello, April 1, 1818_




        You must have thought me very tardy in acknoleging the receipt

of your letter of Jan. 13. and in returning my thanks, which I now

do, for the very handsome copy of Cicero's works from your press,

which you have been so kind as to present me.  I waited first the

receipt of that and the books accompanying it, but I happened at the

time of their arrival to be reading the 5th book of Cicero's

Tusculans, which I followed by that of his Offices, and concluded to

lay aside the variorum edition, and to use yours, after which I might

write more understandingly on the subject.  having been extremely

disgusted with the Philadelphia and New York Delphin editions, some

of which I had read, and altho executed with a good type on good

paper, yet so full of errors of the press as not to be worth the

paper they were printed on, I wished to see the state of the

classical press with you.  their editions had on an average about one

error for every page.  I read therefore the portions of your's above

mentioned with a pretty sharp eye, and in something upwards of 200.

pages I found the errors noted on the paper inclosed, being an

average of one for every 13. pages.  this is a good advance on the

presses of N.Y. and Philada., and gives hopes of rapid improvements.

the errors in the Variorum editions however are fewer than these, the

Elzevirs still fewer: but the perfection of accuracy is to be found

in the folio edition of Homer by the Foulis of Glasgow.  I have

understood they offered 1000 guineas for the discovery of any error

in it, even of an accent, and that the reward was never claimed.  I

am glad to find you are thinking of printing Livy.  there should be

no hesitation between that and Quinctilian.  this last is little

wanting.  we have Blair's and Adams's books which give us the

rhetoric of our own language and that of a foreign and a dead one

will interest few readers.  but of Livy there is not, nor ever has

been an edition meriting the name of an editio optima.  the Delphin

edition might have been, but for it's numerous errors of the press,

and unmanageable size in 4to.  it's notes are valuable, and it has

the whole of Freinsheim's supplement with the marginal references to

his authorities.  Clerk's edition is of a handy size, has the whole

of Freinsheim, but without the references, which we often wish to

turn to, and it is without notes.  the late Paris edition of La Malle

has only the supplement of the 2d decad and no notes.  I possess

these two last mentioned editions, but would gladly become a

subscriber to such a one as I describe, that is to say, an 8vo

edition with the Delphin notes and all Freinsheim's supplements and

references.  if correctly executed it would be the editio optima, be

called for in Europe and do us honor there.  since consigning my

library to Congress I have supplied myself from Europe with most of

the classics, and of the best editions, in which I have been much

aided by mr. Ticknor, your most learned and valuable countryman.




        I make you my acknolegement for the sermon on the Unity of God,

and am glad to see our countrymen looking that question in the face.

it must end in a return to primitive christianity, and the

disbandment of the unintelligible Athanasian jargon of 3. being 1.

and 1. being 3.  this sermon is one of the strongest pieces against

it.  I observe you are about printing a work of Belsham's on the same

subject, for which I wish to be a subscriber, and inclose you a 5 D.

bill, there being none of fractional denominations.  the surplus

therefore may stand as I shall be calling for other things.  Accept

the assurance of my great respect.







        INFLATION AND DEMORALIZATION




        _To Nathaniel Macon_

        _Monticello, January 12, 1819_




        DEAR SIR, -- The problem you had wished to propose to me was

one which I could not have solved; for I knew nothing of the facts.

I read no newspaper now but Ritchie's, and in that chiefly the

advertisements, for they contain the only truths to be relied on in a

newspaper.  I feel a much greater interest in knowing what has passed

two or three thousand years ago, than in what is now passing.  I read

nothing, therefore, but of the heroes of Troy, of the wars of

Lacedaemon and Athens, of Pompey and Caesar, and of Augustus too, the

Bonaparte and parricide scoundrel of that day.  I have had, and still

have, such entire confidence in the late and present Presidents, that

I willingly put both soul and body into their pockets.  While such

men as yourself and your worthy colleagues of the legislature, and

such characters as compose the executive administration, are watching

for us all, I slumber without fear, and review in my dreams the

visions of antiquity.  There is, indeed, one evil which awakens me at

times, because it jostles me at every turn.  It is that we have now

no measure of value.  I am asked eighteen dollars for a yard of

broadcloth, which, when we had dollars, I used to get for eighteen

shillings; from this I can only understand that a dollar is now worth

but two inches of broadcloth, but broadcloth is no standard of

measure or value.  I do not know, therefore, whereabouts I stand in

the scale of property, nor what to ask, or what to give for it.  I

saw, indeed, the like machinery in action in the years '80 and '81,

and without dissatisfaction; because in wearing out, it was working

out our salvation.  But I see nothing in this renewal of the game of

"Robin's alive" but a general demoralization of the nation, a

filching from industry its honest earnings, wherewith to build up

palaces, and raise gambling stock for swindlers and shavers, who are

to close too their career of piracies by fraudulent bankruptcies.  My

dependence for a remedy, however, is with the wisdom which grows with

time and suffering.  Whether the succeeding generation is to be more

virtuous than their predecessors, I cannot say; but I am sure they

will have more worldly wisdom, and enough, I hope, to know that

honesty is the first chapter in the book of wisdom.  I have made a

great exertion to write you thus much; my antipathy to taking up a

pen being so intense that I have never given you a stronger proof,

than in the effort of writing a letter, how much I value you, and of

the superlative respect and friendship with which I salute you.







        HABITS OF "A HARD STUDENT"




        _To Dr. Vine Utley_

        _Monticello, March 21, 1819_




        SIR, -- Your letter of February the 18th came to hand on the

1st instant; and the request of the history of my physical habits

would have puzzled me not a little, had it not been for the model

with which you accompanied it, of Doctor Rush's answer to a similar

inquiry.  I live so much like other people, that I might refer to

ordinary life as the history of my own.  Like my friend the Doctor, I

have lived temperately, eating little animal food, and that not as an

aliment, so much as a condiment for the vegetables, which constitute

my principal diet.  I double, however, the Doctor's glass and a half

of wine, and even treble it with a friend; but halve its effects by

drinking the weak wines only.  The ardent wines I cannot drink, nor

do I use ardent spirits in any form.  Malt liquors and cider are my

table drinks, and my breakfast, like that also of my friend, is of

tea and coffee.  I have been blest with organs of digestion which

accept and concoct, without ever murmuring, whatever the palate

chooses to consign to them, and I have not yet lost a tooth by age.

I was a hard student until I entered on the business of life, the

duties of which leave no idle time to those disposed to fulfil them;

and now, retired, and at the age of seventy-six, I am again a hard

student.  Indeed, my fondness for reading and study revolts me from

the drudgery of letter writing.  And a stiff wrist, the consequence

of an early dislocation, makes writing both slow and painful.  I am

not so regular in my sleep as the Doctor says he was, devoting to it

from five to eight hours, according as my company or the book I am

reading interests me; and I never go to bed without an hour, or half

hour's previous reading of something moral, whereon to ruminate in

the intervals of sleep.  But whether I retire to bed early or late, I

rise with the sun.  I use spectacles at night, but not necessarily in

the day, unless in reading small print.  My hearing is distinct in

particular conversation, but confused when several voices cross each

other, which unfits me for the society of the table.  I have been

more fortunate than my friend in the article of health.  So free from

catarrhs that I have not had one, (in the breast, I mean) on an

average of eight or ten years through life.  I ascribe this exemption

partly to the habit of bathing my feet in cold water every morning,

for sixty years past.  A fever of more than twenty-four hours I have

not had above two or three times in my life.  A periodical headache

has afflicted me occasionally, once, perhaps, in six or eight years,

for two or three weeks at a time, which seems now to have left me;

and except on a late occasion of indisposition, I enjoy good health;

too feeble, indeed, to walk much, but riding without fatigue six or

eight miles a day, and sometimes thirty or forty.  I may end these

egotisms, therefore, as I began, by saying that my life has been so

much like that of other people, that I might say with Horace, to

every one _"nomine mutato, narratur fabula de te."_ I must not end,

however, without due thanks for the kind sentiments of regard you are

so good as to express towards myself; and with my acknowledgments for

these, be pleased to accept the assurances of my respect and esteem.







        SETTING THE RECORD STRAIGHT




        _To Samuel Adams Wells_

        _Monticello, May 12, 1819_




        SIR, -- An absence of some time at an occasional and distant

residence must apologize for the delay in acknowledging the receipt

of your favor of April 12th.  And candor obliges me to add that it

has been somewhat extended by an aversion to writing, as well as to

calls on my memory for facts so much obliterated from it by time as

to lessen my confidence in the traces which seem to remain.  One of

the inquiries in your letter, however, may be answered without an

appeal to the memory.  It is that respecting the question whether

committees of correspondence originated in Virginia or Massachusetts?

On which you suppose me to have claimed it for Virginia.  But

certainly I have never made such a claim.  The idea, I suppose, has

been taken up from what is said in Wirt's history of Mr. Henry, p.

87, and from an inexact attention to its precise term.  It is there

said "this house [of burgesses of Virginia] had the merit of

originating that powerful engine of resistance, corresponding

committees _between the legislatures_ of the _different colonies_."

That the fact as here expressed is true, your letter bears witness

when it says that the resolutions of Virginia for this purpose were

transmitted to the speakers of the different Assemblies, and by that

of Massachusetts was laid at the next session before that body, who

appointed a committee for the specified object: adding, "thus in

Massachusetts there were two committees of correspondence, one chosen

by the people, the other appointed by the House of Assembly; in the

former, Massachusetts preceded Virginia; in the latter, Virginia

preceded Massachusetts." To the origination of committees for the

interior correspondence between the counties and towns of a State, I

know of no claim on the part of Virginia; but certainly none was ever

made by myself.  I perceive, however, one error into which memory had

led me.  Our committee for national correspondence was appointed in

March, '73, and I well remember that going to Williamsburg in the

month of June following, Peyton Randolph, our chairman, told me that

messengers, bearing despatches between the two States, had crossed

each other by the way; that of Virginia carrying our propositions for

a committee of national correspondence, and that of Massachusetts

bringing, as my memory suggested, a similar proposition.  But here I

must have misremembered; and the resolutions brought us from

Massachusetts were probably those you mention of the town meeting of

Boston, on the motion of Mr. Samuel Adams, appointing a committee "to

state the rights of the colonists, and of that province in

particular, and the infringements of them, to communicate them to the

several towns, as the sense of the town of Boston, and to request of

each town a free communication of its sentiments on this subject"?  I

suppose, therefore, that these resolutions were not received, as you

think, while the House of Burgesses was in session in March, 1773;

but a few days after we rose, and were probably what was sent by the

messenger who crossed ours by the way.  They may, however, have been

still different.  I must therefore have been mistaken in supposing

and stating to Mr. Wirt, that the proposition of a committee for

national correspondence was nearly simultaneous in Virginia and

Massachusetts.




        A similar misapprehension of another passage in Mr. Wirt's

book, for which I am also quoted, has produced a similar reclamation

of the part of Massachusetts by some of her most distinguished and

estimable citizens.  I had been applied to by Mr. Wirt for such facts

respecting Mr. Henry, as my intimacy with him, and participation in

the transactions of the day, might have placed within my knowledge.

I accordingly committed them to paper, and Virginia being the theatre

of his action, was the only subject within my contemplation, while

speaking of him.  Of the resolutions and measures here, in which he

had the acknowledged lead, I used the expression that "Mr. Henry

certainly gave the first impulse to the ball of revolution." [Wirt,

p. 41.] The expression is indeed general, and in all its extension

would comprehend all the sister States.  But indulgent construction

would restrain it, as was really meant, to the subject matter under

contemplation, which was Virginia alone; according to the rule of the

lawyers, and a fair canon of general criticism, that every expression

should be construed _secundum subjectam materiem_.  Where the first

attack was made, there must have been of course, the first act of

resistance, and that was of Massachusetts.  Our first overt act of

war was Mr. Henry's embodying a force of militia from several

counties, regularly armed and organized, marching them in military

array, and making reprisal on the King's treasury at the seat of

government for the public powder taken away by his Governor.  This

was on the last days of April, 1775.  Your formal battle of Lexington

was ten or twelve days before that, which greatly overshadowed in

importance, as it preceded in time our little affray, which merely

amounted to a levying of arms against the King, and very possibly you

had had military affrays before the regular battle of Lexington.




        These explanations will, I hope, assure you, Sir, that so far

as either facts or opinions have been truly quoted from me they have

never been meant to intercept the just fame of Massachusetts, for the

promptitude and perseverance of her early resistance.  We willingly

cede to her the laud of having been (although not exclusively) "the

cradle of sound principles," and if some of us believe she has

deflected from them in her course, we retain full confidence in her

ultimate return to them.




        I will now proceed to your quotation from Mr. Galloway's

statements of what passed in Congress on their declaration of

independence, in which statement there is not one word of truth, and

where, bearing some resemblance to truth, it is an entire perversion

of it.  I do not charge this on Mr. Galloway himself; his desertion

having taken place long before these measures, he doubtless received

his information from some of the loyal friends whom he left behind

him.  But as yourself, as well as others, appear embarrassed by

inconsistent accounts of the proceedings on that memorable occasion,

and as those who have endeavored to restore the truth have themselves

committed some errors, I will give you some extracts from a written

document on that subject, for the truth of which I pledge myself to

heaven and earth; having, while the question of independence was

under consideration before Congress, taken written notes, in my seat,

of what was passing, and reduced them to form on the final

conclusion.  I have now before me that paper, from which the

following are extracts: * * *




        Governor McKean, in his letter to McCorkle of July 16th, 1817,

has thrown some lights on the transactions of that day, but trusting

to his memory chiefly at an age when our memories are not to be

trusted, he has confounded two questions, and ascribed proceedings to

one which belonged to the other.  These two questions were, 1. The

Virginia motion of June 7th to declare independence, and 2. The

actual declaration, its matter and form.  Thus he states the question

on the declaration itself as decided on the 1st of July.  But it was

the Virginia motion which was voted on that day in committee of the

whole; South Carolina, as well as Pennsylvania, then voting against

it.  But the ultimate decision in _the House_ on the report of the

committee being by request postponed to the next morning, all the

States voted for it, except New York, whose vote was delayed for the

reason before stated.  It was not till the 2d of July that the

declaration itself was taken up, nor till the 4th that it was

decided; and it was signed by every member present, except Mr.

Dickinson.




        The subsequent signatures of members who were not then present,

and some of them not yet in office, is easily explained, if we

observe who they were; to wit, that they were of New York and

Pennsylvania.  New York did not sign till the 15th, because it was

not till the 9th, (five days after the general signature,) that their

convention authorized them to do so.  The convention of Pennsylvania,

learning that it had been signed by a minority only of their

delegates, named a new delegation on the 20th, leaving out Mr.

Dickinson, who had refused to sign, Willing and Humphreys who had

withdrawn, reappointing the three members who had signed, Morris who

had not been present, and five new ones, to wit, Rush, Clymer, Smith,

Taylor and Ross; and Morris and the five new members were permitted

to sign, because it manifested the assent of their full delegation,

and the express will of their convention, which might have been

doubted on the former signature of a minority only.  Why the

signature of Thornton of New Hampshire was permitted so late as the

4th of November, I cannot now say; but undoubtedly for some

particular reason which we should find to have been good, had it been

expressed.  These were the only post-signers, and you see, Sir, that

there were solid reasons for receiving those of New York and

Pennsylvania, and that this circumstance in no wise affects the faith

of this declaratory charter of our rights and of the rights of man.




        With a view to correct errors of fact before they become

inveterate by repetition, I have stated what I find essentially

material in my papers; but with that brevity which the labor of

writing constrains me to use.




        On the fourth particular articles of inquiry in your letter,

respecting your grandfather, the venerable Samuel Adams, neither

memory nor memorandums enable me to give any information.  I can say

that he was truly a great man, wise in council, fertile in resources,

immovable in his purposes, and had, I think, a greater share than any

other member, in advising and directing our measures, in the northern

war especially.  As a speaker he could not be compared with his

living colleague and namesake, whose deep conceptions, nervous style,

and undaunted firmness, made him truly our bulwark in debate.  But

Mr. Samuel Adams, although not of fluent elocution, was so rigorously

logical, so clear in his views, abundant in good sense, and master

always of his subject, that he commanded the most profound attention

whenever he rose in an assembly by which the froth of declamation was

heard with the most sovereign contempt.  I sincerely rejoice that the

record of his worth is to be undertaken by one so much disposed as

you will be to hand him down fairly to that posterity for whose

liberty and happiness he was so zealous a laborer.




        With sentiments of sincere veneration for his memory, accept

yourself this tribute to it with the assurances of my great respect.




        P. S. August 6th, 1822, since the date of this letter, to wit,

this day, August 6th, '22, I received the new publication of the

secret Journals of Congress, wherein is stated a resolution, July

19th, 1776, that the declaration passed on the 4th be fairly

engrossed on parchment, and when engrossed, be signed by every

member; and another of August 2d, that being engrossed and compared

at the table, was signed by the members.  That is to say the copy

engrossed on parchment (for durability) was signed by the members

after being compared at the table with the original one, signed on

paper as before stated.  I add this P.S. to the copy of my letter to

Mr. Wells, to prevent confounding the signature of the original with

that of the copy engrossed on parchment.







        THE VALUE OF CLASSICAL LEARNING




        _To John Brazier_

        _Poplar Forest, August 24, 1819_




        SIR, -- The acknowledgment of your favor of July 15th, and

thanks for the Review which it covered of Mr. Pickering's Memoir on

the Modern Greek, have been delayed by a visit to an occasional but

distant residence from Monticello, and to an attack here of

rheumatism which is just now moderating.  I had been much pleased

with the memoir, and was much also with your review of it.  I have

little hope indeed of the recovery of the ancient pronunciation of

that finest of human languages, but still I rejoice at the attention

the subject seems to excite with you, because it is an evidence that

our country begins to have a taste for something more than merely as

much Greek as will pass a candidate for clerical ordination.




        You ask my opinion on the extent to which classical learning

should be carried in our country.  A sickly condition permits me to

think, and a rheumatic hand to write too briefly on this litigated

question.  The utilities we derive from the remains of the Greek and

Latin languages are, first, as models of pure taste in writing.  To

these we are certainly indebted for the national and chaste style of

modern composition which so much distinguishes the nations to whom

these languages ae familiar.  Without these models we should probably

have continued the inflated style of our northern ancestors, or the

hyperbolical and vague one of the east.  Second.  Among the values of

classical learning, I estimate the luxury of reading the Greek and

Roman authors in all the beauties of their originals.  And why should

not this innocent and elegant luxury take its preeminent stand ahead

of all those addressed merely to the senses?  I think myself more

indebted to my father for this than for all the other luxuries his

cares and affections have placed within my reach; and more now than

when younger, and more susceptible of delights from other sources.

When the decays of age have enfeebled the useful energies of the

mind, the classic pages fill up the vacuum of _ennui_, and become

sweet composers to that rest of the grave into which we are all

sooner or later to descend.  Third.  A third value is in the stores

of real science deposited and transmitted us in these languages,

to-wit: in history, ethics, arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, natural

history, &c.




        But to whom are these things useful?  Certainly not to all men.

There are conditions of life to which they must be forever estranged,

and there are epochs of life too, after which the endeavor to attain

them would be a great misemployment of time.  Their acquisition

should be the occupation of our early years only, when the memory is

susceptible of deep and lasting impressions, and reason and judgment

not yet strong enough for abstract speculations.  To the moralist

they are valuable, because they furnish ethical writings highly and

justly esteemed: although in my own opinion, the moderns are far

advanced beyond them in this line of science, the divine finds in the

Greek language a translation of his primary code, of more importance

to him than the original because better understood; and, in the same

language, the newer code, with the doctrines of the earliest fathers,

who lived and wrote before the simple precepts of the founder of this

most benign and pure of all systems of morality became frittered into

subtleties and mysteries, and hidden under jargons incomprehensible

to the human mind.  To these original sources he must now, therefore,

return, to recover the virgin purity of his religion.  The lawyer

finds in the Latin language the system of civil law most conformable

with the principles of justice of any which has ever yet been

established among men, and from which much has been incorporated into

our own.  The physician as good a code of his art as has been given

us to this day.  Theories and systems of medicine, indeed, have been

in perpetual change from the days of the good Hippocrates to the days

of the good Rush, but which of them is the true one? the present, to

be sure, as long as it is the present, but to yield its place in turn

to the next novelty, which is then to become the true system, and is

to mark the vast advance of medicine since the days of Hippocrates.

Our situation is certainly benefited by the discovery of some new and

very valuable medicines; and substituting those for some of his with

the treasure of facts, and of sound observations recorded by him

(mixed to be sure with anilities of his day) and we shall have nearly

the present sum of the healing art.  The statesman will find in these

languages history, politics, mathematics, ethics, eloquence, love of

country, to which he must add the sciences of his own day, for which

of them should be unknown to him?  And all the sciences must recur to

the classical languages for the etymon, and sound understanding of

their fundamental terms.  For the merchant I should not say that the

languages are a necessary.  Ethics, mathematics, geography, political

economy, history, seem to constitute the immediate foundations of his

calling.  The agriculturist needs ethics, mathematics, chemistry and

natural philosophy.  The mechanic the same.  To them the languages

are but ornament and comfort.  I know it is often said there have

been shining examples of men of great abilities in all the businesses

of life, without any other science than what they had gathered from

conversations and intercourse with the world.  But who can say what

these men would not have been had they started in the science on the

shoulders of a Demosthenes or Cicero, of a Locke or Bacon, or a

Newton?  To sum the whole, therefore, it may truly be said that the

classical languages are a solid basis for most, and an ornament to

all the sciences.




        I am warned by my aching fingers to close this hasty sketch,

and to place here my last and fondest wishes for the advancement of

our country in the useful sciences and arts, and my assurances of

respect and esteem for the Reviewer of the Memoir on modern Greek.







        LIMITS TO JUDICIAL REVIEW




        _To Judge Spencer Roane_

        _Poplar Forest, September 6, 1819_




        DEAR SIR, -- I had read in the Enquirer, and with great

approbation, the pieces signed Hampden, and have read them again with

redoubled approbation, in the copies you have been so kind as to send

me.  I subscribe to every tittle of them.  They contain the true

principles of the revolution of 1800, for that was as real a

revolution in the principles of our government as that of 1776 was in

its form; not effected indeed by the sword, as that, but by the

rational and peaceable instrument of reform, the suffrage of the

people.  The nation declared its will by dismissing functionaries of

one principle, and electing those of another, in the two branches,

executive and legisltaive, submitted to their election.  Over the

judiciary department, the constitution had deprived them of their

control.  That, therefore, has continued the reprobated system, and

although new matter has been occasionally incorporated into the old,

yet the leaven of the old mass seems to assimilate to itself the new,

and after twenty years' confirmation of the federal system by the

voice of the nation, declared through the medium of elections, we

find the judiciary on every occasion, still driving us into

consolidation.




        In denying the right they usurp of exclusively explaining the

constitution, I go further than you do, if I understand rightly your

quotation from the Federalist, of an opinion that "the judiciary is

the last resort in relation _to the other departments_ of the

government, but not in relation to the rights of the parties to the

compact under which the judiciary is derived." If this opinion be

sound, then indeed is our constitution a complete _felo de se_.  For

intending to establish three departments, co-ordinate and

independent, that they might check and balance one another, it has

given, according to this opinion, to one of them alone, the right to

prescribe rules for the government of the others, and to that one

too, which is unelected by, and independent of the nation.  For

experience has already shown that the impeachment it has provided is

not even a scare-crow; that such opinions as the one you combat, sent

cautiously out, as you observe also, by detachment, not belonging to

the case often, but sought for out of it, as if to rally the public

opinion beforehand to their views, and to indicate the line they are

to walk in, have been so quietly passed over as never to have excited

animadversion, even in a speech of any one of the body entrusted with

impeachment.  The constitution, on this hypothesis, is a mere thing

of wax in the hands of the judiciary, which they may twist and shape

into any form they please.  It should be remembered, as an axiom of

eternal truth in politics, that whatever power in any government is

independent, is absolute also; in theory only, at first, while the

spirit of the people is up, but in practice, as fast as that relaxes.

Independence can be trusted nowhere but with the people in mass.

They are inherently independent of all but moral law.  My

construction of the constitution is very different from that you

quote.  It is that each department is truly independent of the

others, and has an equal right to decide for itself what is the

meaning of the constitution in the cases submitted to its action; and

especially, where it is to act ultimately and without appeal.  I will

explain myself by examples, which, having occurred while I was in

office, are better known to me, and the principles which governed

them.




        A legislature had passed the sedition law.  The federal courts

had subjected certain individuals to its penalties of fine and

imprisonment.  On coming into office, I released these individuals by

the power of pardon committed to executive discretion, which could

never be more properly exercised than where citizens were suffering

without the authority of law, or, which was equivalent, under a law

unauthorized by the constitution, and therefore null.  In the case of

Marbury and Madison, the federal judges declared that commissions,

signed and sealed by the President, were valid, although not

delivered.  I deemed delivery essential to complete a deed, which, as

long as it remains in the hands of the party, is as yet no deed, it

is in _posse_ only, but not in _esse_, and I withheld delivery of the

commissions.  They cannot issue a mandamus to the President or

legislature, or to any of their officers (*).  When the British

treaty of ----- arrived, without any provision against the

impressment of our seamen, I determined not to ratify it.  The Senate

thought I should ask their advice.  I thought that would be a mockery

of them, when I was predetermined against following it, should they

advise its ratification.  The constitution had made their advice

necessary to confirm a treaty, but not to reject it.  This has been

blamed by some; but I have never doubted its soundness.  In the cases

of two persons, _antenati_, under exactly similar circumstances, the

federal court had determined that one of them (Duane) was not a

citizen; the House of Representatives nevertheless determined that

the other (Smith, of South Carolina) was a citizen, and admitted him

to his seat in their body.  Duane was a republican, and Smith a

federalist, and these decisions were made during the federal

ascendancy.




        (*) The constitution controlling the common law in this

particular.




        These are examples of my position, that each of the three

departments has equally the right to decide for itself what is its

duty under the constitution, without any regard to what the others

may have decided for themselves under a similar question.  But you

intimate a wish that my opinion should be known on this subject.  No,

dear Sir, I withdraw from all contest of opinion, and resign

everything cheerfully to the generation now in place.  They are wiser

than we were, and their successors will be wiser than they, from the

progressive advance of science.  Tranquillity is the _summum bonum_

of age.  I wish, therefore, to offend no man's opinion, nor to draw

disquieting animadversions on my own.  While duty required it, I met

opposition with a firm and fearless step.  But loving mankind in my

individual relations with them, I pray to be permitted to depart in

their peace; and like the superannuated soldier, _"quadragenis

stipendiis emeritis,"_ to hang my arms on the post.  I have unwisely,

I fear, embarked in an enterprise of great public concern, but not to

be accomplished within my term, without their liberal and prompt

support.  A severe illness the last year, and another from which I am

just emerged, admonish me that repetitions may be expected, against

which a declining frame cannot long bear up.  I am anxious,

therefore, to get our University so far advanced as may encourage the

public to persevere to its final accomplishment.  That secured, I

shall sing my _nunc demittas_.  I hope your labors will be long

continued in the spirit in which they have always been exercised, in

maintenance of those principles on which I verily believe the future

happiness of our country essentially depends.  I salute you with

affectionate and great respect.







        GREEK PRONUNCIATION




        _To Nathaniel F. Moore_

        _Monticello, September 22, 1819_

 

        I thank you, Sir for the remarks on the pronunciation of the

Greek language which you have been so kind as to send me.  I have

read them with pleasure, as I had the pamphlet of Mr. Pickering on

the same subject.  This question has occupied long and learned

inquiry, and cannot, as I apprehend, be ever positively decided.

Very early in my classical days, I took up the idea that the ancient

Greek language having been changed by degrees into the modern, and

the present race of that people having received it by tradition, they

had of course better pretensions to the ancient pronunciation also,

than any foreign nation could have.  When at Paris, I became

acquainted with some learned Greeks, from whom I took pains to learn

the modern pronunciation.  But I could not receive it as genuine _in

toto_.  I could not believe that the ancient Greeks had provided six

different notations for the simple sound of {i}, iota, and left the

five other sounds which we give to _n, v, {i-i}, {oi}, {yi},_ without

any characters of notation at all.  I could not acknowledge the {y},

upsillon, as an equivalent to our {n}, as in {Achilleys}, which they

pronounce Achillevs, nor the {g}, gamma, to our _y_, as in {alge},

which they pronounce alye.  I concluded, therefore, that as

experience proves to us that the pronunciation of all languages

changes, in their descent through time, that of the Greek must have

done so also in some degree; and the more probably, as the body of

the words themselves had substantially changed, and I presumed that

the instances above mentioned might be classed with the degeneracies

of time; a presumption strengthened by their remarkable cacophony.

As to all the other letters, I have supposed we might yield to their

traditionary claim of a more orthodox pronunciation.  Indeed, they

sound most of them as we do, and, where they differ, as in the {e, d,

ch,} their sounds do not revolt us, nor impair the beauty of the

language.




        If we adhere to the Erasmian pronunciation, we must go to Italy

for it, as we must do for the most probably correct pronunciation of

the language of the Romans, because rejecting the modern, we must

argue that the ancient pronunciation was probably brought from

Greece, with the language itself; and, as Italy was the country to

which it was brought, and from which it emanated to other nations, we

must presume it better preserved there than with the nations copying

from them, who would be apt to affect its pronunciation with some of

their own national peculiarities.  And in fact, we find that no two

nations pronounce it alike, although all pretend to the Erasmian

pronunciation.  But the whole subject is conjectural, and allows

therefore full and lawful scope to the vagaries of the human mind.  I

am glad, however, to see the question stirred here; because it may

excite among our young countrymen a spirit of inquiry and criticism,

and lead them to more attention to this most beautiful of all

languages.  And wishing that the salutary example you have set may

have this good effect, I salute you with great respect and

consideration.







        "I TOO AM AN EPICUREAN"




        _To William Short, with a Syllabus_

        _Monticello, October 31, 1819_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favor of the 21st is received.  My late

illness, in which you are so kind as to feel an interest, was

produced by a spasmodic stricture of the ilium, which came upon me on

the 7th inst.  The crisis was short, passed over favorably on the

fourth day, and I should soon have been well but that a dose of

calomel and jalap, in which were only eight or nine grains of the

former, brought on a salivation.  Of this, however, nothing now

remains but a little soreness of the mouth.  I have been able to get

on horseback for three or four days past.




        As you say of yourself, I too am an Epicurian.  I consider the

genuine (not the imputed) doctrines of Epicurus as containing

everything rational in moral philosophy which Greece and Rome have

left us.  Epictetus indeed, has given us what was good of the stoics;

all beyond, of their dogmas, being hypocrisy and grimace.  Their

great crime was in their calumnies of Epicurus and misrepresentations

of his doctrines; in which we lament to see the candid character of

Cicero engaging as an accomplice.  Diffuse, vapid, rhetorical, but

enchanting.  His prototype Plato, eloquent as himself, dealing out

mysticisms incomprehensible to the human mind, has been deified by

certain sects usurping the name of Christians; because, in his foggy

conceptions, they found a basis of impenetrable darkness whereon to

rear fabrications as delirious, of their own invention.  These they

fathered blasphemously on him whom they claimed as their founder, but

who would disclaim them with the indignation which their caricatures

of his religion so justly excite.  Of Socrates we have nothing

genuine but in the Memorabilia of Xenophon; for Plato makes him one

of his Collocutors merely to cover his own whimsies under the mantle

of his name; a liberty of which we are told Socrates himself

complained.  Seneca is indeed a fine moralist, disfiguring his work

at times with some Stoicisms, and affecting too much of antithesis

and point, yet giving us on the whole a great deal of sound and

practical morality.  But the greatest of all the reformers of the

depraved religion of his own country, was Jesus of Nazareth.

Abstracting what is really his from the rubbish in which it is

buried, easily distinguished by its lustre from the dross of his

biographers, and as separable from that as the diamond from the

dunghill, we have the outlines of a system of the most sublime

morality which has ever fallen from the lips of man; outlines which

it is lamentable he did not live to fill up.  Epictetus and Epicurus

give laws for governing ourselves, Jesus a supplement of the duties

and charities we owe to others.  The establishment of the innocent

and genuine character of this benevolent moralist, and the rescuing

it from the imputation of imposture, which has resulted from

artificial systems, (*) invented by ultra-Christian sects,

unauthorized by a single word ever uttered by him, is a most

desirable object, and one to which Priestley has successfully devoted

his labors and learning.  It would in time, it is to be hoped, effect

a quiet euthanasia of the heresies of bigotry and fanaticism which

have so long triumphed over human reason, and so generally and deeply

afflicted mankind; but this work is to be begun by winnowing the

grain from the chaff of the historians of his life.  I have sometimes

thought of translating Epictetus (for he has never been tolerable

translated into English) by adding the genuine doctrines of Epicurus

from the Syntagma of Gassendi, and an abstract from the Evangelists

of whatever has the stamp of the eloquence and fine imagination of

Jesus.  The last I attempted too hastily some twelve or fifteen years

ago.  It was the work of two or three nights only, at Washington,

after getting through the evening task of reading the letters and

papers of the day.  But with one foot in the grave, these are now

idle projects for me.  My business is to beguile the wearisomeness of

declining life, as I endeavor to do, by the delights of classical

reading and of mathematical truths, and by the consolations of a

sound philosophy, equally indifferent to hope and fear.




        (*) _e. g._ The immaculate conception of Jesus, his

deification, the creation of the world by him, his miraculous powers,

his resurrection and visible ascension, his corporeal presence in the

Eucharist, the Trinity; original sin, atonement, regeneration,

election, orders of Hierarchy, &c.




        I take the liberty of observing that you are not a true

disciple of our master Epicurus, in indulging the indolence to which

you say you are yielding.  One of his canons, you know, was that "the

indulgence which prevents a greater pleasure, or produces a greater

pain, is to be avoided." Your love of repose will lead, in its

progress, to a suspension of healthy exercise, a relaxation of mind,

an indifference to everything around you, and finally to a debility

of body, and hebetude of mind, the farthest of all things from the

happiness which the well-regulated indulgences of Epicurus ensure;

fortitude, you know, is one of his four cardinal virtues.  That

teaches us to meet and surmount difficulties; not to fly from them,

like cowards; and to fly, too, in vain, for they will meet and arrest

us at every turn of our road.  Weigh this matter well; brace yourself

up; take a seat with Correa, and come and see the finest portion of

your country, which, if you have not forgotten, you still do not

know, because it is no longer the same as when you knew it.  It will

add much to the happiness of my recovery to be able to receive Correa

and yourself, and prove the estimation in which I hold you both.

Come, too, and see our incipient University, which has advanced with

great activitiy this year.  By the end of the next, we shall have

elegant accommodations for seven professors, and the year following

the professors themselves.  No secondary character will be received

among them.  Either the ablest which America or Europe can furnish,

or none at all.  They will give us the selected society of a great

city separated from the dissipations and levities of its ephemeral

insects.




        I am glad the bust of Condorcet has been saved and so well

placed.  His genius should be before us; while the lamentable, but

singular act of ingratitude which tarnished his latter days, may be

thrown behind us.




        I will place under this a syllabus of the doctrines of

Epicurus, somewhat in the lapidary style, which I wrote some twenty

years ago, a like one of the philosophy of Jesus, of nearly the same

age, is too long to be copied.  _Vale, et tibi persuade carissimum te

esse mihi_.




        _Syllabus of the doctrines of Epicurus._




        _Physical_. -- The Universe eternal.

        Its parts, great and small, interchangeable.

        Matter and Void alone.

        Motion inherent in matter which is weighty and declining.

        Eternal circulation of the elements of bodies.

        Gods, an order of beings next superior to man, enjoying in

their sphere, their own felicities; but not meddling with the

concerns of the scale of beings below them.

        _Moral_. -- Happiness the aim of life.

        Virtue the foundation of happiness.

        Utility the test of virtue.

        Pleasure active and In-do-lent.

        In-do-lence is the absence of pain, the true felicity.

        Active, consists in agreeable motion; it is not happiness, but

the means to produce it.

        Thus the absence of hunger is an article of felicity; eating

the means to obtain it.

        The _summum bonum_ is to be not pained in body, nor troubled in

mind.

        _i. e._ In-do-lence of body, tranquillity of mind.

        To procure tranquillity of mind we must avoid desire and fear,

the two principal diseases of the mind.

        Man is a free agent.

        Virtue consists in 1. Prudence. 2. Temperance. 3. Fortitude. 4.

Justice.

        To which are opposed, 1. Folly. 2. Desire. 3. Fear. 4. Deceit.







        "A FIRE BELL IN THE NIGHT"




        _To John Holmes_

        _Monticello, April 22, 1820_




        I thank you, dear Sir, for the copy you have been so kind as to

send me of the letter to your constituents on the Missouri question.

It is a perfect justification to them.  I had for a long time ceased

to read newspapers, or pay any attention to public affairs, confident

they were in good hands, and content to be a passenger in our bark to

the shore from which I am not distant.  But this momentous question,

like a fire bell in the night, awakened and filled me with terror.  I

considered it at once as the knell of the Union.  It is hushed,

indeed, for the moment.  But this is a reprieve only, not a final

sentence.  A geographical line, coinciding with a marked principle,

moral and political, once conceived and held up to the angry passions

of men, will never be obliterated; and every new irritation will mark

it deeper and deeper.  I can say, with conscious truth, that there is

not a man on earth who would sacrifice more than I would to relieve

us from this heavy reproach, in any _practicable_ way.  The cession

of that kind of property, for so it is misnamed, is a bagatelle which

would not cost me a second thought, if, in that way, a general

emancipation and _expatriation_ could be effected; and gradually, and

with due sacrifices, I think it might be.  But as it is, we have the

wolf by the ears, and we can neither hold him, nor safely let him go.

Justice is in one scale, and self-preservation in the other.  Of one

thing I am certain, that as the passage of slaves from one State to

another, would not make a slave of a single human being who would not

be so without it, so their diffusion over a greater surface would

make them individually happier, and proportionally facilitate the

accomplishment of their emancipation, by dividing the burthen on a

greater number of coadjutors.  An abstinence too, from this act of

power, would remove the jealousy excited by the undertaking of

Congress to regulate the condition of the different descriptions of

men composing a State.  This certainly is the exclusive right of

every State, which nothing in the constitution has taken from them

and given to the General Government.  Could Congress, for example,

say, that the non-freemen of Connecticut shall be freemen, or that

they shall not emigrate into any other State?




        I regret that I am now to die in the belief, that the useless

sacrifice of themselves by the generation of 1776, to acquire

self-government and happiness to their country, is to be thrown away

by the unwise and unworthy passions of their sons, and that my only

consolation is to be, that I live not to weep over it.  If they would

but dispassionately weigh the blessings they will throw away, against

an abstract principle more likely to be effected by union than by

scission, they would pause before they would perpetrate this act of

suicide on themselves, and of treason against the hopes of the world.

To yourself, as the faithful advocate of the Union, I tender the

offering of my high esteem and respect.







        JESUS AND THE JEWS




        _To William Short_

        _Monticello, August 4, 1820_




        DEAR SIR, -- I owe you a letter for your favor of June the

29th, which was received in due time; and there being no subject of

the day, of particular interest, I will make this a supplement to

mine of April the 13th.  My aim in that was, to justify the character

of Jesus against the fictions of his pseudo-followers, which have

exposed him to the inference of being an impostor.  For if we could

believe that he really countenanced the follies, the falsehoods and

the charlatanisms which his biographers father on him, and admit the

misconstructions, interpolations and theorizations of the fathers of

the early, and fanatics of the latter ages, the conclusion would be

irresistible by every sound mind, that he was an impostor.  I give no

credit to their falsifications of his actions and doctrines, and to

rescue his character, the postulate in my letter asked only what is

granted in reading every other historian.  When Livy and Siculus, for

example, tell us things which coincide with our experience of the

order of nature, we credit them on their word, and place their

narrations among the records of credible history.  But when they tell

us of calves speaking, of statues sweating blood, and other things

against the course of nature, we reject these as fables not belonging

to history.  In like manner, when an historian, speaking of a

character well known and established on satisfactory testimony,

imputes to it things incompatible with that character, we reject them

without hesitation, and assent to that only of which we have better

evidence.  Had Plutarch informed us that Caesar and Cicero passed

their whole lives in religious exercises, and abstinence from the

affairs of the world, we should reject what was so inconsistent with

their established characters, still crediting what he relates in

conformity with our ideas of them.  So again, the superlative wisdom

of Socrates is testified by all antiquity, and placed on ground not

to be questioned.  When, therefore, Plato puts into his mouth such

paralogisms, such quibbles on words, and sophisms, as a school boy

would be ashamed of, we conclude they were the whimsies of Plato's

own foggy brain, and acquit Socrates of puerilities so unlike his

character.  (Speaking of Plato, I will add, that no writer, antient

or modern, has bewildered the world with more _ignes fatui_, than

this renowned philosopher, in Ethics, in Politics and Physics.  In

the latter, to specify a single example, compare his views of the

animal economy, in his Timaeus, with those of Mrs. Bryan in her

Conversations on Chemistry, and weigh the science of the canonised

philosopher against the good sense of the unassuming lady.  But

Plato's visions have furnished a basis for endless systems of

mystical theology, and he is therefore all but adopted as a Christian

saint.  It is surely time for men to think for themselves, and to

throw off the authority of names so artificially magnified.  But to

return from this parenthasis.) I say, that this free exercise of

reason is all I ask for the vindication of the character of Jesus.

We find in the writings of his biographers matter of two distinct

descriptions.  First, a groundwork of vulgar ignorance, of things

impossible, of superstitions, fanaticisms and fabrications.

Intermixed with these, again, are sublime ideas of the Supreme Being,

aphorisms and precepts of the purest morality and benevolence,

sanctioned by a life of humility, innocence and simplicity of

manners, neglect of riches, absence of worldly ambition and honors,

with an eloquence and persuasiveness which have not been surpassed.

These could not be inventions of the groveling authors who relate

them.  They are far beyond the powers of their feeble minds.  They

shew that there was a character, the subject of their history, whose

splendid conceptions were above all suspicion of being interpolations

from their hands.  Can we be at a loss in separating such materials,

and ascribing each to its genuine author?  The difference is obvious

to the eye and to the understanding, and we may read as we run to

each his part; and I will venture to affirm, that he who, as I have

done, will undertake to winnow this grain from its chaff, will find

it not to require a moment's consideration.  The parts fall asunder

of themselves, as would those of an image of metal and clay.




        There are, I acknowledge, passages not free from objection,

which we may, with probability, ascribe to Jesus himself; but

claiming indulgence from the circumstances under which he acted.  His

object was the reformation of some articles in the religion of the

Jews, as taught by Moses.  That sect had presented for the object of

their worship, a being of terrific character, cruel, vindictive,

capricious and unjust.  Jesus, taking for his type the best qualities

of the human head and heart, wisdom, justice, goodness, and adding to

them power, ascribed all of these, but in infinite perfection, to the

Supreme Being, and formed him really worthy of their adoration.

Moses had either not believed in a future state of existence, or had

not thought it essential to be explicitly taught to his people.

Jesus inculcated that doctrine with emphasis and precision.  Moses

had bound the Jews to many idle ceremonies, mummeries and

observances, of no effect towards producing the social utilities

which constitute the essence of virtue; Jesus exposed their futility

and insignificance.  The one instilled into his people the most

anti-social spirit towards other nations; the other preached

philanthropy and universal charity and benevolence.  The office of

reformer of the superstitions of a nation, is ever dangerous.  Jesus

had to walk on the perilous confines of reason and religion: and a

step to right or left might place him within the gripe of the priests

of the superstition, a blood thirsty race, as cruel and remorseless

as the being whom they represented as the family God of Abraham, of

Isaac and of Jacob, and the local God of Israel.  They were

constantly laying snares, too, to entangle him in the web of the law.

He was justifiable, therefore, in avoiding these by evasions, by

sophisms, by misconstructions and misapplications of scraps of the

prophets, and in defending himself with these their own weapons, as

sufficient, _ad homines_, at least.  That Jesus did not mean to

impose himself on mankind as the son of God, physically speaking, I

have been convinced by the writings of men more learned than myself

in that lore.  But that he might conscientiously believe himself

inspired from above, is very possible.  The whole religion of the

Jews, inculcated on him from his infancy, was founded in the belief

of divine inspiration.  The fumes of the most disordered imaginations

were recorded in their religious code, as special communications of

the Deity; and as it could not but happen that, in the course of

ages, events would now and then turn up to which some of these vague

rhapsodies might be accommodated by the aid of allegories, figures,

types, and other tricks upon words, they have not only preserved

their credit with the Jews of all subsequent times, but are the

foundation of much of the religions of those who have schismatised

from them.  Elevated by the enthusiasm of a warm and pure heart,

conscious of the high strains of an eloquence which had not been

taught him, he might readily mistake the coruscations of his own fine

genius for inspirations of an higher order.  This belief carried,

therefore, no more personal imputation, than the belief of Socrates,

that himself was under the care and admonitions of a guardian Daemon.

And how many of our wisest men still believe in the reality of these

inspirations, while perfectly sane on all other subjects.  Excusing,

therefore, on these considerations, those passages in the gospels

which seem to bear marks of weakness in Jesus, ascribing to him what

alone is consistent with the great and pure character of which the

same writings furnish proofs, and to their proper authors their own

trivialities and imbecilities, I think myself authorised to conclude

the purity and distinction of his character, in opposition to the

impostures which those authors would fix upon him; and that the

postulate of my former letter is no more than is granted in all other

historical works.




        Mr. Correa is here, on his farewell visit to us.  He has been

much pleased with the plan and progress of our University, and has

given some valuable hints to its botanical branch.  He goes to do, I

hope, much good in his new country; the public instruction there, as

I understand, being within the department destined for him.  He is

not without dissatisfaction, and reasonable dissatisfaction too, with

the piracies of Baltimore; but his justice and friendly dispositions

will, I am sure, distinguish between the iniquities of a few

plunderers, and the sound principles of our country at large, and of

our government especially.  From many conversations with him, I hope

he sees, and will promote in his new situation, the advantages of a

cordial fraternization among all the American nations, and the

importance of their coalescing in an American system of policy,

totally independent of, and unconnected with that of Europe.  The day

is not distant, when we may formally require a meridian of partition

through the ocean which separates the two hemispheres, on the hither

side of which no European gun shall ever be heard, nor an American on

the other; and when, during the rage of the eternal wars of Europe,

the lion and the lamb, within our regions, shall lie down together in

peace.  The excess of population in Europe and want of room, render

war, in their opinion, necessary to keep down that excess of numbers.

Here, room is abundant, population scanty, and peace the necessary

means for producing men, to whom the redundant soil is offering the

means of life and happiness.  The principles of society there and

here, then, are radically different, and I hope no American patriot

will ever lose sight of the essential policy of interdicting in the

seas and territories of both Americas, the ferocious and sanguinary

contests of Europe.  I wish to see this coalition begun.  I am

earnest for an agreement with the maritime powers of Europe,

assigning them the task of keeping down the piracies of their seas

and the cannibalisms of the African coasts, and to us, the

suppression of the same enormities within our seas: and for this

purpose, I should rejoice to see the fleets of Brazil and the United

States riding together as brethren of the same family, and pursuing

the same object.  And indeed it would be of happy augury to begin at

once this concert of action here, on the invitation of either to the

other government, while the way might be preparing for withdrawing

our cruisers from Europe, and preventing naval collisions there which

daily endanger our peace.




        Turning to another part of your letter, I do not think the

obstacles insuperable which you state as opposed to your visit to us.

From one of the persons mentioned, I never heard a sentiment but of

esteem for you and I am certain you would be recieved with kindness

and cordiality.  But still the call may be omitted without notice.

The mountain lies between his residence and the main road, and

occludes the expectation of transient visits.  I am equally ignorant

of any dispositions not substantially friendly to you in the other

person.  But the alibi there gives you ten free months in the year.

But if the visit is to be but once in your life, I would suppress my

impatience and consent it should be made a year or two hence.

Because, by that time our University will be compleate and in full

action: and you would recieve the satisfaction, in the final adieu to

your native state, of seeing that she would retain her equal standing

in the sisterhood of our republics.  However, come now, come then, or

come when you please, your visit will give me the gratification I

feel in every opportunity of proving to you the sincerity of my

friendship and respect for you.







        THE UNIVERSITY, NEOLOGY, AND MATERIALISM




        _To John Adams_

        _Monticello, Aug. 15, 1820_




        I am a great defaulter, my dear Sir, in our correspondence, but

prostrate health rarely permits me to write; and, when it does,

matters of business imperiously press their claims.  I am getting

better however, slowly, swelled legs being now the only serious

symptom, and these, I believe, proceed from extreme debility.  I can

walk but little; but I ride 6. or 8. miles a day without fatigue; and

within a few days, I shall endeavor to visit my other home, after a

twelve month's absence from it.  Our University, 4 miles distant,

gives me frequent exercise, and the oftener as I direct it's

architecture.  It's plan is unique, and it is becoming an object of

curiosity for the traveller.  I have lately had an opportunity of

reading a critique on this institution in your North American Review

of January last, having been not without anxiety to see what that

able work would say of us: and I was relieved on finding in it much

coincidence of opinion, and even, where criticisms were indulged, I

found they would have been obviated had the developements of our plan

been fuller.  But these were restrained by the character of the paper

reviewed, being merely a report of outlines, not a detailed treatise,

and addressed to a legislative body, not to a learned academy.  E.g.

as an inducement to introduce the Anglo-Saxon into our plan, it was

said that it would reward amply the _few weeks_ of attention which

alone would be requisite for it's attainment; leaving both term and

degree under an indefinite expression, because I know that not much

time is necessary to attain it to an useful degree, sufficient to

give such instruction in the etymologies of our language as may

satisfy ordinary students, while more time would be requisite for

those who would propose to attain a critical knolege of it.  In a

letter which I had occasion to write to Mr. Crofts (who sent you, I

believe, as well as myself, a copy of his treatise on the English and

German languages, as preliminary to an Etymological dictionary he

meditated) I went into explanations with him of an easy process for

simplifying the study of the Anglo-Saxon, and lessening the terrors,

and difficulties presented by it's rude Alphabet, and unformed

orthography.  But this is a subject beyond the bounds of a letter, as

it was beyond the bounds of a Report to the legislature.  Mr. Crofts

died, I believe, before any progress was made in the work he had

projected.




        The reviewer expresses doubt, rather than decision, on our

placing Military and Naval architecture in the department of Pure

Mathematics.  Military architecture embraces fortification and field

works, which with their bastions, curtains, hornworks, redoubts etc.

are based on a technical combination of lines and angles.  These are

adapted to offence and defence, with and against the effects of

bombs, balls, escalades etc.  But lines and angles make the sum of

elementary geometry, a branch of Pure Mathematics: and the direction

of the bombs, balls, and other projectiles, the necessary appendages

of military works, altho' no part of their architecture, belong to

the conic sections, a branch of transcendental geometry.  Diderot and

Dalembert therefore, in their Arbor scientiae, have placed military

architecture in the department of elementary geometry.  Naval

architecture teaches the best form and construction of vessels; for

which best form it has recourse to the question of the Solid of least

resistance, a problem of transcendental geometry.  And it's

appurtenant projectiles belong to the same branch, as in the

preceding case.  It is true that so far as respects the action of the

water on the rudder and oars, and of the wind on the sails, it may be

placed in the department of mechanics, as Diderot and Dalambert have

done: but belonging quite as much to geometry, and allied in it's

military character, to military architecture, it simplified our plan

to place both under the same head.  These views are so obvious that I

am sure they would have required but a second thought to reconcile

the reviewer to their _location_ under the head of Pure Mathematics.

For this word _Location_, see Bailey, Johnson, Sheridan, Walker etc.

But if Dictionaries are to be the Arbiters of language, in which of

them shall we find _neologism_.  No matter.  It is a good word, well

sounding, obvious, and expresses an idea which would otherwise

require circumlocution.  The Reviewer was justifiable therefore in

using it; altho' he noted at the same time, as unauthoritative,

_centrality_, _grade_, _sparse_; all which have been long used in

common speech and writing.  I am a friend to _neology_.  It is the

only way to give to a language copiousness and euphony.  Without it

we should still be held to the vocabulary of Alfred or of Ulphilas;

and held to their state of science also: for I am sure they had no

words which could have conveyed the ideas of Oxigen, cotyledons,

zoophytes, magnetism, electricity, hyaline, and thousands of others

expressing ideas not then existing, nor of possible communication in

the state of their language.  What a language has the French become

since the date of their revolution, by the free introduction of new

words!  The most copious and eloquent in the living world; and equal

to the Greek, had not that been regularly modifiable almost ad

infinitum.  Their rule was that whenever their language furnished or

adopted a root, all it's branches, in every part of speech were

legitimated by giving them their appropriate terminations.

{adelphos} ["brother"], {adelphe} ["sister"], {adelphidion} ["little

brother"], {adelphotes} ["brotherly affection"], {adelphixis}

["brotherhood"], {adelphidoys} ["nephew"], {adelphikos} ["brotherly,"

adj.], {adelphizo} ["to adopt as a brother"], {adelphikos}

["brotherly," adv.].  And this should be the law of every language.

Thus, having adopted the adjective _fraternal_, it is a root, which

should legitimate fraternity, fraternation, fraternisation,

fraternism, to fraternate, fraternise, fraternally.  And give the

word neologism to our language, as a root, and it should give us it's

fellow substantives, neology, neologist, neologisation; it's

adjectives neologous, neological, neologistical, it's verb neologise,

and adverb neologically.  Dictionaries are but the depositories of

words already legitimated by usage.  Society is the work-shop in

which new ones are elaborated.  When an individual uses a new word,

if illformed it is rejected in society, if wellformed, adopted, and,

after due time, laid up in the depository of dictionaries.  And if,

in this process of sound neologisation, our transatlantic brethren

shall not choose to accompany us, we may furnish, after the Ionians,

a second example of a colonial dialect improving on it's primitive.




        But enough of criticism: let me turn to your puzzling letter of

May 12. on matter, spirit, motion etc.  It's croud of scepticisms

kept me from sleep.  I read it, and laid it down: read it, and laid

it down, again and again: and to give rest to my mind, I was obliged

to recur ultimately to my habitual anodyne, `I feel: therefore I

exist.' I feel bodies which are not myself: there are other

existencies then.  I call them _matter_.  I feel them changing place.

This gives me _motion_.  Where there is an absence of matter, I call

it _void_, or _nothing_, or _immaterial space_.  On the basis of

sensation, of matter and motion, we may erect the fabric of all the

certainties we can have or need.  I can concieve _thought_ to be an

action of a particular organisation of matter, formed for that

purpose by it's creator, as well as that _attraction_ in an action of

matter, or _magnetism_ of loadstone.  When he who denies to the

Creator the power of endowing matter with the mode of action called

_thinking_ shall shew how he could endow the Sun with the mode of

action called _attraction_, which reins the planets in the tract of

their orbits, or how an absence of matter can have a will, and, by

that will, put matter into motion, then the materialist may be

lawfully required to explain the process by which matter exercises

the faculty of thinking.  When once we quit the basis of sensation,

all is in the wind.  To talk of _immaterial_ existences is to talk of

_nothings_.  To say that the human soul, angels, god, are immaterial,

is to say they are _nothings_, or that there is no god, no angels, no

soul.  I cannot reason otherwise: but I believe I am supported in my

creed of materialism by Locke, Tracy, and Stewart.  At what age of

the Christian church this heresy of _immaterialism_, this masked

atheism, crept in, I do not know.  But a heresy it certainly is.

Jesus taught nothing of it.  He told us indeed that `God is a

spirit,' but he has not defined what a spirit is, nor said that it is

not _matter_.  And the antient fathers generally, if not universally,

held it to be matter: light and thin indeed, an etherial gas; but

still matter.  Origen says `Deus reapse corporalis est; sed graviorum

tantum corporum ratione, incorporeus.' Tertullian `quid enim deus

nisi corpus?' and again `quis negabit deumesse corpus?  Etsi deus

spiritus, spiritus etiam corpus est, sui generis, in sua effigie.'

St. Justin Martyr `{to Theion phamen einai asomaton oyk oti asomaton

-- epeide de to me krateisthai ypo tinos, toy krateisthai timioteron

esti, dia toyto kaloymen ayton asomaton.}' And St. Macarius, speaking

of angels says `quamvis enim subtilia sint, tamen in substantia,

forma et figura, secundum tenuitatem naturae eorum, corpora sunt

tenuia.' And St. Austin, St. Basil, Lactantius, Tatian, Athenagoras

and others, with whose writings I pretend not a familiarity, are said

by those who are, to deliver the same doctrine.  Turn to your Ocellus

d'Argens 97. 105. and to his Timaeus 17. for these quotations.  In

England these Immaterialists might have been burnt until the 29. Car.

2. when the writ de haeretico comburendo was abolished: and here

until the revolution, that statute not having extended to us.  All

heresies being now done away with us, these schismatists are merely

atheists, differing from the material Atheist only in their belief

that `nothing made something,' and from the material deist who

believes that matter alone can operate on matter.




        Rejecting all organs of information therefore but my senses, I

rid myself of the Pyrrhonisms with which an indulgence in

speculations hyperphysical and antiphysical so uselessly occupy and

disquiet the mind.  A single sense may indeed be sometimes decieved,

but rarely: and never all our senses together, with their faculty of

reasoning.  They evidence realities; and there are enough of these

for all the purposes of life, without plunging into the fathomless

abyss of dreams and phantasms.  I am satisfied, and sufficiently

occupied with the things which are, without tormenting or troubling

myself about those which may indeed be, but of which I have no

evidence.  I am sure that I really know many, many, things, and none

more surely than that I love you with all my heart, and pray for the

continuance of your life until you shall be tired of it yourself.







        JUDICIAL SUBVERSION




        _To Thomas Ritchie_

        _Monticello, December 25, 1820_




        DEAR SIR, -- On my return home after a long absence, I find

here your favor of November the 23d, with Colonel Taylor's

"Construction Construed," which you have been so kind as to send me,

in the name of the author as well as yourself.  Permit me, if you

please, to use the same channel for conveying to him the thanks I

render you also for this mark of attention.  I shall read it, I know,

with edification, as I did his Inquiry, to which I acknowledge myself

indebted for many valuable ideas, and for the correction of some

errors of early opinion, never seen in a correct light until

presented to me in that work.  That the present volume is equally

orthodox, I know before reading it, because I know that Colonel

Taylor and myself have rarely, if ever, differed in any political

principle of importance.  Every act of his life, and every word he

ever wrote, satisfies me of this.  So, also, as to the two

Presidents, late and now in office, I know them both to be of

principles as truly republican as any men living.  If there be

anything amiss, therefore, in the present state of our affairs, as

the formidable deficit lately unfolded to us indicates, I ascribe it

to the inattention of Congress to their duties, to their unwise

dissipation and waste of the public contributions.  They seemed, some

little while ago, to be at a loss for objects whereon to throw away

the supposed fathomless funds of the treasury.  I had feared the

result, because I saw among them some of my old fellow laborers, of

tried and known principles, yet often in their minorities.  I am

aware that in one of their most ruinous vagaries, the people were

themselves betrayed into the same phrenzy with their Representatives.

The deficit produced, and a heavy tax to supply it, will, I trust,

bring both to their sober senses.




        But it is not from this branch of government we have most to

fear.  Taxes and short elections will keep them right.  The judiciary

of the United States is the subtle corps of sappers and miners

constantly working under ground to undermine the foundations of our

confederated fabric.  They are construing our constitution from a

co-ordination of a general and special government to a general and

supreme one alone.  This will lay all things at their feet, and they

are too well versed in English law to forget the maxim, _"boni

judicis est ampliare juris-dictionem."_ We shall see if they are bold

enough to take the daring stride their five lawyers have lately

taken.  If they do, then, with the editor of our book, in his address

to the public, I will say, that "against this every man should raise

his voice," and more, should uplift his arm.  Who wrote this

admirable address?  Sound, luminous, strong, not a word too much, nor

one which can be changed but for the worse.  That pen should go on,

lay bare these wounds of our constitution, expose the decisions

_seriatim_, and arouse, as it is able, the attention of the nation to

these bold speculators on its patience.  Having found, from

experience, that impeachment is an impracticable thing, a mere

scare-crow, they consider themselves secure for life; they sculk from

responsibility to public opinion, the only remaining hold on them,

under a practice first introduced into England by Lord Mansfield.  An

opinion is huddled up in conclave, perhaps by a majority of one,

delivered as if unanimous, and with the silent acquiescence of lazy

or timid associates, by a crafty chief judge, who sophisticates the

law to his mind, by the turn of his own reasoning.  A judiciary law

was once reported by the Attorney General to Congress, requiring each

judge to deliver his opinion _seriatim_ and openly, and then to give

it in writing to the clerk to be entered in the record.  A judiciary

independent of a king or executive alone, is a good thing; but

independence of the will of the nation is a solecism, at least in a

republican government.




        But to return to your letter; you ask for my opinion of the

work you send me, and to let it go out to the public.  This I have

ever made a point of declining, (one or two instances only excepted.)

Complimentary thanks to writers who have sent me their works, have

betrayed me sometimes before the public, without my consent having

been asked.  But I am far from presuming to direct the reading of my

fellow citizens, who are good enough judges themselves of what is

worthy their reading.  I am, also, too desirous of quiet to place

myself in the way of contention.  Against this I am admonished by

bodily decay, which cannot be unaccompanied by corresponding wane of

the mind.  Of this I am as yet sensible, sufficiently to be unwilling

to trust myself before the public, and when I cease to be so, I hope

that my friends will be too careful of me to draw me forth and

present me, like a Priam in armor, as a spectacle for public

compassion.  I hope our political bark will ride through all its

dangers; but I can in future be but an inert passenger.




        I salute you with sentiments of great friendship and respect.







        THE MISSOURI QUESTION




        _To Albert Gallatin_

        _Monticello, Dec. 26, 1820_




        DEAR SIR, -- `It is said to be an ill wind which blows

favorably to no one.' My ill health has long suspended the too

frequent troubles I have heretofore given you with my European

correspondence.  To this is added a stiffening wrist, the effect of

age on an antient dislocation, which renders writing slow and

painful, and disables me nearly from all correspondence, and may very

possibly make this the last trouble I shall give you in that way.




        Looking from our quarter of the world over the horizon of yours

we imagine we see storms gathering which may again desolate the face

of that country.  So many revolutions going on, in different

countries at the same time, such combinations of tyranny, and

military preparations and movements to suppress them.  England &

France unsafe from internal conflict, Germany, on the first favorable

occasion, ripe for insurrection, such a state of things, we suppose,

must end in war, which needs a kindling spark in one spot only to

spread over the whole.  Your information can correct these views

which are stated only to inform you of impressions here.




        At home things are not well.  The flood of paper money, as you

well know, had produced an exaggeration of nominal prices and at the

same time a facility of obtaining money, which not only encouraged

speculations on fictitious capital, but seduced those of real

capital, even in private life, to contract debts too freely.  Had

things continued in the same course, these might have been

manageable.  But the operations of the U.S. bank for the demolition

of the state banks, obliged these suddenly to call in more than half

of their paper, crushed all fictitious and doubtful capital, and

reduced the prices of property and produce suddenly to 1/3 of what

they had been.  Wheat, for example, at the distance of two or three

days from market, fell to and continues at from one third to half a

dollar.  Should it be stationary at this for a while, a very general

revolution of property must take place.  Something of the same

character has taken place in our fiscal system.  A little while back

Congress seemed at a loss for objects whereon to squander the

supposed fathomless funds of our treasury.  This short frenzy has

been arrested by a deficit of 5 millions the last year, and of 7.

millions this year.  A loan was adopted for the former and is

proposed for the latter, which threatens to saddle us with a

perpetual debt.  I hope a tax will be preferred, because it will

awaken the attention of the people, and make reformation & economy

the principles of the next election.  The frequent recurrence of this

chastening operation can alone restrain the propensity of governments

to enlarge expence beyond income.  The steady tenor of the courts of

the US. to break down the constitutional barrier between the

coordinate powers of the States, and of the Union, and a formal

opinion lately given by 5. lawyers of too much eminence to be

neglected, give uneasiness.  But nothing has ever presented so

threatening an aspect as what is called the Missouri question.  The

Federalists compleatly put down, and despairing of ever rising again

under the old division of whig and tory, devised a new one, of

slave-holding, & non-slave-holding states, which, while it had a

semblance of being Moral, was at the same time Geographical, and

calculated to give them ascendancy by debauching their old opponents

to a coalition with them.  Moral the question certainly is not,

because the removal of slaves from one state to another, no more than

their removal from one country to another, would never make a slave

of one human being who would not be so without it.  Indeed if there

were any morality in the question it is on the other side; because by

spreading them over a larger surface, their happiness would be

increased, & the burthen of their future liberation lightened by

bringing a greater number of shoulders under it.  However it served

to throw dust into the eyes of the people and to fanaticise them,

while to the knowing ones it gave a geographical and preponderant

line of the Patomac and Ohio, throwing 12. States to the North and

East, & 10. to the South & West.  With these therefore it is merely a

question of power: but with this geographical minority it is a

question of existence.  For if Congress once goes out of the

Constitution to arrogate a right of regulating the conditions of the

inhabitants of the States, its majority may, and probably will next

declare that the condition of all men within the US. shall be that of

freedom, in which case all the whites South of the Patomak and Ohio

must evacuate their States; and most fortunate those who can do it

first.  And so far this crisis seems to be advancing.  The Missouri

constitution is recently rejected by the House of Representatives.

What will be their next step is yet to be seen.  If accepted on the

condition that Missouri shall expunge from it the prohibition of free

people of colour from emigration to their state, it will be expunged,

and all will be quieted until the advance of some new state shall

present the question again.  If rejected unconditionally, Missouri

assumes independent self-government, and Congress, after pouting

awhile, must recieve them on the footing of the original states.

Should the Representative propose force, 1. the Senate will not

concur. 2. were they to concur, there would be a secession of the

members South of the line, & probably of the three North Western

states, who, however inclined to the other side, would scarcely

separate from those who would hold the Misisipi from it's mouth to

it's source.  What next?  Conjecture itself is at a loss.  But

whatever it shall be you will hear from others and from the

newspapers.  And finally the whole will depend on Pensylvania.  While

she and Virginia hold together, the Atlantic states can never

separate.  Unfortunately in the present case she has become more

fanaticised than any other state.  However useful where you are, I

wish you were with them.  You might turn the scale there, which would

turn it for the whole.  Should this scission take place, one of it's

most deplorable consequences would be it's discouragement of the

efforts of the European nations in the regeneration of their

oppressive and Cannibal governments.




        Amidst this prospect of evil, I am glad to see one good effect.

It has brought the necessity of some plan of general emancipation &

deportation more home to the minds of our people than it has ever

been before.  Insomuch, that our Governor has ventured to propose one

to the legislature.  This will probably not be acted on at this time.

Nor would it be effectual; for while it proposes to devote to that

object one third of the revenue of the State, it would not reach one

tenth of the annual increase.  My proposition would be that the

holders should give up all born after a certain day, past, present,

or to come, that these should be placed under the guardianship of the

State, and sent at a proper age to S. Domingo.  There they are

willing to recieve them, & the shortness of the passage brings the

deportation within the possible means of taxation aided by charitable

contributions.  In this I think Europe, which has forced this evil on

us, and the Eastern states who have been it's chief instruments of

importation, would be bound to give largely.  But the proceeds of the

land office, if appropriated, would be quite sufficient.  God bless

you and preserve you multos aNos.







        BOLINGBROKE AND PAINE




        _To Francis Eppes_

        _Monticello, January 19, 1821_




        DEAR FRANCIS, -- Your letter of the 1st came safely to hand.  I

am sorry you have lost Mr. Elliot, however the kindness of Dr. Cooper

will be able to keep you in the track of what is worthy of your time.




 

        You ask my opinion of Lord Bolingbroke and Thomas Paine.  They

were alike in making bitter enemies of the priests and pharisees of

their day.  Both were honest men; both advocates for human liberty.

Paine wrote for a country which permitted him to push his reasoning

to whatever length it would go.  Lord Bolingbroke in one restrained

by a constitution, and by public opinion.  He was called indeed a

tory; but his writings prove him a stronger advocate for liberty than

any of his countrymen, the whigs of the present day.  Irritated by

his exile, he committed one act unworthy of him, in connecting

himself momentarily with a prince rejected by his country.  But he

redeemed that single act by his establishment of the principles which

proved it to be wrong.  These two persons differed remarkably in the

style of their writing, each leaving a model of what is most perfect

in both extremes of the simple and the sublime.  No writer has

exceeded Paine in ease and familiarity of style, in perspicuity of

expression, happiness of elucidation, and in simple and unassuming

language.  In this he may be compared with Dr. Franklin; and indeed

his Common Sense was, for awhile, believed to have been written by

Dr. Franklin, and published under the borrowed name of Paine, who had

come over with him from England.  Lord Bolingbroke's, on the other

hand, is a style of the highest order.  The lofty, rhythmical,

full-flowing eloquence of Cicero.  Periods of just measure, their

members proportioned, their close full and round.  His conceptions,

too, are bold and strong, his diction copious, polished and

commanding as his subject.  His writings are certainly the finest

samples in the English language, of the eloquence proper for the

Senate.  His political tracts are safe reading for the most timid

religionist, his philosophical, for those who are not afraid to trust

their reason with discussions of right and wrong.




        You have asked my opinion of these persons, and, _to you_, I

have given it freely.  But, remember, that I am old, that I wish not

to make new enemies, nor to give offence to those who would consider

a difference of opinion as sufficient ground for unfriendly

dispositions.  God bless you, and make you what I wish you to be.







        THE UNIVERSITY AND THE SCHOOLS




        _To General James Breckinridge_

        _Monticello, February 15, 1821_




        DEAR SIR, -- I learn, with deep affliction, that nothing is

likely to be done for our University this year.  So near as it is to

the shore that one shove more would land it there, I had hoped that

would be given; and that we should open with the next year an

institution on which the fortunes of our country may depend more than

may meet the general eye.  The reflections that the boys of this age

are to be the men of the next; that they should be prepared to

receive the holy charge which we are cherishing to deliver over to

them; that in establishing an institution of wisdom for them, we

secure it to all our future generations; that in fulfilling this

duty, we bring home to our own bosoms the sweet consolation of seeing

our sons rising under a luminous tuition, to destinies of high

promise; these are considerations which will occur to all; but all, I

fear, do not see the speck in our horizon which is to burst on us as

a tornado, sooner or later.  The line of division lately marked out

between different portions of our confederacy, is such as will never,

I fear, be obliterated, and we are now trusting to those who are

against us in position and principle, to fashion to their own form

the minds and affections of our youth.  If, as has been estimated, we

send three hundred thousand dollars a year to the northern

seminaries, for the instruction of our own sons, then we must have

there five hundred of our sons, imbibing opinions and principles in

discord with those of their own country.  This canker is eating on

the vitals of our existence, and if not arrested at once, will be

beyond remedy.  We are now certainly furnishing recruits to their

school.  If it be asked what are we to do, or said we cannot give the

last lift to the University without stopping our primary schools, and

these we think most important; I answer, I know their importance.  No

body can doubt my zeal for the general instruction of the people.

Who first started that idea?  I may surely say, myself.  Turn to the

bill in the revised code, which I drew more than forty years ago, and

before which the idea of a plan for the education of the people,

generally, had never been suggested in this State.  There you will

see developed the first rudiments of the whole system of general

education we are now urging and acting on: and it is well known to

those with thom I have acted on this subject, that I never have

proposed a sacrifice of the primary to the ultimate grade of

instruction.  Let us keep our eye steadily on the whole system.  If

we cannot do every thing at once, let us do one at a time.  The

primary schools need no preliminary expense; the ultimate grade

requires a considerable expenditure in advance.  A suspension of

proceeding for a year or two on the primary schools, and an

application of the whole income, during that time, to the completion

of the buildings necessary for the University, would enable us then

to start both institutions at the same time.  The intermediate

branch, of colleges, academies and private classical schools, for the

middle grade, may hereafter receive any necessary aids when the funds

shall become competent.  In the mean time, they are going on

sufficiently, as they have ever yet gone on, at the private expense

of those who use them, and who in numbers and means are competent to

their own exigencies.  The experience of three years has, I presume,

left no doubt that the present plan of primary schools, of putting

money into the hands of twelve hundred persons acting for nothing,

and under no responsibility, is entirely inefficient.  Some other

must be thought of; and during this pause, if it be only for a year,

the whole revenue of that year, with that of the last three years

which has not been already thrown away, would place our University in

readiness to start with a better organization of primary schools, and

both may then go on, hand in hand, for ever.  No diminution of the

capital will in this way have been incurred; a principle which ought

to be deemed sacred.  A relinquishment of interest on the late loan

of sixty thousand dollars, would so far, also, forward the University

without lessening the capital.




        But what may be best done I leave with entire confidence to

yourself and your colleagues in legislation, who know better than I

do the conditions of the literary fund and its wisest applications

and I shall acquiesce with perfect resignation to their will.  I have

brooded, perhaps with fondness, over this establishment, as it held

up to me the hope of continuing to be useful while I continued to

live.  I had believed that the course and circumstances of my life

had placed within my power some services favorable to the outset of

the institution.  But this may be egoism; pardonable, perhaps, when I

express a consciousness that my colleagues and successors will do as

well, whatever the legislature shall enable them to do.




        I have thus, my dear Sir, opened my bosom, with all its

anxieties, freely to you.  I blame nobody for seeing things in a

different light.  I am sure that all act conscientiously, and that

all will be done honestly and wisely which can be done.  I yield the

concerns of the world with cheerfulness to those who are appointed in

the order of nature to succeed to them; and for yourself, for our

colleagues, and for all in charge of our country's future fame and

fortune, I offer up sincere prayers.







        A DANGEROUS EXAMPLE




        _To Jedidiah Morse_

        _Monticello, March 6, 1822_




        SIR, -- I have duly received your letter of February the 16th,

and have now to express my sense of the honorable station proposed to

my ex-brethren and myself, in the constitution of the society for the

civilization and improvement of the Indian tribes.  The object too

expressed, as that of the association, is one which I have ever had

much at heart, and never omitted an occasion of promoting, while I

have been in situations to do it with effect, and nothing, even now,

in the calm of age and retirement, would excite in me a more lively

interest than an approvable plan of raising that respectable and

unfortunate people from the state of physical and moral abjection, to

which they have been reduced by circumstances foreign to them.  That

the plan now proposed is entitled to unmixed approbation, I am not

prepared to say, after mature consideration, and with all the

partialities which its professed object would rightfully claim from

me.




        I shall not undertake to draw the line of demarcation between

private associations of laudable views and unimposing numbers, and

those whose magnitude may rivalise and jeopardise the march of

regular government.  Yet such a line does exist.  I have seen the

days, they were those which preceded the Revolution, when even this

last and perilous engine became necessary; but they were days which

no man would wish to see a second time.  That was the case where the

regular authorities of the government had combined against the rights

of the people, and no means of correction remained to them, but to

organise a collateral power, which, with their support, might rescue

and secure their violated rights.  But such is not the case with our

government.  We need hazard no collateral power, which, by a change

of its original views, and assumption of others we know not how

virtuous or how mischievous, would be ready organised and in force

sufficient to shake the established foundations of society, and

endanger its peace and the principles on which it is based.  Is not

the machine now proposed of this gigantic stature?  It is to consist

of the ex-Presidents of the United States, the Vice President, the

Heads of all the executive departments, the members of the supreme

judiciary, the Governors of the several States and territories, all

the members of both Houses of Congress, all the general officers of

the army, the commissioners of the navy, all Presidents and

Professors of colleges and theological seminaries, all the clergy of

the United States, the Presidents and Secretaries of all associations

having relation to Indians, all commanding officers within or near

Indian territories, all Indian superintendants and agents; all these

_ex-officio_; and as many private individuals as will pay a certain

price for membership.  Observe too, that the clergy will constitute

(*) nineteen twentieths of this association, and, by the law of the

majority, may command the twentieth part, which, composed of all the

high authorities of the United States, civil and military, may be

outvoted and wielded by the nineteen parts with uncontrollable power,

both as to purpose and process.  Can thisformidable array be reviewed

without dismay?  It will besaid, that in this association will be all

the confidential officers of the government; the choice of the people

themselves.  No man on earth has more implicit confidence than myself

in the integrity and discretion of this chosen band of servants.  But

is confidence or discretion, or is _strict limit_, the principle of

our constitution?  It will comprehend, indeed, all the functionaries

of the government; but seceded from their constitutional stations as

guardians of the nation, and acting not by the laws of their station,

but by those of a voluntary society, having no limit to their

purposes but the same will which constitutes their existence.  It

will be the authorities of the people and all influential characters

from among them, arrayed on one side, and on the other, the people

themselves deserted by their leaders.  It is a fearful array.  It

will be said, that these are imaginary fears.  I know they are so at

present.  I know it is as impossible for these agents of our choice

and unbounded confidence, to harbor machinations against the adored

principles of our constitution, as for gravity to change its

direction, and gravid bodies to mount upwards.  The fears are indeed

imaginary: but the example is _real_.  Under its authority, as a

precedent, future associations will arise with objects at which we

should shudder at this time.  The society of Jacobins, in another

country, was instituted on principles and views as virtuous as ever

kindled the hearts of patriots.  It was the pure patriotism of their

purposes which extended their association to the limits of the

nation, and rendered their power within it boundless; and it was this

power which degenerated their principles and practices to such

enormities, as never before could have been imagined.  Yet these were

men; and we and our descendants will be no more.  The present is a

case where, if ever, we are to guard against ourselves; not against

ourselves as we are, but as we may be; for who can now imagine what

we may become under circumstances not now imaginable?  The object too

of this institution, seems to require so hazardous an example as

little as any which could be proposed.  The government is, at this

time, going on with the process of civilising the Indians, on a plan

probably as promising as any one of us is able to devise, and with

resources more competent than we could expect to command by voluntary

taxation.  Is it that the new characters called into association with

those of the government, are wiser than these?  Is it that a plan

originated by a meeting of private individuals, is better than that

prepared by the concentrated wisdom of the nation, of men not

self-chosen, but clothed with the full confidence of the people?  Is

it that there is no danger that a new authority, marching,

independently, along side of the government, in the same line and to

the same object, may not produce collision, may not thwart and

obstruct the operations of the government, or wrest the object

entirely from their hands?  Might we not as well appoint a committee

for each department of the government, to counsel and direct its head

separately, as volunteer ourselves to counsel and direct the whole,

in mass?  And might we not do it as well for their foreign, their

fiscal, and their military, as for their Indian affairs?  And how

many societies, auxiliary to the government, may we expect to see

spring up, in imitation of this, offering to associate themselves in

this and that of its functions?  In a word, why not take the

government out of its constitutional hands, associate them indeed

with us, to preserve a semblance that the acts are theirs, but

insuring them to be our own by allowing them a minor vote only?




        (*) The clergy of the United States may probably be estimated

at eight thousand.  The residue of this society at four hundred; but

if the former number be halved, the reasoning will be the same.




        These considerations have impressed my mind with a force so

irresistible, that (in duty bound to answer your polite letter,

without which I should not have obtruded an opinion,) I have not been

able to withhold the expression of them.  Not knowing the individuals

who have proposed this plan, I cannot be conceived as entertaining

personal disrespect for them.  On the contrary, I see in the printed

list persons for whom I cherish sentiments of sincere friendship; and

others, for whose opinions and purity of purpose I have the highest

respect.  Yet thinking as I do, that this association is unnecessary;

that the government is proceeding to the same object under control of

the law; that they are competent to it in wisdom, in means, and

inclination; that this association, this wheel within a wheel, is

more likely to produce collision than aid; and that it is, in its

magnitude, of dangerous example; I am bound to say, that, as a

dutiful citizen, I cannot in conscience become a member of this

society, possessing as it does my entire confidence in the integrity

of its views.  I feel with awe the weight of opinion to which I may

be opposed, and that, for myself, I have need to ask the indulgence

of a belief, that the opinion I have given is the best result I can

deduce from my own reason and experience, and that it is sincerely

conscientious.  Repeating therefore, my just acknowledgments for the

honor proposed to me; I beg leave to add the assurances to the

society and yourself of my highest confidence and consideration.

