





        A UNITARIAN CREED




        _To Dr. Benjamin Waterhouse_

        _Monticello, June 26, 1822_




        DEAR SIR, -- I have received and read with thankfulness and

pleasure your denunciation of the abuses of tobacco and wine.  Yet,

however sound in its principles, I expect it will be but a sermon to

the wind.  You will find it as difficult to inculcate these sanative

precepts on the sensualities of the present day, as to convince an

Athanasian that there is but one God.  I wish success to both

attempts, and am happy to learn from you that the latter, at least,

is making progress, and the more rapidly in proportion as our

Platonizing Christians make more stir and noise about it.  The

doctrines of Jesus are simple, and tend all to the happiness of man.




        1. That there is one only God, and he all perfect.




        2. That there is a future state of rewards and punishments.




        3. That to love God with all thy heart and thy neighbor as

thyself, is the sum of religion.  These are the great points on which

he endeavored to reform the religion of the Jews.  But compare with

these the demoralizing dogmas of Calvin.




        1. That there are three Gods.




        2. That good works, or the love of our neighbor, are nothing.




        3. That faith is every thing, and the more incomprehensible the

proposition, the more merit in its faith.




        4. That reason in religion is of unlawful use.




        5. That God, from the beginning, elected certain individuals to

be saved, and certain others to be damned; and that no crimes of the

former can damn them; no virtues of the latter save.




        Now, which of these is the true and charitable Christian?  He

who believes and acts on the simple doctrines of Jesus?  Or the

impious dogmatists, as Athanasius and Calvin?  Verily I say these are

the false shepherds foretold as to enter not by the door into the

sheepfold, but to climb up some other way.  They are mere usurpers of

the Christian name, teaching a counter-religion made up of the

_deliria_ of crazy imaginations, as foreign from Christianity as is

that of Mahomet.  Their blasphemies have driven thinking men into

infidelity, who have too hastily rejected the supposed author

himself, with the horrors so falsely imputed to him.  Had the

doctrines of Jesus been preached always as pure as they came from his

lips, the whole civilized world would now have been Christian.  I

rejoice that in this blessed country of free inquiry and belief,

which has surrendered its creed and conscience to neither kings nor

priests, the genuine doctrine of one only God is reviving, and I

trust that there is not a _young man_ now living in the United States

who will not die an Unitarian.




        But much I fear, that when this great truth shall be

re-established, its votaries will fall into the fatal error of

fabricating formulas of creed and confessions of faith, the engines

which so soon destroyed the religion of Jesus, and made of

Christendom a mere Aceldama; that they will give up morals for

mysteries, and Jesus for Plato.  How much wiser are the Quakers, who,

agreeing in the fundamental doctrines of the gospel, schismatize

about no mysteries, and, keeping within the pale of common sense,

suffer no speculative differences of opinion, any more than of

feature, to impair the love of their brethren.  Be this the wisdom of

Unitarians, this the holy mantle which shall cover within its

charitable circumference all who believe in one God, and who love

their neighbor!  I conclude my sermon with sincere assurances of my

friendly esteem and respect.







        SERIATIM OPINIONS AND THE HISTORY OF PARTIES




        _To Justice William Johnson_

        _Monticello, Oct. 27, 1822_




        DEAR SIR, -- I have deferred my thanks for the copy of your

Life of Genl. Greene, until I could have time to read it.  This I

have done, and with the greatest satisfaction; and can now more

understandingly express the gratification it has afforded me.  I

really rejoice that we have at length a fair history of the Southern

war.  It proves how much we were left to defend ourselves as we

could, while the resources of the Union were so disproportionately

devoted to the North.  I am glad too to see the Romance of Lee

removed from the shelf of History to that of Fable.  Some small

portion of the transactions he relates were within my own knolege;

and of these I can say he has given more falsehood than fact; and I

have heard many officers declare the same as to what had passed under

their eyes.  Yet this book had begun to be quoted as history.  Greene

was truly a great man, he had not perhaps all the qualities which so

peculiarly rendered Genl. Washington the fittest man on earth for

directing so great a contest under so great difficulties.

Difficulties proceeding not from lukewarmness in our citizens or

their functionaries, as our military leaders supposed; but from the

pennyless condition of a people, totally shut out from all commerce &

intercourse with the world, and therefore without any means for

converting their labor into money.  But Greene was second to no one

in enterprise, in resource, in sound judgment, promptitude of

decision, and every other military talent.  In addition to the work

you have given us, I look forward with anxiety to that you promise in

the last paragraph of your book.  Lee's military fable you have put

down.  Let not the invidious libel on the views of the Republican

party, and on their regeneration of the government go down to

posterity as hypocritically masked.  I was myself too laboriously

employed, while in office, and too old when I left it, to do justice

to those who had labored so faithfully to arrest our course towards

monarchy, and to secure the result of our revolutionary sufferings

and sacrifices in a government bottomed on the only safe basis, the

elective will of the people.  You are young enough for the task, and

I hope you will undertake it.




        There is a subject respecting the practice of the court of

which you are a member, which has long weighed on my mind, on which I

have long thought I would write to you, and which I will take this

opportunity of doing.  It is in truth a delicate undertaking, & yet

such is my opinion of your candor and devotedness to the

Constitution, in it's true spirit, that I am sure I shall meet your

approbation in unbosoming myself to you.  The subject of my

uneasiness is the habitual mode of making up and delivering the

opinions of the supreme court of the US.




        You know that from the earliest ages of the English law, from

the date of the year-books, at least, to the end of the IId George,

the judges of England, in all but self-evident cases, delivered their

opinions seriatim, with the reasons and authorities which governed

their decisions.  If they sometimes consulted together, and gave a

general opinion, it was so rarely as not to excite either alarm or

notice.  Besides the light which their separate arguments threw on

the subject, and the instruction communicated by their several modes

of reasoning, it shewed whether the judges were unanimous or divided,

and gave accordingly more or less weight to the judgment as a

precedent.  It sometimes happened too that when there were three

opinions against one, the reasoning of the one was so much the most

cogent as to become afterwards the law of the land.  When Ld.

Mansfield came to the bench he introduced the habit of caucusing

opinions.  The judges met at their chambers, or elsewhere, secluded

from the presence of the public, and made up what was to be delivered

as the opinion of the court.  On the retirement of Mansfield, Ld.

Kenyon put an end to the practice, and the judges returned to that of

seriatim opinions, and practice it habitually to this day, I believe.

I am not acquainted with the late reporters, do not possess them, and

state the fact from the information of others.  To come now to

ourselves I know nothing of what is done in other states, but in this

our great and good Mr. Pendleton was, after the revolution, placed at

the head of the court of Appeals.  He adored Ld. Mansfield, &

considered him as the greatest luminary of law that any age had ever

produced, and he introduced into the court over which he presided,

Mansfield's practice of making up opinions in secret & delivering

them as the Oracles of the court, in mass.  Judge Roane, when he came

to that bench, broke up the practice, refused to hatch judgments, in

Conclave, or to let others deliver opinions for him.  At what time

the seriatim opinions ceased in the supreme Court of the US., I am

not informed.  They continued I know to the end of the 3d Dallas in

1800.  Later than which I have no Reporter of that court.  About that

time the present C. J. came to the bench.  Whether he carried the

practice of Mr. Pendleton to it, or who, or when I do not know; but I

understand from others it is now the habit of the court, & I suppose

it true from the cases sometimes reported in the newspapers, and

others which I casually see, wherein I observe that the opinions were

uniformly prepared in private.  Some of these cases too have been of

such importance, of such difficulty, and the decisions so grating to

a portion of the public as to have merited the fullest explanation

from every judge seriatim, of the reasons which had produced such

convictions on his mind.  It was interesting to the public to know

whether these decisions were really unanimous, or might not perhaps

be of 4. against 3. and consequently prevailing by the preponderance

of one voice only.  The Judges holding their offices for life are

under two responsibilities only.  1.  Impeachment.  2. Individual

reputation.  But this practice compleatly withdraws them from both.

For nobody knows what opinion any individual member gave in any case,

nor even that he who delivers the opinion, concurred in it himself.

Be the opinion therefore ever so impeachable, having been done in the

dark it can be proved on no one.  As to the 2d guarantee, personal

reputation, it is shielded compleatly.  The practice is certainly

convenient for the lazy, the modest & the incompetent.  It saves them

the trouble of developing their opinion methodically and even of

making up an opinion at all.  That of seriatim argument shews whether

every judge has taken the trouble of understanding the case, of

investigating it minutely, and of forming an opinion for himself,

instead of pinning it on another's sleeve.  It would certainly be

right to abandon this practice in order to give to our citizens one

and all, that confidence in their judges which must be so desirable

to the judges themselves, and so important to the cement of the

union.  During the administration of Genl. Washington, and while E.

Randolph was Attorney General, he was required by Congress to digest

the judiciary laws into a single one, with such amendments as might

be thought proper.  He prepared a section requiring the Judges to

give their opinions seriatim, in writing, to be recorded in a

distinct volume.  Other business prevented this bill from being taken

up, and it passed off, but such a volume would have been the best

possible book of reports, and the better, as unincumbered with the

hired sophisms and perversions of Counsel.




        What do you think of the state of parties at this time?  An

opinion prevails that there is no longer any distinction, that the

republicans & Federalists are compleatly amalgamated but it is not

so.  The amalgamation is of name only, not of principle.  All indeed

call themselves by the name of Republicans, because that of

Federalists was extinguished in the battle of New Orleans.  But the

truth is that finding that monarchy is a desperate wish in this

country, they rally to the point which they think next best, a

consolidated government.  Their aim is now therefore to break down

the rights reserved by the constitution to the states as a bulwark

against that consolidation, the fear of which produced the whole of

the opposition to the constitution at it's birth.  Hence new

Republicans in Congress, preaching the doctrines of the old

Federalists, and the new nick-names of Ultras and Radicals.  But I

trust they will fail under the new, as the old name, and that the

friends of the real constitution and union will prevail against

consolidation, as they have done against monarchism.  I scarcely know

myself which is most to be deprecated, a consolidation, or

dissolution of the states.  The horrors of both are beyond the reach

of human foresight.




        I have written you a long letter, and committed to you thoughts

which I would do to few others.  If I am right, you will approve

them; if wrong, commiserate them as the dreams of a Superannuate

about things from which he is to derive neither good nor harm.  But

you will still receive them as a proof of my confidence in the

rectitude of your mind and principles, of which I pray you to receive

entire assurance with that of my continued and great friendship and

respect.







        RELIGION AND THE UNIVERSITY




        _To Dr. Thomas Cooper_

        _Monticello, November 2, 1822_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favor of October the 18th came to hand

yesterday.  The atmosphere of our country is unquestionably charged

with a threatening cloud of fanaticism, lighter in some parts, denser

in others, but too heavy in all.  I had no idea, however, that in

Pennsylvania, the cradle of toleration and freedom of religion, it

could have arisen to the height you describe.  This must be owing to

the growth of Presbyterianism.  The blasphemy and absurdity of the

five points of Calvin, and the impossibility of defending them,

render their advocates impatient of reasoning, irritable, and prone

to denunciation.  In Boston, however, and its neighborhood,

Unitarianism has advanced to so great strength, as now to humble this

haughtiest of all religious sects; insomuch that they condescend to

interchange with them and the other sects, the civilities of

preaching freely and frequently in each others' meeting-houses.  In

Rhode Island, on the other hand, no sectarian preacher will permit an

Unitarian to pollute his desk.  In our Richmond there is much

fanaticism, but chiefly among the women.  They have their night

meetings and praying parties, where, attended by their priests, and

sometimes by a hen-pecked husband, they pour forth the effusions of

their love to Jesus, in terms as amatory and carnal, as their modesty

would permit them to use to a mere earthly lover.  In our village of

Charlottesville, there is a good degree of religion, with a small

spice only of fanaticism.  We have four sects, but without either

church or meeting-house.  The court-house is the common temple, one

Sunday in the month to each.  Here, Episcopalian and Presbyterian,

Methodist and Baptist, meet together, join in hymning their Maker,

listen with attention and devotion to each others' preachers, and all

mix in society with perfect harmony.  It is not so in the districts

where Presbyterianism prevails undividedly.  Their ambition and

tyranny would tolerate no rival if they had power.  Systematical in

grasping at an ascendency over all other sects, they aim, like the

Jesuits, at engrossing the education of the country, are hostile to

every institution which they do not direct, and jealous at seeing

others begin to attend at all to that object.  The diffusion of

instruction, to which there is now so growing an attention, will be

the remote remedy to this fever of fanaticism; while the more

proximate one will be the progress of Unitarianism.  That this will,

ere long, be the religion of the majority from north to south, I have

no doubt.




 

        In our university you know there is no Professorship of

Divinity.  A handle has been made of this, to disseminate an idea

that this is an institution, not merely of no religion, but against

all religion.  Occasion was taken at the last meeting of the

Visitors, to bring forward an idea that might silence this calumny,

which weighed on the minds of some honest friends to the institution.

In our annual report to the legislature, after stating the

constitutional reasons against a public establishment of any

religious instruction, we suggest the expediency of encouraging the

different religious sects to establish, each for itself, a

professorship of their own tenets, on the confines of the university,

so near as that their students may attend the lectures there, and

have the free use of our library, and every other accommodation we

can give them; preserving, however, their independence of us and of

each other.  This fills the chasm objected to ours, as a defect in an

institution professing to give instruction in _all_ useful sciences.

I think the invitation will be accepted, by some sects from candid

intentions, and by others from jealousy and rivalship.  And by

bringing the sects together, and mixing them with the mass of other

students, we shall soften their asperities, liberalize and neutralize

their prejudices, and make the general religion a religion of peace,

reason, and morality.




        The time of opening our university is still as uncertain as

ever.  All the pavilions, boarding houses, and dormitories are done.

Nothing is now wanting but the central building for a library and

other general purposes.  For this we have no funds, and the last

legislature refused all aid.  We have better hopes of the next.  But

all is uncertain.  I have heard with regret of disturbances on the

part of the students in your seminary.  The article of discipline is

the most difficult in American education.  Premature ideas of

independence, too little repressed by parents, beget a spirit of

insubordination, which is the great obstacle to science with us, and

a principal cause of its decay since the revolution.  I look to it

with dismay in our institution, as a breaker ahead, which I am far

from being confident we shall be able to weather.  The advance of

age, and tardy pace of the public patronage, may probably spare me

the pain of witnessing consequences.




        I salute you with constant friendship and respect.







        CALVIN AND COSMOLOGY




        _To John Adams_

        _Monticello, April 11, 1823_




        DEAR SIR, -- The wishes expressed, in your last favor, that I

may continue in life and health until I become a Calvinist, at least

in his exclamation of `_mon Dieu!_ jusque a quand'! would make me

immortal.  I can never join Calvin in addressing _his god._ He was

indeed an Atheist, which I can never be; or rather his religion was

Daemonism.  If ever man worshipped a false god, he did.  The being

described in his 5. points is not the God whom you and I acknolege

and adore, the Creator and benevolent governor of the world; but a

daemon of malignant spirit.  It would be more pardonable to believe

in no god at all, than to blaspheme him by the atrocious attributes

of Calvin.  Indeed I think that every Christian sect gives a great

handle to Atheism by their general dogma that, without a revelation,

there would not be sufficient proof of the being of a god.  Now one

sixth of mankind only are supposed to be Christians: the other five

sixths then, who do not believe in the Jewish and Christian

revelation, are without a knolege of the existence of a god!  This

gives compleatly a gain de cause to the disciples of Ocellus,

Timaeus, Spinosa, Diderot and D'Holbach.  The argument which they

rest on as triumphant and unanswerable is that, in every hypothesis

of Cosmogony you must admit an eternal pre-existence of something;

and according to the rule of sound philosophy, you are never to

employ two principles to solve a difficulty when one will suffice.

They say then that it is more simple to believe at once in the

eternal pre-existence of the world, as it is now going on, and may

for ever go on by the principle of reproduction which we see and

witness, than to believe in the eternal pre-existence of an ulterior

cause, or Creator of the world, a being whom we see not, and know

not, of whose form substance and mode or place of existence, or of

action no sense informs us, no power of the mind enables us to

delineate or comprehend.  On the contrary I hold (without appeal to

revelation) that when we take a view of the Universe, in it's parts

general or particular, it is impossible for the human mind not to

percieve and feel a conviction of design, consummate skill, and

indefinite power in every atom of it's composition.  The movements of

the heavenly bodies, so exactly held in their course by the balance

of centrifugal and centripetal forces, the structure of our earth

itself, with it's distribution of lands, waters and atmosphere,

animal and vegetable bodies, examined in all their minutest

particles, insects mere atoms of life, yet as perfectly organised as

man or mammoth, the mineral substances, their generation and uses, it

is impossible, I say, for the human mind not to believe that there

is, in all this, design, cause and effect, up to an ultimate cause, a

fabricator of all things from matter and motion, their preserver and

regulator while permitted to exist in their present forms, and their

regenerator into new and other forms.  We see, too, evident proofs of

the necessity of a superintending power to maintain the Universe in

it's course and order.  Stars, well known, have disappeared, new ones

have come into view, comets, in their incalculable courses, may run

foul of suns and planets and require renovation under other laws;

certain races of animals are become extinct; and, were there no

restoring power, all existences might extinguish successively, one by

one, until all should be reduced to a shapeless chaos.  So

irresistible are these evidences of an intelligent and powerful Agent

that, of the infinite numbers of men who have existed thro' all time,

they have believed, in the proportion of a million at least to Unit,

in the hypothesis of an eternal pre-existence of a creator, rather

than in that of a self-existent Universe.  Surely this unanimous

sentiment renders this more probable than that of the few in the

other hypothesis.  Some early Christians indeed have believed in the

coeternal pre-existance of both the Creator and the world, without

changing their relation of cause and effect.  That this was the

opinion of St. Thomas, we are informed by Cardinal Toleto, in these

words `Deus ab aeterno fuit jam omnipotens, sicut cum produxit

mundum.  Ab aeterno potuit producere mundum. -- Si sol ab aeterno

esset, lumen ab aeterno esset; et si pes, similiter vestigium.  At

lumen et vestigium effectus sunt efficientis solis et pedis; potuit

ergo cum causa aeterna effectus coaeterna esse.  Cujus sententiae est

S. Thomas Theologorum primus' Cardinal Toleta.




        Of the nature of this being we know nothing.  Jesus tells us

that `God is a spirit.' 4. John 24. but without defining what a

spirit is {pneyma o Theos}.  Down to the 3d. century we know that it

was still deemed material; but of a lighter subtler matter than our

gross bodies.  So says Origen.  `Deus igitur, cui anima similis est,

juxta Originem, reapte corporalis est; sed graviorum tantum ratione

corporum incorporeus.' These are the words of Huet in his commentary

on Origen.  Origen himself says `appelatio {asomaton} apud nostros

scriptores est inusitata et incognita.' So also Tertullian `quis

autem negabit Deum esse corpus, etsi deus spiritus?  Spiritus etiam

corporis sui generis, in sua effigie.' Tertullian.  These two fathers

were of the 3d. century.  Calvin's character of this supreme being

seems chiefly copied from that of the Jews.  But the reformation of

these blasphemous attributes, and substitution of those more worthy,

pure and sublime, seems to have been the chief object of Jesus in his

discources to the Jews: and his doctrine of the Cosmogony of the

world is very clearly laid down in the 3 first verses of the 1st.

chapter of John, in these words, `{en arche en o logos, kai o logos

en pros ton Theon kai Theos en o logos. `otos en en arche pros ton

Theon.  Panta de ayto egeneto, kai choris ayto egeneto ode en, o

gegonen}.  Which truly translated means `in the beginning God

existed, and reason (or mind) was with God, and that mind was God.

This was in the beginning with God.  All things were created by it,

and without it was made not one thing which was made'.  Yet this

text, so plainly declaring the doctrine of Jesus that the world was

created by the supreme, intelligent being, has been perverted by

modern Christians to build up a second person of their tritheism by a

mistranslation of the word {logos}.  One of it's legitimate meanings

indeed is `a word.' But, in that sense, it makes an unmeaning jargon:

while the other meaning `reason', equally legitimate, explains

rationally the eternal preexistence of God, and his creation of the

world.  Knowing how incomprehensible it was that `a word,' the mere

action or articulation of the voice and organs of speech could create

a world, they undertake to make of this articulation a second

preexisting being, and ascribe to him, and not to God, the creation

of the universe.  The Atheist here plumes himself on the uselessness

of such a God, and the simpler hypothesis of a self-existent

universe.  The truth is that the greatest enemies to the doctrines of

Jesus are those calling themselves the expositors of them, who have

perverted them for the structure of a system of fancy absolutely

incomprehensible, and without any foundation in his genuine words.

And the day will come when the mystical generation of Jesus, by the

supreme being as his father in the womb of a virgin will be classed

with the fable of the generation of Minerva in the brain of Jupiter.

But we may hope that the dawn of reason and freedom of thought in

these United States will do away with all this artificial

scaffolding, and restore to us the primitive and genuine doctrines of

this the most venerated reformer of human errors.




        So much for your quotation of Calvin's `mon dieu! jusqu'a

quand' in which, when addressed to the God of Jesus, and our God, I

join you cordially, and await his time and will with more readiness

than reluctance.  May we meet there again, in Congress, with our

antient Colleagues, and recieve with them the seal of approbation

`Well done, good and faithful servants.'







        THE SUPREME COURT AND THE CONSTITUTION




        _To Justice William Johnson_

        _Monticello, June 12, 1823_




        DEAR SIR, -- Our correspondence is of that accommodating

character, which admits of suspension at the convenience of either

party, without inconvenience to the other.  Hence this tardy

acknowledgment of your favor of April the 11th.  I learn from that

with great pleasure, that you have resolved on continuing your

history of parties.  Our opponents are far ahead of us in

preparations for placing their cause favorably before posterity.  Yet

I hope even from some of them the escape of precious truths, in angry

explosions or effusions of vanity, which will betray the genuine

monarchism of their principles.  They do not themselves believe what

they endeavor to inculcate, that we were an opposition party, not on

principle, but merely seeking for office.  The fact is, that at the

formation of our government, many had formed their political opinions

on European writings and practices, believing the experience of old

countries, and especially of England, abusive as it was, to be a

safer guide than mere theory.  The doctrines of Europe were, that men

in numerous associations cannot be restrained within the limits of

order and justice, but by forces physical and moral, wielded over

them by authorities independent of their will.  Hence their

organization of kings, hereditary nobles, and priests.  Still further

to constrain the brute force of the people, they deem it necessary to

keep them down by hard labor, poverty and ignorance, and to take from

them, as from bees, so much of their earnings, as that unremitting

labor shall be necessary to obtain a sufficient surplus barely to

sustain a scanty and miserable life.  And these earnings they apply

to maintain their privileged orders in splendor and idleness, to

fascinate the eyes of the people, and excite in them an humble

adoration and submission, as to an order of superior beings.

Although few among us had gone all these lengths of opinion, yet many

had advanced, some more, some less, on the way.  And in the

convention which formed our government, they endeavored to draw the

cords of power as tight as they could obtain them, to lessen the

dependence of the general functionaries on their constituents, to

subject to them those of the States, and to weaken their means of

maintaining the steady equilibrium which the majority of the

convention had deemed salutary for both branches, general and local.

To recover, therefore, in practice the powers which the nation had

refused, and to warp to their own wishes those actually given, was

the steady object of the federal party.  Ours, on the contrary, was

to maintain the will of the majority of the convention, and of the

people themselves.  We believed, with them, that man was a rational

animal, endowed by nature with rights, and with an innate sense of

justice; and that he could be restrained from wrong and protected in

right by moderate powers, confided to persons of his own choice, and

held to their duties by dependence on his own will.  We believed that

the complicated organization of kings, nobles, and priests, was not

the wisest nor best to effect the happiness of associated man; that

wisdom and virtue were not hereditary, that the trappings of such a

machinery, consumed by their expense, those earnings of industry,

they were meant to protect, and, by the inequalities they produced,

exposed liberty to sufferance.  We believed that men, enjoying in

ease and security the full fruits of their own industry, enlisted by

all their interests on the side of law and order, habituated to think

for themselves, and to follow their reason as their guide, would be

more easily and safely governed, than with minds nourished in error,

and vitiated and debased, as in Europe, by ignorance, indigence and

oppression.  The cherishment of the people then was our principle,

the fear and distrust of them, that of the other party.  Composed, as

we were, of the landed and laboring interests of the country, we

could not be less anxious for a government of law and order than were

the inhabitants of the cities, the strongholds of federalism.  And

whether our efforts to save the principles and form of our

constitution have not been salutary, let the present republican

freedom, order and prosperity of our country determine.  History may

distort truth, and will distort it for a time, by the superior

efforts at justification of those who are conscious of needing it

most.  Nor will the opening scenes of our present government be seen

in their true aspect, until the letters of the day, now held in

private hoards, shall be broken up and laid open to public view.

What a treasure will be found in General Washington's cabinet, when

it shall pass into the hands of as candid a friend to truth as he was

himself!  When no longer, like Caesar's notes and memorandums in the

hands of Anthony, it shall be open to the high priests of federalism

only, and garbled to say so much, and no more, as suits their views!




        With respect to his farewell address, to the authorship of

which, it seems, there are conflicting claims, I can state to you

some facts.  He had determined to decline re-election at the end of

his first term, and so far determined, that he had requested Mr.

Madison to prepare for him something valedictory, to be addressed to

his constituents on his retirement.  This was done, but he was

finally persuaded to acquiesce in a second election, to which no one

more strenuously pressed him than myself, from a conviction of the

importance of strengthening, by longer habit, the respect necessary

for that office, which the weight of his character only could effect.

When, at the end of his second term, his Valedictory came out, Mr.

Madison recognized in it several passages of his draught, several

others, we were both satisfied, were from the pen of Hamilton, and

others from that of the President himself.  These he probably put

into the hands of Hamilton to form into a whole, and hence it may all

appear in Hamilton's hand-writing, as if it were all of his

composition.




        I have stated above, that the original objects of the

federalists were, 1st, to warp our government more to the form and

principles of monarchy, and, 2d, to weaken the barriers of the State

governments as coordinate powers.  In the first they have been so

completely foiled by the universal spirit of the nation, that they

have abandoned the enterprise, shrunk from the odium of their old

appellation, taken to themselves a participation of ours, and under

the pseudo-republican mask, are now aiming at their second object,

and strengthened by unsuspecting or apostate recruits from our ranks,

are advancing fast towards an ascendancy.  I have been blamed for

saying, that a prevalence of the doctrines of consolidation would one

day call for reformation or _revolution_.  I answer by asking if a

single State of the Union would have agreed to the constitution, had

it given all powers to the General Government?  If the whole

opposition to it did not proceed from the jealousy and fear of every

State, of being subjected to the other States in matters merely its

own?  And if there is any reason to believe the States more disposed

now than then, to acquiesce in this general surrender of all their

rights and powers to a consolidated government, one and undivided?




        You request me confidentially, to examine the question, whether

the Supreme Court has advanced beyond its constitutional limits, and

trespassed on those of the State authorities?  I do not undertake it,

my dear Sir, because I am unable.  Age and the wane of mind

consequent on it, have disqualified me from investigations so severe,

and researches so laborious.  And it is the less necessary in this

case, as having been already done by others with a logic and learning

to which I could add nothing.  On the decision of the case of Cohens

_vs_. The State of Virginia, in the Supreme Court of the United

States, in March, 1821, Judge Roane, under the signature of Algernon

Sidney, wrote for the Enquirer a series of papers on the law of that

case.  I considered these papers maturely as they came out, and

confess that they appeared to me to pulverize every word which had

been delivered by Judge Marshall, of the extra-judicial part of his

opinion; and all was extra-judicial, except the decision that the act

of Congress had not purported to give to the corporation of

Washington the authority claimed by their lottery law, of controlling

the laws of the States within the States themselves.  But unable to

claim that case, he could not let it go entirely, but went on

gratuitously to prove, that notwithstanding the eleventh amendment of

the constitution, a State _could_ be brought as a defendant, to the

bar of his court; and again, that Congress might authorize a

corporation of its territory to exercise legislation within a State,

and paramount to the laws of that State.  I cite the sum and result

only of his doctrines, according to the impression made on my mind at

the time, and still remaining.  If not strictly accurate in

circumstance, it is so in substance.  This doctrine was so completely

refuted by Roane, that if he can be answered, I surrender human

reason as a vain and useless faculty, given to bewilder, and not to

guide us.  And I mention this particular case as one only of several,

because it gave occasion to that thorough examination of the

constitutional limits between the General and State jurisdictions,

which you have asked for.  There were two other writers in the same

paper, under the signatures of Fletcher of Saltoun, and Somers, who,

in a few essays, presented some very luminous and striking views of

the question.  And there was a particular paper which recapitulated

all the cases in which it was thought the federal court had usurped

on the State jurisdictions.  These essays will be found in the

Enquirers of 1821, from May the 10th to July the 13th.  It is not in

my present power to send them to you, but if Ritchie can furnish

them, I will procure and forward them.  If they had been read in the

other States, as they were here, I think they would have left, there

as here, no dissentients from their doctrine.  The subject was taken

up by our legislature of 1821 - '22, and two draughts of

remonstrances were prepared and discussed.  As well as I remember,

there was no difference of opinion as to the matter of right; but

there was as to the expediency of a remonstrance at that time, the

general mind of the States being then under extraordinary excitement

by the Missouri question; and it was dropped on that consideration.

But this case is not dead, it only sleepeth.  The Indian Chief said

he did not go to war for every petty injury by itself, but put it

into his pouch, and when that was full, he then made war.  Thank

Heaven, we have provided a more peaceable and rational mode of

redress.




        This practice of Judge Marshall, of travelling out of his case

to prescribe what the law would be in a moot case not before the

court, is very irregular and very censurable.  I recollect another

instance, and the more particularly, perhaps, because it in some

measure bore on myself.  Among the midnight appointments of Mr.

Adams, were commissions to some federal justices of the peace for

Alexandria.  These were signed and sealed by him, but not delivered.

I found them on the table of the department of State, on my entrance

into office, and I forbade their delivery.  Marbury, named in one of

them, applied to the Supreme Court for a mandamus to the Secretary of

State, (Mr. Madison) to deliver the commission intended for him.  The

court determined at once, that being an original process, they had no

cognizance of it; and therefore the question before them was ended.

But the Chief Justice went on to lay down what the law would be, had

they jurisdiction of the case, to wit: that they should command the

delivery.  The object was clearly to instruct any other court having

the jurisdiction, what they should do if Marbury should apply to

them.  Besides the impropriety of this gratuitous interference, could

anything exceed the perversion of law?  For if there is any principle

of law never yet contradicted, it is that delivery is one of the

essentials to the validity of the deed.  Although signed and sealed,

yet as long as it remains in the hands of the party himself, it is in

_fieri_ only, it is not a deed, and can be made so only by its

delivery.  In the hands of a third person it may be made an escrow.

But whatever is in the executive offices is certainly deemed to be in

the hands of the President; and in this case, was actually in my

hands, because, when I countermanded them, there was as yet no

Secretary of State.  Yet this case of Marbury and Madison is

continually cited by bench and bar, as if it were settled law,

without any animadversion on its being merely an _obiter_

dissertation of the Chief Justice.




        It may be impracticable to lay down any general formula of

words which shall decide at once, and with precision, in every case,

this limit of jurisdiction.  But there are two canons which will

guide us safely in most of the cases.  1st. The capital and leading

object of the constitution was to leave with the States all

authorities which respected their own citizens only, and to transfer

to the United States those which respected citizens of foreign or

other States: to make us several as to ourselves, but one as to all

others.  In the latter case, then, constructions should lean to the

general jurisdiction, if the words will bear it; and in favor of the

States in the former, if possible to be so construed.  And indeed,

between citizens and citizens of the same State, and under their own

laws, I know but a single case in which a jurisdiction is given to

the General Government.  That is, where anything but gold or silver

is made a lawful tender, or the obligation of contracts is any

otherwise impaired.  The separate legislatures had so often abused

that power, that the citizens themselves chose to trust it to the

general, rather than to their own special authorities.  2d. On every

question of construction, carry ourselves back to the time when the

constitution was adopted, recollect the spirit manifested in the

debates, and instead of trying what meaning may be squeezed out of

the text, or invented against it, conform to the probable one in

which it was passed.  Let us try Cohen's case by these canons only,

referring always, however, for full argument, to the essays before

cited.




        1. It was between a citizen and his own State, and under a law

of his State.  It was a domestic case, therefore, and not a foreign

one.




        2. Can it be believed, that under the jealousies prevailing

against the General Government, at the adoption of the constitution,

the States meant to surrender the authority of preserving order, of

enforcing moral duties and restraining vice, within their own

territory?  And this is the present case, that of Cohen being under

the ancient and general law of gaming.  Can any good be effected by

taking from the States the moral rule of their citizens, and

subordinating it to the general authority, or to one of their

corporations, which may justify forcing the meaning of words, hunting

after possible constructions, and hanging inference on inference,

from heaven to earth, like Jacob's ladder?  Such an intention was

impossible, and such a licentiousness of construction and inference,

if exercised by both governments, as may be done with equal right,

would equally authorize both to claim all power, general and

particular, and break up the foundations of the Union.  Laws are made

for men of ordinary understanding, and should, therefore, be

construed by the ordinary rules of common sense.  Their meaning is

not to be sought for in metaphysical subtleties, which may make

anything mean everything or nothing, at pleasure.  It should be left

to the sophisms of advocates, whose trade it is, to prove that a

defendant is a plaintiff, though dragged into court, _torto collo_,

like Bonaparte's volunteers, into the field in chains, or that a

power has been given, because it ought to have been given, _et alia

talia_.  The States supposed that by their tenth amendment, they had

secured themselves against constructive powers.  They were not

lessoned yet by Cohen's case, nor aware of the slipperiness of the

eels of the law.  I ask for no straining of words against the General

Government, nor yet against the States.  I believe the States can

best govern our home concerns, and the General Government our foreign

ones.  I wish, therefore, to see maintained that wholesome

distribution of powers established by the constitution for the

limitation of both; and never to see all offices transferred to

Washington, where, further withdrawn from the eyes of the people,

they may more secretly be bought and sold as at market.




        But the Chief Justice says, "there must be an ultimate arbiter

somewhere." True, there must; but does that prove it is either party?

The ultimate arbiter is the people of the Union, assembled by their

deputies in convention, at the call of Congress, or of two-thirds of

the States.  Let them decide to which they mean to give an authority

claimed by two of their organs.  And it has been the peculiar wisdom

and felicity of our constitution, to have provided this peaceable

appeal, where that of other nations is at once to force.




        I rejoice in the example you set of _seriatim_ opinions.  I

have heard it often noticed, and always with high approbation.  Some

of your brethren will be encouraged to follow it occasionally, and in

time, it may be felt by all as a duty, and the sound practice of the

primitive court be again restored.  Why should not every judge be

asked his opinion, and give it from the bench, if only by yea or nay?

Besides ascertaining the fact of his opinion, which the public have a

right to know, in order to judge whether it is impeachable or not, it

would show whether the opinions were unanimous or not, and thus

settle more exactly the weight of their authority.




        The close of my second sheet warns me that it is time now to

relieve you from this letter of unmerciful length.  Indeed, I wonder

how I have accomplished it, with two crippled wrists, the one

scarcely able to move my pen, the other to hold my paper.  But I am

hurried sometimes beyond the sense of pain, when unbosoming myself to

friends who harmonize with me in principle.  You and I may differ

occasionally in details of minor consequence, as no two minds, more

than two faces, are the same in every feature.  But our general

objects are the same, to preserve the republican form and principles

of our constitution and cleave to the salutary distribution of powers

which that has established.  These are the two sheet anchors of our

Union.  If driven from either, we shall be in danger of foundering.

To my prayers for its safety and perpetuity, I add those for the

continuation of your health, happiness, and usefulness to your

country.







        "RIVERS OF BLOOD MUST YET FLOW"




        _To John Adams_

        _Monticello, Sep. 4, 1823_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your letter of Aug. 15. was recieved in due time,

and with the welcome of every thing which comes from you.  With it's

opinions on the difficulties of revolutions, from despotism to

freedom, I very much concur.  The generation which commences a

revolution can rarely compleat it.  Habituated from their infancy to

passive submission of body and mind to their kings and priests, they

are not qualified, when called on, to think and provide for

themselves and their inexperience, their ignorance and bigotry make

them instruments often, in the hands of the Bonapartes and Iturbides

to defeat their own rights and purposes.  This is the present

situation of Europe and Spanish America.  But it is not desperate.

The light which has been shed on mankind by the art of printing has

eminently changed the condition of the world.  As yet that light has

dawned on the midling classes only of the men of Europe.  The kings

and the rabble of equal ignorance, have not yet recieved it's rays;

but it continues to spread.  And, while printing is preserved, it can

no more recede than the sun return on his course.  A first attempt to

recover the right of self-government may fail; so may a 2d. a 3d.

etc., but as a younger, and more instructed race comes on, the

sentiment becomes more and more intuitive, and a 4th. a 5th. or some

subsequent one of the ever renewed attempts will ultimately succeed.

In France the 1st. effort was defeated by Robespierre, the 2d. by

Bonaparte, the 3d. by Louis XVIII. and his holy allies; another is

yet to come, and all Europe, Russia excepted, has caught the spirit,

and all will attain representative government, more or less perfect.

This is now well understood to be a necessary check on kings, whom

they will probably think it more prudent to chain and tame, than to

exterminate.  To attain all this however rivers of blood must yet

flow, and years of desolation pass over.  Yet the object is worth

rivers of blood, and years of desolation for what inheritance so

valuable can man leave to his posterity?  The spirit of the Spaniard

and his deadly and eternal hatred to a Frenchman, gives me much

confidence that he will never submit, but finally defeat this

atrocious violation of the laws of god and man under which he is

suffering; and the wisdom and firmness of the Cortes afford

reasonable hope that that nation will settle down in a temperate

representative government, with an Executive properly subordinated to

that.  Portugal, Italy, Prussia, Germany, Greece will follow suit.

You and I shall look down from another world on these glorious

atchievements to man, which will add to the joys even of heaven.




        I observe your toast of Mr. Jay on the 4th. of July, wherein

you say that the omission of his signature to the Declaration of

Independance was by _accident_.  Our impressions as to this fact

being different, I shall be glad to have mine corrected, if wrong.

Jay, you know, had been in constant opposition to our laboring

majority.  Our estimate, at the time, was that he, Dickinson and

Johnson of Maryland by their ingenuity, perseverance and partiality

to our English connection, had constantly kept us a year behind where

we ought to have been in our preparations and proceedings.  From

about the date of the Virginia instructions of May 15. 76. to declare

Independance Mr. Jay absented himself from Congress, and never came

there again until Dec. 78.  Of course he had no part in the

discussions or decision of that question.  The instructions to their

delegates by the Convention of New York, then sitting, to sign the

Declaration, were presented to Congress on the 15th. of July only,

and on that day the journals shew the absence of Mr. Jay by a letter

recieved from him, as they had done as early as the 29th. of May by

another letter.  And, I think, he had been omitted by the Convention

on a new election of Delegates when they changed their instructions.

Of this last fact however having no evidence but an antient

impression, I shall not affirm it.  But whether so or not, no agency

of _accident_ appears in the case.  This error of fact however,

whether yours or mine, is of little consequence to the public.  But

truth being as cheap as error, it is as well to rectify it for our

own satisfaction.




        I have had a fever of about three weeks during the last and

preceding month, from which I am entirely recovered except as to

strength.  Ever and affectionately yours







        "THE BEST LETTER THAT EVER WAS WRITTEN . . ."




        _To John Adams_

        _Monticello, Oct. 12, 1823_




        DEAR SIR, -- I do not write with the ease whichyour letter of

Sep. 18. supposes.  Crippled wrists and fingers make writing slow and

laborious.  But, while writing to you, I lose the sense of these

things, in the recollection of antient times, when youth and health

made happiness out of every thing.  I forget for a while the hoary

winter of age, when we can think of nothing but how to keep ourselves

warm, and how to get rid of our heavy hours until the friendly hand

of death shall rid us of all at once.  Against this tedium vitae

however I am fortunately mounted on a Hobby, which indeed I should

have better managed some 30. or 40. years ago, but whose easy amble

is still sufficient to give exercise and amusement to an Octogenary

rider.  This is the establishment of an University, on a scale more

comprehensive, and in a country more healthy and central than our old

William and Mary, which these obstacles have long kept in a state of

languor and inefficiency.  But the tardiness with which such works

proceed may render it doubtful whether I shall live to see it go into

action.




        Putting aside these things however for the present, I write

this letter as due to a friendship co-eval with our government, and

now attempted to be poisoned, when too late in life to be replaced by

new affections.  I had for some time observed, in the public papers,

dark hints and mysterious innuendoes of a correspondence of yours

with a friend, to whom you had opened your bosom without reserve, and

which was to be made public by that friend, or his representative.

And now it is said to be actually published.  It has not yet reached

us, but extracts have been given, and such as seemed most likely to

draw a curtain of separation between you and myself.  Were there no

other motive than that of indignation against the author of this

outrage on private confidence, whose shaft seems to have been aimed

at yourself more particularly, this would make it the duty of every

honorable mind to disappoint that aim, by opposing to it's impression

a seven-fold shield of apathy and insensibility.  With me however no

such armour is needed.  The circumstances of the times, in which we

have happened to live, and the partiality of our friends, at a

particular period, placed us in a state of apparent opposition, which

some might suppose to be personal also; and there might not be

wanting those who wish'd to make it so, by filling our ears with

malignant falsehoods, by dressing up hideous phantoms of their own

creation, presenting them to you under my name, to me under your's,

and endeavoring to instill into our minds things concerning each

other the most destitute of truth.  And if there had been, at any

time, a moment when we were off our guard, and in a temper to let the

whispers of these people make us forget what we had known of each

other for so many years, and years of so much trial, yet all men who

have attended to the workings of the human mind, who have seen the

false colours under which passion sometimes dresses the actions and

motives of others, have seen also these passions subsiding with time

and reflection, dissipating, like mists before the rising sun, and

restoring to us the sight of all things in their true shape and

colours.  It would be strange indeed if, at our years, we were to go

an age back to hunt up imaginary, or forgotten facts, to disturb the

repose of affections so sweetening to the evening of our lives.  Be

assured, my dear Sir, that I am incapable of recieving the slightest

impression from the effort now made to plant thorns on the pillow of

age, worth, and wisdom, and to sow tares between friends who have

been such for near half a century.  Beseeching you then not to suffer

your mind to be disquieted by this wicked attempt to poison it's

peace, and praying you to throw it by, among the things which have

never happened, I add sincere assurances of my unabated, and constant

attachment, friendship and respect.







        THE MONROE DOCTRINE




        _To the President of the United States_

        (JAMES MONROE)

        _Monticello, October 24, 1823_




        DEAR SIR, -- The question presented by the letters you have

sent me, is the most momentous which has ever been offered to my

contemplation since that of Independence.  That made us a nation,

this sets our compass and points the course which we are to steer

through the ocean of time opening on us.  And never could we embark

on it under circumstances more auspicious.  Our first and fundamental

maxim should be, never to entangle ourselves in the broils of Europe.

Our second, never to suffer Europe to intermeddle with cis-Atlantic

affairs.  America, North and South, has a set of interests distinct

from those of Europe, and peculiarly her own.  She should therefore

have a system of her own, separate and apart from that of Europe.

While the last is laboring to become the domicil of despotism, our

endeavor should surely be, to make our hemisphere that of freedom.

One nation, most of all, could disturb us in this pursuit; she now

offers to lead, aid, and accompany us in it.  By acceding to her

proposition, we detach her from the bands, bring her mighty weight

into the scale of free government, and emancipate a continent at one

stroke, which might otherwise linger long in doubt and difficulty.

Great Britain is the nation which can do us the most harm of any one,

or all on earth; and with her on our side we need not fear the whole

world.  With her then, we should most sedulously cherish a cordial

friendship; and nothing would tend more to knit our affections than

to be fighting once more, side by side, in the same cause.  Not that

I would purchase even her amity at the price of taking part in her

wars.  But the war in which the present proposition might engage us,

should that be its consequence, is not her war, but ours.  Its object

is to introduce and establish the American system, of keeping out of

our land all foreign powers, of never permitting those of Europe to

intermeddle with the affairs of our nations.  It is to maintain our

own principle, not to depart from it.  And if, to facilitate this, we

can effect a division in the body of the European powers, and draw

over to our side its most powerful member, surely we should do it.

But I am clearly of Mr. Canning's opinion, that it will prevent

instead of provoking war.  With Great Britain withdrawn from their

scale and shifted into that of our two continents, all Europe

combined would not undertake such a war.  For how would they propose

to get at either enemy without superior fleets?  Nor is the occasion

to be slighted which this proposition offers, of declaring our

protest against the atrocious violations of the rights of nations, by

the interference of any one in the internal affairs of another, so

flagitiously begun by Bonaparte, and now continued by the equally

lawless Alliance, calling itself Holy.




        But we have first to ask ourselves a question.  Do we wish to

acquire to our own confederacy any one or more of the Spanish

provinces?  I candidly confess, that I have ever looked on Cuba as

the most interesting addition which could ever be made to our system

of States.  The control which, with Florida Point, this island would

give us over the Gulf of Mexico, and the countries and isthmus

bordering on it, as well as all those whose waters flow into it,

would fill up the measure of our political well-being.  Yet, as I am

sensible that this can never be obtained, even with her own consent,

but by war; and its independence, which is our second interest, (and

especially its independence of England,) can be secured without it, I

have no hesitation in abandoning my first wish to future chances, and

accepting its independence, with peace and the friendship of England,

rather than its association, at the expense of war and her enmity.




        I could honestly, therefore, join in the declaration proposed,

that we aim not at the acquisition of any of those possessions, that

we will not stand in the way of any amicable arrangement between them

and the mother country; but that we will oppose, with all our means,

the forcible interposition of any other power, as auxiliary,

stipendiary, or under any other form or pretext, and most especially,

their transfer to any power by conquest, cession, or acquisition in

any other way.  I should think it, therefore, advisable, that the

Executive should encourage the British government to a continuance in

the dispositions expressed in these letters, by an assurance of his

concurrence with them as far as his authority goes; and that as it

may lead to war, the declaration of which requires an act of

Congress, the case shall be laid before them for consideration at

their first meeting, and under the reasonable aspect in which it is

seen by himself.




        I have been so long weaned from political subjects, and have so

long ceased to take any interest in them, that I am sensible I am not

qualified to offer opinions on them worthy of any attention.  But the

question now proposed involves consequences so lasting, and effects

so decisive of our future destinies, as to rekindle all the interest

I have heretofore felt on such occasions, and to induce me to the

hazard of opinions, which will prove only my wish to contribute still

my mite towards anything which may be useful to our country.  And

praying you to accept it at only what it is worth, I add the

assurance of my constant and affectionate friendship and respect.







        A PLAN OF EMANCIPATION




        _To Jared Sparks_

        _Monticello, February 4, 1824_




        DEAR SIR, -- I duly received your favor of the 13th, and with

it, the last number of the North American Review.  This has

anticipated the one I should receive in course, but have not yet

received, under my subscription to the new series.  The article on

the African colonization of the people of color, to which you invite

my attention, I have read with great consideration.  It is, indeed, a

fine one, and will do much good.  I learn from it more, too, than I

had before known, of the degree of success and promise of that

colony.




        In the disposition of these unfortunate people, there are two

rational objects to be distinctly kept in view.  First. The

establishment of a colony on the coast of Africa, which may introduce

among the aborigines the arts of cultivated life, and the blessings

of civilization and science.  By doing this, we may make to them some

retribution for the long course of injuries we have been committing

on their population.  And considering that these blessings will

descend to the _"nati natorum, et qui nascentur ab illis,"_ we shall

in the long run have rendered them perhaps more good than evil.  To

fulfil this object, the colony of Sierra Leone promises well, and

that of Mesurado adds to our prospect of success.  Under this view,

the colonization society is to be considered as a missionary society,

having in view, however, objects more humane, more justifiable, and

less aggressive on the peace of other nations, than the others of

that appellation.




        The subject object, and the most interesting to us, as coming

home to our physical and moral characters, to our happiness and

safety, is to provide an asylum to which we can, by degrees, send the

whole of that population from among us, and establish them under our

patronage and protection, as a separate, free and independent people,

in some country and climate friendly to human life and happiness.

That any place on the coast of Africa should answer the latter

purpose, I have ever deemed entirely impossible.  And without

repeating the other arguments which have been urged by others, I will

appeal to figures only, which admit no controversy.  I shall speak in

round numbers, not absolutely accurate, yet not so wide from truth as

to vary the result materially.  There are in the United States a

million and a half of people of color in slavery.  To send off the

whole of these at once, nobody conceives to be practicable for us, or

expedient for them.  Let us take twenty-five years for its

accomplishment, within which time they will be doubled.  Their

estimated value as property, in the first place, (for actual property

has been lawfully vested in that form, and who can lawfully take it

from the possessors?) at an average of two hundred dollars each,

young and old, would amount to six hundred millions of dollars, which

must be paid or lost by somebody.  To this, add the cost of their

transportation by land and sea to Mesurado, a year's provision of

food and clothing, implements of husbandry and of their trades, which

will amount to three hundred millions more, making thirty-six

millions of dollars a year for twenty-five years, with insurance of

peace all that time, and it is impossible to look at the question a

second time.  I am aware that at the end of about sixteen years, a

gradual detraction from this sum will commence, from the gradual

diminution of breeders, and go on during the remaining nine years.

Calculate this deduction, and it is still impossible to look at the

enterprise a second time.  I do not say this to induce an inference

that the getting rid of them is forever impossible.  For that is

neither my opinion nor my hope.  But only that it cannot be done in

this way.  There is, I think, a way in which it can be done; that is,

by emancipating the after-born, leaving them, on due compensation,

with their mothers, until their services are worth their maintenance,

and then putting them to industrious occupations, until a proper age

for deportation.  This was the result of my reflections on the

subject five and forty years ago, and I have never yet been able to

conceive any other practicable plan.  It was sketched in the Notes on

Virginia, under the fourteenth query.  The estimated value of the

new-born infant is so low, (say twelve dollars and fifty cents,) that

it would probably be yielded by the owner gratis, and would thus

reduce the six hundred millions of dollars, the first head of

expense, to thirty-seven millions and a half; leaving only the

expense of nourishment while with the mother, and of transportation.

And from what fund are these expenses to be furnished?  Why not from

that of the lands which have been ceded by the very States now

needing this relief?  And ceded on no consideration, for the most

part, but that of the general good of the whole.  These cessions

already constitute one fourth of the States of the Union.  It may be

said that these lands have been sold; are now the property of the

citizens composing those States; and the money long ago received and

expended.  But an equivalent of lands in the territories since

acquired, may be appropriated to that object, or so much, at least,

as may be sufficient; and the object, although more important to the

slave States, is highly so to the others also, if they were serious

in their arguments on the Missouri question.  The slave States, too,

if more interested, would also contribute more by their gratuitous

liberation, thus taking on themselves alone the first and heaviest

item of expense.




        In the plan sketched in the Notes on Virginia, no particular

place of asylum was specified; because it was thought possible, that

in the revolutionary state of America, then commenced, events might

open to us some one within practicable distance.  This has now

happened.  St. Domingo has become independent, and with a population

of that color only; and if the public papers are to be credited,

their Chief offers to pay their passage, to receive them as free

citizens, and to provide them employment.  This leaves, then, for the

general confederacy, no expense but of nurture with the mother a few

years, and would call, of course, for a very moderate appropriation

of the vacant lands.  Suppose the whole annual increase to be of

sixty thousand effective births, fifty vessels, of four hundred tons

burthen each, constantly employed in that short run, would carry off

the increase of every year, and the old stock would die off in the

ordinary course of nature, lessening from the commencement until its

final disappearance.  In this way no violation of private right is

proposed.  Voluntary surrenders would probably come in as fast as the

means to be provided for their care would be competent to it.

Looking at my own State only, and I presume not to speak for the

others, I verily believe that this surrender of property would not

amount to more, annually, than half our present direct taxes, to be

continued fully about twenty or twenty-five years, and then gradually

diminishing for as many more until their final extinction; and even

this half tax would not be paid in cash, but by the delivery of an

object which they have never yet known or counted as part of their

property; and those not possessing the object will be called on for

nothing.  I do not go into all the details of the burthens and

benefits of this operation.  And who could estimate its blessed

effects?  I leave this to those who will live to see their

accomplishment, and to enjoy a beatitude forbidden to my age.  But I

leave it with this admonition, to rise and be doing.  A million and a

half are within their control; but six millions, (which a majority of

those now living will see them attain,) and one million of these

fighting men, will say, "we will not go."




        I am aware that this subject involves some constitutional

scruples.  But a liberal construction, justified by the object, may

go far, and an amendment of the constitution, the whole length

necessary.  The separation of infants from their mothers, too, would

produce some scruples of humanity.  But this would be straining at a

gnat, and swallowing a camel.




        I am much pleased to see that you have taken up the subject of

the duty on imported books.  I hope a crusade will be kept up against

it, until those in power shall become sensible of this stain on our

legislation, and shall wipe it from their code, and from the

remembrance of man, if possible.




        I salute you with assurances of high respect and esteem.







        PROFESSORS FROM ABROAD




        _To Dugald Stewart_

        _Monticello in Virginia, Apr. 26, 1824_




        DEAR SIR, -- It is now 35 years since I had the great pleasure

of becoming acquainted with you in Paris, and since we saw together

Louis XVI. led in triumph by his people thro' the streets of his

capital; these years too have been like ages in the events they have

engendered without seeming at all to have bettered the condn of

suffering man.  Yet his mind has been opening and advancing, a

sentiment of his wrongs has been spreading, and it will end in the

ultimate establishment of his rights.  To effect this nothing is

wanting but a general concurrence of will, and some fortunate

accident will produce that.  At a subsequent period you were so kind

as to recall me to your recollection on the publicn of your

invaluable book on the Philosophy of the Human Mind, a copy of which

you sent me, and I have been happy to see it become the text book of

most of our colleges & academies, and pass thro' several

reimpressions in the U.S.  An occurrence of a character dear to us

both leads again to a renewal of our recollections and associates us

in an occasion of still rendering some service to those we are about

to leave.  The State of Virga, of which I am a native and resident,

is establishing an university on a scale as extensive and liberal as

circumstances permit or call for.  We have been 4 or 5 years in

preparing our buildings, which are now ready to recieve their

tenants.  We proceed, therefore, to the engaging professors, and

anxious to recieve none but of the highest grade of science in their

respective lines, we find we must have recourse to Europe, where

alone that grade is to be found, and to Gr. Br. of preference, as the

land of our own language, morals, manners, and habits.  To make the

selection we send a special agent, M'r Francis W. Gilmer, who will

have the honor of delivering you this letter.  He is well educated

himself in most of the branches of science, of correct morals and

habits, an enlarged mind, and a discretion meriting entire

confidence.  From the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, where we

expect he will find persons duly qualified in the particular branches

in which these seminaries are respectively eminent, he will pass on

to Edinburg, distinguished for it's school of Medicine as well as of

other sciences, but when arrived there he will be a perfect stranger,

and would have to grope his way in darkness and uncertainty; you can

lighten his path, and to beseech you to do so is the object of this

letter.  Your knolege of persons and characters there can guard him

against being misled and lead him to the consummation of our wishes.

We do not expect to engage the high characters there who are at the

head of their schools, established in offices, honors, & emoluments

which can be bettered no where.  But we know there is always a junior

set of aspirants, treading on their heels, ready to take their

places, and as well & sometimes better qualified than they are.

These persons, unsettled as yet, surrounded by competitors of equal

claims, and perhaps greater credit and interest, may be willing to

accept immediately a comfortable certainty here in place of uncertain

hopes there, and a lingering delay of even these.  From this

description of persons we may hope to procure characters of the first

order of science.  But how to distinguish them?  For we are told that

were the mission of our agent once known, he would be overwhelmed

with applicants, unworthy as well as worthy, yet all supported on

recommendns and certificates equally exaggerated, and by names so

respectable as to confound all discrimination.  Yet this

discrimination is all important to us.  An unlucky selection at first

would blast all our prospects.  Let me beseech you, then, good Sir,

to lead Mr. Gilmer by the hand in his researches, to instruct him as

to the competent characters, & guard him against those not so.

Besides the first degree of eminence in science, a professor with us

must be of sober and correct morals & habits, having the talent of

communicating his knolege with facility, and of an accomodating and

peaceable temper.  The latter is all important for the harmony of the

institution.  For minuter particulars I will refer you to Mr. Gilmer,

who possesses a full knolege of everything & our full confidence in

everything.  He takes with him plans of our establm't, which will

shew the comfortable accommodns provided for the professors, whether

with or without families; and by the expensiveness and extent of the

scale they will see it is not an ephemeral thing to which they are

invited.




        A knolege of your character & disposns to do good dispenses

with all apology for the trouble I give you.  While the character and

success of this institN, involving the future hopes and happiness of

my country, will justify the anxieties I feel in the choice of it's

professors, I am sure the object will excite in your breast such

sympathies of kind disposN, as will give us the benefits we ask of

your counsels & attentions.  And, with my acknolegements for these,

accept assurances of constant and sincere attamt, esteem & respect.







        SAXONS, CONSTITUTIONS, AND A CASE OF PIOUS FRAUD




        _To Major John Cartwright_

        _Monticello, June 5, 1824_




        DEAR AND VENERABLE SIR, -- I am much indebted for your kind

letter of February the 29th, and for your valuable volume on the

English constitution.  I have read this with pleasure and much

approbation, and think it has deduced the constitution of the English

nation from its rightful root, the Anglo-Saxon.  It is really

wonderful, that so many able and learned men should have failed in

their attempts to define it with correctness.  No wonder then, that

Paine, who thought more than he read, should have credited the great

authorities who have declared, that the will of parliament is the

constitution of England.  So Marbois, before the French revolution,

observed to me, that the Almanac Royal was the constitution of

France.  Your derivation of it from the Anglo-Saxons, seems to be

made on legitimate principles.  Having driven out the former

inhabitants of that part of the island called England, they became

aborigines as to you, and your lineal ancestors.  They doubtless had

a constitution; and although they have not left it in a written

formula, to the precise text of which you may always appeal, yet they

have left fragments of their history and laws, from which it may be

inferred with considerable certainty.  Whatever their history and

laws shew to have been practised with approbation, we may presume was

permitted by their constitution; whatever was not so practised, was

not permitted.  And although this constitution was violated and set

at naught by Norman force, yet force cannot change right.  A

perpetual claim was kept up by the nation, by their perpetual demand

of a restoration of their Saxon laws; which shews they were never

relinquished by the will of the nation.  In the pullings and haulings

for these antient rights, between the nation, and its kings of the

races of Plantagenets, Tudors and Stuarts, there was sometimes gain,

and sometimes loss, until the final re-conquest of their rights from

the Stuarts.  The destitution and expulsion of this race broke the

thread of pretended inheritance, extinguished all regal usurpations,

and the nation re-entered into all its rights; and although in their

bill of rights they specifically reclaimed some only, yet the

omission of the others was no renunciation of the right to assume

their exercise also, whenever occasion should occur.  The new King

received no rights or powers, but those expressly granted to him.  It

has ever appeared to me, that the difference between the whig and the

tory of England is, that the whig deduces his rights from the

Anglo-Saxon source, and the tory from the Norman.  And Hume, the

great apostle of toryism, says, in so many words, note AA to chapter

42, that, in the reign of the Stuarts, `it was the people who

encroached upon the sovereign, not the sovereign who attempted, as is

pretended, to usurp upon the people.' This supposes the Norman

usurpations to be rights in his successors.  And again, C, 159, `the

commons established a principle, which is noble in itself, and seems

specious, but is belied by all history and experience, _that the

people are the origin of all just power_.' And where else will this

degenerate son of science, this traitor to his fellow men, find the

origin of just powers, if not in the majority of the society?  Will

it be in the minority?  Or in an individual of that minority?




        Our Revolution commenced on more favorable ground.  It

presented us an album on which we were free to write what we pleased.

We had no occasion to search into musty records, to hunt up royal

parchments, or to investigate the laws and institutions of a

semi-barbarous ancestry.  We appealed to those of nature, and found

them engraved on our hearts.  Yet we did not avail ourselves of all

the advantages of our position.  We had never been permitted to

exercise self-government.  When forced to assume it, we were novices

in its science.  Its principles and forms had entered little into our

former education.  We established however some, although not all its

important principles.  The constitutions of most of our States

assert, that all power is inherent in the people; that they may

exercise it by themselves, in all cases to which they think

themselves competent, (as in electing their functionaries executive

and legislative, and deciding by a jury of themselves, in all

judiciary cases in which any fact is involved,) or they may act by

representatives, freely and equally chosen; that it is their right

and duty to be at all times armed; that they are entitled to freedom

of person, freedom of religion, freedom of property, and freedom of

the press.  In the structure of our legislatures, we think experience

has proved the benefit of subjecting questions to two separate bodies

of deliberants; but in constituting these, natural right has been

mistaken, some making one of these bodies, and some both, the

representatives of property instead of persons; whereas the double

deliberation might be as well obtained without any violation of true

principle, either by requiring a greater age in one of the bodies, or

by electing a proper number of representatives of persons, dividing

them by lots into two chambers, and renewing the division at frequent

intervals, in order to break up all cabals.  Virginia, of which I am

myself a native and resident, was not only the first of the States,

but, I believe I may say, the first of the nations of the earth,

which assembled its wise men peaceably together to form a fundamental

constitution, to commit it to writing, and place it among their

archives, where every one should be free to appeal to its text.  But

this act was very imperfect.  The other States, as they proceeded

successively to the same work, made successive improvements; and

several of them, still further corrected by experience, have, by

conventions, still further amended their first forms.  My own State

has gone on so far with its _premiere ebauche_; but it is now

proposing to call a convention for amendment.  Among other

improvements, I hope they will adopt the subdivision of our counties

into wards.  The former may be estimated at an average of twenty-four

miles square; the latter should be about six miles square each, and

would answer to the hundreds of your Saxon Alfred.  In each of these

might be, 1. An elementary school. 2. A company of militia, with its

officers. 3. A justice of the peace and constable. 4. Each ward

should take care of their own poor. 5. Their own roads. 6. Their own

police. 7. Elect within themselves one or more jurors to attend the

courts of justice. And 8. Give in at their Folk-house, their votes

for all functionaries reserved to their election.  Each ward would

thus be a small republic within itself, and every man in the State

would thus become an acting member of the common government,

transacting in person a great portion of its rights and duties,

subordinate indeed, yet important, and entirely within his

competence.  The wit of man cannot devise a more solid basis for a

free, durable and well administered republic.




        With respect to our State and federal governments, I do not

think their relations correctly understood by foreigners.  They

generally suppose the former subordinate to the latter.  But this is

not the case.  They are co-ordinate departments of one simple and

integral whole.  To the State governments are reserved all

legislation and administration, in affairs which concern their own

citizens only, and to the federal government is given whatever

concerns foreigners, or the citizens of other States; these functions

alone being made federal.  The one is the domestic, the other the

foreign branch of the same government; neither having control over

the other, but within its own department.  There are one or two

exceptions only to this partition of power.  But, you may ask, if the

two departments should claim each the same subject of power, where is

the common umpire to decide ultimately between them?  In cases of

little importance or urgency, the prudence of both parties will keep

them aloof from the questionable ground: but if it can neither be

avoided nor compromised, a convention of the States must be called,

to ascribe the doubtful power to that department which they may think

best.  You will perceive by these details, that we have not yet so

far perfected our constitutions as to venture to make them

unchangeable.  But still, in their present state, we consider them

not otherwise changeable than by the authority of the people, on a

special election of representatives for that purpose expressly: they

are until then the _lex legum_.




        But can they be made unchangeable?  Can one generation bind

another, and all others, in succession forever?  I think not.  The

Creator has made the earth for the living, not the dead.  Rights and

powers can only belong to persons, not to things, not to mere matter,

unendowed with will.  The dead are not even things.  The particles of

matter which composed their bodies, make part now of the bodies of

other animals, vegetables, or minerals, of a thousand forms.  To what

then are attached the rights and powers they held while in the form

of men?  A generation may bind itself as long as its majority

continues in life; when that has disappeared, another majority is in

place, holds all the rights and powers their predecessors once held,

and may change their laws and institutions to suit themselves.

Nothing then is unchangeable but the inherent and unalienable rights

of man.




        I was glad to find in your bo ok a formal contradition, at

length, of the judiciary usurpation of legislative powers; for such

the judges have usurped in their repeated decisions, that

Christianity is a part of the common law.  The proof of the contrary,

which you have adduced, is incontrovertible; to wit, that the common

law existed while the Anglo-Saxons were yet Pagans, at a time when

they had never yet heard the name of Christ pronounced, or knew that

such a character had ever existed.  But it may amuse you, to shew

when, and by what means, they stole this law in upon us.  In a case

of _quare impedit_ in the Year-book 34. H. 6. folio 38. (anno 1458,)

a question was made, how far the ecclesiastical law was to be

respected in a common law court?  And Prisot, Chief Justice, gives

his opinion in these words, `A tiel leis qu' ils de seint eglise ont

en _ancien scripture_, covient a nous a donner credence; car ceo

common ley sur quels touts manners leis sont fondes.  Et auxy, Sir,

nous sumus obleges de conustre lour ley de saint eglise: et

semblablement ils sont obliges de conustre nostre ley.  Et, Sir, si

poit apperer or a nous que l'evesque ad fait come un ordinary fera en

tiel cas, adong nous devons ceo adjuger bon, ou auterment nemy,' &c.

See S. C. Fitzh. Abr. Qu. imp. 89. Bro. Abr. Qu. imp. 12.  Finch in

his first book, c. 3. is the first afterwards who quotes this case,

and mistakes it thus.  `To such laws of the church as have warrant in

_holy scripture_, our law giveth credence.' And cites Prisot;

mistranslating _`ancien scripture,'_ into _`holy scripture.'_ Whereas

Prisot palpably says, `to such laws as those of holy church have in

_antient writing_, it is proper for us to give credence;' to wit, to

their _antient written_ laws.  This was in 1613, a century and a half

after the dictum of Prisot. Wingate, in 1658, erects this false

translation into a maxim of the common law, copying the words of

Finch, but citing Prisot. Wing. Max. 3.  And Sheppard, title,

`Religion,' in 1675, copies the same mistranslation, quoting the Y.

B. Finch and Wingate.  Hale expresses it in these words;

`Christianity is parcel of the laws of England.' 1 Ventr. 293. 3 Keb.

607.  But he quotes no authority.  By these echoings and re-echoings

from one to another, it had become so established in 1728, that in

the case of the King _vs._ Woolston, 2 Stra. 834, the court would not

suffer it to be debated, whether to write against Christianity was

punishable in the temporal court at common law?  Wood, therefore,

409, ventures still to vary the phrase, and say, that all blasphemy

and profaneness are offences by the common law; and cites 2 Stra.

Then Blackstone, in 1763, IV. 59, repeats the words of Hale, that

`Christianity is part of the laws of England,' citing Ventris and

Strange.  And finally, Lord Mansfield, with a little qualification,

in Evans' case, in 1767, says, that `the essential principles of

revealed religion are part of the common law.' Thus ingulphing Bible,

Testament and all into the common law, without citing any authority.

And thus we find this chain of authorities hanging link by link, one

upon another, and all ultimately on one and the same hook, and that a

mistranslation of the words _`ancien scripture,'_ used by Prisot.

Finch quotes Prisot; Wingate does the same.  Sheppard quotes Prisot,

Finch and Wingate.  Hale cites nobody.  The court in Woolston's case,

cite Hale.  Wood cites Woolston's case.  Blackstone quotes Woolston's

case and Hale.  And Lord Mansfield, like Hale, ventures it on his own

authority.  Here I might defy the best read lawyer to produce another

scrip of authority for this judiciary forgery; and I might go on

further to shew, how some of the Anglo-Saxon priests interpolated

into the text of Alfred's laws, the 20th, 21st, 22nd and 23rd

chapters of Exodus, and the 15th of the Acts of the Apostles, from

the 23rd to the 29th verses.  But this would lead my pen and your

patience too far.  What a conspiracy this, between Church and State!

Sing Tantarara, rogues all, rogues all, Sing Tantarara, rogues all!




        I must still add to this long and rambling letter, my

acknowledgments for your good wishes to the University we are now

establishing in this State.  There are some novelties in it.  Of that

of a professorship of the principles of government, you express your

approbation.  They will be founded in the rights of man.  That of

agriculture, I am sure, you will approve: and that also of

Anglo-Saxon.  As the histories and laws left us in that type and

dialect, must be the text books of the reading of the learners, they

will imbibe with the language their free principles of government.

The volumes you have been so kind as to send, shall be placed in the

library of the University.  Having at this time in England a person

sent for the purpose of selecting some Professors, a Mr. Gilmer of my

neighborhood, I cannot but recommend him to your patronage, counsel

and guardianship, against imposition, misinformation, and the

deceptions of partial and false recommendations, in the selection of

characters.  He is a gentleman of great worth and correctness, my

particular friend, well educated in various branches of science, and

worthy of entire confidence.




        Your age of eighty-four and mine of eighty-one years, insure us

a speedy meeting.  We may then commune at leisure, and more fully, on

the good and evil, which, in the course of our long lives, we have

both witnessed; and in the mean time, I pray you to accept assurances

of my high veneration and esteem for your person and character.







        THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY




        _To William Ludlow_

        _Monticello, September 6, 1824_




        SIR, -- The idea which you present in your letter of July 30th,

of the progress of society from its rudest state to that it has now

attained, seems conformable to what may be probably conjectured.

Indeed, we have under our eyes tolerable proofs of it.  Let a

philosophic observer commence a journey from the savages of the Rocky

Mountains, eastwardly towards our sea-coast.  These he would observe

in the earliest stage of association living under no law but that of

nature, subscribing and covering themselves with the flesh and skins

of wild beasts.  He would next find those on our frontiers in the

pastoral state, raising domestic animals to supply the defects of

hunting.  Then succeed our own semi-barbarous citizens, the pioneers

of the advance of civilization, and so in his progress he would meet

the gradual shades of improving man until he would reach his, as yet,

most improved state in our seaport towns.  This, in fact, is

equivalent to a survey, in time, of the progress of man from the

infancy of creation to the present day.  I am eighty-one years of

age, born where I now live, in the first range of mountains in the

interior of our country.  And I have observed this march of

civilization advancing from the sea coast, passing over us like a

cloud of light, increasing our knowledge and improving our condition,

insomuch as that we are at this time more advanced in civilization

here than the seaports were when I was a boy.  And where this

progress will stop no one can say.  Barbarism has, in the meantime,

been receding before the steady step of amelioration; and will in

time, I trust, disappear from the earth.  You seem to think that this

advance has brought on too complicated a state of society, and that

we should gain in happiness by treading back our steps a little way.

I think, myself, that we have more machinery of government than is

necessary, too many parasites living on the labor of the industrious.

I believe it might be much simplified to the relief of those who

maintain it.  Your experiment seems to have this in view.  A society

of seventy families, the number you name, may very possibly be

governed as a single family, subsisting on their common industry, and

holding all things in common.  Some regulators of the family you

still must have, and it remains to be seen at what period of your

increasing population your simple regulations will cease to be

sufficient to preserve order, peace, and justice.  The experiment is

interesting; I shall not live to see its issue, but I wish it success

equal to your hopes, and to yourself and society prosperity and

happiness.







        RETURN OF THE HERO




        _To Lafayette_

        _Monticello, October 9, 1824_




        I have duly received, my dear friend and General, your letter

of the 1st from Philadelphia, giving us the welcome assurance that

you will visit the neighborhood which, during the march of our enemy

near it, was covered by your shield from his robberies and ravages.

In passing the line of your former march you will experience pleasing

recollections of the good you have done.  My neighbors, too, of our

academical village, who well remember their obligations to you, have

expressed to you, in a letter from a committee appointed for that

purpose, their hope that you will accept manifestations of their

feelings, simple indeed, but as cordial as any you will have

received.  It will be an additional honor to the University of the

State that you will have been its first guest.  Gratify them, then,

by this assurance to their committee, if it has not been done.  But

what recollections, dear friend, will this call up to you and me!

What a history have we to run over from the evening that yourself,

Meusnier, Bernau, and other patriots settled, in my house in Paris,

the outlines of the constitution you wished!  And to trace it through

all the disastrous chapters of Robespierre, Barras, Bonaparte, and

the Bourbons!  These things, however, are for our meeting.  You

mention the return of Miss Wright to America, accompanied by her

sister; but do not say what her stay is to be, nor what her course.

Should it lead her to a visit of our University, which, in its

architecture only, is as yet an object, herself and her companion

will nowhere find a welcome more hearty than with Mrs. Randolph, and

all the inhabitants of Monticello.  This Athenaeum of our country, in

embryo, is as yet but promise; and not in a state to recall the

recollections of Athens.  But everything has its beginning, its

growth, and end; and who knows with what future delicious morsels of

philosophy, and by what future Miss Wright raked from its ruins, the

world may, some day, be gratified and instructed?  Your son George we

shall be very happy indeed to see, and to renew in him the

recollections of your very dear family; and the revolutionary merit

of M. le Vasseur has that passport to the esteem of every American,

and, to me, the additional one of having been your friend and

co-operator, and he will, I hope, join you in making head-quarters

with us at Monticello.  But all these things _a revoir_ -- ; in the

meantime we are impatient that your ceremonies at York should be

over, and give you to the embraces of friendship.




        P. S. Will you come by Mr. Madison's, or let him or me know on

what day he may meet you here, and join us in our greetings?







        COUNSEL TO A NAMESAKE




        _To Thomas Jefferson Smith_

        _Monticello, February 21, 1825_




        This letter will, to you, be as one from the dead.  The writer

will be in the grave before you can weigh its counsels.  Your

affectionate and excellent father has requested that I would address

to you something which might possibly have a favorable influence on

the course of life you have to run, and I too, as a namesake, feel an

interest in that course.  Few words will be necessary, with good

dispositions on your part.  Adore God.  Reverence and cherish your

parents.  Love your neighbor as yourself, and your country more than

yourself.  Be just.  Be true.  Murmur not at the ways of Providence.

So shall the life into which you have entered, be the portal to one

of eternal and ineffable bliss.  And if to the dead it is permitted

to care for the things of this world, every action of your life will

be under my regard.  Farewell.




        _The portrait of a good man by the most sublime of poets, for

your imitation_

        Lord, who's the happy man that may to thy blest courts repair;

        Not stranger-like to visit them but to inhabit there?

        'Tis he whose every thought and deed by rules of virtue moves;

        Whose generous tongue disdains to speak the thing his heart

disproves.

        Who never did a slander forge, his neighbor's fame to wound;

        Nor hearken to a false report, by malice whispered round.

        Who vice in all its pomp and power, can treat with just

neglect;

        And piety, though clothed in rages, religiously respect.

        Who to his plighted vows and trust has ever firmly stood;

        And though he promise to his loss, he makes his promise good.

        Whose soul in usury disdains his treasure to employ;

        Whom no rewards can ever bribe the guiltless to destroy.

|P1500|p1

        The man, who, by his steady course, has happiness insur'd.

        When earth's foundations shake, shall stand, by Providence

secur'd.




        _A Decalogue of Canons for observation in practical life_.

        1. Never put off till to-morrow what you can do to-day.

        2. Never trouble another for what you can do yourself.

        3. Never spend your money before you have it.

        4. Never buy what you do not want, because it is cheap; it will

be dear to you.

        5. Pride costs us more than hunger, thirst and cold.

        6. We never repent of having eaten too little.

        7. Nothing is troublesome that we do willingly.

        8. How much pain have cost us the evils which have never

happened.

        9. Take things always by their smooth handle.

        10. When angry, count ten, before you speak; if very angry, an

hundred.







        THE OBJECT OF THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE




        _To Henry Lee_

        _Monticello, May 8, 1825_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favor of Apr. 29 has been duly recieved, and

the offer of mineralogical specimens from Mr. Myer has been

communicated to Dr. Emmet our Professor of Natural history.  The last

donation of the legislature to the University was appropriated

specifically to a library and apparatus of every kind.  But we apply

it first to the more important articles of a library, of an

astronomical, physical, & chemical apparatus.  And we think it safest

to see what these will cost, before we venture on collections of

mineral & other subjects, the last we must proportion to what sum we

shall have left only.  The Professor possesses already what he thinks

will be sufficient for mineralogical and geological explanations to

his school.  I do not know how far he might be tempted to enlarge his

possession by a catalogue of articles and prices, if both should be

satisfactory.  If Mr. Myer chuses to send such a catalogue, it shall

be returned to you immediately, if the purchase be not approved.




        That George Mason was the author of the bill of rights, and the

constitution founded on it, the evidence of the day established fully

in my mind.  Of the paper you mention, purporting to be instructions

to the Virginia delegation in Congress, I have no recollection.  If

it were anything more than a project of some private hand, that is to

say, had any such instructions been ever given by the convention,

they would appear in the journals, which we possess entire.  But with

respect to our rights, and the acts of the British government

contravening those rights, there was but one opinion on this side of

the water.  All American whigs thought alike on these subjects.  When

forced, therefore, to resort to arms for redress, an appeal to the

tribunal of the world was deemed proper for our justification.  This

was the object of the Declaration of Independence.  Not to find out

new principles, or new arguments, never before thought of, not merely

to say things which had never been said before; but to place before

mankind the common sense of the subject, in terms so plain and firm

as to command their assent, and to justify ourselves in the

independent stand we are compelled to take.  Neither aiming at

originality of principle or sentiment, nor yet copied from any

particular and previous writing, it was intended to be an expression

of the American mind, and to give to that expression the proper tone

and spirit called for by the occasion.  All its authority rests then

on the harmonizing sentiments of the day, whether expressed in

conversation, in letters, printed essays, or in the elementary books

of public right, as Aristotle, Cicero, Locke, Sidney, &c.  The

historical documents which you mention as in your possession, ought

all to be found, and I am persuaded you will find, to be

corroborative of the facts and principles advanced in that

Declaration.  Be pleased to accept assurances of my great esteem and

respect.







        THE ANGLO-SAXON LANGUAGE




        _To the Honorable J. Evelyn Denison, M.P._

        _Monticello, November 9, 1825_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favor of July 30th was duly received, and we

have now at hand the books you have been so kind as to send to our

University.  They are truly acceptable in themselves, for we might

have been years not knowing of their existence; but give the greater

pleasure as evidence of the interest you have taken in our infant

institution.  It is going on as successfully as we could have

expected; and I have no reason to regret the measure taken of

procuring Professors from abroad where science is so much ahead of

us.  You witnessed some of the puny squibs of which I was the butt on

that account.  They were probably from disappointed candidates, whose

unworthiness had occasioned their applications to be passed over.

The measure has been generally approved in the South and West; and by

all liberal minds in the North.  It has been peculiarly fortunate,

too, that the Professors brought from abroad were as happy selections

as could have been hoped, as well for their qualifications in science

as correctness and amiableness of character.  I think the example

will be followed, and that it cannot fail to be one of the

efficacious means of promoting that cordial good will, which it is so

much the interest of both nations to cherish.  These teachers can

never utter an unfriendly sentiment towards their native country; and

those into whom their instructions will be infused, are not of

ordinary significance only: they are exactly the persons who are to

succeed to the government of our country, and to rule its future

enmities, its friendships and fortunes.  As it is our interest to

receive instruction through this channel, so I think it is yours to

furnish it; for these two nations holding cordially together, have

nothing to fear from the united world.  They will be the models for

regenerating the condition of man, the sources from which

representative government is to flow over the whole earth.




        I learn from you with great pleasure, that a taste is reviving

in England for the recovery of the Anglo-Saxon dialect of our

language; for a mere dialect it is, as much as those of Piers

Plowman, Gower, Douglas, Chaucer, Spenser, Shakspeare, Milton, for

even much of Milton is already antiquated.  The Anglo-Saxon is only

the earliest we possess of the many shades of mutation by which the

language has tapered down to its modern form.  Vocabularies we need

for each of these stages from Somner to Bailey, but not grammars for

each or any of them.  The grammar has changed so little, in the

descent from the earliest, to the present form, that a little

observation suffices to understand its variations.  We are greatly

indebted to the worthies who have preserved the Anglo-Saxon form,

from Doctor Hickes down to Mr. Bosworth.  Had they not given to the

public what we possess through the press, that dialect would by this

time have been irrecoverably lost.  I think it, however, a misfortune

that they have endeavored to give it too much of a learned form, to

mount it on all the scaffolding of the Greek and Latin, to load it

with their genders, numbers, cases, declensions, conjugations, &c.

Strip it of these embarrassments, vest it in the Roman type which we

have adopted instead of our English black letter, reform its uncouth

orthography, and assimilate its pronunciation, as much as may be, to

the present English, just as we do in reading Piers Plowman or

Chaucer, and with the cotemporary vocabulary for the few lost words,

we understand it as we do them.  For example, the Anglo-Saxon text of

the Lord's prayer, as given us 6th Matthew, ix., is spelt and written

thus, in the equivalent Roman type: "Faeder ure thu the eart in

heofenum, si thin nama gehalgod.  to becume thin rice.  gewurthe thin

willa on eorthan.  swa swa on heofenum.  urne daeghwamlican hlaf syle

us to daeg.  and forgyf us ure gyltas, swa swa we forgifath urum

gyltendum.  and ne ge-laedde thu us on costnunge, ac alys us of

yfele'.  I should spell and pronounce thus: 'Father our, thou tha art

in heavenum.  si thine name y-hallowed.  come thin ric.  y-wurth

thine will on earthan.  so so on heavenum.  ourn daywhamlican loaf

sell us to day.  and forgive us our guilts so so we forgivath ourum

guiltendum.  and no y-lead thou us on costnunge, ac a-lease us of

evil'.  And here it is to be observed by-the-bye, that there is but

the single word "temptation" in our present version of this prayer

that is not Anglo-Saxon; for the word "trespasses" taken from the

French, ({ofeilemata} in the original) might as well have been

translated by the Anglo-Saxon "guilts."




        The learned apparatus in which Dr. Hickes and his successors

have muffled our Anglo-Saxon, is what has frightened us from

encountering it.  The simplification I propose may, on the contrary,

make it a regular part of our common English education.




        So little reading and writing was there among our Anglo-Saxon

ancestors of that day, that they had no fixed orthography.  To

produce a given sound, every one jumbled the letters together,

according to his unlettered notion of their power, and all jumbled

them differently, just as would be done at this day, were a dozen

peasants, who have learnt the alphabet, but have never read, desired

to write the Lord's prayer.  Hence the varied modes of spelling by

which the Anglo-Saxons meant to express the same sound.  The word

_many_, for example, was spelt in twenty different ways; yet we

cannot suppose they were twenty different words, or that they had

twenty different ways of pronouncing the same word.  The Anglo-Saxon

orthography, then, is not an exact representation of the sounds meant

to be conveyed.  We must drop in pronunciation the superfluous

consonants, and give to the remaining letters their present English

sound; because, not knowing the true one, the present enunciation is

as likely to be right as any other, and indeed more so, and

facilitates the acquisition of the language.




        It is much to be wished that the publication of the present

county dialects of England should go on.  It will restore to us our

language in all its shades of variation.  It will incorporate into

the present one all the riches of our ancient dialects; and what a

store this will be, may be seen by running the eye over the county

glossaries, and observing the words we have lost by abandonment and

disuse, which in sound and sense are inferior to nothing we have

retained.  When these local vocabularies are published and digested

together into a single one, it is probable we shall find that there

is not a word in Shakspeare which is not now in use in some of the

counties in England, from whence we may obtain its true sense.  And

what an exchange will their recovery be for the volumes of idle

commentaries and conjectures with which that divine poet has been

masked and metamorphosed.  We shall find in him new sublimities which

we had never tasted before, and find beauties in our ancient poets

which are lost to us now.  It is not that I am merely an enthusiast

for Palaeology.  I set equal value on the beautiful engraftments we

have borrowed from Greece and Rome, and I am equally a friend to the

encouragement of a judicious neology; a language cannot be too rich.

The more copious, the more susceptible of embellishment it will

become.  There are several things wanting to promote this

improvement.  To reprint the Saxon books in modern type; reform their

orthography; publish in the same way the treasures still existing in

manuscript.  And, more than all things, we want a dictionary on the

plan of Stephens or Scapula, in which the Saxon root, placed

alphabetically, shall be followed by all its cognate modifications of

nouns, verbs, &c., whether Anglo-Saxon, or found in the dialects of

subsequent ages.  We want, too, an elaborate history of the English

language.  In time our country may be able to co-operate with you in

these labors, of common advantage, but as yet it is too much a blank,

calling for other and more pressing attentions.  We have too much to

do in the improvements of which it is susceptible, and which are

deemed more immediately useful.  Literature is not yet a distinct

profession with us.  Now and then a strong mind arises, and at its

intervals of leisure from business, emits a flash of light.  But the

first object of young societies is bread and covering; science is but

secondary and subsequent.




        I owe apology for this long letter.  It must be found in the

circumstance of its subject having made an interesting part in the

tenor of your letter, and in my attachment to it.  It is a hobby

which too often runs away with me where I meant not to give up the

rein.  Our youth seem disposed to mount it with me, and to begin

their course where mine is ending.




        Our family recollects with pleasure the visit with which you

favored us; and join me in assuring you of our friendly and

respectful recollections, and of the gratification it will ever be to

us to hear of your health and welfare.







        A GIFT TO A GRANDDAUGHTER




        _Ellen Randolph Coolidge_

        _Monticello, Nov. 14, 1825_




        MY DEAR ELLEN -- In my letter of Oct. 13. to Mr. Coolidge, I

gave an account of the riot we had at the University, and of it's

termination.  You will both of course be under anxiety till you know

how it has gone off?  With the best effects in the world.  Having let

it be understood, from the beginning, that we wished to trust very

much to the discretion of the Students themselves for their own

government.  With about four fifths of them, this did well, but there

were about 15. or 20. bad subjects who were disposed to try whether

our indulgence was without limit.  Hence the licentious transaction

of which I gave an account to Mr. Coolidge.  But when the whole mass

saw the serious way in which that experiment was met, the Faculty of

Professors assembled, the Board of Visitors coming forward in support

of that authority, a grand jury taking up the subject, four of the

most guilty expelled, the rest reprimanded, severer laws enacted, and

a rigorous execution of them declared in future, it gave them a shock

and struck a terror, the most severe, as it was less expected.  It

determined the well disposed among them to frown upon every thing of

the kind hereafter, and the ill-disposed returned to order from fear

if not from better motives.  A perfect subordination has succeeded,

entire respect towards the Professors, and industry, order, and quiet

the most exemplary, has prevailed ever since.  Every one is sensible

of the strength which the institution has derived from what appeared

at first to threaten it's foundation.  We have no further fear of any

thing of the kind from the present set.  But as at the next term

their numbers will be more than doubled by the accession of an

additional band, as unbroken as these were, we mean to be prepared,

and to ask of the legislature a power to call in the civil authority

in the first instant of disorder, and to quell it on the spot by

imprisonment and the same legal coercions, provided against disorder

generally, committed by other citizens, from whom, at their age, they

have no right to distinction.




        We have heard of the loss of your baggage, with the vessel

carrying it, and sincerely condole with you on it.  It is not to be

estimated by it's pecuniary value, but by that it held in your

affections.  The documents of your childhood, your letters,

correspondencies, notes, books, &c., &c., all gone!  And your life

cut in two, as it were, and a new one to begin, without any records

of the former.  John Hemmings was the first who brought me the news.

He had caught it accidentally from those who first read the letter

from Col. Peyton announcing it.  He was au desespoir!  That beautiful

writing desk he had taken so much pains to make for you!  Everything

else seemed as nothing in his eye, and that loss was everything.

Virgil could not have been more afflicted had his Aeneid fallen a

prey to the flames.  I asked him if he could not replace it by making

another?  No.  His eyesight had failed him too much, and his

recollection of it was too imperfect.  It has occurred to me however,

that I can replace it, not, indeed, to you, but to Mr. Coolidge, by a

substitute, not claiming the same value from it's decorations, but

from the part it has _borne_ in our history and the events with which

it has been associated.  I recieved a letter from a friend in

Philadelphia lately, asking information of the house, and room of the

house there, in which the Declaration of Independence was written,

with a view to future celebrations of the 4th. of July in it,

another, enquiring whether a paper given to the Philosophical society

there, as a rough draught of that Declaration was genuinely so?  A

society is formed there lately for an annual celebration of the

advent of Penn to that place.  It was held in his antient Mansion,

and the chair in which he actually sat when at his writing table was

presented by a lady owning it, and was occupied by the president of

the celebration.  Two other chairs were given them, made of the elm,

under the shade of which Penn had made his first treaty with the

Indians.  If then things acquire a superstitious value because of

their connection with particular persons, surely a connection with

the great Charter of our Independence may give a value to what has

been associated with that; and such was the idea of the enquirers

after the room in which it was written.  Now I happen still to

possess the writing-box on which it was written.  It was made from a

drawing of my own, by Ben. Randall, a cabinet maker in whose house I

took my first lodgings on my arrival in Philadelphia in May 1776.

And I have used it ever since.  It claims no merit of particular

beauty.  It is plain, neat, convenient, and, taking no more room on

the writing table than a moderate 4to. volume, it yet displays it

self sufficiently for any writing.  Mr. Coolidge must do me the favor

of accepting this.  Its imaginary value will increase with the years,

and if he lives to my age, or another half century, he may see it

carried in the procession of our nation's birthday, as the relics of

teh saints are in those of the church.  I will send it thro' Colonel

Peyton, and hope with better fortune than that for which it is to be

a substitute.




        I remark what you say in your letter to your mother, relative

to Mr. Willard and our University clock.  Judging from that that he

is the person whom Mr. Coolidge would recommend, and having recieved

from Dr. Waterhouse a very strong recommendation of him, you may

assure the old gentleman from me that he shall have the making of it.

We have lately made an important purchase of lands amounting to 7000.

D. and the government is taking from us, under their old and new

Tariff, 2700. D. duty on the marble caps and bases of the portico of

our Rotunda, of 10 columns only.  These things try our funds for the

moment.  At the end of the year we shall see how we stand, and I

expect we may be able to give the final order for the clock by

February.




        I want to engage you, as my agent at Boston, for certain

articles not to be had here, and for such only.  But it will be on

the indispensable condition that you keep as rigorous an account of

Dollars and cents as old Yerragan our neighbor would do.  This alone

can induce friends to ask services freely, which would otherwise be

the asking of presents and amount to a prohibition.  We should be

very glad occasionally to get small supplies of the fine dumb codfish

to be had at Boston, and also of the tongues and sounds of the Cod.

This selection of the articles I trouble you for is not of such as

are better there than here; for on that ground we might ask for every

thing from thence, but such only as are not to be had here to all.

Perhaps I should trepass on Mr. Coolidge for one other article.  We

pay here 2. D. a gallon for bad French brandy.  I think I have seen

in Degrand's Price current Marseilles brandy, from Dodge and Oxnard,

advertised good at 1. Dollar, and another kind called Seignettes,

which I am told is good Cognac at 1.25. D.  I will ask of you then a

supply of a kental of good dumb fish, and about 20 or 30 lbs. of

tongues and sounds; and of Mr. Collidge a 30 gallon cask of Dodge and

Oxnard's Marseilles brandy, if tolerable good at 1. D. or

thereabouts, but double cased to guard against spoliation.  Knowing

nothing of the prices of the fish, I will at a venture, desire Col.

Peyton to remit 60. D. to Mr. Coolidge immediately, and any little

difference between this and actual cost either way, may stand over to

your next account.  We should be the better perhaps of your recipe

for dressing both articles.




        I promised Mr. Ticknor to inform him at times how our

University goes on.  I shall be glad if you will read to him that

part of this letter which respects it, presuming Mr. Coolidge may

have communicated to him the facts of my former letter to him.  These

facts may be used ad libitum, only keeping my name out of sight.

Writing is so irksome to me, especially since I am obliged to do it

in a recumbent posture, that I am sure Mr. Ticknor will excuse my

economy in this exercise.  To you perhaps I should apologize for the

want of it on this occasion.  The family is well.  My own health

changes little.  I ride two or three miles in a carriage every day.

With my affectionate salutations to Mr. Coolidge, be assured yourself

of my tender and constant love.







        CONSOLIDATION!




        _To William Branch Giles_

        _Monticello, December 26, 1825_




        DEAR SIR, -- I wrote you a letter yesterday, of which you will

be free to make what use you please.  This will contain matters not

intended for the public eye.  I see, as you do, and with the deepest

affliction, the rapid strides with which the federal branch of our

government is advancing towards the usurpation of all the rights

reserved to the States, and the consolidation in itself of all

powers, foreign and domestic; and that, too, by constructions which,

if legitimate, leave no limits to their power.  Take together the

decisions of the federal court, the doctrines of the President, and

the misconstructions of the constitutional compact acted on by the

legislature of the federal branch, and it is but too evident, that

the three ruling branches of that department are in combination to

strip their colleagues, the State authorities, of the powers reserved

by them, and to exercise themselves all functions foreign and

domestic.  Under the power to regulate commerce, they assume

indefinitely that also over agriculture and manufactures, and call it

regulation to take the earnings of one of these branches of industry,

and that too the most depressed, and put them into the pockets of the

other, the most flourishing of all.  Under the authority to establish

post roads, they claim that of cutting down mountains for the

construction of roads, of digging canals, and aided by a little

sophistry on the words "general welfare," a right to do, not only the

acts to effect that, which are specifically enumerated and permitted,

but whatsoever they shall think, or pretend will be for the general

welfare.  And what is our resource for the preservation of the

constitution?  Reason and argument?  You might as well reason and

argue with the marble columns encircling them.  The representatives

chosen by ourselves?  They are joined in the combination, some from

incorrect views of government, some from corrupt ones, sufficient

voting together to out-number the sound parts; and with majorities

only of one, two, or three, bold enough to go forward in defiance.

Are we then _to stand to our arms_, with the hot-headed Georgian?

No.  That must be the last resource, not to be thought of until much

longer and greater sufferings.  If every infraction of a compact of

so many parties is to be resisted at once, as a dissolution of it,

none can ever be formed which would last one year.  We must have

patience and longer endurance then with our brethren while under

delusion; give them time for reflection and experience of

consequences; keep ourselves in a situation to profit by the chapter

of accidents; and separate from our companions only when the sole

alternatives left, are the dissolution of our Union with them, or

submission to a government without limitation of powers.  Between

these two evils, when we must make a choice, there can be no

hesitation.  But in the meanwhile, the States should be watchful to

note every material usurpation on their rights; to denounce them as

they occur in the most peremptory terms; to protest against them as

wrongs to which our present submission shall be considered, not as

acknowledgments or precedents of r yeomanry.  This will be to them a

next best blessing to the monarchy of their first aim, and perhaps

the surest stepping-stone to it.




        I learn with great satisfaction that your school is thriving

well, and that you have at its head a truly classical scholar.  He is

one of three or four whom I can hear of in the State.  We were

obliged the last year to receive shameful Latinists into the

classical school of the University, such as we will certainly refuse

as soon as we can get from better schools a sufficiency of those

properly instructed to form a class.  We must get rid of this

Connecticut Latin, of this barbarous confusion of long and short

syllables, which renders doubtful whether we are listening to a

reader of Cherokee, Shawnee, Iroquois, or what.  Our University has

been most fortunate in the five professors procured from England.  A

finer selection could not have been made.  Besides their being of a

grade of science which has left little superior behind, the

correctness of their moral character, their accommodating

dispositions, and zeal for the prosperity of the institution, leave

us nothing more to wish.  I verily believe that as high a degree of

education can now be obtained here, as in the country they left.  And

a finer set of youths I never saw assembled for instruction.  They

committed some irregularities at first, until they learned the lawful

length of their tether; since which it has never been transgressed in

the smallest degree.  A great proportion of them are severely devoted

to study, and I fear not to say that within twelve or fifteen years

from this time, a majority of the rulers of our State will have been

educated here.  They shall carry hence the correct principles of our

day, and you may count assuredly that they will exhibit their country

in a degree of sound respectability it has never known, either in our

days, or those of our forefathers.  I cannot live to see it.  My joy

must only be that of anticipation.  But that youo may see it in full

fruition, is the probable consequence of the twenty years I am ahead

of you in time, and is the sincere prayer of your affectionate and

constant friend.







        "TAKE CARE OF ME WHEN DEAD"




        _To James Madison_

        _Monticello. February 17, 1826_




        DEAR SIR, -- My circular was answered by Genl. Breckenridge,

approving, as we had done, of the immediate appointment of Terril to

the chair of Law.  But our four Colleagues, who were together in

Richmond, concluded not to appoint until our meeting in April.  In

the meantime the term of the present lamented Incumbent draws near to

a close.  About 150. students have already entered; many of those who

engaged for a 2d. year, are yet to come; and I think we may count

that our dormitories will be filled.  Whether there will be any

overflowing for the accomodations provided in the vicinage, which are

quite considerable, is not yet known.  None will enter there while a

dormitory remains vacant.  Were the Law-chair filled it would add 50.

at least to our number.




        Immediately on seeing the overwhelming vote of the House of

Representatives against giving us another dollar, I rode to the

University and desired Mr. Brockenbrough to engage in nothing new, to

stop everything on hand which could be done without, and to employ

all his force and funds in finishing the circular room for the books,

and the anatomical theatre.  These cannot be done without; and for

these and all our debts we have funds enough.  But I think it prudent

then to clear the decks thoroughly, to see how we shall stand, and

what we may accomplish further.  In the meantime, there have arrived

for us in different ports of the United States, ten boxes of books

from Paris, seven from London, and from Germany I know not how many;

in all, perhaps, about twenty-five boxes.  Not one of these can be

opened until the book-room is completely finished, and all the

shelves ready to receive their charge directly from the boxes as they

shall be opened.  This cannot be till May.  I hear nothing definite

of the three thousand dollars duty of which we are asking the

remission from Congress.  In the selection of our Law Professor, we

must be rigorously attentive to his political principles.  You will

recollect that before the revolution, Coke Littleton was the

universal elementary book of law students, and a sounder whig never

wrote, nor of profounder learning in the orthodox doctrines of the

British constitution, or in what were called English liberties.  You

remember also that our lawyers were then all whigs.  But when his

black-letter text, and uncouth but cunning learning got out of

fashion, and the honied Mansfieldism of Blackstone became the

student's hornbook, from that moment, that profession (the nursery of

our Congress) began to slide into toryism, and nearly all the young

brood of lawyers now are of that hue.  They suppose themselves,

indeed, to be whigs, because they no longer know what whigism or

republicanism means.  It is in our seminary that that vestal flame is

to be kept alive; it is thence it is to spread anew over our own and

the sister States.  If we are true and vigilant in our trust, within

a dozen or twenty years a majority of our own legislature will be

from one school, and many disciples will have carried its doctrines

home with them to their several States, and will have leavened thus

the whole mass.  New York has taken strong ground in vindication of

the constitution; South Carolina had already done the same.  Although

I was against our leading, I am equally against omitting to follow in

the same line, and backing them firmly; and I hope that yourself or

some other will mark out the track to be pursued by us.




        You will have seen in the newspapers some proceedings in the

legislature, which have cost me much mortification.  My own debts had

become considerable, but not beyond the effect of some lopping of

property, which would have been little felt, when our friend Nicholas

gave me the _coup de grace_.  Ever since that I have been paying

twelve hundred dollars a year interest on his debt, which, with my

own, was absorbing so much of my annual income, as that the

maintenance of my family was making deep and rapid inroads on my

capital, and had already done it.  Still, sales at a fair price would

leave me competently provided.  Had crops and prices for several

years been such as to maintain a steady competition of substantial

bidders at market, all would have been safe.  But the long succession

of years of stunted crops, of reduced prices, the general prostration

of the farming business, under levies for the support of

manufactures, &c., with the calamitous fluctuations of value in our

paper medium, have kept agriculture in a state of abject depression,

which has peopled the western States by silently breaking up those on

the Atlantic, and glutted the land market, while it drew off its

bidders.  In such a state of things, property has lost its character

of being a resource for debts.  Highland in Bedford, which, in the

days of our plethory, sold readily for from fifty to one hundred

dollars the acre, (and such sales were many then,) would not now sell

for more than from ten to twenty dollars, or one-quarter or one-fifth

of its former price.  Reflecting on these things, the practice

occurred to me, of selling, on fair valuation, and by way of lottery,

often resorted to before the Revolution to effect large sales, and

still in constant usage in every State for individual as well as

corporation purposes.  If it is permitted in my case, my lands here

alone, with the mills, &c., will pay every thing, and leave me

Monticello and a farm free.  If refused, I must sell everything here,

perhaps considerably in Bedford, move thither with my family, where I

have not even a log hut to put my head into, and whether ground for

burial, will depend on the depredations which, under the form of

sales, shall have been committed on my property.  The question then

with me was _ultrum horum_?  But why afflict you with these details?

Indeed, I cannot tell, unless pains are lessened by communication

with a frt, which, with my own, was absorbing so much of my annual

income, as that the maintenance of my family was making deep and

rapid inroads on my capital, and had already done it.  Still, sales

at a fair price would leave me competently provided.  Had crops and

prices for several years been such as to maintain a steady

competition of substantial bidders at market, all would have been

safe.  But the long succession of years of stunted crops, of reduced

prices, the general prostration of the farming business, under levies

for the support of manufactures, &c., with the calamitous

fluctuations of value in our paper medium, have kept agriculture in a

state of abject depression, which has peopled the western States by

silently breaking up those on the Atlantic, and glutted the land

market, while it drew off its bidders.  In such a state of things,

property has lost its character of being a resource for debts.

Highland in Bedford, which, in the days of our plethory, sold readily

for from fifty to one hundred dollars the acre, (and such sales were

many then,) would not now sell for more than from ten to twenty

dollars, or one-quarter or one-fifth of its former price.  Reflecting

on these things, the practice occurred to me, of selling, on fair

valuation, and by way of lottery, often resorted to before the

Revolution to effect large sales, and still in constant usage in

every State for individual as well as corporation purposes.  If it is

permitted in my case, my lands here alone, with the mills, &c., will

pay every thing, and leave me Monticello and a farm free.  If

refused, I must sell everything here, perhaps considerably in

Bedford, move thither with my family, where I have not even a log hut

to put my head into, and whether ground for burial, will depend on

the depredations which, under the form of sales, shall have been

committed on my property.  The question then with me was _ultrum

horum_?  But why afflict you with these details?  Indeed, I cannot

tell, unless pains are lessened by communication with a friend.  The

friendship which has subsisted between us, now half a century, and

the harmony of our political principles and pursuits, have been

sources of constant happiness to me through that long period.  And if

I remove beyond the reach of attentions to the University, or beyond

the bourne of life itself, as I soon must, it is a comfort to leave

that institution under your care, and an assurance that it will not

be wanting.  It has also been a great solace to me, to believe that

you are engaged in vindicating to posterity the course we have

pursued for preserving to them, in all their purity, the blessings of

self-government, which we had assisted too in acquiring for them.  If

ever the earth has beheld a system of administration conducted with a

single and steadfast eye to the general interest and happiness of

those committed to it, one which, protected by truth, can never know

reproach, it is that to which our lives have been devoted.  To myself

you have been a pillar of support through life.  Take care of me when

dead, and be assured that I shall leave with you my last affections.







        _NUNC DIMITTIS_ ON SLAVERY




        _To James Heaton_

        _Monticello, May 20, 1826_




        DEAR SIR, -- The subject of your letter of April 20, is one on

which I do not permit myself to express an opinion, but when time,

place, and occasion may give it some favorable effect.  A good cause

is often injured more by ill-timed efforts of its friends than by the

arguments of its enemies.  Persuasion, perseverance, and patience are

the best advocates on questions depending on the will of others.  The

revolution in public opinion which this cause requires, is not to be

expected in a day, or perhaps in an age; but time, which outlives all

things, will outlive this evil also.  My sentiments have been forty

years before the public.  Had I repeated them forty times, they would

only have become the more stale and threadbare.  Although I shall not

live to see them consummated, they will not die with me; but living

or dying, they will ever be in my most fervent prayer.  This is

written for yourself and not for the public, in compliance with your

request of two lines of sentiment on the subject.  Accept the

assurance of my good will and respect.







        LAST LETTER: APOTHEOSIS OF LIBERTY




        _To Roger C. Weightman_

        _Monticello, June 24, 1826_




        RESPECTED SIR, -- The kind invitation I receive from you, on

the part of the citizens of the city of Washington, to be present

with them at their celebration on the fiftieth anniversary of

American Independence, as one of the surviving signers of an

instrument pregnant with our own, and the fate of the world, is most

flattering to myself, and heightened by the honorable accompaniment

proposed for the comfort of such a journey.  It adds sensibly to the

sufferings of sickness, to be deprived by it of a personal

participation in the rejoicings of that day.  But acquiescence is a

duty, under circumstances not placed among those we are permitted to

control.  I should, indeed, with peculiar delight, have met and

exchanged there congratulations personally with the small band, the

remnant of that host of worthies, who joined with us on that day, in

the bold and doubtful election we were to make for our country,

between submission or the sword; and to have enjoyed with them the

consolatory fact, that our fellow citizens, after half a century of

experience and prosperity, continue to approve the choice we made.

May it be to the world, what I believe it will be, (to some parts

sooner, to others later, but finally to all,) the signal of arousing

men to burst the chains under which monkish ignorance and

superstition had persuaded them to bind themselves, and to assume the

blessings and security of self-government.  That form which we have

substituted, restores the free right to the unbounded exercise of

reason and freedom of opinion.  All eyes are opened, or opening, to

the rights of man.  The general spread of the light of science has

already laid open to every view the palpable truth, that the mass of

mankind has not been born with saddles on their backs, nor a favored

few booted and spurred, ready to ride them legitimately, by the grace

of God.  These are grounds of hope for others.  For ourselves, let

the annual return of this day forever refresh our recollections of

these rights, and an undiminished devotion to them.




        I will ask permission here to express the pleasure with which I

should have met my ancient neighbors of the city of Washington and

its vicinities, with whom I passed so many years of a pleasing social

intercourse; an intercourse which so much relieved the anxieties of

the public cares, and left impressions so deeply engraved in my

affections, as never to be forgotten.  With my regret that ill health

forbids me the gratification of an acceptance, be pleased to receive

for yourself, and those for whom you write, the assurance of my

highest respect and friendly attachments.




End
