




        THE SUBLINE OSSIAN



        _To Charles McPherson_

        _Albemarle, in Virga, Feb. 25, 1773_



        DEAR SIR, -- Encouraged by the small acquaintance which I had

the pleasure of having contracted with you during your residence in

this country, I take the liberty of making the present application to

you.  I understood you were related to the gentleman of your name

(Mr. James McPherson), to whom the world is so much indebted for the

elegant collection, arrangement, and translation of Ossian's poems.

These pieces have been and will, I think, during my life, continue to

be to me the sources of daily pleasures.  The tender and the sublime

emotions of the mind were never before so wrought up by the human

hand.  I am not ashamed to own that I think this rude bard of the

North the greatest poet that has ever existed.  Merely for the

pleasure of reading his works, I am become desirous of learning the

language in which he sung, and of possessing his songs in their

original form.  Mr. McPherson, I think, informs us he is possessed of

the originals.  Indeed, a gentleman has lately told me he had seen

them in print; but I am afraid he has mistaken a specimen from

Temora, annexed to some of the editions of the translation, for the

whole works.  If they are printed, it will abridge my request and

your trouble, to the sending me a printed copy; but if there be more

such, my petition is, that you would be so good as to use your

interest with Mr. McPherson to obtain leave to take a manuscript copy

of them, and procure it to be done.  I would choose it in a fair,

round hand, on fine paper, with a good margin, bound in parchments as

elegantly as possible, lettered on the back, and marbled or gilt on

the edges of the leaves.  I would not regard expense in doing this.

I would further beg the favor of you to give me a catalogue of the

books written in that language, and to send me such of them as may be

necessary for learning it.  These will, of course, include a grammar

and dictionary.  The cost of these, as well as the copy of Ossian,

will be (for me), on demand, answered by Mr. Alexander McCaul,

sometime of Virginia, merchant, but now of Glasgow, or by your friend

Mr. Ninian Minzees, of Richmond, in Virginia, to whose care the books

may be sent.  You can, perhaps, tell me whether we may ever hope to

see any more of those Celtic pieces published.  Manuscript copies of

any which are in print, it would at any time give me the greatest

happiness to receive.  The glow of one warm thought is to me worth

more than money.  I hear with pleasure from your friend that your

path through life is likely to be smoothed by success.  I wish the

business and the pleasures of your situation would admit leisure now

and then to scribble a line to one who wishes you every felicity, and

would willingly merit the appellation of, dear sir, Your friend and

humble servant.





        NEWS FROM BOSTON



        _To William Small_

        _May 7, 1775_



        DEAR SIR, -- I had the pleasure by a gentleman who saw you at

Birmingham to hear of your welfare.  By Capt. Aselby of the

True-patriot belonging to Messrs.  Farrell & Jones of Bristol I send

you 3 doz. bottles of Madeira, being the half of a present which I

had laid by for you.  The capt was afraid to take more on board lest

it should draw upon him the officers of the customs.  The remaining

three doz. therefore I propose to send by Cap;att Drew belonging to

the same mercantile house, who is just arrived here.  That which goes

by Aselby will be delivered by him to your order, the residue by

Drew, or by Farrell & Jones, I know not which as yet.  I hope you

will find it fine as it came to me genuine from the island & has been

kept in my own cellar eight years.  Within this week we have received

the unhappy news of an action of considerable magnitude, between the

King's troops and our brethren of Boston, in which it is said five

hundred of the former, with the Earl of Percy, are slain.  That such

an action has occurred, is undoubted, though perhaps the

circumstances may not have reached us with truth.  This accident has

cut off our last hope of reconciliation, and a phrensy of revenge

seems to have seized all ranks of people.  It is a lamentable

circumstance, that the only mediatory power, acknowledged by both

parties, instead of leading to a reconciliation of his divided

people, should pursue the incendiary purpose of still blowing up the

flames, as we find him constantly doing, in every speech and public

declaration.  This may, perhaps, be intended to intimidate into

acquiescence, but the effect has been most unfortunately otherwise.

A little knowledge of human nature, and attention to its ordinary

workings, might have foreseen that the spirits of the people here

were in a state, in which they were more likely to be provoked, than

frightened, by haughty deportment.  And to fill up the measure of

irritation, a proscription of individuals has been substituted in the

room of just trial.  Can it be believed, that a grateful people will

suffer those to be consigned to execution, whose sole crime has been

the developing and asserting their rights?  Had the Parliament

possessed the power of reflection, they would have avoided a measure

as impotent, as it was inflammatory.  When I saw Lord Chatham's bill,

I entertained high hope that a reconciliation could have been brought

about.  The difference between his terms, and those offered by our

Congress, might have been accommodated, if entered on, by both

parties, with a dispostion to accommodate.  But the dignity of

Parliament, it seems, can brook no opposition to its power.  Strange,

that a set of men, who have made sale of their virtue to the

Minister, should yet talk of retaining dignity!  But I am getting

into politics, though I sat down only to ask your acceptance of the

wine, and express my constant wishes for your happiness.  This

however seems to be ensured by your philosophy & peaceful vocation.

I shall still hope that amidst public dissention private friendship

may be preserved inviolate and among the warmest you can ever possess

is that of your humble servt.





        RECONCILIATION OR INDEPENDENCE



        _To John Randolph_

        _Monticello, August 25, 1775_



        DEAR SIR, -- I received your message by Mr. Braxton &

immediately gave him an order on the Treasurer for the money which

the Treasurer assured me should be answered on his return.  I now

send the bearer for the violin & such music appurtaining to her as

may be of no use to the young ladies.  I beleive you had no case to

her.  If so, be so good as to direct Watt Lenox to get from Prentis's

some bays or other coarse woollen to wrap her in & then to pack her

securely in a wooden box.  I am sorry the situation of our country

should render it not eligible to you to remain longer in it.  I hope

the returning wisdom of Great Britain will, ere long, put an end to

this unnatural contest.  There may be people to whose tempers and

dispositions contention is pleasing, and who, therefore, wish a

continuance of confusion, but to me it is of all states but one, the

most horrid.  My first wish is a restoration of our just rights; my

second, a return of the happy period, when, consistently with duty, I

may withdraw myself totally from the public stage, and pass the rest

of my days in domestic ease and tranquillity, banishing every desire

of ever hearing what passes in the world.  Perhaps (for the latter

adds considerably to the warmth of the former wish), looking with

fondness towards a reconciliation with Great Britain, I cannot help

hoping you may be able to contribute towards expediting this good

work.  I think it must be evident to yourself, that the Ministry have

been deceived by their officers on this side of the water, who (for

what purpose I cannot tell) have constantly represented the American

opposition as that of a small faction, in which the body of the

people took little part.  This, you can inform them, of your own

knowledge, is untrue.  They have taken it into their heads, too, that

we are cowards, and shall surrender at discretion to an armed force.

The past and future operations of the war must confirm or undeceive

them on that head.  I wish they were thoroughly and minutely

acquainted with every circumstance relative to America, as it exists

in truth.  I am persuaded, this would go far towards disposing them

to reconciliation.  Even those in Parliament who are called friends

to America, seem to know nothing of our real determinations.  I

observe, they pronounced in the last Parliament, that the Congress of

1774 did not mean to insist rigorously on the terms they held out,

but kept something in reserve, to give up; and, in fact, that they

would give up everything but the article of taxation.  Now, the truth

is far from this, as I can affirm, and put my honor to the assertion.

Their continuance in this error may, perhaps, produce very ill

consequences.  The Congress stated the lowest terms they thought

possible to be accepted, in order to convince the world they were not

unreasonable.  They gave up the monopoly and regulation of trade, and

all acts of Parliament prior to 1764, leaving to British generosity

to render these, at some future time, as easy to America as the

interest of Britain would admit.  But this was before blood was

spilt.  I cannot affirm, but have reason to think, these terms would

not now be accepted.  I wish no false sense of honor, no ignorance of

our real intentions, no vain hope thatpartial concessions of right

will be accepted, may induce the Ministry to trifle with

accommodation, till it shall be out of their power ever to

accommodate.  If, indeed, Great Britain, disjointed from her

colonies, be a match for the most potent nations of Europe, with the

colonies thrown into their scale, they may go on securely.  But if

they are not assured of this, it would be certainly unwise, by trying

the event of another campaign, to risk our accepting a foreign aid,

which, perhaps, may not be attainable, but on condition of

everlasting avulsion from Great Britain.  This would be thought a

hard condition, to those who still wish for reunion with their parent

country.  I am sincerely one of those, and would rather be in

dependence on Great Britain, properly limited, than on anyother

nation on earth, or than on no nation.  But I am one of those, too,

who, rather than submit to the rights of legislating for us, assumed

by the British Parliament, and which late experience has shown they

will so cruelly exercise, would lend my hand to sink the whole Island

in the ocean.



        If undeceiving the Minister, as to matters of fact, may change

his disposition, it will, perhaps, be in your power, by assisting to

do this, to render service to the whole empire, at the most critical

time, certainly, that it has ever seen.  Whether Britain shall

continue the head of the greatest empire on earth, or shall return to

her original station in the political scale of Europe, depends,

perhaps, on the resolutions of the succeeding winter.  God send they

may be wise and salutary for us all.  I shall be glad to hear from

you as often as you may be disposed to think of things here.  You may

be at liberty, I expect, to communicate some things, consistently

with your honor, and the duties you will owe to a protecting nation.

Such a communication among individuals, may be mutually beneficial to

the contending parties.  On this or any future occasion, if I affirm

to you any facts, your knowledge of me will enable you to decide on

their credibility; if I hazard opinions on the dispositions of men or

other speculative points, you can only know they are my opinions.  My

best wishes for your felicity, attend you, wherever you go, and

believe me to be assuredly, Your friend and servant.



        P. S. My collection of classics, & of books of parliamentary

learning particularly is not so complete as I could wish.  As you are

going to the land of literature & of books you may be willing to

dispose of some of yours here & replace them there in better

editions.  I should be willing to treat on this head with any body

you may think proper to empower for that purpose.





        SAXONS, NORMANS, AND LAND TENURE



        _To Edmund Pendleton_

        _Philadelphia, Aug. 13, 1776_



        DEAR SIR, -- Your's of Aug. 3. came to hand yesterday; having

had no moment to spare since, I am obliged to set down to answer it

at a Committee table while the Committee is collecting.  My thoughts

therefore on the subject you propose will be merely extempore.  The

opinion that our lands were allodial possessions is one which I have

very long held, and had in my eye during a pretty considerable part

of my law reading which I found always strengthened it.  It was

mentioned in a very hasty production, intended to have been put under

a course of severe correction, but produced afterwards to the world

in a way with which you are acquainted.  This opinion I have thought

& still think to prove if ever I should have time to look into books

again.  But this is only meant with respect to the English law as

transplanted here.  How far our acts of assembly or acceptance of

grants may have converted lands which were allodial into feuds I have

never considered.  This matter is now become a mere speculative

point; & we have it in our power to make it what it ought to be for

the public good.



 

        It may be considered in the two points of view 1st. as bringing

a revenue into the public treasury.  2d. as a tenure.  I have only

time to suggest hints on each of these heads.  1. Is it consistent

with good policy or free government to establish a perpetual revenue?

is it not against the practice of our wise British ancestors? have

not the instances in which we have departed from this in Virginia

been constantly condemned by the universal voice of our country? is

it safe to make the governing power when once seated in office,

independent of it's revenue? should we not have in contemplation &

prepare for an event (however deprecated) which may happen in the

possibility of things; I mean a reacknowledgment of the British

tyrant as our king, & previously strip him of every prejudicial

possession?  Remember how universally the people run into the idea of

recalling Charles the 2d after living many years under a republican

government.  -- As to the second was not the separation of the

property from the perpetual use of lands a mere fiction?  Is not it's

history well known, & the purposes for which it was introduced, to

wit, the establishment of a military system of defence?



        Was it not afterwards made an engine of immense oppression?  Is

it wanting with us for the purpose of military defence?  May not it's

other legal effects (such as them at least as are valuable) be

performed in other more simple ways?  Has it not been the practice of

all other nations to hold their lands as their personal estate in

absolute dominion?  Are we not the better for what we have hitherto

abolished of the feudal system?  Has not every restitution of the

antient Saxon laws had happy effects?  Is it not better now that we

return at once into that happy system of our ancestors, the wisest &

most perfect ever yet devised by the wit of man, as it stood before

the 8th century.



        The idea of Congress selling out unlocated lands has been

sometimes dropped, but we have alwais met the hint with such

determined opposition that I believe it will never be proposed.  -- I

am against selling the lands at all.  The people who will migrate to

the Westward whether they form part of the old, or of a new colony

will be subject to their proportion of the Continental debt then

unpaid.  They ought not to be subject to more.  They will be a people

little able to pay taxes.  There is no equity in fixing upon them the

whole burthen of this war, or any other proportion than we bear

ourselves.  By selling the lands to them, you will disgust them, and

cause an avulsion of them from the common union.  They will settle

the lands in spite of everybody.  -- I am at the same time clear that

they should be appropriated in small quantities.  It is said that

wealthy foreigners will come in great numbers, & they ought to pay

for the liberty we shall have provided for them.  True, but make them

pay in settlers.  A foreigner who brings a settler for every 100, or

200 acres of land to be granted him pays a better price than if he

had put into the public treasury 5/ or 5 pound.  That settler will be

worth to the public 20 times as much every year, as on our old plan

he would have paid in one paiment.  I have thrown these loose

thoughts together only in obedience to your letter, there is not an

atom of them which would not have occurred to you on a moment's

contemplation of the subject.  Charge yourself therefore with the

trouble of reading two pages of such undigested stuff.



        By Saturday's post the General wrote us that Ld. Howe had got

(I think 100) flat bottomed boats alongside, & 30 of them were then

loaded with men; by which it was concluded he was preparing to

attack, yet this is Tuesday & we hear nothing further.  The General

has by his last return, 17000 some odd men, of whom near 4000 are

sick & near 3000 at out posts in Long Island &c.  So you may say he

has but 10000 effective men to defend the works of New York.  His

works however are good & his men in spirits, which I hope will be

equal to an addition of many thousands.  He had called for 2000 men

from the flying camp which were then embarking to him & would

certainly be with him in time even if the attack was immediate.  The

enemy have (since Clinton & his army joined them) 15.000 men of whom

not many are sick.  Every influence of Congress has been exerted in

vain to double the General's force.  It was impossible to prevail on

the people to leave their harvest.  That is now in, & great numbers

are in motion, but they have no chance to be there in time.  Should

however any disaster befall us at New York they will form a great

army on the spot to stop the progress of the enemy.  I think there

cannot be less than 6 or 8000 men in this city & between it & the

flying camp.  Our council complain of our calling away two of the

Virginia battalions.  But is this reasonable.  They have no British

enemy, & if human reason is of any use to conjecture future events,

they will not have one.  Their Indian enemy is not to be opposed by

their regular battalions.  Other colonies of not more than half their

military strength have 20 battalions in the field.  Think of these

things & endeavor to reconcile them not only to this, but to yield

greater assistance to the common cause if wanted.  I wish every

battalion we have was now in New York.  -- We yesterday received

dispatches from the Commissioners at Fort Pitt.  I have not read

them, but a gentleman who has, tells me they are favorable.  The

Shawanese & Delewares are disposed to peace.  I believe it, for this

reason.  We had by different advices information from the Shawanese

that they should strike us, that this was against their will, but

that they must do what the Senecas bid them.  At that time we knew

the Senecas meditated war.  We directed a declaration to be made to

the six nations in general that if they did not take the most

decisive measures for the preservation of neutrality we would never

cease waging war with them while one was to be found on the face of

the earth.  They immediately changed their conduct and I doubt not

have given corresponding information to the Shawanese and Delewares.



        I hope the Cherokees will now be driven beyond the Missisipi &

that this in future will be declared to the Indians the invariable

consequence of their beginning a war.  Our contest with Britain is

too serious and too great to permit any possibility of avocation from

the Indians.  This then is the season for driving them off, & our

Southern colonies are happily rid of every other enemy & may exert

their whole force in that quarter.



        I hope to leave this place some time this month.

        I am Dear Sir, Your affectionate friend



        P. S.  Mr. Madison of the college & Mr. Johnson of Fredsb'gh

are arrived in New York.  They say nothing material had happened in

England.  The French ministry was changed.





        THE VIRGINIA CONSTITUTION



        _To Edmund Pendleton_

        _Philadelpha, Aug. 26, 1776_



        DEAR SIR -- Your's of the 10'th. inst. came to hand about three

days ago, the post having brought no mail with him the last week.

You seem to have misapprehended my proposition for the choice of a

Senate.  I had two things in view: to get the wisest men chosen, & to

make them perfectly independent when chosen.  I have ever observed

that a choice by the people themselves is not generally distinguished

for it's wisdom.  This first secretion from them is usually crude &

heterogeneous.  But give to those so chosen by the people a second

choice themselves, & they generally will chuse wise men.  For this

reason it was that I proposed the representatives (& not the people)

should chuse the Senate, & thought I had notwithstanding that made

the Senators (when chosen) perfectly independant of their electors.

However I should have no objection to the mode of election proposed

in the printed plan of your committee, to wit, that the people of

each county should chuse twelve electors, who should meet those of

the other counties in the same district & chuse a senator.  I should

prefer this too for another reason, that the upper as well as lower

house should have an opportunity of superintending & judging of the

situation of the whole state & be not all of one neighborhood as our

upper house used to be.  So much for the wisdom of the Senate.  To

make them independent, I had proposed that they should hold their

places for nine years, & then go out (one third every three years) &

be incapable for ever of being re-elected to that house.  My idea was

that if they might be re-elected, they would be casting their eye

forward to the period of election (however distant) & be currying

favor with the electors, & consequently dependant on them.  My reason

for fixing them in office for a term of years rather than for life,

was that they might have in idea that they were at a certain period

to return into the mass of the people & become the governed instead

of the governor which might still keep alive that regard to the

public good that otherwise they might perhaps be induced by their

independance to forget.  Yet I could submit, tho' not so willingly to

an appointment for life, or to any thing rather than a mere creation

by & dependance on the people.  I think the present mode of election

objectionable because the larger county will be able to send & will

always send a man (less fit perhaps) of their own county to the

exclusion of a fitter who may chance to live in a smaller county.  --

I wish experience may contradict my fears.  -- That the Senate as

well as lower [or shall I speak truth & call it upper] house should

hold no office of profit I am clear; but not that they should of

necessity possess distinguished property.  You have lived longer than

I have and perhaps may have formed a different judgment on better

grounds; but my observations do not enable me to say I think

integrity the characteristic of wealth.  In general I beleive the

decisions of the people, in a body, will be more honest & more

disinterested than those of wealthy men: & I can never doubt an

attachment to his country in any man who has his family & peculium in

it: -- Now as to the representative house which ought to be so

constructed as to answer that character truly.  I was for extending

the right of suffrage (or in other words the rights of a citizen) to

all who had a permanent intention of living in the country.  Take

what circumstances you please as evidence of this, either the having

resided a certain time, or having a family, or having property, any

or all of them.  Whoever intends to live in a country must wish that

country well, & has a natural right of assisting in the preservation

of it.  I think you cannot distinguish between such a person residing

in the country & having no fixed property, & one residing in a

township whom you say you would admit to a vote.  -- The other point

of equal representation I think capital & fundamental.  I am glad you

think an alteration may be attempted in that matter.  -- The

fantastical idea of virtue & the public good being a sufficient

security to the state against the commission of crimes, which you say

you have heard insisted on by some, I assure you was never mine.  It

is only the sanguinary hue of our penal laws which I meant to object

to.  Punishments I know are necessary, & I would provide them, strict

& inflexible, but proportioned to the crime.  Death might be

inflicted for murther & perhaps for treason if you would take out of

the description of treason all crimes which are not such in their

nature.  Rape, buggery &c -- punish by castration.  All other crimes

by working on high roads, rivers, gallies &c. a certain time

proportioned to the offence.  But as this would be no punishment or

change of condition to slaves (me miserum!) let them be sent to other

countries.  By these means we should be freed from the wickedness of

the latter, & the former would be living monuments of public

vengeance.  Laws thus proportionate & mild should never be dispensed

with.  Let mercy be the character of the lawgiver, but let the judge

be a mere machine.  The mercies of the law will be dispensed equally

& impartially to every description of men; those of the judge, or of

the executive power, will be the eccentric impulses of whimsical,

capricious designing man.  -- I am indebted to you for a topic to

deny to the Pensylvania claim to a line 39 complete degrees from the

equator.  As an advocate I shall certainly insist on it; but I wish

they would compromise by an extension of Mason & Dixon's line.  --

They do not agree to the temporary line proposed by our assembly.



        We have assurance (not newspaper, but Official) that the French

governors of the West Indies have received orders not only to furnish

us with what we want but to protect our ships.  They will convoy our

vessels, they say, thro' the line of British cruisers.  What you will

see in the papers of capt Weeks is indubitably true.  The inhabitants

of S't. Pierre's went out in boats to see the promised battle, but

the British captain chose not to shew.  -- By our last letters from

N. York the enemy had landed 8000 men on Long island.  On Friday a

small party, about 40, of them were out maroding & had got some

cattle in a barn.  Some riflemen (with whom was our Jamieson)

attacked them, took away the cattle, they retired as far as the house

of Judge Lifford where were their officer's quarters, they were

beaten thence also, & the house burnt by the riflemen.  It is alwais

supposed you know that good execution was done.  One officer was

killed & left with 9 guineas in his pocket, which shews they were in

a hurry; the swords & fusees of three other officers were found, the

owners supposed to be killed or wounded & carried away.  On Saturday

about 2000 of them attempted to march to Bedford.  Colo Hans's

battalion of 300 Pennsylvania riflemen having posted themselves in a

cornfeild & a wood to advantage attacked them.  The enemy had some of

their Jagers with the m, who it seems are German riflemen used to the

woods.  General Sullivan (who commands during the illness of Gen'l.

Green) sent some musquetry to support the riflemen.  The enemy gave

way & were driven half a mile beyond their former station.  Among the

dead left on the way, were three Jagers.  Gen'l. Washington had sent

over 6 battal's. to join Sullivan who had before three thousand, some

say & rightly I beleive 6000; & had posted 5 battalions more on the

water side ready to join Sullivan if the enemy should make that the

field of trial, or to return to N. York if wanted there.  A general

embarkation was certainly begun. 13.  transports crouded with men had

fallen down to the narrows & others loading.  So that we expect every

hour to hear of this great affair.  Washington by his last return had

23,000 men of whom however 5000 were sick.  Since this, Colo Aylett

just returned from there, tells us he has received 16 new England

battalions, so that we may certainly hope he has 25,000 effective,

which is about the strength of the enemy probably, tho' we have never

heard certainly that their last 5000, are come, in which case I

should think they have but 20,000.  Washington discovers a

confidence, which he usually does only on very good grounds.  He sais

his men are high in spirits.  Those ordered to Long island went with

the eagerness of young men going to a dance.  A few more skirmishes

would be an excellent preparative for our people.  Provisions on

Staten island were become so scarce that a cow sold for ten pounds, a

sheep for ten dollars.  They were barreling up all the horse flesh

they could get.  -- Colo Lee being not yet come I am still here, &

suppose I shall not get away till about this day se'nnight.  I shall

see you in Williamsburgh the morning of the Assembly.  Adieu.





        FIRST LETTER TO ADAMS



        _To John Adams_

        _Williamsburgh, May 16, 1777_



        DEAR SIR -- Matters in our part of the continent are too much

in quiet to send you news from hence.  Our battalions for the

Continental service were some time ago so far filled as rendered the

recommendation of a draught from the militia hardly requisite, and

the more so as in this country it ever was the most unpopular and

impracticable thing that could be attempted.  Our people even under

the monarchical government had learnt to consider it as the last of

all oppressions.  I learn from our delegates that the Confederation

is again on the carpet.  A great and a necessary work, but I fear

almost desperate.  The point of representation is what most alarms

me, as I fear the great and small colonies are bitterly determined

not to cede.  Will you be so good as to recollect the proposition I

formerly made you in private and try if you can work it into some

good to save our union?  It was that any proposition might be

negatived by the representatives of a majority of the people of

America, or of a majority of the colonies of America.  The former

secures the larger the latter the smaller colonies.  I have mentioned

it to many here.  The good whigs I think will so far cede their

opinions for the sake of the Union, and others we care little for.

The journals of congress not being printed earlier gives more

uneasiness than I would ever wish to see produced by any act of that

body, from whom alone I know our salvation can proceed.  In our

assembly even the best affected think it an indignity to freemen to

be voted away life and fortune in the dark.  Our house have lately

written for a M.S. copy of your journals, not meaning to desire a

communication of any thing ordered to be kept secret.  I wish the

regulation of the post office adopted by Congress last September

could be put in practice.  It was for the riders to travel night and

day, and to go their several stages three times a week.  The speedy

and frequent communication of intelligence is really of great

consequence.  So many falshoods have been propagated that nothing now

is beleived unless coming from Congress or camp.  Our people merely

for want of intelligence which they may rely on are become lethargick

and insensible of the state they are in.  Had you ever a leisure

moment I should ask a letter from you sometime directed to the care

of Mr. Dick, Fredericksburgh: but having nothing to give in return it

would be a tax on your charity as well as your time.  The esteem I

have for you privately, as well as for your public importance will

always render assurances of your health and happiness agreeable.  I

am Dear Sir Your friend and servt:





        "THE FAVORITE PASSION OF MY SOUL"



        _To Giovanni Fabbroni_

        _Williamsburg in Virginia, June 8, 1778_



        SIR, -- Your letter of Sep. 15. 1777 from Paris comes safe to

hand.  We have not however had the pleasure of seeing Mr. De Cenis,

the bearer of it in this country, as he joined the army in

Pennsylvania as soon as he arrived.  I should have taken particular

pleasure in serving him on your recommendation.  From the kind

anxiety expressed in your letter as well as from other sources of

information we discover that our enemies have filled Europe with

Thrasonic accounts of victories they had never won and conquests they

were fated never to make.  While these accounts alarmed our friends

in Europe they afforded us diversion.  We have long been out of all

fear for the event of the war.  I enclose you a list of the killed,

wounded, and captives of the enemy from the commencement of

hostilities at Lexington in April, 1775, until November, 1777, since

which there has been no event of any consequence.  This is the best

history of the war which can be brought within the compass of a

letter.  I believe the account to be near the truth, tho' it is

difficult to get at the numbers lost by an enemy with absolute

precision.  Many of the articles have been communicated to us from

England as taken from the official returns made by their General.  I

wish it were in my power to send you as just an account of our loss.

But this cannot be done without an application to the war office

which being in another county is at this time out of my reach.  I

think that upon the whole it has been about one half the number lost

by them, in some instances more, but in others less.  This difference

is ascribed to our superiority in taking aim when we fire; every

soldier in our army having been intimate with his gun from his

infancy.  If there could have been a doubt before as to the event of

the war it is now totally removed by the interposition of France, &

the generous alliance she has entered into with us.  Tho' much of my

time is employed in the councils of America I have yet a little

leisure to indulge my fondness for philosophical studies.  I could

wish to correspond with you on subjects of that kind.  It might not

be unacceptable to you to be informed for instance of the true power

of our climate as discoverable from the thermometer, from the force &

direction of the winds, the quantity of rain, the plants which grow

without shelter in winter &c.  On the other hand we should be much

pleased with contemporary observations on the same particulars in

your country, which will give us a comparative view of the two

climates.  Farenheit's thermometer is the only one in use with us, I

make my daily observations as early as possible in the morning &

again about 4 o'clock in the afternoon, these generally showing the

maxima of cold & heat in the course of 24 hours.  I wish I could

gratify your Botanical taste; but I am acquainted with nothing more

than the first principles of that science; yet myself & my friends

may furnish you with any Botanical subjects which this country

affords, and are not to be had with you; and I shall take pleasure in

procuring them when pointed out by you.  The greatest difficulty will

be the means of conveyance during the continuance of the war.



        If there is a gratification which I envy any people in this

world, it is to your country its music.  This is the favorite passion

of my soul, & fortune has cast my lot in a country where it is in a

state of deplorable barbarism.  From the line of life in which we

conjecture you to be, I have for some time lost the hope of seeing

you here.  Should the event prove so, I shall ask your assistance in

procuring a substitute, who may be a proficient in singing, & on the

Harpsichord.  I should be contented to receive such an one two or

three years hence, when it is hoped he may come more safely and find

here a greater plenty of those useful things which commerce alone can

furnish.  The bounds of an American fortune will not admit the

indulgence of a domestic band of musicians, yet I have thought that a

passion for music might be reconciled with that economy which we are

obliged to observe.  I retain for instance among my domestic servants

a gardener (Ortolans), a weaver (Tessitore di lino e lin), a cabinet

maker (Stipeltaio) and a stone cutter (Scalpellino laborante in

piano) to which I would add a vigneron.  In a country where like

yours music is cultivated and practised by every class of men I

suppose there might be found persons of those trades who could

perform on the French horn, clarinet or hautboy & bassoon, so that

one might have a band of two French horns, two clarinets, & hautboys

& a bassoon, without enlarging their domestic expenses.  A certainty

of employment for a half dozen years, and at the end of that time to

find them if they choose a conveyance to their own country might

induce them to come here on reasonable wages.  Without meaning to

give you trouble, perhaps it might be practicable for you in [your]

ordinary intercourse with your people, to find out such men disposed

to come to America.  Sobriety and good nature would be desirable

parts of their characters.  If you think such a plan practicable, and

will be so kind as to inform me what will be necessary to be done on

my part I will take care that it shall be done.  The necessary

expenses, when informed of them, I can remit before they are wanting,

to any port in France, with which country alone we have safe

correspondence.  I am Sir with much esteem your humble servant.





        "A TRUE WHIG IN SCIENCE"



        _To David Rittenhouse_

        _Monticello in Albemarle, Virginia, July 19, 1778_



        DEAR SIR, -- I sincerely congratulate you on the recovery of

Philadelphia, and wish it may be found uninjured by the enemy -- how

far the interests of literature may have suffered by the injury or

removal of the Orrery (as it is miscalled) the publick libraries,

your papers & implements, are doubts which still excite anxiety.  We

were much disappointed in Virginia generally on the day of the great

eclipse, which proved to be cloudy.  In Williamsburgh, where it was

total, I understand only the beginning was seen.  At this place which

is in Lat. 38 degrees-8' and Longitude West from Williamsburgh about

1 degrees-45' as is conjectured, eleven digits only were supposed to

be covered, as it was not seen at all till the moon had advanced

nearly one third over the sun's disc.  Afterwards it was seen at

intervals through the whole.  The egress particularly was visible.

It proved however of little use to me for want of a time piece that

could be depended on; which circumstance, together with the

subsequent restoration of Philadelphia to you, has induced me to

trouble you with this letter to remind you of your kind promise of

making me an accurate clock; which being intended for astronomical

purposes only, I would have divested of all apparatus for striking or

for any other purpose, which by increasing it's complication might

disturb it's accuracy.  A companion to it, for keeping seconds, and

which might be moved easily, would greatly add to it's value.  The

theodolite, for which I spoke to you also, I can now dispense with,

having since purchased a most excellent one.



        Writing to a philosopher, I may hope to be pardoned for

intruding some thoughts of my own tho' they relate to him personally.

Your time for two years past has, I believe, been principally

employed in the civil government of your country.  Tho' I have been

aware of the authority our cause would acquire with the world from

it's being known that yourself & Doc't. Franklin were zealous friends

to it and am myself duly impressed with a sense of the arduousness of

government, and the obligation those are under who are able to

conduct it, yet I am also satisfied there is an order of geniusses

above that obligation, & therefore exempted from it, nobody can

conceive that nature ever intended to throw away a Newton upon the

occupations of a crown.  It would have been a prodigality for which

even the conduct of providence might have been arraigned, had he been

by birth annexed to what was so far below him.  Cooperating with

nature in her ordinary economy we should dispose of and employ the

geniusses of men according to their several orders and degrees.  I

doubt not there are in your country many persons equal to the task of

conducting government: but you should consider that the world has but

one Ryttenhouse, & that it never had one before.  The amazing

mechanical representation of the solar system which you conceived &

executed, has never been surpassed by any but the work of which it is

a copy.  Are those powers then, which being intended for the

erudition of the world are, like air and light, the world's common

property, to be taken from their proper pursuit to do the commonplace

drudgery of governing a single state, a work which my be executed by

men of an ordinary stature, such as are always & everywhere to be

found?  Without having ascended mount Sinai for inspiration, I can

pronounce that the precept, in the decalogue of the vulgar, that they

shall not make to themselves "the likeness of anything that is in the

heavens above" is reversed for you, and that you will fulfil the

highest purposes of your creation by employing yourself in the

perpetual breach of that inhibition.  For my own country in

particular you must remember something like a promise that it should

be adorned with one of them.  The taking of your city by the enemy

has hitherto prevented the proposition from being made & approved by

our legislature.  The zeal of a true whig in science must excuse the

hazarding these free thoughts, which flow from a desire of promoting

the diffusion of knowledge & of your fame, and from one who can

assure you truly that he is with much sincerity & esteem Your most

obed't. & most humble serv't.



        P. S.  If you can spare as much time as to give me notice of

the receipt of this, & what hope I may form of my clocks, it will

oblige me.  If sent to Fredericksburgh it will come safe to hand.





        WAR AND HUMANITY



        _To Patrick Henry_

        _Albemarle, March 27, 1779_



        Sir, -- A report prevailing here, that in consequence of some

powers from Congress, the Governor and Council have it in

contemplation to remove the Convention troops, either wholly or in

part, from their present situation, I take the liberty of troubling

you with some observations on that subject.  The reputation and

interest of our country, in general, may be affected by such a

measure: it would, therefore, hardly be deemed an indecent liberty in

the most private citizen, to offer his thoughts to the consideration

of the Executive.  The locality of my situation, particularly in the

neighborhood of the present barracks, and the public relation in

which I stand to the people among whom they are situated, together

with a confidence which a personal knowledge of the members of the

Executive gives me, that they will be glad of information from any

quarter, on a subject interesting to the public, induce me to hope

that they will acquit me of impropriety in the present

representation.



        By an article in the Convention of Saratoga, it is stipulated,

on the part of the United States, that the officers shall not be

separated from their men.  I suppose the term officers, includes

_general_ as well as _regimental_ officers.  As there are general

officers who command all the troops, no part of them can be separated

from these officers without a violation of the article: they cannot,

of course, be separated from one another, unless the same general

officer could be in different places at the same time.  It is true,

the article adds the words, "as far as circumstances will admit."

This was a necessary qualification; because, in no place in America,

I suppose, could there have been found quarters for both officers and

men together; those for the officers to be according to their rank.

So far, then, as the circumstances of the place where they should be

quartered, should render a separation necessary, in order to procure

quarters for the officers, according to their rank, the article

admits that separation.  And these are the circumstances which must

have been under the contemplation of the parties; both of whom, and

all the world beside (who are ultimate judges in the case), would

still understand that they were to be as near in the environs of the

camp, as convenient quarters could be procured; and not that the

qualification of the article destroyed the article itself, and laid

it wholly at our discretion.  Congress, indeed, have admitted of this

separation; but are they so far lords of right and wrong as that our

consciences may be quiet with their dispensation?  Or is the case

amended by saying they leave it optional in the Governor and Council

to separate the troops or not?  At the same time that it exculpates

not them, it is drawing the Governor and Council into a participation

in the breach of faith.  If indeed it is only proposed, that a

separation of the troops shall be referred to the consent of their

officers; that is a very different matter.  Having carefully avoided

conversation with them on public subjects, I cannot say, of my own

knowledge, how they would relish such a proposition.  I have heard

from others, that they will choose to undergo anything together,

rather than to be separated, and that they will remonstrate against

it in the strongest terms.  The Executive, therefore, if voluntary

agents in this measure, must be drawn into a paper war with them, the

more disagreeable, as it seems that faith and reason will be on the

other side.  As an American, I cannot help feeling a thorough

mortification, that our Congress should have permitted an infraction

of our public honor; as a citizen of Virginia, I cannot help hoping

and confiding, that our Supreme Executive, whose acts will be

considered as the acts of the Commonwealth, estimate that honor too

highly to make its infraction their own act.  I may be permitted to

hope, then, that if any removal takes place, it will be a general

one; and, as it is said to be left to the Governor and Council to

determine on this, I am satisfied that, suppressing every other

consideration, and weighing the matter dispassionately, they will

determine upon this sole question, Is it for the benefit of those for

whom they act, that the Convention troops should be removed from

among them?  Under the head of interest, these circumstances, viz.,

the expense of building barracks, said to have been pound 25,000, and

of removing the troops back-wards and forwards, amounting to, I know

not how much, are not to be permitted, merely because they are

Continental expenses; for we are a part of the Continent; we must pay

a shilling of every dollar wasted.  But the sums of money which, by

these troops, or on their account, are brought into, and expended in

this State, are a great and local advantage.  This can require no

proof.  If, at the conclusion of the war, for instance, our share of

the Continental debt should be twenty millions of dollars, or say

that we are called on to furnish an annual quota of two millions four

hundred thousand dollars, to Congress, to be raised by tax, it is

obvious that we should raise these given sums with greater or less

ease, in proportion to the greater or less quantity of money found in

circulation among us.  I expect that our circulating money is

[increased?], by the presence of these troops, at the rate of $30,000

a week, at the least.  I have heard, indeed, that an objection arises

to their being kept within this State, from the information of the

commissary that they cannot be subsisted here.  In attending to the

information of that officer, it should be borne in mind that the

county of King William and its vicinities are one thing, the

territory of Virginia another.  If the troops could be fed upon long

letters, I believe the gentleman at the head of that department in

this country, would be the best commissary upon earth.  But till I

see him determined to act, not to write; to sacrifice his domestic

ease to the duties of his appointment, and apply to the resources of

this country, wheresoever they are to be had, I must entertain a

different opinion of him.  I am mistaken if, for the animal

subsistence of the troops hitherto, we are not principally indebted

to the genius and exertions of Hawkins, during the very short time he

lived after his appointment to that department, by your board.  His

eye immediately pervaded the whole State, it was reduced at once to a

regular machine, to a system, and the whole put into movement and

animation by the fiat of a comprehensive mind.  If the Commonwealth

of Virginia cannot furnish these troops with bread, I would ask of

the commissariat, which of the thirteen is now become the grain

colony?  If we are in danger of famine from the addition of four

thousand mouths, what is become of that surplus of bread, the

exportation of which used to feed the West Indies and Eastern States,

and fill the colony with hard money?  When I urge the sufficiency of

this State, however, to subsist these troops, I beg to be understood,

as having in contemplation the quantity of provisions necessary for

their real use, and not as calculating what is to be lost by the

wanton waste, mismanagement, and carelessness of those employed about

it.  If magazines of beef and pork are suffered to rot by slovenly

butchering, or for want of timely provision and sale; if quantities

of flour are exposed, by the commissaries entrusted with the keeping

it, to pillage and destruction; and if, when laid up in the

Continental stores, it is still to be embezzled and sold, the land of

Egypt itself would be insufficient for their supply, and their

removal would be necessary, not to a more plentiful country, but to

more able and honest commissaries.  Perhaps the magnitude of this

question, and its relation to the whole State, may render it worth

while to await the opinion of the National Council, which is now to

meet within a few weeks.  There is no danger of distress in the

meantime, as the commissaries affirm they have a great sufficiency of

provisions for some time to come.  Should the measure of removing

them into another State be adopted, and carried into execution,

before the meeting of Assembly, no disapprobation of theirs will

bring them back, because they will then be in the power of others,

who will hardly give them up.



        Want of information as to what may be the precise measure

proposed by the Governor and Council, obliges me to shift my ground,

and take up the subject in every possible form.  Perhaps, they have

not thought to remove the troops out of this State altogether, but to

some other part of it.  Here, the objections arising from the

expenses of removal, and of building new barracks, recur.  As to

animal food, it may be driven to one part of the country as easily as

to another: that circumstance, therefore, may be thrown out of the

question.  As to bread, I suppose they will require about forty or

forty-five thousand bushels of grain a year.  The place to which it

is to be brought to them, is about the centre of the State.  Besides,

that the country round about is fertile, all the grain made in the

counties adjacent to any kind of navigation, may be brought by water

to within twelve miles of the spot.  For these twelve miles, wagons

must be employed; I suppose half a dozen will be a plenty.  Perhaps,

this part of the expense might have been saved, had the barracks been

built on the water; but it is not sufficient to justify their being

abandoned now they are built.  Wagonage, indeed, seems to the

commissariat an article not worth economising.  The most wanton and

studied circuity of transportation has been practised: to mention

only one act, they have bought quantities of flour for these troops

in Cumberland, have ordered it to be wagoned down to Manchester, and

wagoned thence up to the barracks.  This fact happened to fall within

my own knowledge.  I doubt not there are many more such, in order

either to produce their total removal, or to run up the expenses of

the present situation, and satisfy Congress that the nearer they are

brought to the commissary's own bed, the cheaper they will be

subsisted.  The grain made in the western counties may be brought

partly in wagons, as conveniently to this as to any other place;

perhaps more so, on account of its vicinity to one of the best passes

through the Blue Ridge; and partly by water, as it is near to James

river, to the navigation of which, ten counties are adjacent above

the falls.  When I said that the grain might be brought hither from

all the counties of the State adjacent to navigation, I did not mean

to say it would be proper to bring it from all.  On the contrary, I

think the commissary should be instructed, after the next harvest,

not to send one bushel of grain to the barracks from below the falls

of the rivers, or from the northern counties.  The counties on tide

water are accessible to the calls for our own army.  Their supplies

ought, therefore, to be husbanded for them.  The counties in the

northwestern parts of the State are not only within reach for our own

grand army, but peculiarly necessary for the support of Macintosh's

army; or for the support of any other northwestern expedition, which

the uncertain conduct of the Indians should render necessary;

insomuch, that if the supplies of that quarter should be misapplied

to any other purpose, it would destroy, in embryo, every exertion,

either for particular or general safety there.  The counties above

tide water, in the middle and southern and western parts of the

country, are not accessible to calls for either of those purposes,

but at such an expense of transportation as the article would not

bear.  Here, then, is a great field, whose supplies of bread cannot

be carried to our army, or rather, which will raise no supplies of

bread, because there is nobody to eat them.  Was it not, then, wise

in Congress to remove to that field four thousand idle mouths, who

must otherwise have interfered with the pasture of our own troops?

And, if they are removed to any other part of the country, will it

not defeat this wise purpose?  The mills on the waters of James

river, above the falls, open to canoe navigation, are very many.

Some of them are of great note, as manufacturers.  The barracks are

surrounded by mills.  There are five or six round about

Charlottesville.  Any two or three of the whole might, in the course

of the winter, manufacture flour sufficient for the year.  To say the

worst, then, of this situation, it is but twelve miles wrong.  The

safe custody of these troops is another circumstance worthy

consideration.  Equally removed from the access of an eastern or

western enemy; central to the whole State, so that should they

attempt an irruption in any direction, they must pass through a great

extent of hostile country; in a neighborhood thickly inhabited by a

robust and hardy people zealous in the American cause, acquainted

with the use of arms, and the defiles and passes by which they must

issue: it would seem, that in this point of view, no place could have

been better chosen.



        Their health is also of importance.  I would not endeavor to

show that their lives are valuable to us, because it would suppose a

possibility, that humanity was kicked out of doors in America, and

interest only attended to.  The barracks occupy the top and brow of a

very high hill, (you have been untruly told they were in a bottom.)

They are free from bog, have four springs which seem to be plentiful,

one within twenty yards of the piquet, two within fifty yards, and

another within two hundred and fifty, and they propose to sink wells

within the piquet.  Of four thousand people, it should be expected,

according to the ordinary calculations, that one should die every

day.  Yet, in the space of near three months, there have been but

four deaths among them; two infants under three weeks old, and two

others by apoplexy.  The officers tell me, the troops were never

before so healthy since they were embodied.



        But is an enemy so execrable, that, though in captivity, his

wishes and comforts are to be disregarded and even crossed?  I think

not.  It is for the benefit of mankind to mitigate the horrors of war

as much as possible.  The practice, therefore, of modern nations, of

treating captive enemies with politeness and generosity, is not only

delightful in contemplation, but really interesting to all the world,

friends, foes, and neutrals.  Let us apply this: the officers, after

considerable hardships, have all procured quarters, comfortable and

satisfactory to them.  In order to do this, they were obliged, in

many instances, to hire houses for a year certain, and at such

exorbitant rents, as were sufficient to tempt independent owners to

go out of them, and shift as they could.  These houses, in most

cases, were much out of repair.  They have repaired them at a

considerable expense.  One of the general officers has taken a place

for two years, advanced the rent for the whole time, and been

obliged, moreover, to erect additional buildings for the

accommodation of part of his family, for which there was not room in

the house rented.  Independent of the brick work, for the carpentry

of these additional buildings, I know he is to pay fifteen hundred

dollars.  The same gentleman, to my knowledge, has paid to one person

three thousand six hundred and seventy dollars for different articles

to fix himself commodiously.  They have generally laid in their

stocks of grain and other provisions, for it is well known that

officers do not live on their rations.  They have purchased cows,

sheep, &c., set in to farming, prepared their gardens, and have a

prospect of comfort and quiet before them.  To turn to the soldiers:

the environs of the barracks are delightful, the ground cleared, laid

off in hundreds of gardens, each enclosed in its separate paling;

these well prepared, and exhibiting a fine appearance.  General

Riedezel alone laid out upwards of two hundred pounds in garden seeds

for the German troops only.  Judge what an extent of ground these

seeds would cover.  There is little doubt that their own gardens will

furnish them a great abundance of vegetables through the year.  Their

poultry, pigeons and other preparations of that kind, present to the

mind the idea of a company of farmers, rather than a camp of

soldiers.  In addition to the barracks built for them by the public,

and now very comfortable, they have built great numbers for

themselves, in such messes as fancied each other; and the whole

corps, both officers and men, seem now happy and satisfied with their

situation.  Having thus found the art of rendering captivity itself

comfortable, and carried it into execution, at their own great

expense and labor, their spirits sustained by the prospect of

gratifications rising before their eyes, does not every sentiment of

humanity revolt against the proposition of stripping them of all

this, and removing them into new situations, where, from the advanced

season of the year, no preparations can be made for carrying

themselves comfortably through the heats of summer; and when it is

known that the necessary advances for the conveniences already

provided, have exhausted their funds and left them unable to make the

like exertions anew.  Again, review this matter, as it may regard

appearances.  A body of troops, after staying a twelvemonth at

Boston, are ordered to take a march of seven hundred miles to

Virginia, where, it is said, they may be plentifully subsisted.  As

soon as they are there, they are ordered on some other march,

because, in Virginia, it is said, they cannot be subsisted.

Indifferent nations will charge this either to ignorance, or to whim

and caprice; the parties interested, to cruelty.  They now view the

proposition in that light, and it is said, there is a general and

firm persuasion among them, that they were marched from Boston with

no other purpose than to harass and destroy them with eternal

marches.  Perseverance in object, though not by the most direct way,

is often more laudable than perpetual changes, as often as the object

shifts light.  A character of steadiness in our councils, is worth

more than the subsistence of four thousand people.



        There could not have been a more unlucky concurrence of

circumstances than when these troops first came.  The barracks were

unfinished for want of laborers, the spell of weather the worst ever

known within the memory of man, no stores of bread laid in, the

roads, by the weather and number of wagons, soon rendered impassable:

not only the troops themselves were greatly disappointed, but the

people in the neighborhood were alarmed at the consequences which a

total failure of provisions might produce.  In this worst state of

things, their situation was seen by many and disseminated through the

country, so as to occasion a general dissatisfaction, which even

seized the minds of reasonable men, who, if not affected by the

contagion, must have foreseen that the prospect must brighten, and

that great advantages to the people must necessarily arise.  It has,

accordingly, so happened.  The planters, being more generally sellers

than buyers, have felt the benefit of their presence in the most

vital part about them, their purses, and are now sensible of its

source.  I have too good an opinion of their love of order to believe

that a removal of these troops would produce any irregular proofs of

their disapprobation, but I am well assured it would be extremely

odious to them.



        To conclude.  The separation of these troops would be a breach

of public faith, therefore I suppose it is impossible; if they are

removed to another State, it is the fault of the commissaries; if

they are removed to any other part of the State, it is the fault of

the commissaries; and in both cases, the public interest and public

security suffer, the comfortable and plentiful subsistence of our own

army is lessened, the health of the troops neglected, their wishes

crossed, and their comforts torn from them, the character of whim and

caprice, or, what is worse, of cruelty, fixed on us as a nation, and,

to crown the whole, our own people disgusted with such a proceeding.



        I have thus taken the liberty of representing to you the facts

and the reasons, which seem to militate against the separation or

removal of these troops.  I am sensible, however, that the same

subject may appear to different persons, in very different lights.

What I have urged as reasons, may, to sounder minds, be apparent

fallacies.  I hope they will appear, at least, so plausible, as to

excuse the interposition of



        Your Excellency's most obedient and most humble servant.

