




        CHRISTIANITY AND THE COMMON LAW




        _To Dr. Thomas Cooper_

        _Monticello, February 10, 1814_




        DEAR SIR, -- In my letter of January 16, I promised you a

sample from my common-place book, of the pious disposition of the

English judges, to connive at the frauds of the clergy, a disposition

which has even rendered them faithful allies in practice.  When I was

a student of the law, now half a century ago, after getting through

Coke Littleton, whose matter cannot be abridged, I was in the habit

of abridging and common-placing what I read meriting it, and of

sometimes mixing my own reflections on the subject.  I now enclose

you the extract from these entries which I promised.  They were

written at a time of life when I was bold in the pursuit of

knowledge, never fearing to follow truth and reason to whatever

results they led, and bearding every authority which stood in their

way.  This must be the apology, if you find the conclusions bolder

than historical facts and principles will warrant.  Accept with them

the assurances of my great esteem and respect.

 

        _Common-place Book._

        873. In Quare imp. in C. B. 34, H. 6, fo. 38, the def. Br. of

Lincoln pleads that the church of the pl. became void by the death of

the incumbent, that the pl. and J. S. each pretending a right,

presented two several clerks; that the church being thus rendered

litigious, he was not obliged, by the _Ecclesiastical law_ to admit

either, until an inquisition de jure patronatus, in the

ecclesiastical court: that, by the same law, this inquisition was to

be at the suit of either claimant, and was not _ex-officio_ to be

instituted by the bishop, and at his proper costs; that neither party

had desired such an inquisition; that six months passed whereon it

belonged to him of right to present as on a lapse, which he had done.

The pl. demurred.  A question was, How far the _Ecclesiastical law_

was to be respected in this matter by the common law court? and

Prisot C. 3, in the course of his argument uses this expression, "A

tiels leis que ils de seint eglise ont en _ancien scripture_, covient

a nous a donner credence, car ces common ley sur quel touts manners

leis sont fondes: et auxy, sin, nous sumus obliges de conustre nostre

ley; et, sin, si poit apperer or a nous que lievesque ad fait comme

un ordinary fera en tiel cas, adong nous devons ces adjuger bon

autrement nemy," &c.  It does not appear that judgment was given. Y.

B. ubi supra. S. C. Fitzh. abr. Qu. imp. 89. Bro. abr. Qu. imp. 12.

Finch mistakes this in the following manner: "To such laws of the

church as have warrant in _Holy Scripture_, our law giveth credence,"

and cites the above case, and the words of Prisot on the margin.

Finch's law. B. 1, ch. 3, published 1613.  Here we find "ancien

scripture" converted into "Holy Scripture," whereas it can only mean

the _ancient written_ laws of the church.  It cannot mean the

Scriptures, 1, because the "ancien scripture" must then be understood

to mean the "Old Testament" or Bible, in opposition to the "New

Testament," and to the exclusion of that, which would be absurd and

contrary to the wish of those |P1323|p1 who cite this passage to

prove that the Scriptures, or Christianity, is a part of the common

law.  2. Because Prisot says, "Ceo [est] common ley, sur quel touts

manners leis sont fondes." Now, it is true that the ecclesiastical

law, so far as admitted in England, derives its authority from the

common law.  But it would not be true that the Scriptures so derive

their authority.  3. The whole case and arguments show that the

question was how far the Ecclesiastical law in general should be

respected in a common law court.  And in Bro. abr. of this case,

Littleton says, "Les juges del common ley prendra conusans quid est

_lax ecclesiae_, vel admiralitatis, et trujus modi." 4. Because the

particular part of the Ecclesiastical law then in question, to wit,

the right of the patron to present to his advowson, was not founded

on the law of God, but subject to the modification of the lawgiver,

and so could not introduce any such general position as Finch

pretends.  Yet Wingate [in 1658] thinks proper to erect this false

quotation into a maxim of the common law, expressing it in the very

words of Finch, but citing Prisot, wing. max.  3. Next comes

Sheppard, [in 1675,] who states it in the same words of Finch, and

quotes the Year-Book, Finch and Wingate.  3. Shepp. abr. tit.

Religion.  In the case of the King _v_. Taylor, Sir Matthew Hale lays

it down in these words, "Christianity is parcel of the laws of

England." 1 Ventr. 293, 3 Keb. 607.  But he quotes no authority,

resting it on his own, which was good in all cases in which his mind

received no bias from his bigotry, his superstitions, his visions

above sorceries, demons, &c.  The power of these over him is

exemplified in his hanging of the witches.  So strong was this

doctrine become in 1728, by additions and repetitions from one

another, that in the case of the King _v_. Woolston, the court would

not suffer it to be debated, whether to write against Christianity

was punishable in the temporal courts at common law, saying it had

been so settled in Taylor's case, ante 2, stra. 834; therefore, Wood,

in his Institute, lays it down that all blasphemy and profaneness are

offences by the _common law_, and cites Strange ubi supra. Wood 409.

And Blackstone [about 1763] repeats, in the words of Sir Matthew

Hale, that "Christianity is part of the laws of England," citing

Ventris and Strange ubi supra. 4. Blackst. 59.  Lord Mansfield

qualifies it a little by saying that "The essential |P1324|p1

principles of revealed religion are part of the common law." In the

case of the Chamberlain of London _v_. Evans, 1767.  But he cities no

authority, and leaves us at our peril to find out what, in the

opinion of the judge, and according to the measure of his foot or his

faith, are those essential principles of revealed religion obligatory

on us as a part of the common law.




        Thus we find this string of authorities, when examined to the

beginning, all hanging on the same hook, a perverted expression of

Prisot's, or on one another, or nobody.  Thus Finch quotes Prisot;

Wingate also; Sheppard quotes Prisot, Finch and Wingate; Hale cites

nobody; the court in Woolston's case cite Hale; Wood cites Woolston's

case; Blackstone that and Hale; and Lord Mansfield, like Hale,

ventures it on his own authority.  In the earlier ages of the law, as

in the year-books, for instance, we do not expect much recurrence to

authorities by the judges, because in those days there were few or

none such made public.  But in latter times we take no judge's word

for what the law is, further than he is warranted by the authorities

he appeals to.  His decision may bind the unfortunate individual who

happens to be the particular subject of it; but it cannot alter the

law.  Though the common law may be termed "Lex non Scripta," yet the

same Hale tells us "when I call those parts of our laws Leges non

Scriptae, I do not mean as if those laws were only oral, or

communicated from the former ages to the latter merely by word.  For

all those laws have their several monuments in writing, whereby they

are transferred from one age to another, and without which they would

soon lose all kind of certainty.  They are for the most part extant

in records of pleas, proceedings, and judgments, in books of reports

and judicial decisions, in tractates of learned men's arguments and

opinions, preserved from ancient times and still extant in writing."

Hale's H. c. d. 22.  Authorities for what is common law may therefore

be as well cited, as for any part of the Lex Scripta, and there is no

better instance of the necessity of holding the judges and writers to

a declaration of their authorities than the present; where we detect

them endeavoring to make law where they found none, and to submit us

at one stroke to a whole system, no particle of which has its

foundation in the common law.  For we know that the common law is

that system of law which was introduced by the Saxons on their

settlement in England, and altered from time to time by proper

legislative authority from that time to the date of Magna Charta,

which terminates the period of the common law, or lex non scripta,

and commences that of the statute law, or Lex Scripta.  This

settlement took place about the middle of the fifth century.  But

Christianity was not introduced till the seventh century; the

conversion of the first christian king of the Heptarchy having taken

place about the year 598, and that of the last about 686.  Here,

then, was a space of two hundred years, during which the common law

was in existence, and Christianity no part of it.  If it ever was

adopted, therefore, into the common law, it must have been between

the introduction of Christianity and the date of the Magna Charta.

But of the laws of this period we have a tolerable collection by

Lambard and Wilkins, probably not perfect, but neither very

defective; and if any one chooses to build a doctrine on any law of

that period, supposed to have been lost, it is incumbent on him to

prove it to have existed, and what were its contents.  These were so

far alterations of the common law, and became themselves a part of

it.  But none of these adopt Christianity as a part of the common

law.  If, therefore, from the settlement of the Saxons to the

introduction of Christianity among them, that system of religion

could not be a part of the common law, because they were not yet

Christians, and if, having their laws from that period to the close

of the common law, we are all able to find among them no such act of

adoption, we may safely affirm (though contradicted by all the judges

and writers on earth) that Christianity neither is, nor ever was a

part of the common law.  Another cogent proof of this truth is drawn

from the silence of certain writers on the common law.  Bracton gives

us a very complete and scientific treatise of the whole body of the

common law.  He wrote this about the close of the reign of Henry

III., a very few years after the date of the Magna Charta.  We

consider this book as the more valuable, as it was written about fore

gives us the former in its ultimate state.  Bracton, too, was an

ecclesiastic, and would certainly not have failed to inform us of the

adoption of Christianity as a part of the common law, had any such

adoption ever taken place.  But no word of his, which intimates

anything like it, has ever been cited.  Fleta and Britton, who wrote

in the succeeding reign (of Edward I.), are equally silent.  So also

is Glanvil, an earlier writer than any of them, (viz.: temp.  H. 2,)

but his subject perhaps might not have led him to mention it.

Justice Fortescue Aland, who possessed more Saxon learning than all

the judges and writers before mentioned put together, places this

subject on more limited ground.  Speaking of the laws of the Saxon

kings, he says, "the ten commandments were made part of their laws,

and consequently were _once_ part of the law of England; so that to

break any of the ten commandments was then esteemed a breach of the

common law, of England; and why it is not so now, perhaps it may be

difficult to give a good reason." Preface to Fortescue Aland's

reports, xvii.  Had he proposed to state with more minuteness how

much of the scriptures had been made a part of the common law, he

might have added that in the laws of Alfred, where he found the ten

commandments, two or three other chapters of Exodus are copied almost

verbatim.  But the adoption of a part proves rather a rejection of

the rest, as municipal law.  We might as well say that the Newtonian

system of philosophy is a part of the common law, as that the

Christian religion is.  The truth is that Christianity and

Newtonianism being reason and verity itself, in the opinion of all

but infidels and Cartesians, they are protected under the wings of

the common law from the dominion of other sects, but not erected into

dominion over them.  An eminent Spanish physician affirmed that the

lancet had slain more men than the sword.  Doctor Sangrado, on the

contrary, affirmed that with plentiful bleedings, and draughts of

warm water, every disease was to be cured.  The common law protects

both opinions, but enacts neither into law.  See post. 879.




        879. Howard, in his Contumes Anglo-Normandes, 1.87, notices the

falsification of the laws of Alfred, by prefixing to them four

chapters of the Jewish law, to wit: the 20th, 21st, 22d and 23d

chapters of Exodus, to which he might have added the 15th chapter of

the Acts of the Apostles, v. 23, and precepts from other parts of the

scripture.  These he calls a _hors d'oeuvre_ of some pious copyist.

This awkward monkish fabrication makes the preface to Alfred's

genuine laws stand in the body of the work, and the very words of

Alfred himself prove the fraud; for he declares, in that preface,

that he has collected these laws from those of Ina, of Offa,

Aethelbert and his ancestors, saying nothing of any of them being

taken from the Scriptures.  It is still more certainly proved by the

inconsistencies it occasions.  For example, the Jewish legislator

Exodus xxi. 12, 13, 14, (copied by the Pseudo Alfred [symbol omitted]

13,) makes murder, with the Jews, death.  But Alfred himself, Le.

xxvi., punishes it by a fine only, called a Weregild, proportioned to

the condition of the person killed.  It is remarkable that Hume

(append. 1 to his History) examining this article of the laws of

Alfred, without perceiving the fraud, puzzles himself with accounting

for the inconsistency it had introduced.  To strike a pregnant woman

so that she die is death by Exodus, xxi. 22, 23, and Pseud. Alfr. 18;

but by the laws of Alfred ix., pays a Weregild for both woman and

child.  To smite out an eye, or a tooth, Exod. xxi. 24-27. Pseud.

Alfr. 19, 20, if of a servant by his master, is freedom to the

servant; in every other case retaliation.  But by Alfr. Le. xl. a

fixed indemnification is paid.  Theft of an ox, or a sheep, by the

Jewish law, Exod. xxii. 1, was repaid five-fold for the ox and

four-fold for the sheep; by the Pseudograph 24, the ox double, the

sheep four-fold; but by Alfred Le. xvi., he who stole a cow and a

calf was to repay the worth of the cow and 401 for the calf.  Goring

by an ox was the death of the ox, and the flesh not to be eaten.

Exod. xxi. 28. Pseud. Alfr. 21 by Alfred Le. xxiv., the wounded

person had the ox.  The Pseudograph makes municipal laws of the ten

commandments, 1-10, regulates concubinage, 12, makes it death to

strike or to curse father or mother, 14, 15, gives an eye for an eye,

tooth for a tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning,

wound for wound, strife for strife, 19; sells the thief to repay his

theft, 24; obliges the fornicator to marry the woman he has lain

with, 29; forbids interest on money, 35; makes the laws of bailment,

28, very different from what Lord Holt delivers in Coggs _v_.

Bernard, ante 92, and what Sir William Jones tells us they were; and

punishes witchcraft with death, 30, which Sir Matthew Hale, 1 H. P.

C. B. 1, ch. 33, declares was not a felony before the Stat. 1, Jac.

12.  It was under that statute, and not this forgery, that he hung

Rose Cullendar and Amy Duny, 16 Car.  2, (1662,) on whose trial he

declared "that there were such creatures as witches he made no doubt

at all; for first the Scripture had affirmed so much, secondly the

wisdom of all nations had provided laws against such persons, and

such hath been the judgment of this kingdom, as appears by that act

of Parliament which hath provided punishment proportionable to the

quality of the offence." And we must certainly allow greater weight

to this position that "it was no felony till James' Statute," laid

down deliberately in his H. P. C., a work which he wrote to be

printed, finished, and transcribed for the press in his life time,

than to the hasty scripture that "at _common law_ witchcraft was

punished with death as heresy, by writ de Heretico Comburendo" in his

Methodical Summary of the P. C. p. 6, a work "not intended for the

press, not fitted for it, and which he declared himself he had never

read over since it was written;" Pref.  Unless we understand his

meaning in that to be that witchcraft could not be punished at common

law as witchcraft, but as heresy.  In either sense, however, it is a

denial of this pretended law of Alfred.  Now, all men of reading know

that these pretended laws of homicide, concubinage, theft,

retaliation, compulsory marriage, usury, bailment, and others which

might have been cited, from the Pseudograph, were never the laws of

England, not even in Alfred's time; and of course that it is a

forgery.  Yet palpable as it must be to every lawyer, the English

judges have piously avoided lifting the veil under which it was

shrouded.  In truth, the alliance between Church and State in England

has ever made their judges accomplices in the frauds of the clergy;

and even bolder than they are.  For instead of being contented with

these four surreptitious chapters of Exodus, they have taken the

whole leap, and declared at once that the whole Bible and Testament

in a lump, make a part of the common law; ante 873: the first

judicial declaration of which was by this same Sir Matthew Hale.  And

thus they incorporate into the English code laws made for the Jews

alone, and the precepts of the gospel, intended by their benevolent

author as obligatory only in _foro concientiae_; and they arm the

whole with the coercions of municipal law.  In doing this, too, they

have not even used the Connecticut caution of declaring, as is done

in their blue laws, that the laws of God shall be the laws of their

land, except where their own contradict them; but they swallow the

yea and nay together.  Finally, in answer to Fortescue Aland's

question why the ten commandments should not now be a part of the

common law of England? we may say they are not because they never

were made so by legislative authority, the document which has imposed

that doubt on him being a manifest forgery.







        CLASSIFICATION IN NATURAL HISTORY




        _To Dr. John Manners_

        _Monticello, February 22, 1814_




        SIR, -- The opinion which, in your letter of January 24, you

are pleased to ask of me, on the comparative merits of the different

methods of classification adopted by different writers on Natural

History, is one which I could not have given satisfactorily, even at

the earlier period at which the subject was more familiar; still

less, after a life of continued occupation in civil concerns has so

much withdrawn me from studies of that kind.  I can, therefore,

answer but in a very general way.  And the text of this answer will

be found in an observation in your letter, where, speaking of

nosological systems, you say that disease has been found to be an

unit.  Nature has, in truth, produced units only through all her

works.  Classes, orders, genera, species, are not of her work.  Her

creation is of individuals.  No two animals are exactly alike; no two

plants, nor even two leaves or blades of grass; no two

crystallizations.  And if we may venture from what is within the

cognizance of such organs as ours, to conclude on that beyond their

powers, we must believe that no two particles of matter are of exact

resemblance.  This infinitude of units or individuals being far

beyond the capacity of our memory, we are obliged, in aid of that, to

distribute them into masses, throwing into each of these all the

individuals which have a certain degree of resemblance; to subdivide

these again into smaller groups, according to certain points of

dissimilitude observable in them, and so on until we have formed what

we call a system of classes, orders, genera and species.  In doing

this, we fix arbitrarily on such characteristic resemblances and

differences as seem to us most prominent and invariable in the

several subjects, and most likely to take a strong hold in our

memories.  Thus Ray formed one classification on such lines of

division as struck him most favorably; Klein adopted another; Brisson

a third, and other naturalists other designations, till Linnaeus

appeared.  Fortunately for science, he conceived in the three

kingdoms of nature, modes of classification which obtained the

approbation of the learned of all nations.  His system was

accordingly adopted by all, and united all in a general language.  It

offered the three great desiderata: First, of aiding the memory to

retain a knowledge of the productions of nature.  Secondly, of

rallying all to the same names for the same objects, so that they

could communicate understandingly on them.  And Thirdly, of enabling

them, when a subject was first presented, to trace it by its

character up to the conventional name by which it was agreed to be

called.  This classification was indeed liable to the imperfection of

bringing into the same group individuals which, though resembling in

the characteristics adopted by the author for his classification, yet

have strong marks of dissimilitude in other respects.  But to this

objection every mode of classification must be liable, because the

plan of creation is inscrutable to our limited faculties.  Nature has

not arranged her productions on a single and direct line.  They

branch at every step, and in every direction, and he who attempts to

reduce them into departments, is left to do it by the lines of his

own fancy.  The objection of bringing together what are disparata in

nature, lies against the classifications of Blumenbach and of Cuvier,

as well as that of Linnaeus, and must forever lie against all.

Perhaps not in equal degree; on this I do not pronounce.  But neither

is this so important a consideration as that of uniting all nations

under one language in Natural History.  This had been happily

effected by Linnaeus, and can scarcely be hoped for a second time.

Nothing indeed is so desperate as to make all mankind agree in giving

up a language they possess, for one which they have to learn.  The

attempt leads directly to the confusion of the tongues of Babel.

Disciples of Linnaeus, of Blumenbach, and of Cuvier, exclusively

possessing their own nomenclatures, can no longer communicate

intelligibly with one another.  However much, therefore, we are

indebted to both these naturalists, and to Cuvier especially, for the

valuable additions they have made to the sciences of nature, I cannot

say they have rendered her a service in this attempt to innovate in

the settled nomenclature of her productions; on the contrary, I think

it will be a check on the progress of science, greater or less, in

proportion as their schemes shall more or less prevail.  They would

have rendered greater service by holding fast to the system on which

we had once all agreed, and by inserting into that such new genera,

orders, or even classes, as new discoveries should call for.  Their

systems, too, and especially that of Blumenbach, are liable to the

objection of giving too much into the province of anatomy.  It may be

said, indeed, that anatomy is a part of natural history.  In the

broad sense of the word, it certainly is.  In that sense, however, it

would comprehend all the natural sciences, every created thing being

a subject of natural history in extenso.  But in the subdivisions of

general science, as has been observed in the particular one of

natural history, it has been necessary to draw arbitrary lines, in

order to accommodate our limited views.  According to these, as soon

as the structure of any natural production is destroyed by art, it

ceases to be a subject of natural history, and enters into the domain

ascribed to chemistry, to pharmacy, to anatomy, &c.  Linnaeus' method

was liable to this objection so far as it required the aid of

anatomical dissection, as of the heart, for instance, to ascertain

the place of any animal, or of a chemical process for that of a

mineral substance.  It would certainly be better to adopt as much as

possible such exterior and visible characteristics as every traveller

is competent to observe, to ascertain and to relate.  But with this

objection, lying but in a small degree, Linnaeus' method was

received, understood, and conventionally settled among the learned,

and was even getting into common use.  To disturb it then was

unfortunate.  The new system attempted in botany, by Jussieu, in

mineralogy, by Hauiy, are subjects of the same regret, and so also

the no-system of Buffon, the great advocate of individualism in

opposition to classification.  He would carry us back to the days and

to the confusion of Aristotle and Pliny, give up the improvements of

twenty centuries, and co-operate with the neologists in rendering the

science of one generation useless to the next by perpetual changes of

its language.  In botany, Wildenow and Persoon have incorporated into

Linnaeus the new discovered plants.  I do not know whether any one

has rendered us the same service as to his natural history.  It would

be a very acceptable one.  The materials furnished by Humboldt, and

those from New Holland particularly, require to be digested into the

Catholic system.  Among these, the Ornithorhyncus mentioned by you,

is an amusing example of the anomalies by which nature sports with

our schemes of classification.  Although with out mammae, naturalists

are obliged to place it in the class of mammiferae; and Blumenbach,

particularly, arranges it in his order of Palmipeds and toothless

genus, with the walrus and manatie.  In Linnaeus' system it might be

inserted as a new genus between the anteater and manis, in the order

of Bruta.  It seems, in truth, to have stronger relations with that

class than any other in the construction of the heart, its red and

warm blood, hairy integuments, in being quadruped and viviparous, and

may we not say, in its _tout ensemble_, which Buffon makes his sole

principle of arrangement?  The mandible, as you observe, would draw

it towards the birds, were not this characteristic overbalanced by

the weightier ones before mentioned.  That of the Cloaca is

equivocal, because although a character of birds, yet some mammalia,

as the beaver and sloth, have the rectum and urinary passage

terminating at a common opening.  Its ribs also, by their number and

structure, are nearer those of the bird than of the mammalia.  It is

possible that further opportunities of examination may discover the

mammae.  Those of the Opossum are asserted, by the Chevalier

d'Aboville, from his own observations on that animal, made while here

with the French army, to be not discoverable until pregnancy, and to

disappear as soon as the young are weaned.  The Duckbill has many

additional particularities which liken it to other genera, and some

entirely peculiar.  Its description and history needs yet further

information.




        In what I have said on the method of classing, I have not at

all meant to insinuate that that of Linnaeus is intrinsically

preferable to those of Blumenbach and Cuvier.  I adhere to the

Linnean because it is sufficient as a ground-work, admits of

supplementary insertions as new productions are discovered, and

mainly because it has got into so general use that it will not be

easy to displace it, and still less to find another which shall have

the same singular fortune of obtaining the general consent.  During

the attempt we shall become unintelligible to one another, and

science will be really retarded by efforts to advance it made by its

most favorite sons.  I am not myself apt to be alarmed at innovations

recommended by reason.  That dread belongs to those whose interests

or prejudices shrink from the advance of truth and science.  My

reluctance is to give up an universal language of which we are in

possession, without an assurnace of general consent to receive

another.  And the higher the character of the authors recommending

it, and the more excellent what they offer, the greater the danger of

producing schism.




        I should seem to need apology for these long remarks to you who

are so much more recent in these studies, but I find it in your

particular request and my own respect for it, and with that be

pleased to accept the assurance of my esteem and consideration.







        THE CENSORSHIP OF BOOKS




        _To N. G. Dufief_

        _Monticello, April 19, 1814_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favor of the 6th instant is just received,

and I shall with equal willingness and truth, state the degree of

agency you had, respecting the copy of M. de Becourt's book, which

came to my hands.  That gentleman informed me, by letter, that he was

about to publish a volume in French, "Sur la Creation du Monde, un

Systeme d'Organisation Primitive," which, its title promised to be,

either a geological or astronomical work.  I subscribed; and, when

published, he sent me a copy; and as you were my correspondent in the

book line in Philadelphia, I took the liberty of desiring him to call

on you for the price, which, he afterwards informed me, you were so

kind as to pay him for me, being, I believe, two dollars.  But the

sole copy which came to me was from himself directly, and, as far as

I know, was never seen by you.




        I am really mortified to be told that, _in the United States of

America_, a fact like this can become a subject of inquiry, and of

criminal inquiry too, as an offence against religion; that a question

about the sale of a book can be carried before the civil magistrate.

Is this then our freedom of religion? and are we to have a censor

whose imprimatur shall say what books may be sold, and what we may

buy?  And who is thus to dogmatize religious opinions for our

citizens?  Whose foot is to be the measure to which ours are all to

be cut or stretched?  Is a priest to be our inquisitor, or shall a

layman, simple as ourselves, set up his reason as the rule for what

we are to read, and what we must believe?  It is an insult to our

citizens to question whether they are rational beings or not, and

blasphemy against religion to suppose it cannot stand the test of

truth and reason.  If M. de Becourt's book be false in its facts,

disprove them; if false in its reasoning, refute it.  But, for God's

sake, let us freely hear both sides, if we choose.  I know little of

its contents, having barely glanced over here and there a passage,

and over the table of contents.  From this, the Newtonian philosophy

seemed the chief object of attack, the issue of which might be

trusted to the strength of the two combatants; Newton certainly not

needing the auxiliary arm of the government, and still less the holy

author of our religion, as to what in it concerns him.  I thought the

work would be very innocent, and one which might be confided to the

reason of any man; not likely to be much read if let alone, but, if

persecuted, it will be generally read.  Every man in the United

States will think it a duty to buy a copy, in vindication of his

right to buy, and to read what he pleases.  I have been just reading

the new constitution of Spain.  One of its fundamental basis is

expressed in these words: "The _Roman Catholic_ religion, the only

true one, is, and always shall be, that of the Spanish nation.  The

government protects it by wise and just laws, and prohibits the

exercise of any other whatever." Now I wish this presented to those

who question what you may sell, or we may buy, with a request to

strike out the words, "Roman Catholic," and to insert the

denomination of their own religion.  This would ascertain the code of

dogmas which each wishes should domineer over the opinions of all

others, and be taken, like the Spanish religion, under the

"protection of wise and just laws." It would shew to what they wish

to reduce the liberty for which one generation has sacrificed life

and happiness.  It would present our boasted freedom of religion as a

thing of theory only, and not of practice, as what would be a poor

exchange for the theoretic thraldom, but practical freedom of Europe.

But it is impossible that the laws of Pennsylvania, which set us the

first example of the wholesome and happy effects of religious

freedom, can permit the inquisitorial functions to be proposed to

their courts.  Under them you are surely safe.




        At the date of yours of the 6th, you had not received mine of

the 3d inst., asking a copy of an edition of Newton's Principia,

which I had seen advertised.  When the cost of that shall be known,

it shall be added to the balance of $4.93, and incorporated with a

larger remittance I have to make to Philadelphia.  Accept the

assurance of my great esteem and respect.







        THE MORAL SENSE




        _To Thomas Law_

        _Poplar Forest, June 13, 1814_




        DEAR SIR, -- The copy of your Second Thoughts on Instinctive

Impulses, with the letter accompanying it, was received just as I was

setting out on a journey to this place, two or three days' distant

from Monticello.  I brought it with me and read it with great

satisfaction, and with the more as it contained exactly my own creed

on the foundation of morality in man.  It is really curious that on a

quesion so fundamental, such a variety of opinions should have

prevailed among men, and those, too, of the most exemplary virtue and

first order of understanding.  It shows how necessary was the care of

the Creator in making the moral principle so much a part of our

constitution as that no errors of reasoning or of speculation might

lead us astray from its observance in practice.  Of all the theories

on this question, the most whimsical seems to have been that of

Wollaston, who considers _truth_ as the foundation of morality.  The

thief who steals your guinea does wrong only inasmuch as he acts a

lie in using your guinea as if it were his own.  Truth is certainly a

branch of morality, and a very important one to society.  But

presented as its foundation, it is as if a tree taken up by the

roots, had its stem reversed in the air, and one of its branches

planted in the ground.  Some have made the _love of God_ the

foundation of morality.  This, too, is but a branch of our moral

duties, which are generally divided into duties to God and duties to

man.  If we did a good act merely from the love of God and a belief

that it is pleasing to Him, whence arises the morality of the

Atheist?  It is idle to say, as some do, that no such being exists.

We have the same evidence of the fact as of most of those we act on,

to-wit: their own affirmations, and their reasonings in support of

them.  I have observed, indeed, generally, that while in protestant

countries the defections from the Platonic Christianity of the

priests is to Deism, in catholic countries they are to Atheism.

Diderot, D'Alembert, D'Holbach, Condorcet, are known to have been

among the most virtuous of men.  Their virtue, then, must have had

some other foundation than the love of God.




        The {To chylon} of others is founded in a different faculty,

that of taste, which is not even a branch of morality.  We have

indeed an innate sense of what we call beautiful, but that is

exercised chiefly on subjects addressed to the fancy, whether through

the eye in visible forms, as landscape, animal figure, dress,

drapery, architecture, the composition of colors, &c., or to the

imagination directly, as imagery, style, or measure in prose or

poetry, or whatever else constitutes the domain of criticism or

taste, a faculty entirely distinct from the moral one.

Self-interest, or rather self-love, or _egoism_, has been more

plausibly substituted as the basis of morality.  But I consider our

relations with others as constituting the boundaries of morality.

With ourselves we stand on the ground of identity, not of relation,

which last, requiring two subjects, excludes self-love confined to a

single one.  To ourselves, in strict language, we can owe no duties,

obligation requiring also two parties.  Self-love, therefore, is no

part of morality.  Indeed it is exactly its counterpart.  It is the

sole antagonist of virtue, leading us constantly by our propensities

to self-gratification in violation of our moral duties to others.

Accordingly, it is against this enemy that are erected the batteries

of moralists and religionists, as the only obstacle to the practice

of morality.  Take from man his selfish propensities, and he can have

nothing to seduce him from the practice of virtue.  Or subdue those

propensities by education, instruction or restraint, and virtue

remains without a competitor.  Egoism, in a broader sense, has been

thus presented as the source of moral action.  It has been said that

we feed the hungry, clothe the naked, bind up the wounds of the man

beaten by thieves, pour oil and wine into them, set him on our own

beast and bring him to the inn, because we receive ourselves pleasure

from these acts.  So Helvetius, one of the best men on earth, and the

most ingenious advocate of this principle, after defining "interest"

to mean not merely that which is pecuniary, but whatever may procure

us pleasure or withdraw us from pain, [_de l'esprit_ 2, 1,] says,

[ib. 2, 2,] "the humane man is he to whom the sight of misfortune is

insupportable, and who to rescue himself from this spectacle, is

forced to succor the unfortunate object." This indeed is true.  But

it is one step short of the ultimate question.  These good acts give

us pleasure, but how happens it that they give us pleasure?  Because

nature hath implanted in our breasts a love of others, a sense of

duty to them, a moral instinct, in short, which prompts us

irresistibly to feel and to succor their distresses, and protests

against the language of Helvetius, [ib. 2, 5,] "what other motive

than self-interest could determine a man to generous actions?  It is

as impossible for him to love what is good for the sake of good, as

to love evil for the sake of evil." The Creator would indeed have

been a bungling artist, had he intended man for a social animal,

without planting in him social dispositions.  It is true they are not

planted in every man, because there is no rule without exceptions;

but it is false reasoning which converts exceptions into the general

rule.  Some men are born without the organs of sight, or of hearing,

or without hands.  Yet it would be wrong to say that man is born

without these faculties, and sight, hearing, and hands may with truth

enter into the general definition of man.  The want or imperfection

of the moral sense in some men, like the want or imperfection of the

senses of sight and hearing in others, is no proof that it is a

general characteristic of the species.  When it is wanting, we

endeavor to supply the defect by education, by appeals to reason and

calculation, by presenting to the being so unhappily conformed, other

motives to do good and to eschew evil, such as the love, or the

hatred, or rejection of those among whom he lives, and whose society

is necessary to his happiness and even existence; demonstrations by

sound calculation that honesty promotes interest in the long run; the

rewards and penalties established by the laws; and ultimately the

prospects of a future state of retribution for the evil as well as

the good done while here.  These are the correctives which are

supplied by education, and which exercise the functions of the

moralist, the preacher, and legislator; and they lead into a course

of correct action all those whose disparity is not too profound to be

eradicated.  Some have argued against the existence of a moral sense,

by saying that if nature had given us such a sense, impelling us to

virtuous actions, and warning us against those which are vicious,

then nature would also have designated, by some particular ear-marks,

the two sets of actions which are, in themselves, the one virtuous

and the other vicious.  Whereas, we find, in fact, that the same

actions are deemed virtuous in one country and vicious in another.

The answer is that nature has constituted _utility_ to man the

standard and best of virtue.  Men living in different countries,

under different circumstances, different habits and regimens, may

have different utilities; the same act, therefore, may be useful, and

consequently virtuous in one country which is injurious and vicious

in another differently circumstanced.  I sincerely, then, believe

with you in the general existence of a moral instinct.  I think it

the brightest gem with which the human character is studded, and the

want of it as more degrading than the most hideous of the bodily

deformities.  I am happy in reviewing the roll of associates in this

principle which you present in your second letter, some of which I

had not before met with.  To these might be added Lord Kaims, one of

the ablest of our advocates, who goes so far as to say, in his

Principles of Natural Religion, that a man owes no duty to which he

is not urged by some impulsive feeling.  This is correct, if referred

to the standard of general feeling in the given case, and not to the

feeling of a single individual.  Perhaps I may misquote him, it being

fifty years since I read his book.




        The leisure and solitude of my situation here has led me to the

indiscretion of taxing you with a long letter on a subject whereon

nothing new can be offered you.  I will indulge myself no farther

than to repeat the assurances of my continued esteem and respect.







        BONAPARTE AND PLATO




        _To John Adams_

        _Monticello, July 5, 1814_




        DEAR SIR -- Since mine of Jan. 24. yours of Mar. 14. was

recieved.  It was not acknoleged in the short one of May 18. by Mr.

Rives, the only object of that having been to enable one of our most

promising young men to have the advantage of making his bow to you.

I learned with great regret the serious illness mentioned in your

letter: and I hope Mr. Rives will be able to tell me you are entirely

restored.  But our machines have now been running for 70. or 80.

years, and we must expect that, worn as they are, here a pivot, there

a wheel, now a pinion, next a spring, will be giving way: and however

we may tinker them up for awhile, all will at length surcease motion.

Our watches, with works of brass and steel, wear out within that

period.  Shall you and I last to see the course the seven-fold

wonders of the times will take?  The Attila of the age dethroned, the

ruthless destroyer of 10. millions of the human race, whose thirst

for blood appeared unquenchable, the great oppressor of the rights

and liberties of the world, shut up within the circuit of a little

island of the Mediterranean, and dwindled to the condition of an

humble and degraded pensioner on the bounty of those he had most

injured.  How miserably, how meanly, has he closed his inflated

career!  What a sample of the Bathos will his history present!  He

should have perished on the swords of his enemies, under the walls of

Paris.




 

        `Leon piagato a morte Cosi fra l'ire estrema

            Sente mancar la vita,           rugge, minaccia, e freme,

            Guarda la sua ferita,           Che fa tremar morendo

            Ne s'avilisce ancor.            Tal volta il cacciator.'

                                                  Metast Adriano.




        But Bonaparte was a lion in the field only.  In civil life a

cold-blooded, calculating unprincipled Usurper, without a virtue, no

statesman, knowing nothing of commerce, political economy, or civil

government, and supplying ignorance by bold presumption.  I had

supposed him a great man until his entrance into the Assembly des

cinq cens, 18. Brumaire (an. 8.) From that date however I set him

down as a great scoundrel only.  To the wonders of his rise and fall,

we may add that of a Czar of Muscovy dictating, _in Paris_, laws and

limits to all the successors of the Caesars, and holding even the

balance in which the fortunes of this new world are suspended.  I own

that, while I rejoice, for the good of mankind, to the deliverance of

Europe from the havoc which would have never ceased while Bonaparte

should have lived in power, I see with anxiety the tyrant of the

ocean remaining in vigor, and even participating in the merit of

crushing his brother tyrant.  While the world is thus turned up side

down, on which side of it are we?  All the strong reasons indeed

place us on the side of peace; the interests of the continent, their

friendly dispositions, and even the interests of England.  Her

passions alone are opposed to it.  Peace would seem now to be an easy

work, the causes of the war being removed.  Her orders of council

will no doubt be taken care of by the allied powers, and, war

ceasing, her impressment of our seamen ceases of course.  But I fear

there is foundation for the design intimated in the public papers, of

demanding a cession of our right in the fisheries.  What will

Massachusets say to this?  I mean her majority, which must be

considered as speaking, thro' the organs it has appointed itself, as

the Index of it's will.  She chose to sacrifice the liberty of our

seafaring citizens, in which we were all interested, and with them

her obligations to the Co-states; rather than war with England.  Will

she now sacrifice the fisheries to the same partialities?  This

question is interesting to her alone: for to the middle, the Southern

and Western States they are of no direct concern; of no more than the

culture of tobacco, rice and cotton to Massachusets.  I am really at

a loss to conjecture what our refractory sister will say on this

occasion.  I know what, as a citizen of the Union, I would say to

her.  `Take this question ad referendum.  It concerns you alone.  If

you would rather give up the fisheries than war with England, we give

them up.  If you had rather fight for them, we will defend your

interests to the last drop of our blood, chusing rather to set a good

example than follow a bad one.' And I hope she will determine to

fight for them.  With this however you and I shall have nothing to

do; ours being truly the case wherein `non tali auxilio, nec

defensoribus istis Tempus eget.' Quitting this subject therefore I

will turn over another leaf.




        I am just returned from one of my long absences, having been at

my other home for five weeks past.  Having more leisure there than

here for reading, I amused myself with reading seriously Plato's

republic.  I am wrong however in calling it amusement, for it was the

heaviest task-work I ever went through.  I had occasionally before

taken up some of his other works, but scarcely ever had patience to

go through a whole dialogue.  While wading thro' the whimsies, the

puerilities, and unintelligible jargon of this work, I laid it down

often to ask myself how it could have been that the world should have

so long consented to give reputation to such nonsense as this?  How

the soi-disant Christian world indeed should have done it, is a piece

of historical curiosity.  But how could the Roman good sense do it?

And particularly how could Cicero bestow such eulogies on Plato?

Altho' Cicero did not wield the dense logic of Demosthenes, yet he

was able, learned, laborious, practised in the business of the world,

and honest.  He could not be the dupe of mere style, of which he was

himself the first master in the world.  With the Moderns, I think, it

is rather a matter of fashion and authority.  Education is chiefly in

the hands of persons who, from their profession, have an interest in

the reputation and the dreams of Plato.  They give the tone while at

school, and few, in their after-years, have occasion to revise their

college opinions.  But fashion and authority apart, and bringing

Plato to the test of reason, take from him his sophisms, futilities,

and incomprehensibilities, and what remains?  In truth, he is one of

the race of genuine Sophists, who has escaped the oblivion of his

brethren, first by the elegance of his diction, but chiefly by the

adoption and incorporation of his whimsies into the body of

artificial Christianity.  His foggy mind, is forever presenting the

semblances of objects which, half seen thro' a mist, can be defined

neither in form or dimension.  Yet this which should have consigned

him to early oblivion really procured him immortality of fame and

reverence.  The Christian priesthood, finding the doctrines of Christ

levelled to every understanding, and too plain to need explanation,

saw, in the mysticisms of Plato, materials with which they might

build up an artificial system which might, from it's indistinctness,

admit everlasting controversy, give employment for their order, and

introduce it to profit, power and pre-eminence.  The doctrines which

flowed from the lips of Jesus himself are within the comprehension of

a child; but thousands of volumes have not yet explained the

Platonisms engrafted on them: and for this obvious reason that

nonsense can never be explained.  Their purposes however are

answered.  Plato is canonized; and it is now deemed as impious to

question his merits as those of an Apostle of Jesus.  He is

peculiarly appealed to as an advocate of the immortality of the soul;

and yet I will venture to say that were there no better arguments

than his in proof of it, not a man in the world would believe it.  It

is fortunate for us that Platonic republicanism has not obtained the

same favor as Platonic Christianity; or we should now have been all

living, men, women and children, pell mell together, like beasts of

the field or forest.  Yet `Plato is a great Philosopher,' said La

Fontaine.  But says Fontenelle `do you find his ideas very clear'?

`Oh no! he is of an obscurity impenetrable.' `Do you not find him

full of contradictions?'  `Certainly,' replied La Fontaine, `he is

but a Sophist.' Yet immediately after, he exclaims again, `Oh Plato

was a great Philosopher.' Socrates had reason indeed to complain of

the misrepresentations of Plato; for in truth his dialogues are

libels on Socrates.




        But why am I dosing you with these Ante-diluvian topics?

Because I am glad to have some one to whom they are familiar, and who

will not recieve them as if dropped from the moon.  Our

post-revolutionary youth are born under happier stars than you and I

were.  They acquire all learning in their mothers' womb, and bring it

into the world ready-made.  The information of books is no longer

necessary; and all knolege which is not innate, is in contempt, or

neglect at least.  Every folly must run it's round; and so, I

suppose, must that of self-learning, and self sufficiency; of

rejecting the knolege acquired in past ages, and starting on the new

ground of intuition.  When sobered by experience I hope our

successors will turn their attention to the advantages of education.

I mean of education on the broad scale, and not that of the petty

_academies_, as they call themselves, which are starting up in every

neighborhood, and where one or two men, possessing Latin, and

sometimes Greek, a knolege of the globes, and the first six books of

Euclid, imagine and communicate this as the sum of science.  They

commit their pupils to the theatre of the world with just taste

enough of learning to be alienated from industrious pursuits, and not

enough to do service in the ranks of science.  We have some

exceptions indeed.  I presented one to you lately, and we have some

others.  But the terms I use are general truths.  I hope the

necessity will at length be seen of establishing institutions, here

as in Europe, where every branch of science, useful at this day, may

be taught in it's highest degrees.  Have you ever turned your

thoughts to the plan of such an institution?  I mean to a

specification of the particular sciences of real use in human

affairs, and how they might be so grouped as to require so many

professors only as might bring them within the views of a just but

enlightened economy?  I should be happy in a communication of your

ideas on this problem, either loose or digested.  But to avoid my

being run away with by another subject, and adding to the length and

ennui of the present letter, I will here present to Mrs. Adams and

yourself the assurance of my constant and sincere friendship and

respect.







        EMANCIPATION AND THE YOUNGER GENERATION




        _To Edward Coles_

        _Monticello, August 25, 1814_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favour of July 31, was duly received, and was

read with peculiar pleasure.  The sentiments breathed through the

whole do honor to both the head and heart of the writer.  Mine on the

subject of slavery of negroes have long since been in possession of

the public, and time has only served to give them stronger root.  The

love of justice and the love of country plead equally the cause of

these people, and it is a moral reproach to us that they should have

pleaded it so long in vain, and should have produced not a single

effort, nay I fear not much serious willingness to relieve them &

ourselves from our present condition of moral & political

reprobation.  From those of the former generation who were in the

fulness of age when I came into public life, which was while our

controversy with England was on paper only, I soon saw that nothing

was to be hoped.  Nursed and educated in the daily habit of seeing

the degraded condition, both bodily and mental, of those unfortunate

beings, not reflecting that that degradation was very much the work

of themselves & their fathers, few minds have yet doubted but that

they were as legitimate subjects of property as their horses and

cattle.  The quiet and monotonous course of colonial life has been

disturbed by no alarm, and little reflection on the value of liberty.

And when alarm was taken at an enterprize on their own, it was not

easy to carry them to the whole length of the principles which they

invoked for themselves.  In the first or second session of the

Legislature after I became a member, I drew to this subject the

attention of Col. Bland, one of the oldest, ablest, & most respected

members, and he undertook to move for certain moderate extensions of

the protection of the laws to these people.  I seconded his motion,

and, as a younger member, was more spared in the debate; but he was

denounced as an enemy of his country, & was treated with the grossest

indecorum.  From an early stage of our revolution other & more

distant duties were assigned to me, so that from that time till my

return from Europe in 1789, and I may say till I returned to reside

at home in 1809, I had little opportunity of knowing the progress of

public sentiment here on this subject.  I had always hoped that the

younger generation receiving their early impressions after the flame

of liberty had been kindled in every breast, & had become as it were

the vital spirit of every American, that the generous temperament of

youth, analogous to the motion of their blood, and above the

suggestions of avarice, would have sympathized with oppression

wherever found, and proved their love of liberty beyond their own

share of it.  But my intercourse with them, since my return has not

been sufficient to ascertain that they had made towards this point

the progress I had hoped.  Your solitary but welcome voice is the

first which has brought this sound to my ear; and I have considered

the general silence which prevails on this subject as indicating an

apathy unfavorable to every hope.  Yet the hour of emancipation is

advancing, in the march of time.  It will come; and whether brought

on by the generous energy of our own minds; or by the bloody process

of St Domingo, excited and conducted by the power of our present

enemy, if once stationed permanently within our Country, and offering

asylum & arms to the oppressed, is a leaf of our history not yet

turned over.  As to the method by which this difficult work is to be

effected, if permitted to be done by ourselves, I have seen no

proposition so expedient on the whole, as that as emancipation of

those born after a given day, and of their education and expatriation

after a given age.  This would give time for a gradual extinction of

that species of labour & substitution of another, and lessen the

severity of the shock which an operation so fundamental cannot fail

to produce.  For men probably of any color, but of this color we

know, brought from their infancy without necessity for thought or

forecast, are by their habits rendered as incapable as children of

taking care of themselves, and are extinguished promptly wherever

industry is necessary for raising young.  In the mean time they are

pests in society by their idleness, and the depredations to which

this leads them.  Their amalgamation with the other color produces a

degradation to which no lover of his country, no lover of excellence

in the human character can innocently consent.  I am sensible of the

partialities with which you have looked towards me as the person who

should undertake this salutary but arduous work.  But this, my dear

sir, is like bidding old Priam to buckle the armour of Hector

"trementibus aequo humeris et inutile ferruncingi." No, I have

overlived the generation with which mutual labors & perils begat

mutual confidence and influence.  This enterprise is for the young;

for those who can follow it up, and bear it through to its

consummation.  It shall have all my prayers, & these are the only

weapons of an old man.  But in the mean time are you right in

abandoning this property, and your country with it?  I think not.  My

opinion has ever been that, until more can be done for them, we

should endeavor, with those whom fortune has thrown on our hands, to

feed and clothe them well, protect them from all ill usage, require

such reasonable labor only as is performed voluntarily by freemen, &

be led by no repugnancies to abdicate them, and our duties to them.

The laws do not permit us to turn them loose, if that were for their

good: and to commute them for other property is to commit them to

those whose usage of them we cannot control.  I hope then, my dear

sir, you will reconcile yourself to your country and its unfortunate

condition; that you will not lessen its stock of sound disposition by

withdrawing your portion from the mass.  That, on the contrary you

will come forward in the public councils, become the missionary of

this doctrine truly christian; insinuate & inculcate it softly but

steadily, through the medium of writing and conversation; associate

others in your labors, and when the phalanx is formed, bring on and

press the proposition perseveringly until its accomplishment.  It is

an encouraging observation that no good measure was ever proposed,

which, if duly pursued, failed to prevail in the end.  We have proof

of this in the history of the endeavors in the English parliament to

suppress that very trade which brought this evil on us.  And you will

be supported by the religious precept, "be not weary in well-doing."

That your success may be as speedy & complete, as it will be of

honorable & immortal consolation to yourself, I shall as fervently

and sincerely pray as I assure you of my great friendship and

respect.







        A SYSTEM OF EDUCATION




        _To Peter Carr_

        _Monticello, September 7, 1814_




        DEAR SIR, -- On the subject of the academy or college proposed

to be established in our neighborhood, I promised the trustees that I

would prepare for them a plan, adapted, in the first instance, to our

slender funds, but susceptible of being enlarged, either by their own

growth or by accession from other quarters.




        I have long entertained the hope that this, our native State,

would take up the subject of education, and make an establishment,

either with or without incorporation into that of William and Mary,

where every branch of science, deemed useful at this day, should be

taught in its highest degree.  With this view, I have lost no

occasion of making myself acquainted with the organization of the

best seminaries in other countries, and with the opinions of the most

enlightened individuals, on the subject of the sciences worthy of a

place in such an institution.  In order to prepare what I have

promised our trustees, I have lately revised these several plans with

attention; and I am struck with the diversity of arrangement

observable in them -- no two alike: Yet, I have no doubt that these

several arrangements have been the subject of mature reflection, by

wise and learned men, who, contemplating local circumstances, have

adapted them to the conditions of the section of society for which

they have been framed.  I am strengthened in this conclusion by an

examination of each separately, and a conviction that no one of them,

if adopted without change, would be suited to the circumstances and

pursuit of our country.  The example they set, then, is authority for

us to select from their different institutions the materials which

are good for us, and, with them, to erect a structure, whose

arrangement shall correspond with our own social condition, and shall

admit of enlargement in proportion to the encouragement it may merit

and receive.  As I may not be able to attend the meetings of the

trustees, I will make you the depository of my ideas on the subject,

which may be corrected, as you proceed, by the better view of others,

and adapted, from time to time, to the prospects which open upon us,

and which cannot be specifically seen and provided for.




        In the first place, we must ascertain with precision the object

of our institution, by taking a survey of the general field of

science, and marking out the portion we mean to occupy at first, and

the ultimate extension of our views beyond that, should we be enabled

to render it, in the end, as comprehensive as we would wish.




        1. Elementary schools.




        It is highly interesting to our country, and it is the duty of

its functionaries, to provide that every citizen in it should receive

an education proportioned to the condition and pursuits of his life.

The mass of our citizens may be divided into two classes -- the

laboring and the learned.  The laboring will need the first grade of

education to qualify them for their pursuits and duties; the learned

will need it as a foundation for further acquirements.  A plan was

formerly proposed to the legislature of this State for laying off

every county into hundreds or wards of five or six miles square,

within each of which should be a school for the education of the

children of the ward, wherein they should receive three years'

instruction gratis, in reading, writing, arithmetic as far as

fractions, the roots and ratios, and geography.  The Legislature at

one time tried an ineffectual expedient for introducing this plan,

which having failed, it is hoped they will some day resume it in a

more promising form.




        2. General schools.




        At the discharging of the pupils from the elementary schools,

the two classes separate -- those destined for labor will engage in

the business of agriculture, or enter into apprenticeships to such

handicraft art as may be their choice; their companions, destined to

the pursuits of science, will proceed to the college, which will

consist, 1st of general schools; and, 2d, of professional schools.

The general schools will constitute the second grade of education.




        The learned class may still be subdivided into two sections: 1,

Those who are destined for learned professions, as means of

livelihood; and, 2, The wealthy, who, possessing independent

fortunes, may aspire to share in conducting the affairs of the

nation, or to live with usefulness and respect in the private ranks

of life.  Both of these sections will require instruction in all the

higher branches of science; the wealthy to qualify them for either

public or private life; the professional section will need those

branches, especially, which are the basis of their future profession,

and a general knowledge of the others, as auxiliary to that, and

necessary to their standing and association with the scientific

class.  All the branches, then, of useful science, ought to be taught

in the general schools, to a competent degree, in the first instance.

These sciences may be arranged into three departments, not rigorously

scientific, indeed, but sufficiently so for our purposes.  These are,

I. Language; II. Mathematics; III.  Philosophy.




        I. Language. In the first department, I would arrange a

distinct science.  1, Languages and History, ancient and modern; 2,

Grammar; 3, Belles Lettres; 4, Rhetoric and Oratory; 5, A school for

the deaf, dumb and blind.  History is here associated with languages,

not as a kindred subject, but on the principle of economy, because

both may be attained by the same course of reading, if books are

selected with that view.




        II. Mathematics. In the department of Mathematics, I should

give place distinctly: 1, Mathematics pure; 2, Physico-Mathematics;

3, Physic; 4, Chemistry; 5, Natural History, to wit: Mineralogy; 6,

Botany; and 7, Zoology; 8, Anatomy; 9, the Theory of Medicine.




        III. Philosophy. In the Philosophical department, I should

distinguish: 1, Ideology; 2, Ethics; 3, the Law of Nature and

Nations; 4, Government; 5, Political Economy.




        But, some of these terms being used by different writers, in

different degrees of extension, I shall define exactly what I mean to

comprehend in each of them.




        I. 3. Within the term of Belles Lettres I include poetry and

composition generally, and criticism.




        II. 1. I consider pure mathematics as the science of, 1,

Numbers, and 2, Measure in the abstract; that of numbers

comprehending Arithmetic, Algebra and Fluxions; that of Measure

(under the general appellation of Geometry), comprehending

Trigonometry, plane and spherical, conic sections, and transcendental

curves.




        II. 2. Physico-Mathematics treat of physical subjects by the

aid of mathematical calculation.  These are Mechanics, Statics,

Hydrostatics, Hydrodynamics, Navigation, Astronomy, Geography,

Optics, Pneumatics, Acoustics.




        II. 3. Physics, or Natural Philosophy (not entering the limits

of Chemistry) treat of natural substances, their properties, mutual

relations and action.  They particularly examine the subjects of

motion, action, magnetism, electricity, galvanism, light,

meteorology, with an etc. not easily enumerated.  These definitions

and specifications render immaterial the question whether I use the

generic terms in the exact degree of comprehension in which others

use them; to be understood is all that is necessary to the present

object.




        3. Professional Schools.




        At the close of this course the students separate; the wealthy

retiring, with a sufficient stock of knowledge, to improve themselves

to any degree to which their views may lead them, and the

professional section to the professional schools, constituting the

third grade of education, and teaching the particular sciences which

the individuals of this section mean to pursue, with more minuteness

and detail than was within the scope of the general schools for the

second grade of instruction.  In these professional schools each

science is to be taught in the highest degree it has yet attained.

They are to be the




        1st Department, the fine arts, to wit: Civil Architecture,

Gardening, Painting, Sculpture, and the Theory of Music; the




        2nd Department, Architecture, Military and Naval; Projectiles,

Rural Economy (comprehending Agriculture, Horticulture and

Veterinary), Technical Philosophy, the Practice of Medicine, Materia

Medica, Pharmacy and Surgery.  In the




        3rd Department, Theology and Ecclesiastical History; Law,

Municipal and Foreign.




        To these professional schools will come those who separated at

the close of their first elementary course, to wit:




        The lawyer to the law school.




        The ecclesiastic to that of theology and ecclesiastical

history.




        The physican to those of medicine, materia medica, pharmacy and

surgery.




        The military man to that of military and naval architecture and

projectiles.




        The agricultor to that of rural economy.




        The gentleman, the architect, the pleasure gardener, painter

and musician to the school of fine arts.




 

        And to that of technical philosophy will come the mariner,

carpenter, shipwright, pumpmaker, clockmaker, machinist, optician,

metallurgist, founder, cutler, druggist, brewer, vintner, distiller,

dyer, painter, bleacher, soapmaker, tanner, powdermaker, saltmaker,

glassmaker, to learn as much as shall be necessary to pursue their

art understandingly, of the sciences of geometry, mechanics, statics,

hydrostatics, hydraulics, hydrodynamics, navigation, astronomy,

geography, optics, pneumatics, physics, chemistry, natural history,

botany, mineralogy and pharmacy.




        The school of technical philosophy will differ essentially in

its functions from the other professional schools.  The others are

instituted to ramify and dilate the particular sciences taught in the

schools of the second grade on a general scale only.  The technical

school is to abridge those which were taught there too much _in

extenso_ for the limited wants of the artificer or practical man.

These artificers must be grouped together, according to the

particular branch of science in which they need elementary and

practical instruction; and a special lecture or lectures should be

prepared for each group.  And these lectures should be given in the

evening, so as not to interrupt the labors of the day.  The school,

particularly, should be maintained wholly at the public expense, on

the same principles with that of the ward schools.  Through the whole

of the collegiate course, at the hours of recreation on certain days,

all the students should be taught the manual exercise; military

evolutions and man;oeuvers should be under a standing organization as

a military corps, and with proper officers to train and command them,




        A tabular statement of this distribution of the sciences will

place the system of instruction more particularly in view:




        1st or Elementary Grade in the Ward Schools.

                Reading, Writing, Arithmetic, Geography.

        2d, or General Grade.

                1. Language and History, ancient and modern.

                2. Mathematics, viz: Mathematics pure,

Physico-Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry, Anatomy, Theory of Medicine,

Zoology, Botany and Mineralogy. |P1352|p1

                3. Philosophy, viz: Ideology, and Ethics, Law of Nature

and Nations, Government, Political Economy.

        3d, or Professional Grades.

                Theology and Ecclesiastical History; Law, Municipal and

Foreign; Practice of Medicine; Materia Medica and Pharmacy; Surgery;

Architecture, Military and Naval, and Projectiles; Technical

Philosophy; Rural Economy; Fine Arts.




        On this survey of the field of science, I recur to the

question, what portion of it we mark out for the occupation of our

institution?  With the first grade of education we shall have nothing

to do.  The sciences of the second grade are our first object; and,

to adapt them to our slender beginnings, we must separate them into

groups, comprehending many sciences each, and greatly more, in the

first instance, than ought to be imposed on, or can be competently

conducted by a single professor permanently.  They must be subdivided

from time to time, as our means increase, until each professor shall

have no more under his care than he can attend to with advantage to

his pupils and ease to himself.  For the present, we may group the

sciences into professorships, as follows, subject, however, to be

changed, according to the qualifications of the persons we may be

able to engage.




        I. Professorship.

         Languages and History, ancient and modern.

         Belles-Lettres, Rhetoric and Oratory.

                 II. Professorship.

         Mathematics pure, Physico-Mathematics.

         Physics, Anatomy, Medicine, Theory.

                 III. Professorship.

         Chemistry, Zoology, Botany, Mineralogy.

                 IV. Professorship.

         Philosophy.




        The organization of the branch of the institution which

respects its government, police and economy, depending on principles

which have no affinity with those of its institution, may be the

subject of separate and subsequent consideration.




        With this tribute of duty to the board of trustees, accept

assurances of my great esteem and consideration.







        A LIBRARY FOR CONGRESS




        _To Samuel H. Smith_

        _Monticello, September 21, 1814_




        DEAR SIR, -- I learn from the newspapers that the Vandalism of

our enemy has triumphed at Washington over science as well as the

arts, by the destruction of the public library with the noble edifice

in which it was deposited.  Of this transaction, as of that of

Copenhagen, the world will entertain but one sentiment.  They will

see a nation suddenly withdrawn from a great war, full armed and full

handed, taking advantage of another whom they had recently forced

into it, unarmed, and unprepared, to indulge themselves in acts of

barbarism which do not belong to a civilized age.  When Van Ghent

destroyed their shipping at Chatham, and De Ruyter rode triumphantly

up the Thames, he might in like manner, by the acknowledgment of

their own historians, have forced all their ships up to London

bridge, and there have burnt them, the tower, and city, had these

examples been then set.  London, when thus menaced, was near a

thousand years old, Washington is but in its teens.




        I presume it will be among the early objects of Congress to

re-commence their collection.  This will be difficult while the war

continues, and intercourse with Europe is attended with so much risk.

You know my collection, its condition and extent.  I have been fifty

years making it, and have spared no pains, opportunity or expense, to

make it what it is.  While residing in Paris, I devoted every

afternoon I was disengaged, for a summer or two, in examining all the

principal book-stores, turning over every book with my own hand, and

putting by everything which related to America, and indeed whatever

was rare and valuable in every science.  Besides this, I had standing

orders during the whole time I was in Europe, on its principal

book-marts, particularly Amsterdam, Frankfort, Madrid and London, for

such works relating to America as could not be found in Paris.  So

that in that department particularly, such a collection was made as

probably can never again be effected, because it is hardly probable

that the same opportunities, the same time, industry, perseverance

and expense, with some knowledge of the bibliography of the subject,

would again happen to be in concurrence.  During the same period, and

after my return to America, I was led to procure, also, whatever

related to the duties of those in the high concerns of the nation.

So that the collection, which I suppose is of between nine and ten

thousand volumes, while it includes what is chiefly valuable in

science and literature generally, extends more particularly to

whatever belongs to the American statesman.  In the diplomatic and

parliamentary branches, it is particularly full.  It is long since I

have been sensible it ought not to continue private property, and had

provided that at my death, Congress should have the refusal of it at

their own price.  But the loss they have now incurred, makes the

present the proper moment for their accommodation, without regard to

the small remnant of time and the barren use of my enjoying it.  I

ask of your friendship, therefore, to make for me the tender of it to

the library committee of Congress, not knowing myself of whom the

committee consists.  I enclose you the catalogue, which will enable

them to judge of its contents.  Nearly the whole are well bound,

abundance of them elegantly, and of the choicest editions existing.

They may be valued by persons named by themselves, and the payment

made convenient to the public.  It may be, for instance, in such

annual instalments as the law of Congress has left at their disposal,

or in stock of any of their late loans, or of any loan they may

institute at this session, so as to spare the present calls of our

country, and await its days of peace and prosperity.  They may enter,

nevertheless, into immediate use of it, as eighteen or twenty wagons

would place it in Washington in a single trip of a fortnight.  I

should be willing indeed, to retain a few of the books, to amuse the

time I have yet to pass, which might be valued with the rest, but not

included in the sum of valuation until they should be restored at my

death, which I would carefully provide for, so that the whole library

as it stands in the catalogue at this moment should be theirs without

any garbling.  Those I should like to retain would be chiefly

classical and mathematical.  Some few in other branches, and

particularly one of the five encyclopedias in the catalogue.  But

this, if not acceptable, would not be urged.  I must add, that I have

not revised the library since I came home to live, so that it is

probable some of the books may be missing, except in the chapters of

Law and Divinity, which have been revised and stand exactly as in the

catalogue.  The return of the catalogue will of course be needed,

whether the tender be accepted or not.  I do not know that it

contains any branch of science which Congress would wish to exclude

from their collection; there is, in fact, no subject to which a

member of Congress may not have occasion to refer.  But such a wish

would not correspond with my views of preventing its dismemberment.

My desire is either to place it in their hands entire, or to preserve

it so here.  I am engaged in making an alphabetical index of the

author's names, to be annexed to the catalogue, which I will forward

to you as soon as completed.  Any agreement you shall be so good as

to take the trouble of entering into with the committee, I hereby

confirm.  Accept the assurance of my great esteem and respect.







        A JUST BUT SAD WAR




        _To William Short_

        _Monticello, November 28, 1814_




        DEAR SIR, -- Yours of October 28th came to hand on the 15th

instant only.  The settlement of your boundary with Colonel Monroe,

is protracted by circumstances which seem foreign to it.  One would

hardly have expected that the hostile expedition to Washington could

have had any connection with an operation one hundred miles distant.

Yet preventing his attendance, nothing could be done.  I am satisfied

there is no unwillingness on his part, but on the contrary a desire

to have it settled; and therefore, if he should think it

indispensable to be present at the investigation, as is possible, the

very first time he comes here I will press him to give a day to the

decision, without regarding Mr. Carter's absence.  Such an occasion

must certainly offer soon after the fourth of March, when Congress

rises of necessity, and be assured I will not lose one possible

moment in effecting it.




        Although withdrawn from all anxious attention to political

concerns, yet I will state my impressions as to the present war,

because your letter leads to the subject.  The essential grounds of

the war were, 1st, the orders of council; and 2d, the impressment of

our citizens; (for I put out of sight from the love of peace the

multiplied insults on our government and aggressions on our commerce,

with which our pouch, like the Indian's, had long been filled to the

mouth.) What immediately produced the declaration was, 1st, the

proclamation of the Prince Regent that he would never repeal the

orders of council as to us, until Bonaparte should have revoked his

decrees as to all other nations as well as ours; and 2d, the

declaration of his minister to ours that no arrangement whatever

could be devised admissible in lieu of impressment.  It was certainly

a misfortune that _they_ did not know themselves at the date of this

silly and insolent proclamation, that within one month they would

repeal the orders, and that _we_, at the date of our declaration,

could not know of the repeal which was then going on one thousand

leagues distant.  Their determinations, as declared by themselves,

could alone guide us, and they shut the door on all further

negotiation, throwing down to us the gauntlet of war or submission as

the only alternatives.  We cannot blame the government for choosing

that of war, because certainly the great majority of the nation

thought it ought to be chosen, not that they were to gain by it in

dollars and cents; all men know that war is a losing game to both

parties.  But they know also that if they do not resist encroachment

at some point, all will be taken from them, and that more would then

be lost even in dollars and cents by submission than resistance.  It

is the case of giving a part to save the whole, a limb to save life.

It is the melancholy law of human societies to be compelled sometimes

to choose a great evil in order to ward off a greater; to deter their

neighbors from rapine by making it cost them more than honest gains.

The enemy are accordingly now disgorging what they had so ravenously

swallowed.  The orders of council had taken from us near one thousand

vessels.  Our list of captures from them is now one thousand three

hundred, and, just become sensible that it is small and not large

ships which gall them most, we shall probably add one thousand prizes

a year to their past losses.  Again, supposing that, according to the

confession of their own minister in parliament, the Americans they

had impressed were something short of two thousand, the war against

us alone cannot cost them less than twenty millions of dollars a

year, so that each American impressed has already cost them ten

thousand dollars, and every year will add five thousand dollars more

to his price.  We, I suppose, expend more; but had we adopted the

other alternative of submission, no mortal can tell what the cost

would have been.  I consider the war then as entirely justifiable on

our part, although I am still sensible it is a deplorable misfortune

to us.  It has arrested the course of the most remarkable tide of

prosperity any nation ever experienced, and has closed such prospects

of future improvement as were never before in the view of any people.

Farewell all hopes of extinguishing public debt! farewell all visions

of applying surpluses of revenue to the improvements of peace rather

than the ravages of war.  Our enemy has indeed the consolation of

Satan on removing our first parents from Paradise: from a peaceable

and agricultural nation, he makes us a military and manufacturing

one.  We shall indeed survive the conflict.  Breeders enough will

remain to carry on population.  We shall retain our country, and

rapid advances in the art of war will soon enable us to beat our

enemy, and probably drive him from the continent.  We have men

enough, and I am in hopes the present session of Congress will

provide the means of commanding their services.  But I wish I could

see them get into a better train of finance.  Their banking projects

are like dosing dropsy with more water.  If anything could revolt our

citizens against the war, it would be the extravagance with which

they are about to be taxed.  It is strange indeed that at this day,

and in a country where English proceedings are so familiar, the

principles and advantages of funding should be neglected, and

expedients resorted to.  Their new bank, if not abortive at its

birth, will not last through one campaign; and the taxes proposed

cannot be paid.  How can a people who cannot get fifty cents a bushel

for their wheat, while they pay twelve dollars a bushel for their

salt, pay five times the amount of taxes they ever paid before?  Yet

that will be the case in all the States south of the Potomac.  Our

resources are competent to the maintenance of the war if duly

economized and skillfuly employed in the way of anticipation.

However, we must suffer, I suppose, from our ignorance in funding, as

we did from that of fighting, until necessity teaches us both; and,

fortunately, our stamina are so vigorous as to rise superior to great

mismanagement.  This year I think we shall have learnt how to call

forth our force, and by the next I hope our funds, and even if the

state of Europe should not by that time give the enemy employment

enough nearer home, we shall leave him nothing to fight for here.

These are my views of the war.  They embrace a great deal of

sufferance, trying privations, and no benefit but that of teaching

our enemy that he is never to gain by wanton injuries on us.  To me

this state of things brings a sacrifice of all tranquillity and

comfort through the residue of life.  For although the debility of

age disables me from the services and sufferings of the field, yet,

by the total annihilation in value of the produce which was to give

me subsistence and independence, I shall be like Tantalus, up to the

shoulders in water, yet dying with thirst.  We can make indeed enough

to eat, drink and clothe ourselves; but nothing for our salt, iron,

groceries and taxes, which must be paid in money.  For what can we

raise for the market?  Wheat? we can only give it to our horses, as

we have been doing ever since harvest.  Tobacco? it is not worth the

pipe it is smoked in.  Some say Whiskey; but all mankind must become

drunkards to consume it.  But although we feel, we shall not flinch.

We must consider now, as in the revolutionary war, that although the

evils of resistance are great, those of submission would be greater.

We must meet, therefore, the former as the casualties of tempests and

earthquakes, and like them necessarily resulting from the

constitution of the world.  Your situation, my dear friend, is much

better.  For, although I do not know with certainty the nature of

your investments, yet I presume they are not in banks, insurance

companies, or any other of those gossamer castles.  If in

ground-rents, they are solid; if in stock of the United States, they

are equally so.  I once thought that in the event of a war we should

be obliged to suspend paying the interest of the public debt.  But a

dozen years more of experience and observation on our people and

government, have satisfied me it will never be done.  The sense of

the necessity of public credit is so universal and so deeply rooted,

that no other necessity will prevail against it; and I am glad to see

that while the former eight millions are steadfastly applied to the

sinking of the old debt, the Senate have lately insisted on a sinking

fund for the new.  This is the dawn of that improvement in the

management of our finances which I look to for salvation; and I trust

that the light will continue to advance, and point out their way to

our legislators.  They will soon see that instead of taxes for the

whole year's expenses, which the people cannot pay, a tax to the

amount of the interest and a reasonable portion of the principal will

command the whole sum, and throw a part of the burthens of war on

times of peace and prosperity.  A sacred payment of interest is the

only way to make the most of their resources, and a sense of that

renders your income from our funds more certain than mine from lands.

Some apprehend danger from the defection of Massachusetts.  It is a

disagreeable circumstance, but not a dangerous one.  If they become

neutral, we are sufficient for one enemy without them, and in fact we

get no aid from them now.  If their administration determines to join

the enemy, their force will be annihilated by equality of division

among themselves.  Their federalists will then call in the English

army, the republicans ours, and it will only be a transfer of the

scene of war from Canada to Massachusetts; and we can get ten men to

go to Massachusetts for one who will go to Canada.  Every one, too,

must know that we can at any moment make peace with England at the

expense of the navigation and fisheries of Massachusetts.  But it

will not come to this.  Their own people will put down these

factionists as soon as they see the real object of their opposition;

and of this Vermont, New Hampshire, and even Connecticut itself,

furnish proofs.




        You intimate a possibility of your return to France, now that

Bonaparte is put down.  I do not wonder at it, France, freed from

that monster, must again become the most agreeable country on earth.

It would be the second choice of all whose ties of family and fortune

gives a preference to some other one, and the first of all not under

those ties.  Yet I doubt if the tranquillity of France is entirely

settled.  If her Pretorian bands are not furnished with employment on

her external enemies, I fear they will recall the old, or set up some

new cause.




 

        God bless you and preserve you in bodily health.  Tranquillity

of mind depends much on ourselves, and greatly on due reflection "how

much pain have cost us the evils which have never happened."

Affectionately adieu.







        WAR, REVOLUTION, AND RESTORATION




        _To Lafayette_

        _Monticello, February 14, 1815_




        MY DEAR FRIEND, -- Your letter of August the 14th has been

received and read again, and again, with extraordinary pleasure.  It

is the first glimpse which has been furnished me of the interior

workings of the late unexpected but fortunate revolution of your

country.  The newspapers told us only that the great beast was

fallen; but what part in this the patriots acted, and what the

egotists, whether the former slept while the latter were awake to

their own interests only, the hireling scribblers of the English

press said little and knew less.  I see now the mortifying

alternative under which the patriot there is placed, of being either

silent, or disgraced by an association in opposition with the remains

of Bonapartism.  A full measure of liberty is not now perhaps to be

expected by your nation, nor am I confident they are prepared to

preserve it.  More than a generation will be requisite, under the

administration of reasonable laws favoring the progress of knowledge

in the general mass of the people, and their habituation to an

independent security of person and property, before they will be

capable of estimating the value of freedom, and the necessity of a

sacred adherence to the principles on which it rests for

preservation.  Instead of that liberty which takes root and growth in

the progress of reason, if recovered by mere force or accident, it

becomes, with an unprepared people, a tyranny still, of the many, the

few, or the one.  Possibly you may remember, at the date of the _jeu

de paume_, how earnestly I urged yourself and the patriots of my

acquaintance, to enter then into a compact with the king, securing

freedom of religion, freedom of the press, trial by jury, _habeas

corpus_, and a national legislature, all of which it was known he

would then yield, to go home, and let these work on the amelioration

of the condition of the people, until they should have rendered them

capable of more, when occasions would not fail to arise for

communicating to them more.  This was as much as I then thought them

able to bear, soberly and usefully for themselves.  You thought

otherwise, and that the dose might still be larger.  And I found you

were right; for subsequent events proved they were equal to the

constitution of 1791.  Unfortunately, some of the most honest and

enlightened of our patriotic friends, (but closet politicians merely,

unpractised in the knowledge of man,) thought more could still be

obtained and borne.  They did not weigh the hazards of a transition

from one form of government to another, the value of what they had

already rescued from those hazards, and might hold in security if

they pleased, nor the imprudence of giving up the certainty of such a

degree of liberty, under a limited monarch, for the uncertainty of a

little more under the form of a republic.  You differed from them.

You were for stopping there, and for securing the constitution which

the National Assembly had obtained.  Here, too, you were right; and

from this fatal error of the republicans, from their separation from

yourself and the constitutionalists, in their councils, flowed all

the subsequent sufferings and crimes of the French nation.  The

hazards of a second change fell upon them by the way.  The foreigner

gained time to anarchise by gold the government he could not

overthrow by arms, to crush in their own councils the genuine

republicans, by the fraternal embraces of exaggerated and hired

pretenders, and to turn the machine of Jacobinism from the change to

the destruction of order; and, in the end, the limited monarchy they

had secured was exchanged for the unprincipled and bloody tyranny of

Robespierre, and the equally unprincipled and maniac tyranny of

Bonaparte.  You are now rid of him, and I sincerely wish you may

continue so.  But this may depend on the wisdom and moderation of the

restored dynasty.  It is for them now to read a lesson in the fatal

errors of the republicans; to be contented with a certain portion of

power, secured by formal compact with the nation, rather than,

grasping at more, hazard all upon uncertainty, and risk meeting the

fate of their predecessor, or a renewal of their own exile.  We are

just informed, too, of an example which merits, if true, their most

profound contemplation.  The gazettes say that Ferdinand of Spain is

dethroned, and his father re-established on the basis of their new

constitution.  This order of magistrates must, therefore, see, that

although the attempts at reformation have not succeeded in their

whole length, and some secession from the ultimate point has taken

place, yet that men have by no means fallen back to their former

passiveness, but on the contrary, that a sense of their rights, and a

restlessness to obtain them, remain deeply impressed on every mind,

and, if not quieted by reasonable relaxations of power, will break

out like a volcano on the first occasion, and overwhelm everything

again in its way.  I always thought the present king an honest and

moderate man; and having no issue, he is under a motive the less for

yielding to personal considerations.  I cannot, therefore, but hope,

that the patriots in and out of your legislature, acting in phalanx,

but temperately and wisely, pressing unremittingly the principles

omitted in the late capitulation of the king, and watching the

occasions which the course of events will create, may get those

principles engrafted into it, and sanctioned by the solemnity of a

national act.




        With us the affairs of war have taken the most favorable turn

which was to be expected.  Our thirty years of peace had taken off,

or superannuated, all our revolutionary officers of experience and

grade; and our first draught in the lottery of un-tried characters

had been most unfortunate.  The delivery of the fort and army of

Detroit by the traitor Hull; the disgrace at Queenstown, under Van

Rensellaer; the massacre at Frenchtown under Winchester; and

surrender of Boerstler in an open field to one-third of his own

numbers, were the inauspicious beginnings of the first year of our

warfare.  The second witnessed but the single miscarriage occasioned

by the disagreement of Wilkinson and Hampton, mentioned in my letter

to you of November the 30th, 1813, while it gave us the capture of

York by Dearborne and Pike; the capture of Fort George by Dearborne

also; the capture of Proctor's army on the Thames by Harrison, Shelby

and Johnson, and that of the whole British fleet on Lake Erie by

Perry.  The third year has been a continued series of victories,

to-wit: of Brown and Scott at Chippewa, of the same at Niagara; of

Gaines over Drummond at Fort Erie; that of Brown over Drummond at the

same place; the capture of another fleet on Lake Champlain by

M'Donough; the entire defeat of their army under Prevost, on the same

day, by M'Comb, and recently their defeats at New Orleans by Jackson,

Coffee and Carroll, with the loss of four thousand men out of nine

thousand and six hundred, with their two Generals, Packingham and

Gibbs killed, and a third, Keane, wounded, mortally, as is said.




        This series of successes has been tarnished only by the

conflagration at Washington, a _coup de main_ differing from that at

Richmond, which you remember, in the revolutionary war, in the

circumstance only, that we had, in that case, but forty-eight hours'

notice that an enemy had arrived within our capes; whereas, at

Washington, there was abundant previous notice.  The force designated

by the President was double of what was necessary; but failed, as is

the general opinion, through the insubordination of Armstrong, who

would never believe the attack intended until it was actually made,

and the sluggishness of Winder before the occasion, and his

indecision during it.  Still, in the end, the transaction has helped

rather than hurt us, by arousing the general indignation of our

country, and by marking to the world of Europe the Vandalism and

brutal character of the English government.  It has merely served to

immortalize their infamy.  And add further, that through the whole

period of the war, we have beaten them single-handed at sea, and so

thoroughly established our superiority over them with equal force,

that they retire from that kind of contest, and never suffer their

frigates to cruize singly.  The Endymion would never have engaged the

frigate President, but knowing herself backed by three frigates and a

razee, who, though somewhat slower sailers, would get up before she

could be taken.  The disclosure to the world of the fatal secret that

they can be beaten at sea with an equal force, the evidence furnished

by the military operations of the last year that experience is

rearing us officers who, when our means shall be fully under way,

will plant our standard on the walls of Quebec and Halifax, their

recent and signal disaster at New Orleans, and the evaporation of

their hopes from the Hartford convention, will probably raise a

clamor in the British nation, which will force their ministry into

peace.  I say _force_ them, because, willingly, they would never be

at peace.  The British ministers find in a state of war rather than

of peace, by riding the various contractors, and receiving _douceurs_

on the vast expenditures of the war supplies, that they recruit their

broken fortunes, or make new ones, and therefore will not make peace

as long as by any delusions they can keep the temper of the nation up

to the war point.  They found some hopes on the state of our

finances.  It is true that the excess of our banking institutions,

and their present discredit, have shut us out from the best source of

credit we could ever command with certainty.  But the foundations of

credit still remain to us, and need but skill which experience will

soon produce, to marshal them into an order which may carry us

through any length of war.  But they have hoped more in their

Hartford convention.  Their fears of republican France being now done

away, they are directed to republican America, and they are playing

the same game for disorganization here, which they played in your

country.  The Marats, the Dantons and Robespierres of Massachusetts

are in the same pay, under the same orders, and making the same

efforts to anarchise us, that their prototypes in France did there.




        I do not say that all who met at Hartford were under the same

motives of money, nor were those of France.  Some of them are Outs,

and wish to be Inns; some the mere dupes of the agitators, or of

their own party passions, while the Maratists alone are in the real

secret; but they have very different materials to work on.  The

yeomanry of the United States are not the _canaille_ of Paris.  We

might safely give them leave to go through the United States

recruiting their ranks, and I am satisfied they could not raise one

single regiment (gambling merchants and silk-stocking clerks

excepted) who would support them in any effort to separate from the

Union.  The cement of this Union is in the heart-blood of every

American.  I do not believe there is on earth a government

established on so immovable a basis.  Let them, in any State, even in

Massachusetts itself, raise the standard of separation, and its

citizens will rise in mass, and do justice themselves on their own

incendiaries.  If they could have induced the government to some

effort of suppression, or even to enter into discussion with them, it

would have given them some importance, have brought them into some

notice.  But they have not been able to make themselves even a

subject of conversation, either of public or private societies.  A

silent contempt has been the sole notice they excite; consoled,

indeed, some of them, by the _palpable_ favors of Philip.  Have then

no fears for us, my friend.  The grounds of these exist only in

English newspapers, endited or endowed by the Castlereaghs or the

Cannings, or some other such models of pure and uncorrupted virtue.

Their military heroes, by land and sea, may sink our oyster boats,

rob our hen roosts, burn our negro huts, and run off.  But a campaign

or two more will relieve them from further trouble or expense in

defending their American possessions.




        You once gave me a copy of the journal of your campaign in

Virginia, in 1781, which I must have lent to some one of the

undertakers to write the history of the revolutionary war, and forgot

to reclaim.  I conclude this, because it is no longer among my

papers, which I have very diligently searched for it, but in vain.

An author of real ability is now writing that part of the history of

Virginia.  He does it in my neighborhood, and I lay open to him all

my papers.  But I possess none, nor has he any, which can enable him

to do justice to your faithful and able services in that campaign.

If you could be so good as to send me another copy, by the very first

vessel bound to any port in the United States, it might be here in

time; for although he expects to begin to print within a month or

two, yet you know the delays of these undertakings.  At any rate it

might be got in as a supplement.  The old Count Rochambeau gave me

also his _memoire_ of the operations at York, which is gone in the

same way, and I have no means of applying to his family for it.

Perhaps you could render them as well as us, the service of procuring

another copy.




        I learn, with real sorrow, the deaths of Monsieur and Madame de

Tesse.  They made an interesting part in the idle reveries in which I

have sometimes indulged myself, of seeing all my friends of Paris

once more, for a month or two; a thing impossible, which, however, I

never permitted myself to despair of.  The regrets, however, of

seventy-three at the loss of friends, may be the less, as the time is

shorter within which we are to meet again, according to the creed of

our education.




 

        This letter will be handed you by Mr. Ticknor, a young

gentleman of Boston, of great erudition, indefatigable industry, and

preparation for a life of distinction in his own country.  He passed

a few days with me here, brought high recommendations from Mr. Adams

and others, and appeared in every respect to merit them.  He is well

worthy of those attentions which you so kindly bestow on our

countrymen, and for those he may receive I shall join him in

acknowledging personal obligations.




        I salute you with assurances of my constant and affectionate

friendship and respect.




        P. S. February 26th. My letter had not yet been sealed, when I

received news of our peace.  I am glad of it, and especially that we

closed our war with the eclat of the action at New Orleans.  But I

consider it as an armistice only, because no security is provided

against the impressment of our seamen.  While this is unsettled we

are in hostility of mind with England, although actual deeds of arms

may be suspended by a truce.  If she thinks the exercise of this

outrage is worth eternal war, eternal war it must be, or

extermination of the one or the other party.  The first act of

impressment she commits on an American, will be answered by reprisal,

or by a declaration of war here; and the interval must be merely a

state of preparation for it.  In this we have much to do, in further

fortifying our seaport towns, providing military stores, classing and

disciplining our militia, arranging our financial system, and above

all, pushing our domestic manufactures, which have taken such root as

never again can be shaken.  Once more, God bless you.







        LIBRARY CLASSIFICATION




        _To George Watterston_

        _Monticello, May 7, 1815_




        SIR, -- I have duly received your favor of April 26th, in which

you are pleased to ask my opinion on the subject of the arrangement

of libraries.  I shall communicate with pleasure what occurs to me on

it.  Two methods offer themselves, the one alphabetical, the other

according to the subject of the book.  The former is very

unsatisfactory, because of the medley it presents to the mind, the

difficulty sometimes of recalling an author's name, and the greater

difficulty, where the name is not given, of selecting the word in the

title, which shall determine its alphabetical place.  The arrangement

according to subject is far preferable, although sometimes presenting

difficulty also, for it is often doubtful to what particular subject

a book should be ascribed.  This is remarkably the case with books of

travels, which often blend together the geography, natural history,

civil history, agriculture, manufactures, commerce, arts,

occupations, manners, &c., of a country, so as to render it difficult

to say to which they chiefly relate.  Others again, are polygraphical

in their nature, as Encyclopedias, magazines, etc.  Yet on the whole

I have preferred arrangement according to subject, because of the

peculiar satisfaction, when we wish to consider a particular one, of

seeing at a glance the books which have been written on it, and

selecting those from which we effect most readily the information we

seek.  On this principle the arrangement of my library was formed,

and I took the basis of its distribution from Lord Bacon's table of

science, modifying it to the changes in scientific pursuits which

have taken place since his time, and to the greater or less extent of

reading in the science which I proposed to myself.  Thus the law

having been my profession, and politics the occupation to which the

circumstances of the times in which I have lived called my particular

attention, my provision of books in these lines, and in those most

nearly connected with them was more copious, and required in

particular instances subdivisions into sections and paragraphs, while

other subjects of which general views only were contemplated are

thrown into masses.  A physician or theologist would have modified

differently, the chapters, sections, and paragraphs of a library

adapted to their particular pursuits.




        You will receive my library arranged very perfectly in the

order observed in the catalogue, which I have sent with it.  In

placing the books on their shelves, I have generally, but not always,

collocated distinctly the folios, quarto, octavo, and duodecimo,

placing with the last all smaller sizes.  On every book is a label,

indicating the chapter of the catalogue to which it belongs, and the

other it holds among those of the same format.  So that, although the

numbers seem confused on the catalogue, they are consecutive on the

volumes as they stand on their shelves, and indicate at once the

place they occupy there.  Mr. Milligan in packing them has preserved

their arrangement so exactly, in their respective presses, that on

setting the presses up on end, he will be able readily to replace

them in the order corresponding with the catalogue, and thus save you

the immense labor which their rearrangement would otherwise require.




        To give to my catalogue the convenience of the alphabetical

arrangement I have made at the end an alphabet of authors' names and

have noted the chapter or chapters, in which the name will be found;

where it occurs several times in the same chapter, it is indicated,

by one or more perpendicular scores, thus according to the number of

times it will be found in the chapter.  Where a book bears no

author's name, I have selected in its title some leading word for

denoting it alphabetically.  This member of the catalogue would be

more perfect if, instead of the score, the number on the book were

particularly noted.  This could not be done when I made the

catalogue, because no label of numbers had then been put on the

books.  That alteration can now be readily made, and would add

greatly to the convenient use of the catalogue.  I gave to Mr.

Milligan a note of three folio volumes of the laws of Virginia

belonging to the library, which being in known hands, will be

certainly recovered, and shall be forwarded to you.  One is a MS.

volume from which a printed copy is now preparing for publication.




        This statement meets, I believe, all the enquiries of your

letter, and where it is not sufficiently minute, Mr. Milligan, from

his necessary acquaintance with the arrangement, will be able to

supply the smaller details.  Accept the assurances of my respect and

consideration.







        MANUFACTURES




        _To Benjamin Austin_

        _Monticello, January 9, 1816_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favor of December 21st has been received, and

I am first to thank you for the pamphlet it covered.  The same

description of persons which is the subject of that is so much

multiplied here too, as to be almost a grievance, and by their

numbers in the public councils, have wrested from the public hand the

direction of the pruning knife.  But with us as a body, they are

republican, and mostly moderate in their views; so far, therefore,

less objects of jealousy than with you.  Your opinions on the events

which have taken place in France, are entirely just, so far as these

events are yet developed.  But they have not reached their ultimate

termination.  There is still an awful void between the present and

what is to be the last chapter of that history; and I fear it is to

be filled with abominations as frightful as those which have already

disgraced it.  That nation is too high-minded, has too much innate

force, intelligence and elasticity, to remain under its present

compression.  Samson will arise in his strength, as of old, and as of

old will burst asunder the withes and the cords, and the webs of the

Philistines.  But what are to be the scenes of havoc and horror, and

how widely they may spread between brethren of the same house, our

ignorance of the interior feuds and antipathies of the country places

beyond our ken.  It will end, nevertheless, in a representative

government, in a government in which the will of the people will be

an effective ingredient.  This important element has taken root in

the European mind, and will have its growth; their despots, sensible

of this, are already offering this modification of their governments,

as if on their own accord.  Instead of the parricide treason of

Bonaparte, in perverting the means confided to him as a republican

magistrate, to the subversion of that republic and erection of a

military despotism for himself and his family, had he used it

honestly for the establishment and support of a free government in

his own country, France would now have been in freedom and rest; and

her example operating in a contrary direction, every nation in Europe

would have had a government over which the will of the people would

have had some control.  His atrocious egotism has checked the

salutary progress of principle, and deluged it with rivers of blood

which are not yet run out.  To the vast sum of devastation and of

human misery, of which he has been the guilty cause, much is still to

be added.  But the object is fixed in the eye of nations, and they

will press on to its accomplishment and to the general amelioration

of the condition of man.  What a germ have we planted, and how

faithfully should we cherish the parent tree at home!




        You tell me I am quoted by those who wish to continue our

dependence on England for manufactures.  There was a time when I

might have been so quoted with more candor, but within the thirty

years which have since elapsed, how are circumstances changed!  We

were then in peace.  Our independent place among nations was

acknowledged.  A commerce which offered the raw material in exchange

for the same material after receiving the last touch of industry, was

worthy of welcome to all nations.  It was expected that those

especially to whom manufacturing industry was important, would

cherish the friendship of such customers by every favor, by every

inducement, and particularly cultivate their peace by every act of

justice and friendship.  Under this prospect the question seemed

legitimate, whether, with such an immensity of unimproved land,

courting the hand of husbandry, the industry of agriculture, or that

of manufactures, would add most to the national wealth?  And the

doubt was entertained on this consideration chiefly, that to the

labor of the husbandman a vast addition is made by the spontaneous

energies of the earth on which it is employed: for one grain of wheat

committed to the earth, she renders twenty, thirty, and even fifty

fold, whereas to the labor of the manufacturer nothing is added.

Pounds of flax, in his hands, yield, on the contrary, but

penny-weights of lace.  This exchange, too, laborious as it might

seem, what a field did it promise for the occupations of the ocean;

what a nursery for that class of citizens who were to exercise and

maintain our equal rights on that element?  This was the state of

things in 1785, when the "Notes on Virginia" were first printed;

when, the ocean being open to all nations, and their common right in

it acknowledged and exercised under regulations sanctioned by the

assent and usage of all, it was thought that the doubt might claim

some consideration.  But who in 1785 could foresee the rapid

depravity which was to render the close of that century the disgrace

of the history of man?  Who could have imagined that the two most

distinguished in the rank of nations, for science and civilization,

would have suddenly descended from that honorable eminence, and

setting at defiance all those moral laws established by the Author of

nature between nation and nation, as between man and man, would cover

earth and sea with robberies and piracies, merely because strong

enough to do it with temporal impunity; and that under this

disbandment of nations from social order, we should have been

despoiled of a thousand ships, and have thousands of our citizens

reduced to Algerine slavery.  Yet all this has taken place.  One of

these nations interdicted to our vessels all harbors of the globe

without having first proceeded to some one of hers, there paid a

tribute proportioned to the cargo, and obtained her license to

proceed to the port of destination.  The other declared them to be

lawful prize if they had touched at the port, or been visited by a

ship of the enemy nation.  Thus were we completely excluded from the

ocean.  Compare this state of things with that of '85, and say

whether an opinion founded in the circumstances of that day can be

fairly applied to those of the present.  We have experienced what we

did not then believe, that there exists both profligacy and power

enough to exclude us from the field of interchange with other

nations: that to be independent for the comforts of life we must

fabricate them ourselves.  We must now place the manufacturer by the

side of the agriculturist.  The former question is suppressed, or

rather assumes a new form.  Shall we make our own comforts, or go

without them, at the will of a foreign nation?  He, therefore, who is

now against domestic manufacture, must be for reducing us either to

dependence on that foreign nation, or to be clothed in skins, and to

live like wild beasts in dens and caverns.  I am not one of these;

experience has taught me that manufactures are now as necessary to

our independence as to our comfort; and if those who quote me as of a

different opinion, will keep pace with me in purchasing nothing

foreign where an equivalent of domestic fabric can be obtained,

without regard to difference of price, it will not be our fault if we

do not soon have a supply at home equal to our demand, and wrest that

weapon of distress from the hand which has wielded it.  If it shall

be proposed to go beyond our own supply, the question of '85 will

then recur, will our _surplus_ labor be then most beneficially

employed in the culture of the earth, or in the fabrications of art?

We have time yet for consideration, before that question will press

upon us; and the maxim to be applied will depend on the circumstances

which shall then exist; for in so complicated a science as political

economy, no one axiom can be laid down as wise and expedient for all

times and circumstances, and for their contraries.  Inattention to

this is what has called for this explanation, which reflection would

have rendered unnecessary with the candid, while nothing will do it

with those who use the former opinion only as a stalking horse, to

cover their disloyal propensities to keep us in eternal vassalage to

a foreign and unfriendly people.




        I salute you with assurances of great respect and esteem.

