




        THE TRAITOR ARNOLD



        _To J. P. G. Muhlenberg_

        _Richmond, Jan. 31, 1781_



        SIR, -- Acquainted as you are with the treasons of Arnold, I

need say nothing for your information, or to give you a proper

sentiment of them.  You will readily suppose that it is above all

things desirable to drag him from those under whose wing he is now

sheltered.  On his march to and from this place I am certain it might

have been done with facility by men of enterprise & firmness.  I

think it may still be done though perhaps not quite so easily.

Having peculiar confidence in the men from the Western side of the

Mountains, I meant as soon as they should come down to get the

enterprise proposed to a chosen number of them, such whose courage &

whose fidelity would be above all doubt.  Your perfect knowlege of

those men personally, and my confidence in your discretion, induce me

to ask you to pick from among them proper characters, in such number

as you think best, to reveal to them our desire, & engage them to

undertake to seize and bring off this greatest of all traitors.

Whether this may be best effected by their going in as friends &

awaiting their opportunity, or otherwise is left to themselves.  The

smaller the number the better; so that they be sufficient to manage

him.  Every necessary caution must be used on their part, to prevent

a discovery of their design by the enemy, as should they be taken,

the laws of war will justify against them the most rigorous sentence.

I will undertake if they are successful in bringing him off alive,

that they shall receive five thousand guineas reward among them.  And

to men formed for such an enterprise it must be a great incitement to

know that their names will be recorded with glory in history with

those of Vanwert, Paulding & Williams.  The enclosed order from Baron

Steuben will authorize you to call for & dispose of any force you may

think necessary, to place in readiness for covering the enterprise &

securing the retreat of the party.  Mr.  Newton the bearer of this, &

to whom its contents are communicated in confidence, will provide men

of trust to go as guides.  These may be associated in the enterprise

or not, as you please; but let that point be previously settled that

no difficulties may arise as to the parties entitled to participate

of the reward.  You know how necessary profound secrecy is in this

business, even if it be not undertaken.





        WELCOME TO THE MARGUIS



        _To Lafayette_

        _Richmond, March 10th, 1781_



        SIR, -- Intending that this shall await your arrival in this

State I with great joy welcome you on that event.  I am induced to

from the very great esteem your personal character and the Hopes I

entertain of your relieving us from our enemy within this State.

Could any circumstances have rendered your presence more desirable or

more necessary it is the unfortunate one which obliges me to enclose

you the enclosed papers.



        I trust that your future Acquaintance with the Executive of the

State will evince to you that among their faults is not to be counted

a want of dispostion to second the views of the Commander against our

common Enemy.  We are too much interested in the present scene & have

too much at stake to leave a doubt on that Head.  Mild Laws, a People

not used to prompt obedience, a want of provisions of War & means of

procuring them render our orders often ineffectual, oblige us to

temporise & when we cannot accomplish an object in one way to attempt

it in another.  Your knowledge of these circumstances with a temper

to accommodate them ensure me your cooperation in the best way we

can, when we shall be able to pursue the way we would wish.



        I still hope you will find our preparations not far short of

the Information I took the Liberty of giving you in my letter of the

8th instant.  I shall be very happy to receive your first

Applications for whatever may be necessary for the public service and

to convince you of our disposition to promote it as far as the

Abilities of the State and Powers of the Executive will enable us.





        APPEAL TO THE COMMANDER IN CHIEF



        _To George Washington_

        _Charlottesville, May 28th, 1781_



        SIR, -- I make no doubt you will have heard, before this shall

have the honour of being presented to your Excellency, of the

junction of Ld Cornwallis with the force at Petersburg under Arnold,

who had succeeded to the command on the death of Majr. Genl Phillips.

I am now advised that they have evacuated Petersburg, joined at

Westover a reinforcement of 2000 men just arrived from New york,

crossed James River, and on the 26th instant, were three miles

advanced on their way towards Richmond; at which place Majr Genl the

Marquis Fayette, lay with three thousand men Regulars and militia:

these being the whole number we could arm, until the arrival of the

1100 arms from Rhode Island, which are about this time at the place

where our Public stores are deposited.  The whole force of the Enemy

within this State, from the best intelligence I have been able to

get, is I think about 7000 men, infantry and cavalry, including,

also, the small garrison left at Portsmouth: a number of privateers,

which are constantly ravaging the Shores of our rivers, prevent us

from receiving any aid from the Counties lying on navigable waters;

and powerful operations meditated against our Western frontier, by a

joint force of British, and Indian Savages, have as your Excellency

before knew, obliged us to embody, between two and three thousand men

in that quarter.  Your Excellency will judge from this State of

things, and from what you know of our country, what it may probably

suffer during the present campaign.  Should the Enemy be able to

produce no opportunity of annihilating the Marquis's army a small

proportion of their force may yet restrain his movements effectually

while the greater part employed in detachment to waste an unarmed

country and lead the minds of the people to acquiesce under those

events which they see no human power prepared to ward off.  We are

too far removed from the other scenes of war to say whether the main

force of the Enemy be within this State.  But I suppose they cannot

anywhere spare so great an army for the operations of the field.

Were it possible for this circumstance to justify in your Excellency

a determination to lend us your personal aid, it is evident from the

universal voice, that the presence of their beloved Countryman, whose

talents have so long been successfully employed, in establishing the

freedom of kindred States, to whose person they have still flattered

themselves they retained some right and have ever looked up as their

dernier resort in distress.  That your appearance among them I say

would restore full confidence of salvation, and would render them

equal to whatever is not impossible.  I cannot undertake to foresee

and obviate the difficulties which lie in the way of such a

resolution: The whole subject is before you of which I see only

detached parts; and your judgment will be formed on a view of the

whole.  Should the danger of this State and its consequence to the

Union be such as to render it best for the whole that you should

repair to its assistance the difficulty would be how to keep men out

of the field.  I have undertaken to hint this matter to your

Excellency not only on my own sense of its importance to us but at

the solicitations of many members of weight in our Legislature which

has not yet Assembled to speak their own desires.



        A few days will bring to me that relief which the constitution

has prepared for those oppressed with the labours of my office and a

long declared resolution of relinquishing it to abler hands has

prepared my way for retirement to a private station: still as an

individual I should feel the comfortable effects of your presence,

and have (what I thought could not have been) an additional motive

for that gratitude, esteem, & respect with which I have the honour to

be, your Excellency's most obedient humble servant.





        LIMITS OF PUBLIC DUTY



        _To James Monroe_

        _Monticello, May 20, 1782_



        DEAR SIR, -- I have been gratified with the receipt of your two

favours of the 6th & 11th inst.  It gives me pleasure that your

county has been wise enough to enlist your talents into their

service.  I am much obliged by the kind wishes you express of seeing

me also in Richmond, and am always mortified when anything is

expected from me which I cannot fulfill, & more especially if it

relate to the public service.  Before I ventured to declare to my

countrymen my determination to retire from public employment, I

examined well my heart to know whether it were thoroughly cured of

every principle of political ambition, whether no lurking particle

remained which might leave me uneasy when reduced within the limits

of mere private life.  I became satisfied that every fibre of that

passion was thoroughly eradicated.  I examined also in other views my

right to withdraw.  I considered that I had been thirteen years

engaged in public service, that during that time I had so totally

abandoned all attention to my private affairs as to permit them to

run into great disorder and ruin, that I had now a family advanced to

years which require my attention & instruction, that to these were

added the hopeful offspring of a deceased friend whose memory must be

forever dear to me who have no other reliance for being rendered

useful to themselves & their country, that by a constant sacrifice of

time, labour, loss, parental & family duties, I had been so far from

gaining the affection of my countrymen, which was the only reward I

ever asked or could have felt, that I had even lost the small

estimation I before possessed.  That however I might have comforted

myself under the disapprobation of the well-meaning but uninformed

people yet that of their representatives was a shock on which I had

not calculated: that this indeed had been followed by an exculpatory

declaration.  But in the meantime I had been suspected & suspended in

the eyes of the world without the least hint then or afterwards made

public which might restrain them from supposing that I stood

arraigned for treason of the heart and not merely weakness of the

head; and I felt that these injuries, for such they have been since

acknowledged had inflicted a wound on my spirit which will only be

cured by the all-healing grave.  If reason & inclination unite in

justifying my retirement, the laws of my country are equally in favor

of it.  Whether the state may command the political services of all

it's members to an indefinite extent, or if these be among the rights

never wholly ceded to the public power, is a question which I do not

find expressly decided in England.  Obiter dictums on the subject I

have indeed met with, but the complexion of the times in which these

have dropped would generally answer them, besides that this species

of authority is not acknowledged in our profession.  In this country

however since the present government has been established the point

has been settled by uniform, pointed & multiplied precedents.

Offices of every kind, and given by every power, have been daily &

hourly declined & resigned from the declaration of independance to

this moment.  The genl assembly has accepted these without

discrimination of office, and without ever questioning them in point

of right.  If a difference between the office of a delegate & any

other could ever have been supposed, yet in the case of Mr. Thompson

Mason who declined the office of delegate & was permitted so to do by

the house that supposition has been proved to be groundless.  But

indeed no such distinction of offices can be admitted.  Reason and

the opinions of the lawyers putting all on a footing as to this

question and so giving to the delegate the aid of all the precedents

of the refusal of other offices.  The law then does not warrant the

assumption of such a power by the state over it's members.  For if it

does where is that law? nor yet does reason, for tho' I will admit

that this does subject every individual if called on to an equal tour

of political duty yet it can never go so far as to submit to it his

whole existence.  If we are made in some degree for others, yet in a

greater are we made for ourselves.  It were contrary to feeling &

indeed ridiculous to suppose that a man had less right in himself

than one of his neighbors or indeed all of them put together.  This

would be slavery & not that liberty which the bill of rights has made

inviolable and for the preservation of which our government has been

charged.  Nothing could so completely divest us of that liberty as

the establishment of the opinion that the state has a _perpetual_

right to the services of all it's members.  This to men of certain

ways of thinking would be to annihilate the blessing of existence; to

contradict the giver of life who gave it for happiness & not for

wretchedness; and certainly to such it were better that they had

never been born.  However with these I may think public service &

private misery inseparably linked together, I have not the vanity to

count myself among those whom the state would think worth oppressing

with perpetual service.  I have received a sufficient memento to the

contrary.  I am persuaded that having hitherto dedicated to them the

whole of the active & useful part of my life I shall be permitted to

pass the rest in mental quiet.  I hope too that I did not mistake the

modes any more than the matter of right when I preferred a simple act

of renunciation to the taking sanctuary under those disqualifications

provided by the law for other purposes indeed, but which afford

asylum also for rest to the wearied.  I dare say you did not expect

by the few words you dropped on the right of renunciation to expose

yourself to the fatigue of so long a letter, but I wished you to see

that if I had done wrong I had been betrayed by a semblance of right

at least.



        I take the liberty of inclosing to you a letter for Genl

Chastellux for which you will readily find means of conveyance.  But

I meant to give you more trouble with the one to Pelham who lives in

the neighborhood of Manchester & to ask the favor of you to send it

by your servant express which I am in hopes may be done without

absenting him from your person but during those hours in which you

will be engaged in the house.  I am anxious that it should be

received immediately.  Mrs Jefferson has added another daughter to

our family.  She has been ever since & still continues very

dangerously ill.  It will give me great pleasure to see you here

whenever you can favor us with your company.  You will find me still

busy but in lighter occupations.  But in these & all others you will

find me to retain a due sense of your friendship & to be with sincere

esteem, Dr Sir

                 Your mo ob & mo hble servt.



        P. S.  did you ever receive a copy of the Parl. debates &

Histor.  Register with a letter left for you with Mr Jas. Buchanan?





        "A SINGLE EVENT. . ."



        _To Chastellux_

        _Ampthill, Nov. 26, 1782_



        DEAR SIR, -- I received your friendly letters of ----- and June

30 but the latter not till the 17th of Oct.  It found me a little

emerging from the stupor of mind which had rendered me as dead to the

world as she was whose loss occasioned it.  Your letter recalled to

my memory that there were persons still living of much value to me.

If you should have thought me remiss in not testifying to you sooner

how deeply I had been impressed with your worth in the little time I

had the happiness of being with you you will I am sure ascribe it to

it's true cause the state of dreadful suspense in which I had been

kept all the summer & the catastrophe which closed it.  Before that

event my scheme of life had been determined.  I had folded myself in

the arms of retirement, and rested all prospects of future happiness

on domestic & literary objects.  A single event wiped away all my

plans and left me a blank which I had not the spirits to fill up.  In

this state of mind an appointment from Congress found me, requiring

me to cross the Atlantic.  And that temptation might be added to duty

I was informed at the same time from his Excy the Chevalier de

Luzerne that a vessel of force would be sailing about the middle of

Dec. in which you would be passing to France.  I accepted the

appointment and my only object now is so to hasten over those

obstacles which would retard my departure as to be ready to join you

in your voyage, fondly measuring your affections by my own &

presuming your consent.  It is not certain that by any exertion I can

be in Philadelphia by the middle of December.  The contrary is most

probable.  But hoping it will not be much later and counting on those

procrastinations which usually attend the departure of vessels of

size I have hopes of being with you in time.  This will give me full

leisure to learn the result of your observations on the natural

bridge, to communicate to you my answers to the queries of Monsr de

Marbois, to receive edification from you on these and on other

subjects of science, considering chess too as a matter of science.

Should I be able to get out in tolerable time and any extraordinary

delays attend the sailing of the vessel I shall certainly do myself

the honor of waiting on his Excy Count Rochambeau at his Head

quarters and assuring him in person of my high respect and esteem for

him -- an object of which I have never lost sight.  To yourself I am

unable to express the warmth of those sentiments of friendship &

attachment with which I have the honour to be, Dr Sir,

                                         Your most obedt & mo hble servt.





        ADVICE TO A YOUNG DAUGHTER



        _To Martha Jefferson_

        _Annapolis, Nov. 28, 1783_



        MY DEAR PATSY -- After four days journey I arrived here without

any accident and in as good health as when I left Philadelphia.  The

conviction that you would be more improved in the situation I have

placed you than if still with me, has solaced me on my parting with

you, which my love for you has rendered a difficult thing.  The

acquirements which I hope you will make under the tutors I have

provided for you will render you more worthy of my love, and if they

cannot increase it they will prevent it's diminution.  Consider the

good lady who has taken you under her roof, who has undertaken to see

that you perform all your exercises, and to admonish you in all those

wanderings from what is right or what is clever to which your

inexperience would expose you, consider her I say as your mother, as

the only person to whom, since the loss with which heaven has been

pleased to afflict you, you can now look up; and that her displeasure

or disapprobation on any occasion will be an immense misfortune which

should you be so unhappy as to incur by any unguarded act, think no

concession too much to regain her good will.  With respect to the

distribution of your time the following is what I should approve.



        from 8. to 10 o'clock practise music.

        from 10. to 1. dance one day and draw another

        from 1. to 2. draw on the day you dance, and write a letter the

next day.

        from 3. to 4. read French.

        from 4. to 5. exercise yourself in music.

        from 5. till bedtime read English, write &c.



        Communicate this plan to Mrs. Hopkinson and if she approves of

it pursue it.  As long as Mrs. Trist remains in Philadelphia

cultivate her affections.  She has been a valuable friend to you and

her good sense and good heart make her valued by all who know her and

by nobody on earth more than by me.  I expect you will write to me by

every post.  Inform me what books you read, what tunes you learn, and

inclose me your best copy of every lesson in drawing.  Write also one

letter every week either to your aunt Eppes, your aunt Skipwith, your

aunt Carr, or the little lady from whom I now inclose a letter, and

always put the letter you so write under cover to me.  Take care that

you never spell a word wrong.  Always before you write a word

consider how it is spelt, and if you do not remember it, turn to a

dictionary.  It produces great praise to a lady to spell well.  I

have placed my happiness on seeing you good and accomplished, and no

distress which this world can now bring on me could equal that of

your disappointing my hopes.  If you love me then, strive to be good

under every situation and to all living creatures, and to acquire

those accomplishments which I have put in your power, and which will

go far towards ensuring you the warmest love of your affectionate

father,

        P. S.  Keep my letters and read them at times that you may

always have present in your mind those things which will endear you

to me.





        THE MAMMOTH AND WESTERN EXPLORATION



        _To George Rogers Clark_

        _Annapolis, Dec. 4, 1783_



        DEAR SIR -- I received here about a week ago your obliging

letter of Oct. 12. 1783. with the shells and seeds for which I return

you many thanks.  You are also so kind as to keep alive the hope of

getting for me as many of the different species of bones, teeth and

tusks of the _Mammoth_ as can now be found.  This will be most

acceptable.  Pittsburg and Philadelphia or Winchester will be the

surest channel of conveyance.  I find they have subscribed a very

large sum of money in England for exploring the country from the

Missisipi to California.  They pretend it is only to promote knolege.

I am afraid they have thoughts of colonising into that quarter.  Some

of us have been talking here in a feeble way of making the attempt to

search that country.  But I doubt whether we have enough of that kind

of spirit to raise the money.  How would you like to lead such a

party?  Tho I am afraid our prospect is not worth asking the

question.  The definitive treaty of peace is at length arrived.  It

is not altered from the preliminaries.  The cession of the territory

West of Ohio to the United states has been at length accepted by

Congress with some small alterations of the conditions.  We are in

daily expectation of receiving it with the final approbation of

Virginia.  Congress have been lately agitated by questions where they

should fix their residence.  They first resolved on Trentown.  The

Southern states however contrived to get a vote that they would give

half their time to Georgetown at the Falls of Patowmac.  Still we

consider the matter as undecided between the Delaware and Patowmac.

We urge the latter as the only point of union which can cement us to

our Western friends when they shall be formed into separate states.

I shall always be happy to hear from you and am with very particular

esteem Dr. Sir Your friend & humble servt.





        MORE ADVICE



        _To Martha Jefferson_

        _Annapolis, Dec. 11, 1783_



        MY DEAR PATSY -- I wrote you by the post this day fortnight,

since which I h received two letters from you.  I am afraid that you

may not have sent to the post office and therefore that my letter may

be still lying there.  Tho' my business here may not let me write to

you every week yet it will not be amiss for you to enquire at the

office every week.  I wrote to Mr. House by the last post.  Perhaps

his letter may still be in the office.  I hope you will have good

sense enough to disregard those foolish predictions that the world is

to be at an end soon.  The almighty has never made known to any body

at what time he created it, nor will he tell any body when he means

to put an end to it, if ever he means to do it.  As to preparations

for that event, the best way is for you to be always prepared for it.

The only way to be so is never to do nor say a bad thing.  If ever

you are about to say any thing amiss or to do any thing wrong,

consider before hand.  You will feel something within you which will

tell you it is wrong and ought not to be said or done: this is your

conscience, and be sure to obey it.  Our maker has given us all, this

faithful internal Monitor, and if you always obey it, you will always

be prepared for the end of the world: or for a much more certain

event which is death.  This must happen to all: it puts an end to the

world as to us, and the way to be ready for it is never to do a wrong

act.  I am glad you are proceeding regularly under your tutors.  You

must not let the sickness of your French master interrupt your

reading French, because you are able to do that with the help of your

dictionary.  Remember I desired you to send me the best copy you

should make of every lesson Mr. Cimitiere should set you.  In this I

hope you will be punctual because it will let me see how you are

going on.  Always let me know too what tunes you play.  Present my

compliments to Mrs. Hopkinson, Mrs. House and Mrs. Trist.  I had a

letter from your uncle Eppes last week informing me that Polly is

very well, and Lucy recovered from an indispostion.  I am my dear

Patsy your affectionate father,





        AMERICAN "POLITICS & POVERTY"



        _To Chastellux_

        _Annapolis, Jan. 16, 1784_



        DEAR SIR -- L't. Colo Franks being appointed to carry to Paris

one of the copies of our ratifn of the Def. treaty, & being to depart

in the instant of his appointm't. furnishes me a hasty oppy of

obtruding myself on your recollection.  Should this prove troublesome

you must take the blame as having exposed yourself to my esteem by

letting me become acquainted with your merit.  Our transactions on

this side the water must now have become uninteresting to the rest of

the world.  We are busy however among ourselves endeavoring to get

our new governments into regular and concerted motion.  For this

purpose I beleive we shall find some additions requisite to our

Confederation.  As yet every thing has gone smoothly since the war.

We are diverted with the European acc'ts. of the anarchy & opposition

to govmt in America.  Nothing can be more untrue than these

relations.  There was indeed some disatisfaction in the army at not

being paid off before they were disbanded, and a very trifling mutiny

of 200 souldiers in Philadelphia, on the latter occasion Congress

left that place disgusted with the pusillanimity of the govmt and not

from any want of security to their own persons.  The indignation

which the other states felt at this insult to their delegates has

enlisted them more warmly in support of Congress & the people, the

legislature, & the Exec. themselves of Pennsvta have made the most

satisfactory atonements.  Some people also of warm blood undertook to

resolve as commees for proscribing the refugees.  But they were few,

scattered here & there through the several states, were absolutely

unnoticed by those both in & out of power, and never expressed an

idea of not acquiescing ultimately under the decisions of their

governments.  The greatest difficulty we find is to get money from

them.  The reason is not founded in their unwillingness, but in their

real inability.  You were a witness to the total destruction of our

commerce, devastation of our country, and absence of the precious

metals.  It cannot be expected that these should flow in but through

the channels of commerce, or that these channels can be opened in the

first instant of peace.  Time is requisite to avail ourselves of the

productions of the earth, and the first of these will be applied to

renew our stock of those necessaries of which we had been totally

exhausted.  But enough of America it's politics & poverty.  --

Science I suppose is going on with you rapidly as usual.  I am in

daily hopes of seeing something from your pen which may portray us to

ourselves.  Aware of the bias of self love & prejudice in myself and

that your pictures will be faithful I am determined to annihilate my

own opinions and give full credit to yours.  I must caution you to

distrust information from my answers to Monsr. de Marbois' queries.

I have lately had a little leisure to revise them.  I found some

things should be omitted, many corrected, and more supplied &

enlarged.  They are swelled to treble bulk.  Being now too much for

M.S. copies I think the ensuing spring to print a dozen or 20 copies

to be given to my friends, not suffering another to go out.  As I

have presumed to place you in that number I shall take the liberty of

sending you a copy as a testimony of the sincere esteem and affection

with which I have the honor to be D'r Sir Your mo. ob.  & mo. hbl

serv't





        WESTERN COMMERCE

 

        _To George Washington_

        _Annapolis, Mar. 15, 1784_



        D'r. SIR, -- Since my last nothing new has occurred, I suppose

the crippled state of Congress is not new to you.  We have only 9

states present, 8. of whom are represented by two members each, and

of course, on all great questions not only an unanimity of States but

of members is necessary.  An unanimity which never can be obtained on

a matter of any importance.  The consequence is that we are wasting

our time & labour in vain efforts to do business. -- Nothing less

than the presence of 13. States, represented by an odd number of

delegates will enable us to get forward a single capital point.  The

deed for the cession of Western territory by Virginia was executed &

accepted on the 1'st instant.  I hope our country will of herself

determine to cede still further to the meridian of the mouth of the

great Kanhaway.  Further she cannot govern; so far is necessary for

her own well being.  The reasons which call for this boundary (which

will retain all the waters of the Kanhaway) are 1.  That within that

are our lead mines.  2. This river rising in N.  Carola traverses our

whole latitude and offers to every part of it a channel for

navigation & commerce to the Western Country, but 3. It is a channel

which can not be opened but at immense expense and with every

facility which an absolute power over both shores will give.  4. This

river & it's waters forms a band of good land passing along our whole

frontier, and forming on it a barrier which will be strongly seated.

5. For 180 miles beyond these waters is a mountainous barren which

can never be inhabited & will of course form a safe separation

between us & any other State.  6. This tract of country lies more

convenient to receive it's government from Virginia than from any

other State.  7. It will preserve to us all the upper parts of

Yohogany & Cheat rivers within which much will be done to open these

which are the true doors to the Western commerce.  The union of this

navigation with that of the Patowmac is a subject on which I

mentioned that I would take the liberty of writing to you.  I am sure

it's value and practicability are both well known to you.  This is

the moment however for seizing it if ever we mean to have it.  All

the world is becoming commercial.  Was it practicable to keep our new

empire separated from them we might indulge ourselves in speculating

whether commerce contributes to the happiness of mankind.  But we

cannot separate ourselves from them.  Our citizens have had too full

a taste of the comforts furnished by the arts & manufactures to be

debarred the use of them.  We must then in our defence endeavour to

share as large a portion as we can of this modern source of wealth &

power.  That offered to us from the Western Country is under a

competition between the Hudson, the Patowmac & the Missisipi itself.

Down the last will pass all heavy commodities.  But the navigation

through the gulf of Mexico is so dangerous, & that up the Missisipi

so difficult & tedious, that it is not probable that European

merchandize will return through that channel.  It is most likely that

flour, lumber & other heavy articles will be floated on rafts which

will be themselves an article of sale as well as their loading, the

navigators returning by land or in light batteaux.  There will

therefore be a rivalship between the Hudson & Patowmac for the

residue of the commerce of all the country Westward of L. Erie, on

the waters of the lakes, of the Ohio & upper parts of the Missisipi.

To go to N. York, that part of the trade which comes from the lakes

or their waters must first be brought into L. Erie.  So also must

that which comes from the waters of the Missisipi, and of course must

cross at some portage into the waters of the lakes.  When it shall

have entered L. Erie it must coast along it's Southern Shore on

account of the number & excellence of it's harbours, the Northern,

tho' shortest, having few harbours & these unsafe.  Having reached

Cuyahoga, to proceed on to N. York will be 970 miles from thence &

five portages, whereas it is but 430 miles to Alexandria, if it turns

into the Cuyahoga & passes through that, Big beaver, Ohio, Yohogany

(or Monongahela & Cheat) & Patowmac, & there are but two portages.

For the trade of the Ohio or that which shall come into it from it's

own waters or the Missisipi, it is nearer to Alexandria than to New

York by 730 miles, and is interrupted by one portage only.  Nature

then has declared in favour of the Patowmac, and through that channel

offers to pour into our lap the whole commerce of the Western world.

But unfortunately the channel by the Hudson is already open & known

in practice; ours is still to be opened.  This is the moment in which

the trade of the West will begin to get into motion and to take it's

direction.  It behoves us then to open our doors to it.  I have

lately pressed this subject on my friends in the General assembly,

proposing to them to endeavor to have a tax laid which shall bring

into a separate chest from five to ten thousand pounds a year, to be

employed first in opening the upper waters of the Ohio & Patowmac,

where a little money & time will do a great deal, leaving the great

falls for the last part of the work.  To remove the idea of

partiality I have suggested the propriety & justice of continuing

this fund till all the rivers shall be cleared successively.  But a

most powerful objection always arises to propositions of this kind.

It is that public undertakings are carelessly managed and much money

spent to little purpose.  To obviate this objection is the purpose of

my giving you the trouble of this discussion.  You have retired from

public life.  You have weighed this determination & it would be

impertinence in me to touch it.  But would the superintendence of

this work break in too much on the sweets of retirement & repose?  If

they would I stop here.  Your future time & wishes are sacred in my

eye.  If it would be only a dignified amusement to you, what a

monument of your retirement would it be!  It is one which would

follow that of your public life and bespeak it the work of the same

great hand.  I am confident that would you either alone or jointly

with any persons you think proper be willing to direct this business,

it would remove the only objection the weight of which I apprehend.

Tho' the tax should not come in till the fall, it's proceeds should

be anticipated by borrowing from some other fund to enable the work

to be begun this summer.  When you view me as not owning, nor ever

having a prospect of owning one inch of land on any water either of

the Patowmac or Ohio, it will tend to apologize for the trouble I

have given you of this long letter, by showing that my zeal in this

business is public & pure.  The best atonement for the time I have

occupied you will be not to add to it longer than while I assure you

of the sincerity & esteem with which I have the honour to be D'r. Sir

Your most obedient & most humble servt.



        P. S. The hurry of time in my former letter prevented my

thanking you for your polite & friendly invitation to Mount Vernon.

I shall certainly pay my respects there to Mrs Washington & yourself

with great pleasure whenever it shall be in my power.





        THE SOCIETY OF THE CINCINNATI



        _To George Washington_

        _Annapolis, Apr. 16, 1784_



        DEAR SIR -- I received your favor of Apr. 8. by Colo. Harrison.

The subject of it is interesting, and, so far as you have stood

connected with it, has been matter of anxiety to me; because whatever

may be the ultimate fate of the institution of the Cincinnati, as in

it's course it draws to it some degree of disapprobation, I have

wished to see you standing on ground separated from it, and that the

character which will be handed to future ages at the head of our

revolution may in no instance be compromitted in subordinate

altercations.  The subject has been at the point of my pen in every

letter I have written to you, but has been still restrained by the

reflection that you had among your friends more able counsellors,

and, in yourself, one abler than them all.  Your letter has now

rendered a duty what was before a desire, and I cannot better merit

your confidence than by a full and free communication of facts &

sentiments, as far as they have come within my observation.  When the

army was about to be disbanded, & the officers to take final leave,

perhaps never again to meet, it was natural for men who had

accompanied each other thro' so many scenes of hardship, of

difficulty and danger, who in a variety of instances must have been

rendered mutually dear by those aids & good offices to which their

situations had given occasion; it was natural I say for these to

seize with fondness any proposition which promised to bring them

together again at certain & regular periods.  And this I take for

granted was the origin & object of this institution; & I have no

suspicion that they foresaw, much less intended, those mischiefs,

which exist perhaps in the forebodings of politicians only.  I doubt

however whether, in it's execution, it would be found to answer the

wishes of those who framed it, and to foster those friendships it was

intended to preserve.  The members would be brought together at their

annual assemblies no longer to encounter a common enemy, but to

encounter one another in debate & sentiment.  For something I suppose

is to be done at these meetings, & however unimportant, it will

suffice to produce difference of opinion, contradiction & irritation.

The way to make friends quarrel is to put them in disputation under

the public eye.  An experience of near twenty years has taught me

that few friendships stand this test, & that public assemblies, where

every one is free to act & speak, are the most powerful looseners of

the bands of private friendship.  I think therefore that this

institution would fail in it's principal object, the perpetuation of

the personal friendships contracted thro' the war.



        The objections of those who are opposed to the institution

shall be briefly sketched.  You will readily fill them up.  They urge

that it is against the confederation -- against the letter of some of

our constitutions; -- against the spirit of all of them -- that the

foundation on which all these are built is the natural equality of

man, the denial of every preeminence but that annexed to legal

office, & particularly the denial of a preeminence by birth; that

however, in their present dispositions, citizens might decline

accepting honorary instalments into the order, a time may come when a

change of dispositions would render these flattering, when a well

directed distribution of them might draw into the order all the men

of talents, of office & wealth, and in this case would probably

procure an ingraftment into the government; that in this they will be

supported by their foreign members, & the wishes & influence of

foreign courts; that experience has shewn that the hereditary

branches of modern governments are the patrons of privilege &

prerogative, & not of the natural rights of the people whose

oppressors they generally are: that besides these evils, which are

remote, others may take place more immediately; that a distinction is

kept up between the civil & military, which it is for the happiness

of both to obliterate; that when the members assemble they will be

proposing to do something, & what that something may be will depend

on actual circumstances; that being an organized body under habits of

subordination, the first obstructions to enterprize will be already

surmounted; that the moderation & virtue of a single character has

probably prevented this revolution from being closed as most others

have been, by a subversion of that liberty it was intended to

establish; that he is not immortal, & his successor, or some of his

successors, may be led by false calculation into a less certain road

to glory:



 

        What are the sentiments of Congress on this subject, & what

line they will pursue, can only be stated conjecturally.  Congress,

as a body, if left to themselves, will in my opinion say nothing on

the subject.  They may however be forced into a declaration by

instructions from some of the states, or by other incidents.  Their

sentiments, if forced from them, will be unfriendly to the

institution.  If permitted to pursue their own path, they will check

it by side blows whenever it comes in their way, & ---, in

competitions for office, on equal or nearly equal ground, will give

silent preferences to those who are not of the fraternity.  My

reasons for thinking this are 1.  The grounds on which they lately

declined the foreign order proposed to be conferred on some of our

citizens.  2. The fourth of the fundamental articles of constitution

for the new states.  I inclose you the report.  It has been

considered by Congress, recommitted & reformed by a committee

according to sentiments expressed on other parts of it, but the

principle referred to, having not been controverted at all, stands in

this as in the original report.  It is not yet confirmed by Congress.

3. Private conversations on this subject with the members.  Since the

receipt of your letter I have taken occasion to extend these; not

indeed to the military members, because, being of the order, delicacy

forbade it; but to the others pretty generally; and among these I

have as yet found but one who is not opposed to the institution, &

that with an anguish of mind, tho' covered under a guarded silence,

which I have not seen produced by any circumstance before.  I arrived

at Philadelphia before the separation of the last Congress, & saw

there & at Princetown some of its members not now in delegation.

Burke's piece happened to come out at that time, which occasioned

this institution to be the subject of conversation.  I found the same

impressions made on them which their successors have received.  I

hear from other quarters that it is disagreeable generally to such

citizens as have attended to it, & therefore will probably be so to

all when any circumstance shall present it to the notice of all.



        This, Sir, is as faithful an account of sentiments & facts as I

am able to give you.  You know the extent of the circle within which

my observations are at present circumscribed, & can estimate how far,

as forming a part of the general opinion, it may merit notice, or

ought to influence your particular conduct.



        It remains now to pay obedience to that part of your letter

which requests sentiments on the most eligible measures to be pursued

by the society at their next meeting.  I must be far from pretending

to be a judge of what would in fact be the most eligible measures for

the society.  I can only give you the opinions of those with whom I

have conversed, & who, as I have before observed, are unfriendly to

it.  They lead to these conclusions.  1. If the society proceeds

according to it's institution, it will be better to make no

applications to Congress on that subject or any other in their

associated character.  2. If they should propose to modify it, so as

to render it unobjectionable, I think this would not be effected

without such a modification as would amount almost to annihilation;

for such would it be to part with it's inheritability, it's

organization, & it's assemblies.  3. If they shall be disposed to

discontinue the whole, it would remain with them to determine whether

they would chuse it to be done by their own act only, or by a

reference of the matter to Congress which would infallibly produce a

recommendation of total discontinuance.



        You will be sensible, Sir, that these communications are

without all reserve.  I supposed such to be your wish, & mean them

but as materials with such others as you may collect, for your better

judgment to work on.  I consider the whole matter as between

ourselves alone, having determined to take no active part in this or

anything else, which may lead to altercation, or disturb that quiet &

tranquillity of mind to which I consign the remaining portion of my

life.  I have been thrown back by events on a stage where I had never

more thought to appear.  It is but for a time however, & as a day

labourer, free to withdraw, or be withdrawn at will.  While I remain

I shall pursue in silence the path of right, but in every situation,

public or private, I shall be gratified by all occasions of rendering

you service, & of convincing you there is no one to whom your

reputation & happiness are dearer.





        HOT-AIR BALLOONS



        _To Dr. Philip Turpin_

        _Annapolis, Apr. 28, 1784_



        DEAR SIR -- Supposing you may not have received intelligence to

be relied on as to the reality & extent of the late discovery of

traversing the air in ballons, & having lately perused a book in

which everything is brought together on that subject as low down as

Decemb. last, I will give you a detail of it. I will state the

several experiments, with the most interesting circumstances

attending them, by way of table, which will give you a clearer view &

in less compass.



        They suppose the minimum of these ballons to be of 6 inches

diameter: these are constructed of gold-beaters' skin & filled with

inflammeable air. this air produced from iron-filings, the vitriolic

acid & distilled water is, in weight, to Atmospheric air as 7. to 43.

on an average of the trials: & when produced from the filings of

Zinc, the Marine acid & distilled water, is to the Atmospheric air as

5. to 53. or 1. to 10 1/2. but Montgolfier's air is half the weight

of Atmospheric. this is produced by burning straw & wool. the straw

must be dry & open, & the wool shred very fine, so that they may make

a clear flame, with as little smoke as possible. 50 lb. of straw & 5

lb. of wool filled the ballons of Oct. 19. & Nov. 21. in five

minutes. these ballons contained 60,000 cubic feet. no analysis of

this air is given us. Mons'r de Saintford the author of the book,

gives us a very great & useless display of Mathematical learning,

which certainly has as yet had very little to do with this discovery:

& when he comes to the chemical investigations, which are

interesting, he sais little. the ballons sometimes were torn by the

pressure of the internal air being insufficiently counteracted in the

higher regions of the Atmosphere. these rents were of 6. or 7. f.

length, yet the machine descended with a gentle equable motion & not

with an accelerated one. by the trials at Versailles & Champ de Mars

it appears that they will go with a moderate wind 150. leagues in 24

hours. there are yet two principal desiderata.  1. the cheapest &

easiest process of making the lightest inflammable air.  2. an

envelopment which will be light, strong, impervious to the air &

proof against rain. supplies of gas are desireable



        too, without being oblirry fire with the machine: for in those

in which men ascended there was a store of straw & wool laid in the

gallery which surrounded the bottom of the ballon & in which the men

stood, & a chaffing dish of 3. feet cube in which they burnt the

materials to supply air. it is conjectured that these machines may be

guided by oars & raised & depressed by having vessels wherein, by the

aid of pumps, they can produce a vacuum or condensation of

atmospheric air at will. they are, from some new circumstances,

strengthened in the opinion that there are generally opposite or

different currents in the atmosphere: & that if the current next the

earth is not in the direction which suits you, by ascending higher

you may find one that does. between these there is probably a region

of eddy where you may be stationary if philosophical experiments be

your object. the uses of this discovery are suggested to be 1.

transportation of commodities under some circumstances.  2.

traversing deserts, countries possessed by an enemy, or ravaged by

infectious disorders, pathless & inaccessible mountains.  3.

conveying intelligence into a beseiged place, or perhaps enterprising

on it, reconnoitring an army &c.  4. throwing new lights on the

thermometer, barometer, hygrometer, rain, snow, hail, wind & other

phenomena of which the Atmosphere is the theatre.  5. the discovery

of the pole which is but one day's journey in a baloon. from where

the ice has hitherto stopped adventurers.  6. raising weights;

lightening ships over bars.  7. housebreaking, smuggling &c. some of

these objects are ludicrous, others serious, important & probable.  I

will give you the figures of the baloons on the last page.

 

        Congress has determined to adjourn on the 3d of June to meet in

November at Trenton. a vessel arrived here yesterday which left

London the 25th of March. she brings papers to the 20th of that

month. mr. Pitt was still in place, supported by the city of London,

the nation in general, & the House of Lords. still however the

majority in the H. of commons was against him, tho reduced to 12. it

was thought the parliament would be dissolved.



 

        Be so good as to present my dutiful respects to my uncle & aunt

& to be assured of the esteem with which I am Dr. Sir

        your friend & serv't





        "NIL DESPERANDUM"



        _To Richard Price_

        _Paris, Feb. 1, 1785_



        SIR, -- The copy of your Observations on the American

Revolution which you were so kind as to direct to me came duly to

hand, and I should sooner have acknowledged the receipt of it but

that I awaited a private conveiance for my letter, having experienced

much delay and uncertainty in the posts between this place and

London.  I have read it with very great pleasure, as have done many

others to whom I have communicated it.  The spirit which it breathes

is as affectionate as the observations themselves are wise and just.

I have no doubt it will be reprinted in America and produce much good

there.  The want of power in the federal head was early perceived,

and foreseen to be the flaw in our constitution which might endanger

its destruction.  I have the pleasure to inform you that when I left

America in July the people were becoming universally sensible of

this, and a spirit to enlarge the powers of Congress was becoming

general.  Letters and other information recently received shew that

this has continued to increase, and that they are likely to remedy

this evil effectually.  The happiness of governments like ours,

wherein the people are truly the mainspring, is that they are never

to be despaired of.  When an evil becomes so glaring as to strike

them generally, they arrouse themselves, and it is redressed.  He

only is then the popular man and can get into office who shews the

best dispositions to reform the evil.  This truth was obvious on

several occasions during the late war, and this character in our

governments saved us.  Calamity was our best physician.  Since the

peace it was observed that some nations of Europe, counting on the

weakness of Congress and the little probability of a union in measure

among the States, were proposing to grasp at unequal advantages in

our commerce.  The people are become sensible of this, and you may be

assured that this evil will be immediately redressed, and redressed

radically.  I doubt still whether in this moment they will enlarge

those powers in Congress which are necessary to keep the peace among

the States.  I think it possible that this may be suffered to lie

till some two States commit hostilities on each other, but in that

moment the hand of the union will be lifted up and interposed, and

the people will themselves demand a general concession to Congress of

means to prevent similar mischeifs.  Our motto is truly "nil

desperandum." The apprehensions you express of danger from the want

of powers in Congress, led me to note to you this character in our

governments, which, since the retreat behind the Delaware, and the

capture of Charlestown, has kept my mind in perfect quiet as to the

ultimate fate of our union; and I am sure, from the spirit which

breathes thro your book, that whatever promises permanence to that

will be a comfort to your mind.  I have the honour to be, with very

sincere esteem and respect, Sir,

        Your most obedient and most humble serv't.





        ON AMERICAN DEGENERACY



        _To Chastellux_

        _Paris, June 7, 1785_



        DEAR SIR, -- I have been honored with the receipt of your

letter of the 2nd instant, and am to thank you, as I do sincerely,

for the partiality with which you receive the copy of the Notes on my

country.  As I can answer for the facts therein reported on my own

observation, and have admitted none on the report of others, which

were not supported by evidence sufficient to command my own assent, I

am not afraid that you should make any extracts you please for the

Journal de Physique, which come within their plan of publication.

The strictures on slavery and on the constitution of Virginia, are

not of that kind, and they are the parts which I do not wish to have

made public, at least, till I know whether their publication would do

most harm or good.  It is possible, that in my own country, these

strictures might produce an irritation, which would indispose the

people towards the two great objects I have in view; that is, the

emancipation of their slaves, and the settlement of their

constitution on a firmer and more permanent basis.  If I learn from

thence, that they will not produce that effect, I have printed and

reserved just copies enough to be able to give one to every young man

at the College.  It is to them I look, to the rising generation, and

not to the one now in power, for these great reformations.  The other

copy, delivered at your hotel, was for Monsieur de Buffon.  I meant

to ask the favor of you to have it sent to him, as I was ignorant how

to do it.  I have one also for Monsieur Daubenton, but being utterly

unknown to him, I cannot take the liberty of presenting it, till I

can do it through some common acquaintance.



        I will beg leave to say here a few words on the general

question of the degeneracy of animals in America.  1. As to the

degeneracy of the man of Europe transplanted to America, it is no

part of Monsieur de Buffon's system.  He goes, indeed, within one

step of it, but he stops there.  The Abbe Raynal alone has taken that

step.  Your knowledge of America enables you to judge this question,

to say, whether the lower class of people in America, are less

informed and less susceptible of information, than the lower class in

Europe: and whether those in America, who have received such an

education as that country can give, are less improved by it than

Europeans of the same degree of education.  2. As to the aboriginal

man of America, I know of no respectable evidence on which the

opinion of his inferiority of genius has been founded, but that of

Don Ulloa.  As to Robertson, he never was in America, he relates

nothing on his own knowledge, he is a compiler only of the relations

of others, and a mere translator of the opinions of Monsieur de

Buffon.  I should as soon, therefore, add the translators of

Robertson to the witnesses of this fact, as himself.  Paw, the

beginner of this charge, was a compiler from the works of others; and

of the most unlucky description; for he seems to have read the

writings of travellers, only to collect and republish their lies.  It

is really remarkable, that in three volumes 12mo, of small print, it

is scarcely possible to find one truth, and yet, that the author

should be able to produce authority for every fact he states, as he

says he can.  Don Ulloa's testimony is of the most respectable.  He

wrote of what he saw, but he saw the Indian of South America only,

and that, after he had passed through ten generations of slavery.  It

is very unfair, from this sample, to judge of the natural genius of

this race of men; and after supposing that Don Ulloa had not

sufficiently calculated the allowance which should be made for this

circumstance, we do him no injury in considering the picture he draws

of the present Indians of South America, as no picture of what their

ancestors were, three hundred years ago.  It is in North America we

are to seek their original character.  And I am safe in affirming,

that the proofs of genius given by the Indians of North America,

place them on a level with whites in the same uncultivated state.

The North of Europe furnishes subjects enough for comparison with

them, and for a proof of their equality.  I have seen some thousands

myself, and conversed much with them, and have found in them a

masculine, sound understanding.  I have had much information from men

who had lived among them, and whose veracity and good sense were so

far known to me, as to establish a reliance on their information.

They have all agreed in bearing witness in favor of the genius of

this people.  As to their bodily strength, their manners rendering it

disgraceful to labor, those muscles employed in labor will be weaker

with them, than with the European laborer; but those which are

exerted in the chase, and those faculties which are employed in the

tracing an enemy or a wild beast, in contriving ambuscades for him,

and in carrying them through their execution, are much stronger than

with us, because they are more exercised.  I believe the Indian,

then, to be, in body and mind, equal to the white man.  I have

supposed the black man, in his present state, might not be so; but it

would be hazardous to affirm, that, equally cultivated for a few

generations, he would not become so.  3. As to the inferiority of the

other animals of America, without more facts, I can add nothing to

what I have said in my Notes.



        As to the theory of Monsieur de Buffon, that heat is friendly,

and moisture adverse to the production of large animals, I am lately

furnished with a fact by Dr. Franklin, which proves the air of London

and of Paris to be more humid than that of Philadelphia, and so

creates a suspicion that the opinion of the superior humidity of

America may, perhaps, have been too hastily adopted.  And supposing

that fact admitted, I think the physical reasonings urged to show,

that in a moist country animals must be small, and that in a hot one

they must be large, are not built on the basis of experiment.  These

questions, however, cannot be decided, ultimately, at this day.  More

facts must be collected, and more time flow off, before the world

will be ripe for decision.  In the mean time, doubt is wisdom.



        I have been fully sensible of the anxieties of your situation,

and that your attentions were wholly consecrated, where alone they

were wholly due, to the succour of friendship and worth.  However

much I prize your society, I wait with patience the moment when I can

have it without taking what is due to another.  In the mean time, I

am solaced with the hope of possessing your friendship, and that it

is not ungrateful to you to receive assurances of that with which I

have the honor to be, Dear Sir,

 

        your most obedient,

        and most humble servant,

