





        LIGHT AND LIBERTY AND THE PARTIES




        _To John Adams_

        _Monticello, June 15, 1813_




        DEAR SIR -- I wrote you a letter on the 27th. of May, which

probably would reach you about the 3d. inst. and on the 9th. I

recieved yours of the 29th. of May.  Of Lindsay's Memoirs I had never

before heard, and scarcely indeed of himself.  It could not therefore

but be unexpected that two letters of mine should have any thing to

do with his life.  The name of his editor was new to me, and

certainly presents itself, for the first time, under unfavorable

circumstances.  Religion, I suppose, is the scope of his book: and

that a writer on that subject should usher himself to the world in

the very act of the grossest abuse of confidence, by publishing

private letters which passed between two friends, with no views to

their ever being made public, is an instance of inconsistency, as

well as of infidelity of which I would rather be the victim than the

author.  By your kind quotation of the dates of my two letters I have

been enabled to turn to them.  They had compleatly evanished from my

memory.  The last is on the subject of religion, and by it's

publication will gratify the priesthood with new occasion of

repeating their Comminations against me.  They wish it to be believed

that he can have no religion who advocates it's freedom.  This was

not the doctrine of Priestley, and I honored him for the example of

liberality he set to his order.  The first letter is political.  It

recalls to our recollection the gloomy transactions of the times, the

doctrines they witnessed, and the sensibilities they excited.  It was

a confidential communication of reflections on these from one friend

to another, deposited in his bosom, and never meant to trouble the

public mind.  Whether the character of the times is justly portrayed

or not, posterity will decide.  But on one feature of them they can

never decide, the sensations excited in free yet firm minds, by the

terrorism of the day.  None can concieve who did not witness them,

and they were felt by one party only.  This letter exhibits their

side of the medal.  The Federalists no doubt have presented the

other, in their private correspondences, as well as open action.  If

these correspondencies should ever be laid open to the public eye,

they will probably be found not models of comity towards their

adversaries.  The readers of my letter should be cautioned not to

confine it's view to this country alone.  England and it's alarmists

were equally under consideration.  Still less must they consider it

as looking personally towards you.  You happen indeed to be quoted

because you happened to express, more pithily than had been done by

themselves, one of the mottos of the party.  This was in your answer

to the address of the young men of Philadelphia.  [See Selection of

patriotic addresses. pa. 198.] One of the questions you know on which

our parties took different sides, was on the improvability of the

human mind, in science, in ethics, in government etc.  Those who

advocated reformation of institutions, pari passu, with the progress

of science, maintained that no definite limits could be assigned to

that progress.  The enemies of reform, on the other hand, denied

improvement, and advocated steady adherence to the principles,

practices and institutions of our fathers, which they represented as

the consummation of wisdom, and akme of excellence, beyond which the

human mind could never advance.  Altho' in the passage of your answer

alluded to, you expressly disclaim the wish to influence the freedom

of enquiry, you predict that that will produce nothing more worthy of

transmission to posterity, than the principles, institutions, and

systems of education recieved from their ancestors.  I do not

consider this as your deliberate opinion.  You possess, yourself, too

much science, not to see how much is still ahead of you, unexplained

and unexplored.  Your own consciousness must place you as far before

our ancestors, as in the rear of our posterity.  I consider it as an

expression lent to the prejudices of your friends; and altho' I

happened to cite it from you, the whole letter shews I had them only

in view.  In truth, my dear Sir, we were far from considering you as

the author of all the measures we blamed.  They were placed under the

protection of your name, but we were satisfied they wanted much of

your approbation.  We ascribed them to their real authors, the

Pickerings, the Wolcotts, the Tracys, the Sedgwicks, et id genus omne

["and all of their kind"], with whom we supposed you in a state of

Duresse.  I well remember a conversation with you, in the morning of

the day on which you nominated to the Senate a substitute for

Pickering, in which you expressed a just impatience under `the legacy

of Secretaries which Gen. Washington had left you' and whom you

seemed therefore to consider as under public protection.  Many other

incidents shewed how differently you would have acted with less

impassioned advisers; and subsequent events have proved that your

minds were not together.  You would do me great injustice therefore

by taking to yourself what was intended for men who were then your

secret, as they are now your open enemies.  Should you write on the

subject, as you propose, I am sure we shall see you place yourself

farther from them than from us.




        As to myself, I shall take no part in any discussions.  I leave

others to judge of what I have done, and to give me exactly that

place which they shall think I have occupied.  Marshall has written

libels on one side; others, I suppose, will be written on the other

side; and the world will sift both, and separate the truth as well as

they can.  I should see with reluctance the passions of that day

rekindled in this, while so many of the actors are living, and all

are too near the scene not to participate in sympathies with them.

About facts, you and I cannot differ; because truth is our mutual

guide.  And if any opinions you may express should be different from

mine, I shall recieve them with the liberality and indulgence which I

ask for my own, and still cherish with warmth the sentiments of

affectionate respect of which I can with so much truth tender you the

assurance.







        DEBT, TAXES, BANKS, AND PAPER




        _To John Wayles Eppes_

        _Monticello, June 24, 1813_




        DEAR SIR, -- This letter will be on politics only.  For

although I do not often permit myself to think on that subject, it

sometimes obtrudes itself, and suggests ideas which I am tempted to

pursue.  Some of these relating to the business of finance, I will

hazard to you, as being at the head of that committee, but intended

for yourself individually, or such as you trust, but certainly not

for a mixed committee.




        It is a wise rule and should be fundamental in a government

disposed to cherish its credit, and at the same time to restrain the

use of it within the limits of its faculties, "never to borrow a

dollar without laying a tax in the same instant for paying the

interest annually, and the principal within a given term; and to

consider that tax as pledged to the creditors on the public faith."

On such a pledge as this, sacredly observed, a government may always

command, on a _reasonable interest_, all the lendable money of their

citizens, while the necessity of an equivalent tax is a salutary

warning to them and their constituents against oppressions,

bankruptcy, and its inevitable consequence, revolution.  But the term

of redemption must be moderate, and at any rate within the limits of

their rightful powers.  But what limits, it will be asked, does this

prescribe to their powers?  What is to hinder them from creating a

perpetual debt?  The laws of nature, I answer.  The earth belongs to

the living, not to the dead.  The will and the power of man expire

with his life, by nature's law.  Some societies give it an artificial

continuance, for the encouragement of industry; some refuse it, as

our aboriginal neighbors, whom we call barbarians.  The generations

of men may be considered as bodies or corporations.  Each generation

has the usufruct of the earth during the period of its continuance.

When it ceases to exist, the usufruct passes on to the succeeding

generation, free and unincumbered, and so on, successively, from one

generation to another forever.  We may consider each generation as a

distinct nation, with a right, by the will of its majority, to bind

themselves, but none to bind the succeeding generation, more than the

inhabitants of another country.  Or the case may be likened to the

ordinary one of a tenant for life, who may hypothecate the land for

his debts, during the continuance of his usufruct; but at his death,

the reversioner (who is also for life only) receives it exonerated

from all burthen.  The period of a generation, or the term of its

life, is determined by the laws of mortality, which, varying a little

only in different climates, offer a general average, to be found by

observation.  I turn, for instance, to Buffon's tables, of

twenty-three thousand nine hundred and ninety-four deaths, and the

ages at which they happened, and I find that of the numbers of all

ages living at one moment, half will be dead in twenty-four years and

eight months.  But (leaving out minors, who have not the power of

self-government) of the adults (of twenty-one years of age) living at

one moment, a majority of whom act for the society, one half will be

dead in eighteen years and eight months.  At nineteen years then from

the date of a contract, the majority of the contractors are dead, and

their contract with them.  Let this general theory be applied to a

particular case.  Suppose the annual births of the State of New York

to be twenty-three thousand nine hundred and ninety-four, the whole

number of its inhabitants, according to Buffon, will be six hundred

and seventeen thousand seven hundred and three, of all ages.  Of

these there would constantly be two hundred and sixty-nine thousand

two hundred and eighty-six minors, and three hundred and forty-eight

thousand four hundred and seventeen adults, of which last, one

hundred and seventy-four thousand two hundred and nine will be a

majority.  Suppose that majority, on the first day of the year 1794,

had borrowed a sum of money equal to the fee-simple value of the

State, and to have consumed it in eating, drinking and making merry

in their day; or, if your please, in quarrelling and fighting with

their unoffending neighbors.  Within eighteen years and eight months,

one half of the adult citizens were dead.  Till then, being the

majority, they might rightfully levy the interest of their debt

annually on themselves and their fellow-revellers, or

fellow-champions.  But at that period, say at this moment, a new

majority have come into place, in their own right, and not under the

rights, the conditions, or laws of their predecessors.  Are they

bound to acknowledge the debt, to consider the preceding generation

as having had a right to eat up the whole soil of their country, in

the course of a life, to alienate it from them, (for it would be an

alienation to the creditors,) and would they think themselves either

legally or morally bound to give up their country and emigrate to

another for subsistence?  Every one will say no; that the soil is the

gift of God to the living, as much as it had been to the deceased

generation; and that the laws of nature impose no obligation on them

to pay this debt.  And although, like some other natural rights, this

has not yet entered into any declaration of rights, it is no less a

law, and ought to be acted on by honest governments.  It is, at the

same time, a salutary curb on the spirit of war and indebtment,

which, since the modern theory of the perpetuation of debt, has

drenched the earth with blood, and crushed its inhabitants under

burthens ever accumulating.  Had this principle been declared in the

British bill of rights, England would have been placed under the

happy disability of waging eternal war, and of contracting her

thousand millions of public debt.  In seeking, then, for an ultimate

term for the redemption of our debts, let us rally to this principle,

and provide for their payment within the term of nineteen years at

the farthest.  Our government has not, as yet, begun to act on the

rule of loans and taxation going hand in hand.  Had any loan taken

place in my time, I should have strongly urged a redeeming tax.  For

the loan which has been made since the last session of Congress, we

should now set the example of appropriating some particular tax,

sufficient to pay the interest annually, and the principal within a

fixed term, less than nineteen years.  And I hope yourself and your

committee will render the immortal service of introducing this

practice.  Not that it is expected that Congress should formally

declare such a principle.  They wisely enough avoid deciding on

abstract questions.  But they may be induced to keep themselves

within its limits.




        I am sorry to see our loans begin at so exorbitant an interest.

And yet, even at that you will soon be at the bottom of the loan-bag.

We are an agricultural nation.  Such an one employs its sparings in

the purchase or improvement of land or stocks.  The lendable money

among them is chiefly that of orphans and wards in the hands of

executors and guardians, and that which the farmer lays by till he

has enough for the purchase in view.  In such a nation there is one

and one only resource for loans, sufficient to carry them through the

expense of war; and that will always be sufficient, and in the power

of an honest government, punctual in the preservation of its faith.

The fund I mean, is _the mass of circulating coin_.  Every one knows,

that although not literally, it is nearly true, that every paper

dollar emitted banishes a silver one from the circulation.  A nation,

therefore, making its purchases and payments with bills fitted for

circulation, thrusts an equal sum of coin out of circulation.  This

is equivalent to borrowing that sum, and yet the vendor receiving

payment in a medium as effectual as coin for his purchases or

payments, has no claim to interest.  And so the nation may continue

to issue its bills as far as its wants require, and the limits of the

circulation will admit.  Those limits are understood to extend with

us at present, to two hundred millions of dollars, a greater sum than

would be necessary for any war.  But this, the only resource which

the government could command with certainty, the States have

unfortunately fooled away, nay corruptly alienated to swindlers and

shavers, under the cover of private banks.  Say, too, as an

additional evil, that the disposal funds of individuals, to this

great amount, have thus been withdrawn from improvement and useful

enterprise, and employed in the useless, usurious and demoralizing

practices of bank directors and their accomplices.  In the war of

1755, our State availed itself of this fund by issuing a paper money,

bottomed on a specific tax for its redemption, and, to insure its

credit, bearing an interest of five per cent.  Within a very short

time, not a bill of this emission was to be found in circulation.  It

was locked up in the chests of executors, guardians, widows, farmers,

&c.  We then issued bills bottomed on a redeeming tax, but bearing no

interest.  These were readily received, and never depreciated a

single farthing.  In the revolutionary war, the old Congress and the

States issued bills without interest, and without tax.  They occupied

the channels of circulation very freely, till those channels were

overflowed by an excess beyond all the calls of circulation.  But

although we have so improvidently suffered the field of circulating

medium to be filched from us by private individuals, yet I think we

may recover it in part, and even in the whole, if the States will

co-operate with us.  If treasury bills are emitted on a tax

appropriated for their redemption in fifteen years, and (to insure

preference in the first moments of competition) bearing an interest

of six per cent. there is no one who would not take them in

preference to the bank paper now afloat, on a principle of patriotism

as well as interest; and they would be withdrawn from circulation

into private hoards to a considerable amount.  Their credit once

established, others might be emitted, bottomed also on a tax, but not

bearing interest; and if ever their credit faltered, open public

loans, on which these bills alone should be received as specie.

These, operating as a sinking fund, would reduce the quantity in

circulation, so as to maintain that in an equilibrium with specie.

It is not easy to estimate the obstacles which, in the beginning, we

should encounter in ousting the banks from their possession of the

circulation; but a steady and judicious alternation of emissions and

loans, would reduce them in time.  But while this is going on,

another measure should be pressed, to recover ultimately our right to

the circulation.  The States should be applied to, to transfer the

right of issuing circulating paper to Congress exclusively, _in

perpetuum_, if possible, but during the war at least, with a saving

of charter rights.  I believe that every State west and South of

Connecticut river, except Delaware, would immediately do it; and the

others would follow in time.  Congress would, of course, begin by

obliging unchartered banks to wind up their affairs within a short

time, and the others as their charters expired, forbidding the

subsequent circulation of their paper.  This they would supply with

their own, bottomed, every emission, on an adequate tax, and bearing

or not bearing interest, as the state of the public pulse should

indicate.  Even in the non-complying States, these bills would make

their way, and supplant the unfunded paper of their banks, by their

solidity, by the universality of their currency, and by their

receivability for customs and taxes.  It would be in their power,

too, to curtail those banks to the amount of their actual specie, by

gathering up their paper, and running it constantly on them.  The

national paper might thus take place even in the non-complying

States.  In this way, I am not without a hope, that this great, this

sole resource for loans in an agricultural country, might yet be

recovered for the use of the nation during war; and, if obtained _in

perpetuum_, it would always be sufficient to carry us through any

war; provided, that in the interval between war and war, all the

outstanding paper should be called in, coin be permitted to flow in

again, and to hold the field of circulation until another war should

require its yielding place again to the national medium.




        But it will be asked, are we to have no banks?  Are merchants

and others to be deprived of the resource of short accommodations,

found so convenient?  I answer, let us have banks; but let them be

such as are alone to be found in any country on earth, except Great

Britain.  There is not a bank of discount on the continent of Europe,

(at least there was not one when I was there,) which offers anything

but cash in exchange for discounted bills.  No one has a natural

right to the trade of a money lender, but he who has the money to

lend.  Let those then among us, who have a monied capital, and who

prefer employing it in loans rather than otherwise, set up banks, and

give cash or national bills for the notes they discount.  Perhaps, to

encourage them, a larger interest than is legal in the other cases

might be allowed them, on the condition of their lending for short

periods only.  It is from Great Britain we copy the idea of giving

paper in exchange for discounted bills; and while we have derived

from that country some good principles of government and legislation,

we unfortunately run into the most servile imitation of all her

practices, ruinous as they prove to her, and with the gulph yawning

before us into which these very practices are precipitating her.  The

unlimited emission of bank paper has banished all her specie, and is

now, by a depreciation acknowledged by her own statesmen, carrying

her rapidly to bankruptcy, as it did France, as it did us, and will

do us again, and every country permitting paper to be circulated,

other than that by public authority, rigorously limited to the just

measure for circulation.  Private fortunes, in the present state of

our circulation, are at the mercy of those self-created money

lenders, and are prostrated by the floods of nominal money with which

their avarice deluges us.  He who lent his money to the public or to

an individual, before the institution of the United States Bank,

twenty years ago, when wheat was well sold at a dollar the bushel,

and receives now his nominal sum when it sells at two dollars, is

cheated of half his fortune; and by whom?  By the banks, which, since

that, have thrown into circulation ten dollars of their nominal money

where was one at that time.




        Reflect, if you please, on these ideas, and use them or not as

they appear to merit.  They comfort me in the belief, that they point

out a resource ample enough, without overwhelming war taxes, for the

expense of the war, and possibly still recoverable; and that they

hold up to all future time a resource within ourselves, ever at the

command of government, and competent to any wars into which we may be

forced.  Nor is it a slight object to equalize taxes through peace

and war.




        I was in Bedford a fortnight in the month of May, and did not

know that Francis and his cousin Baker were within 10. miles of me at

Lynchburg.  I learnt it by letters from themselves after I had

returned home.  I shall go there early in August and hope their

master will permit them to pass their Saturdays & Sundays with me.

Ever affectionately yours.







        NO PATENTS ON IDEAS




        _To Isaac McPherson_

        _Monticello, August 13, 1813_




        SIR, -- Your letter of August 3d asking information on the

subject of Mr. Oliver Evans' exclusive right to the use of what he

calls his Elevators, Conveyers, and Hopper-boys, has been duly

received.  My wish to see new inventions encouraged, and old ones

brought again into useful notice, has made me regret the

circumstances which have followed the expiration of his first patent.

I did not expect the retrospection which has been given to the

reviving law.  For although the second proviso seemed not so clear as

it ought to have been, yet it appeared susceptible of a just

construction; and the retrospective one being contrary to natural

right, it was understood to be a rule of law that where the words of

a statute admit of two constructions, the one just and the other

unjust, the former is to be given them.  The first proviso takes care

of those who had lawfully used Evans' improvements under the first

patent; the second was meant for those who had lawfully erected and

used them after that patent expired, declaring they "should not be

liable to damages therefor." These words may indeed be restrained to

uses already past, but as there is parity of reason for those to

come, there should be parity of law.  Every man should be protected

in his lawful acts, and be certain that no _ex post facto_ law shall

punish or endamage him for them.  But he is endamaged, if forbidden

to use a machine lawfully erected, at considerable expense, unless he

will pay a new and unexpected price for it.  The proviso says that he

who erected and used lawfully should not be liable to pay damages.

But if the proviso had been omitted, would not the law, construed by

natural equity, have said the same thing.  In truth both provisos are

useless.  And shall useless provisos, inserted _pro majori cautela_

only, authorize inferences against justice?  The sentiment that _ex

post facto_ laws are against natural right, is so strong in the

United States, that few, if any, of the State constitutions have

failed to proscribe them.  The federal constitution indeed interdicts

them in criminal cases only; but they are equally unjust in civil as

in criminal cases, and the omission of a caution which would have

been right, does not justify the doing what is wrong.  Nor ought it

to be presumed that the legislature meant to use a phrase in an

unjustifiable sense, if by rules of construction it can be ever

strained to what is just.  The law books abound with similar

instances of the care the judges take of the public integrity.  Laws,

moreover, abridging the natural right of the citizen, should be

restrained by rigorous constructions within their narrowest limits.




        Your letter, however, points to a much broader question,

whether what have received from Mr. Evans the new and proper name of

Elevators, are of his invention.  Because, if they are not, his

patent gives him no right to obstruct others in the use of what they

possessed before.  I assume it is a Lemma, that it is the invention

of the machine itself, which is to give a patent right, and not the

application of it to any particular purpose, of which it is

susceptible.  If one person invents a knife convenient for pointing

our pens, another cannot have a patent right for the same knife to

point our pencils.  A compass was invented for navigating the sea;

another could not have a patent right for using it to survey land.  A

machine for threshing _wheat_ has been invented in Scotland; a second

person cannot get a patent right for the same machine to thresh

_oats_, a third _rye_, a fourth _peas_, a fifth _clover_, &c.  A

string of buckets is invented and used for raising water, ore, &c.,

can a second have a patent right to the same machine for raising

wheat, a third oats, a fourth rye, a fifth peas, &c?  The question

then whether such a string of buckets was invented first by Oliver

Evans, is a mere question of fact in mathematical history.  Now,

turning to such books only as I happen to possess, I find abundant

proof that this simple machinery has been in use from time

immemorial.  Doctor Shaw, who visited Egypt and the Barbary coast in

the years 1727-8-9, in the margin of his map of Egypt, gives us the

figure of what he calls a Persian wheel, which is a string of round

cups or buckets hanging on a pully, over which they revolved,

bringing up water from a well and delivering it into a trough above.

He found this used at Cairo, in a well 264 feet deep, which the

inhabitants believe to have been the work of the patriarch Joseph.

Shaw's travels, 341, Oxford edition of 1738 in folio, and the

Universal History, I. 416, speaking of the manner of watering the

higher lands of Egypt, says, "formerly they made use of Archimedes's

screw, thence named the Egyptian pump, but they now generally use

wheels (wallowers) which carry a rope or chain of earthen pots

holding about seven or eight quarts apiece, and draw the water from

the canals.  There are besides a vast number of wells in Egypt, from

which the water is drawn in the same manner to water the gardens and

fruit trees; so that it is no exaggeration to say, that there are in

Egypt above 200,000 oxen daily employed in this labor." Shaw's name

of Persian wheel has been since given more particularly to a wheel

with buckets, either fixed or suspended on pins, at its periphery.

Mortimer's husbandry, I. 18, Duhamel III. II., Ferguson's Mechanic's

plate, XIII; but his figure, and the verbal description of the

Universal History, prove that the string of buckets is meant under

that name.  His figure differs from Evans' construction in the

circumstances of the buckets being round, and strung through their

bottom on a chain.  But it is the principle, to wit, a string of

buckets, which constitutes the invention, not the form of the

buckets, round, square, or hexagon; nor the manner of attaching them,

nor the material of the connecting band, whether chain, rope, or

leather.  Vitruvius, L. x. c. 9, describes this machinery as a

windlass, on which is a chain descending to the water, with vessels

of copper attached to it; the windlass being turned, the chain moving

on it will raise the vessel, which in passing over the windlass will

empty the water they have brought up into a reservoir.  And Perrault,

in his edition of Vitruvius, Paris, 1684, fol. plates 61, 62, gives

us three forms of these water elevators, in one of which the buckets

are square, as Mr. Evans' are.  Bossut, Histoire de Mathematiques, i.

86, says, "the drum wheel, the wheel with buckets and the

_Chapelets_, are hydraulic machines which come to us from the

ancients.  But we are ignorant of the time when they began to be put

into use." The _Chapelets_ are the revolving bands of the buckets

which Shaw calls the Persian wheel, the moderns a chain-pump, and Mr.

Evans elevators.  The next of my books in which I find these

elevators is Wolf's Cours de Mathematiques, i. 370, and plate 1,

Paris 1747, 8vo; here are two forms.  In one of them the buckets are

square, attached to two chains, passing over a cylinder or wallower

at top, and under another at bottom, by which they are made to

revolve.  It is a nearly exact representation of Evans' Elevators.

But a more exact one is to be seen in Desagulier's Experimental

Philosophy, ii. plate 34; in the Encyclopedie de Diderot et

D'Alembert, 8vo edition of Lansanne, 1st volume of plates in the four

subscribed Hydraulique.  Norie, is one where round eastern pots are

tied by their collars between two endless ropes suspended on a

revolving lantern or wallower.  This is said to have been used for

raising ore out of a mine.  In a book which I do not possess,

L'Architecture Hidraulique de Belidor, the 2d volume of which is said

[De la Lande's continuation of Montuclas' Historie de Mathematiques,

iii. 711] to contain a detail of all the pumps, ancient and modern,

hydraulic machines, fountains, wells, &c, I have no doubt this

Persian wheel, chain pump, chapelets, elevators, by whichever name

you choose to call it, will be found in various forms.  The last book

I have to quote for it is Prony's Architecture Hydraulique i.,

Avertissement vii., and 648, 649, 650.  In the latter of which

passages he observes that the first idea which occurs for raising

water is to lift it in a bucket by hand.  When the water lies too

deep to be reached by hand, the bucket is suspended by a chain and

let down over a pulley or windlass.  If it be desired to raise a

continued stream of water, the simplest means which offers itself to

the mind is to attach to an endless chain or cord a number of pots or

buckets, so disposed that, the chain being suspended on a lanthorn or

wallower above, and plunged in water below, the buckets may descend

and ascend alternately, filling themselves at bottom and emptying at

a certain height above, so as to give a constant stream.  Some years

before the date of Mr. Evans' patent, a Mr. Martin of Caroline county

in this State, constructed a drill-plough, in which he used the band

of buckets for elevating the grain from the box into the funnel,

which let them down into the furrow.  He had bands with different

sets of buckets adapted to the size of peas, of turnip seed, &c.  I

have used this machine for sowing Benni seed also, and propose to

have a band of buckets for drilling Indian Corn, and another for

wheat.  Is it possible that in doing this I shall infringe Mr. Evans'

patent?  That I can be debarred of any use to which I might have

applied my drill, when I bought it, by a patent issued after I bought

it?




        These verbal descriptions, applying so exactly to Mr. Evans'

elevators, and the drawings exhibited to the eye, flash conviction

both on reason and the senses that there is nothing new in these

elevators but their being strung together on a strap of leather.  If

this strap of leather be an invention, entitling the inventor to a

patent right, it can only extend to the strap, and the use of the

string of buckets must remain free to be connected by chains, ropes,

a strap of hempen girthing, or any other substance except leather.

But, indeed, Mr. Martin had before used the strap of leather.




        The screw of Archimedes is as ancient, at least, as the age of

that mathematician, who died more than 2,000 years ago.  Diodorus

Siculus speaks of it, L. i., p. 21, and L. v., p. 217, of Stevens'

edition of 1559, folio; and Vitruvius, xii.  The cutting of its

spiral worm into sections for conveying flour or grain, seems to have

been an invention of Mr. Evans, and to be a fair subject of a patent

right.  But it cannot take away from others the use of Archimedes'

screw with its perpetual spiral, for any purposes of which it is

susceptible.




        The hopper-boy is an useful machine, and so far as I know,

original.




        It has been pretended by some, (and in England especially,)

that inventors have a natural and exclusive right to their

inventions, and not merely for their own lives, but inheritable to

their heirs.  But while it is a moot question whether the origin of

any kind of property is derived from nature at all, it would be

singular to admit a natural and even an hereditary right to

inventors.  It is agreed by those who have seriously considered the

subject, that no individual has, of natural right, a separate

property in an acre of land, for instance.  By an universal law,

indeed, whatever, whether fixed or movable, belongs to all men

equally and in common, is the property for the moment of him who

occupies it; but when he relinquishes the occupation, the property

goes with it.  Stable ownership is the gift of social law, and is

given late in the progress of society.  It would be curious then, if

an idea, the fugitive fermentation of an individual brain, could, of

natural right, be claimed in exclusive and stable property.  If

nature has made any one thing less susceptible than all others of

exclusive property, it is the action of the thinking power called an

idea, which an individual may exclusively possess as long as he keeps

it to himself; but the moment it is divulged, it forces itself into

the possession of every one, and the receiver cannot dispossess

himself of it.  Its peculiar character, too, is that no one possesses

the less, because every other possesses the whole of it.  He who

receives an idea from me, receives instruction himself without

lessening mine; as he who lights his taper at mine, receives light

without darkening me.  That ideas should freely spread from one to

another over the globe, for the moral and mutual instruction of man,

and improvement of his condition, seems to have been peculiarly and

benevolently designed by nature, when she made them, like fire,

expansible over all space, without lessening their density in any

point, and like the air in which we breathe, move, and have our

physical being, incapable of confinement or exclusive appropriation.

Inventions then cannot, in nature, be a subject of property.  Society

may give an exclusive right to the profits arising from them, as an

encouragement to men to pursue ideas which may produce utility, but

this may or may not be done, according to the will and convenience of

the society, without claim or complaint from any body.  Accordingly,

it is a fact, as far as I am informed, that England was, until

wecopied her, the only country on earth which ever, by a general law,

gave a legal right to the exclusive use of an idea.  In some other

countries it is sometimes done, in a great case, and by a special and

personal act, but, generally speaking, other nations have thought

that these monopolies produce more embarrassment than advantage to

society; and it may be observed that the nations which refuse

monopolies of invention, are as fruitful as England in new and useful

devices.




        Considering the exclusive right to invention as given not of

natural right, but for the benefit of society, I know well the

difficulty of drawing a line between the things which are worth to

the public the embarrassment of an exclusive patent, and those which

are not.  As a member of the patent board for several years, while

the law authorized a board to grant or refuse patents, I saw with

what slow progress a system of general rules could be matured.  Some,

however, were established by that board.  One of these was, that a

machine of which we were possessed, might be applied by every man to

any use of which it is susceptible, and that this right ought not to

be taken from him and given to a monopolist, because the first

perhaps had occasion so to apply it.  Thus a screw for crushing

plaster might be employed for crushing corn-cobs.  And a chain-pump

for raising water might be used for raising wheat: this being merely

a change of application.  Another rule was that a change of material

should not give title to a patent.  As the making a ploughshare of

cast rather than of wrought iron; a comb of iron instead of horn or

of ivory, or the connecting buckets by a band of leather rather than

of hemp or iron.  A third was that a mere change of form should give

no right to a patent, as a high-quartered shoe instead of a low one;

a round hat instead of a three-square; or a square bucket instead of

a round one.  But for this rule, all the changes of fashion in dress

would have been under the tax of patentees.  These were among the

rules which the uniform decisions of the board had already

established, and under each of them Mr. Evans' patent would have been

refused.  First, because it was a mere change of application of the

chain-pump, from raising water to raise wheat.  Secondly, because the

using a leathern instead of a hempen band, was a mere change of

material; and thirdly, square buckets instead of round, are only a

change of form, and the ancient forms, too, appear to have been

indifferently square or round.  But there were still abundance of

cases which could not be brought under rule, until they should have

presented themselves under all their aspects; and these

investigations occupying more time of the members of the board than

they could spare from higher duties, the whole was turned over to the

judiciary, to be matured into a system, under which every one might

know when his actions were safe and lawful.  Instead of refusing a

patent in the first instance, as the board was authorized to do, the

patent now issues of course, subject to be declared void on such

principles as should be established by the courts of law.  This

business, however, is but little analogous to their course of

reading, since we might in vain turn over all the lubberly volumes of

the law to find a single ray which would lighten the path of the

mechanic or the mathematician.  It is more within the information of

a board of academical professors, and a previous refusal of patent

would better guard our citizens against harrassment by law-suits.

But England had given it to her judges, and the usual predominancy of

her examples carried it to ours.




        It happened that I had myself a mill built in the interval

between Mr. Evans' first and second patents.  I was living in

Washington, and left the construction to the mill-wright.  I did not

even know he had erected elevators, conveyers and hopper-boys, until

I learnt it by an application from Mr. Evans' agent for the patent

price.  Although I had no idea he had a right to it by law, (for no

judicial decision had then been given,) yet I did not hesitate to

remit to Mr. Evans the old and moderate patent price, which was what

he then asked, from a wish to encourage even the useful revival of

ancient inventions.  But I then expressed my opinion of the law in a

letter, either to Mr. Evans or to his agent.




        I have thus, Sir, at your request, given you the facts and

ideas which occur to me on this subject.  I have done it without

reserve, although I have not the pleasure of knowing you personally.

In thus frankly committing myself to you, I trust you will feel it as

a point of honor and candor, to make no use of my letter which might

bring disquietude on myself.  And particularly, I should be unwilling

to be brought into any difference with Mr. Evans, whom, however, I

believe too reasonable to take offence at an honest difference of

opinion.  I esteem him much, and sincerely wish him wealth and honor.

I deem him a valuable citizen, of uncommon ingenuity and usefulness.

And had I not esteemed still more the establishment of sound

principles, I should now have been silent.  If any of the matter I

have offered can promote that object, I have no objection to its

being so used; if it offers nothing new, it will of course not be

used at all.  I have gone with some minuteness into the mathematical

history of the elevator, because it belongs to a branch of science in

which, as I have before observed, it is not incumbent on lawyers to

be learned; and it is possible, therefore, that some of the proofs I

have quoted may have escaped on their former arguments.  On the law

of the subject I should not have touched, because more familiar to

those who have already discussed it; but I wished to state my own

view of it merely in justification of myself, my name and approbation

being subscribed to the act.  With these explanations, accept the

assurance of my respect.







        A "DUCTILE AND COPIOUS" LANGUAGE




        _To John Waldo_

        _Monticello, August 16, 1813_




        SIR, -- Your favor of March 27th came during my absence on a

journey of some length.  It covered your "Rudiments of English

Grammar," for which I pray you to accept my thanks.  This

acknowledgment of it has been delayed, until I could have time to

give the work such a perusal as the avocations to which I am subject

would permit.  In the rare and short intervals which these have

allotted me, I have gone over with pleasure a considerable part,

although not yet the whole of it.  But I am entirely unqualified to

give that critical opinion of it which you do me the favor to ask.

Mine has been a life of business, of that kind which appeals to a

man's conscience, as well as his industry, not to let it suffer, and

the few moments allowed me from labor have been devoted to more

attractive studies, that of grammar having never been a favorite with

me.  The scanty foundation, laid in at school, has carried me through

a life of much hasty writing, more indebted for styleto reading and

memory, than to rules of grammar.  I have been pleased to see that in

all cases you appeal to usage, as the arbiter of language; and justly

consider that as giving law to grammar, and not grammar to usage.  I

concur entirely with you in opposition to Purists, who would destroy

all strength and beauty of style, by subjecting it to a rigorous

compliance with their rules.  Fill up all the ellipses and syllepses

of Tacitus, Sallust, Livy, &c., and the elegance and force of their

sententious brevity are extinguished.




        "Auferre, trucidare, rapere, falsis nominibus, imperium

appellant." "Deorum injurias, diis curae." "Allieni appetens, sui

profusus; ardens in cupiditatibus; satis loquentiae, sapientiae

parum." "Annibal peto pacem." "Per diem Sol non _uret_ te, neque Luna

per noctem." Wire-draw these expressions by filling up the whole

syntax and sense, and they become dull paraphrases on rich

sentiments.  We may say then truly with Quinctilian, "Aliud est

Grammatice, aliud Latine loqui." I am no friend, therefore, to what

is called _Purism_, but a zealous one to the _Neology_ which has

introduced these two words without the authority of any dictionary.

I consider the one as destroying the nerve and beauty of language,

while the otherimproves both, and adds to its copiousness.  I have

been not a little disappointed, and made suspicious of my own

judgment, on seeing the Edinburgh Reviews, the ablest critics of the

age, set their faces against the introduction of new words into the

English language; they are particularly apprehensive that the writers

of the United States will adulterate it.  Certainly so great growing

a population, spread over such an extent of country, with such a

variety of climates, of productions, of arts, must enlarge their

language, to make it answer its purpose of expressing all ideas, the

new as well as the old.  The new circumstances under which we are

placed, call for new words, new phrases, and for the transfer of old

words to new objects.  An American dialect will therefore be formed;

so will a West-Indian and Asiatic, as a Scotch and an Irish are

already formed.  But whether will these adulterate, or enrich the

English language?  Has the beautiful poetry of Burns, or his Scottish

dialect, disfigured it?  Did the Athenians consider the Doric, the

Ionian, the Aeolic, and other dialects, as disfiguring or as

beautifying their language?  Did they fastidiously disavow Herodotus,

Pindar, Theocritus, Sappho, Alcaeus, or Grecian writers?  On the

contrary, they were sensible that the variety of dialects, still

infinitely varied by poetical license, constituted the riches of

their language, and made the Grecian Homer the first of poets, as he

must ever remain, until a language equally ductile and copious shall

again be spoken.




        Every language has a set of terminations, which make a part of

its peculiar idiom.  Every root among the Greeks was permitted to

vary its termination, so as to express its radical idea in the form

of any one of the parts of speech; to wit, as a noun, an adjective, a

verb, participle, or adverb; and each of these parts of speech again,

by still varying the termination,could vary the shade of idea

existing in the mind.




        * * *




        It was not, then, the number of Grecian roots (for some other

languages may have as many) which made it the most copious of the

ancient languages; but the infinite diversification which each of

these admitted.  Let the same license be allowed in English, the

roots of which, native and adopted, are perhaps more numerous, and

its idiomatic terminations more various than of the Greek, and see

what the language would become.  Its idiomatic terminations are: --




        _Subst._ Gener-ation--ator; degener-acy;

gener-osity--ousness--alship--alissimo; king-dom--ling; joy-ance;

enjoy-er--ment; herb-age--alist; sanct-uary--imony--itude; royal-ism;

lamb-kin; child-hood; bishop-ric; proceed-ure; horseman-ship;

worthi-ness.




        _Adj_. Gener-ant--ative--ic--ical--able--ous--al;

joy-ful--less--some; herb-y; accous-escent--ulent; child-ish;

wheat-en.




 

        _Verb_.  Gener-ate--alize.




        _Part_. Gener-ating--ated.




        _Adv_. Gener-al--ly.




        I do not pretend that this is a complete list of all the

terminations of the two languages.  It is as much so as a hasty

recollection suggests, and the omissions are as likely to be to the

disadvantage of the one as the other.  If it be a full, or equally

fair enumeration, the English are the double of the Greek

terminations.




        But there is still another source of copiousness more abundant

than that of termination.  It is the composition of the root, and of

every member of its family, 1, with prepositions, and 2, with other

words.  The prepositions used in the composition of Greek words are:

--




        * * *




        Now multiply each termination of a family into every

preposition, and how prolific does it make each root!  But the

English language, besides its own prepositions, about twenty in

number, which it compounds with English roots, uses those of the

Greek for adopted Greek roots, and of the Latin for Latin roots.  The

English prepositions, with examples of their use, are a, as in

a-long, a-board, a-thirst, a-clock; be, as in be-lie; mis, as in

mis-hap; these being inseparable.  The separable, with examples, are

above-cited, after-thought, gain-say, before-hand, fore-thought,

behind-hand, by-law, for-give, fro-ward, in-born, on-set, over-go,

out-go, thorough-go, under-take, up-lift, with-stand.  Now let us see

what copiousness this would produce, were it allowed to compound

every root and its family with every preposition, where both sense

and sound would be in its favor.  Try it on an English root, the verb

"to place," Anglo Saxon _plaece_, (*) for instance, and the Greek and

Latin roots, of kindred meaning, adopted in English, to wit, {thesis}

and locatio, with their prepositions.




        (*) Johnson derives "place" from the French "place," an open

square in a town.  But its northern parentage is visible in its

syno-nime _platz_, Teutonic, and _plattse_, Belgic, both of which

signify locus, and the Anglo-Saxon _plaece, platea, vicus_.




      mis-place       amphi-thesis   a-location          inter-location

      after-place     ana-thesis     ab-location         intro-location

      gain-place      anti-thesis    abs-location        juxta-location

      fore-place      apo-thesis     al-location         ob-location

      hind-place      dia-thesis     anti-location       per-location

      by-place        ek-thesis      circum-location     post-location

      for-place       en-thesis      cis-location        pre-location

      fro-place       epi-thesis     col-location        preter-location

      in-place        cata-thesis    contra-location     pro-location

      on-place        para-thesis    de-location         retro-location

      over-place      peri-thesis    di-location         re-location

      out-place       pro-thesis     dis-location        se-location

      thorough-place  pros-thesis    e-location          sub-location

      under-place     syn-thesis     ex-location         super-location

      up-place        hyper-thesis   extra-location      trans-location

      with-place      hypo-thesis    il-location         ultra-location




        Some of these compounds would be new; but all present distinct

meanings, and the synonisms of the three languages offer a choice of

sounds to express the same meaning; add to this, that in some

instances, usage has authorized the compounding an English root with

a Latin preposition, as in de-place, dis-place, re-place.  This

example may suffice to show what the language would become, in

strength, beauty, variety, and every circumstance which gives

perfection to language, were it permitted freely to draw from all its

legitimate sources.




        The second source of composition is of one family of roots with

another.  The Greek avails itself of this most abundantly, and

beautifully.  The English once did it freely, while in its

Anglo-Saxon form, _e. g. boc-craeft_, book-craft, learning,

_riht-Zeleaf-full_, right-belief-ful, orthodox.  But it has lost by

desuetude much of this branch of composition, which it is desirable

however to resume.




        If we wish to be assured from experiment of the effect of a

judicious spirit of Neology, look at the French language.  Even

before the revolution, it was deemed much more copious than the

English; at a time, too, when they had an academy which endeavored to

arrest the progress of their language, by fixing it to a Dictionary,

out of which no word was ever to be sought, used, or tolerated.  The

institution of parliamentary assemblies in 1789, for which their

language had no opposite terms or phrases, as having never before

needed them, first obliged them to adopt the Parliamentary vocabulary

of England; and other new circumstances called for corresponding new

words; until by the number of these adopted, and by the analogies for

adoption which they have legitimated, I think we may say with truth

that a Dictionaire Neologique of these would be half as large as the

dictionary of the academy; and that at this time it is the language

in which every shade of idea, distinctly perceived by the mind, may

be more exactly expressed, than in any language at this day spoken by

man.  Yet I have no hesitation in saying that the English language is

founded on a broader base, native and adopted, and capable, with the

like freedom of employing its materials, of becoming superior to that

in copiousness and euphony.  Not indeed by holding fast to Johnson's

Dictionary; not by raising a hue and cry against every word he has

not licensed; but by encouraging and welcoming new compositions of

its elements.  Learn from Lye and Benson what the language would now

have been if restrained to their vocabularies.  Its enlargement must

be the consequence, to a certain degree, of its transplantation from

the latitude of London into every climate of the globe; and the

greater the degree the more precious will it become as the organ of

the development of the human mind.




        These are my visions on the improvement of the English language

by a free use of its faculties.  To realize them would require a

course of time.  The example of good writers, the approbation of men

of letters, the judgment of sound critics, and of none more than of

the Edinburgh Reviewers, would give it a beginning, and once begun,

its progress might be as rapid as it has been in France, where we see

what a period of only twenty years has effected.  Under the auspices

of British science and example it might commence with hope.  But the

dread of innovation there, and especially of any example set by

France, has, I fear, palsied the spirit of improvement.Here, where

all is new, no innovation is feared which offersgood.  But we have no

distinct class of literati in our country.  Every man is engaged in

some industrious pursuit, and science is but a secondary occupation,

always subordinate to the main business of his life.  Few therefore

of those who are qualified, have leisure to write.  In time it will

be otherwise.  In the meanwhile, necessity obliges us to neologize.

And should the language of England continue stationary, we shall

probably enlarge our employment of it, until its new character may

separate it in name as well as in power, from the mother-tongue.




        Although the copiousness of a language may not in strictness

make a part of its grammar, yet it cannot be deemed foreign to a

general course of lectures on its structure and character; and the

subject having been presented to my mind by the occasion of your

letter, I have indulged myself in its speculation, and hazarded to

you what has occurred, with the assurance of my great respect.










        THE CODE OF JESUS




        _To John Adams_

        _Monticello, Oct. 12, 1813_




        DEAR SIR -- Since mine of Aug. 22. I have recieved your favors

of Aug. 16. Sep. 2. 14. 15. and -- and Mrs. Adams's of Sep. 20.  I

now send you, according to your request a copy of the Syllabus.  To

fill up this skeleton with arteries, with veins, with nerves, muscles

and flesh, is really beyond my time and information.  Whoever could

undertake it would find great aid in Enfield's judicious abridgment

of Brucker's history of Philosophy, in which he has reduced 5. or 6.

quarto vols. of 1000. pages each of Latin closely printed, to two

moderate 8 vos. of English, open, type.




        To compare the morals of the old, with those of the new

testament, would require an attentive study of the former, a search

thro' all it's books for it's precepts, and through all it's history

for it's practices, and the principles they prove.  Ascommentaries

too on these, the philosophy of the Hebrews must be enquired into,

their Mishna, their Gemara, Cabbala, Jezirah, Sohar, Cosri, and their

Talmud must be examined and understood, in order to do them full

justice.  Brucker, it should seem, has gone deeply into these

Repositories of their ethics, and Enfield, his epitomiser, concludes

in these words.  `Ethics were so little studied among the Jews, that,

in their whole compilation called the Talmud, there is only one

treatise on moral subjects.  Their books of Morals chiefly consisted

in a minute enumeration of duties.  From the law of Moses were

deduced 613. precepts, which were divided into two classes,

affirmative and negative, 248 in the former, and 365 in the latter.

It may serve to give the reader some idea of the low state of moral

philosophy among the Jews in the Middle age, to add, that of the 248.

affirmative precepts, only 3. were considered as obligatory upon

women; and that, in order to obtain salvation, it was judged

sufficient to fulfill any one single law in the hour of death; the

observance of the rest being deemed necessary, only to increase the

felicity of the future life.  What a wretched depravity of sentiment

and manners must have prevailed before such corrupt maxims could have

obtained credit!  It is impossible to collect from these writings a

consistent series of moral Doctrine.' Enfield, B. 4. chap. 3. It was

the reformation of this `wretched depravity' of morals which Jesus

undertook.  In extracting the pure principles which he taught, we

should have to strip off the artificial vestments in which they have

been muffled by priests, who have travestied them into various forms,

as instruments of riches and power to them.  We must dismiss the

Platonists and Plotinists, the Stagyrites and Gamalielites, the

Eclectics the Gnostics and Scholastics, their essences and

emanations, their Logos and Demi-urgos, Aeons and Daemons male and

female, with a long train of Etc. Etc. Etc. or, shall I say at once,

of Nonsense.  We must reduce our volume to the simple evangelists,

select, even from them, the very words only of Jesus, paring off the

Amphibologisms into which they have been led by forgetting often, or

not understanding, what had fallen from him, by giving their own

misconceptions as his dicta, and expressing unintelligibly for others

what they had not understood themselves.  There will be found

remaining the most sublime and benevolent code of morals which has

ever been offered to man.  I have performed this operation for my own

use, by cutting verse by verse out of the printed book, and

arranging, the matter which is evidently his, andwhich is as easily

distinguishable as diamonds in a dunghill.The result is an 8 vo. of

46. pages of pure and unsophisticated doctrines, such as were

professed and acted on by the _unlettered_ apostles, the Apostolic

fathers, and the Christians of the 1st. century.  Their Platonising

successors indeed, in after times, in order to legitimate the

corruptions which they had incorporated into the doctrines of Jesus,

found it necessary to disavow the primitive Christians, who had taken

their principles from the mouth of Jesus himself, of his Apostles,

and the Fathers cotemporary with them.  They excommunicated their

followers as heretics, branding them with the opprobrious name of

Ebionites or Beggars.




        For a comparison of the Graecian philosophy with that of Jesus,

materials might be largely drawn from the same source.  Enfield gives

a history, and detailed account of the opinions and principles of the

different sects.  These relate to

        the gods, their natures, grades, places and powers;

        the demi-gods and daemons, and their agency with man;

        the Universe, it's structure, extent, production and duration;

        the origin of things from the elements of fire, water, air and

earth;

        the human soul, it's essence and derivation;

        the summum bonum and finis bonorum; with a thousand idle dreams

and fancies on these and other subjects the knolege of which is

withheld from man, leaving but a short chapter for his moral duties,

and the principal section of that given to what he owes himself, to

precepts for rendering him impassible, and unassailable by the evils

of life, and for preserving his mind in a state of constant serenity.




        Such a canvas is too broad for the age of seventy, and

especially of one whose chief occupations have been in the practical

business of life.  We must leave therefore to others, younger and

more learned than we are, to prepare this euthanasia for Platonic

Christianity, and it's restoration to the primitive simplicity of

it's founder.  I think you give a just outline of the theism of the

three religions when you say that the principle of the Hebrew was the

fear, of the Gentile the honor, and of the Christian the love of God.




        An expression in your letter of Sep. 14. that `the human

understanding is a revelation from it's maker' gives the best

solution, that I believe can be given, of the question, What did

Socrates mean by his Daemon?  He was too wise to believe, and too

honest to pretend that he had real and familiar converse with a

superior and invisible being.  He probably considered the suggestions

of his conscience, or reason, as revelations, or inspirations from

the Supreme mind, bestowed, on important occasions, by a special

superintending providence.




        I acknolege all the merit of the hymn of Cleanthes to Jupiter,

which you ascribe to it.  It is as highly sublime as a chaste and

correct imagination can permit itself to go.  Yet in the

contemplation of a being so superlative, the hyperbolic flights of

the Psalmist may often be followed with approbation, even with

rapture; and I have no hesitation in giving him the palm over all the

Hymnists of every language, and of every time.  Turn to the 148th.

psalm, in Brady and Tate's version.  Have such conceptions been ever

before expressed?  Their version of the 15th. psalm is more to be

esteemed for it's pithiness, than it's poetry.  Even Sternhold, the

leaden Sternhold, kindles, in a single instance, with the sublimity

of his original, and expresses the majesty of God descending on the

earth, in terms not unworthy of the subject.




      'The Lord descended from And bowed the heav'ns most

         above                                   high;

       And underneath his feet he cast         The darkness of the sky.

       On Cherubim and Seraphim                Full royally he rode;

       And on the wings of mighty              Came flying all abroad.'

         winds                                       Psalm xviii. 9. 10.




        The Latin versions of this passage by Buchanan and by Johnston,

are but mediocres.  But the Greek of Duport is worthy of quotation.




        {Oyranon agklinas katebe ypo possi d' eoisin

        Achlys amphi melaina chythe kai nyx erebenne.

        Rimpha potato Cheroybo ocheymenos, osper eph' ippo.

        Iptato de pterygessi polyplagktoy anemoio.}




        The best collection of these psalms is that of the Octagonian

dissenters of Liverpool, in their printed Form of prayer; but they

are not always the best versions.  Indeed bad is the best of the

English versions; not a ray of poetical genius having ever been

employed on them.  And how much depends on this may be seen by

comparing Brady and Tate's XVth. psalm with Blacklock's Justum et

tenacem propositi virum ["a man just and steadfast of purpose"] of

Horace, quoted in Hume's history, Car. 2. ch. 65.  A translation of

David in this style, or in that of Pompei's Cleanthes, might give us

some idea of the merit of the original.  The character too of the

poetry of these hymns is singular to us.  Written in monostichs, each

divided into strophe and antistrophe, the sentiment of the 1st.

member responded with amplification or antithesis in the second.




        On the subject of the Postscript of yours of Aug. 16. and of

Mrs. Adams's letter, I am silent.  I know the depth of the affliction

it has caused, and can sympathise with it the more sensibly, inasmuch

as there is no degree of affliction, produced by the loss of those

dear to us, which experience has not taught me to estimate.  I have

ever found time and silence the only medecine, and these but assuage,

they never can suppress, the deep-drawn sigh which recollection for

ever brings up, until recollection and life are extinguished

together.  Ever affectionately yours




        P. S. Your's of Sep -- just recieved







        THE NATURAL ARISTOCRACY




        _To John Adams_

        _Monticello, Oct. 28, 1813_




        DEAR SIR -- According to the reservation between us, of taking

up one of the subjects of our correspondence at a time, I turn to

your letters of Aug. 16. and Sep. 2.




        The passage you quote from Theognis, I think has an Ethical,

rather than a political object.  The whole piece is a moral

_exhortation_, {parainesis}, and this passage particularly seems to

be a reproof to man, who, while with his domestic animals he is

curious to improve the race by employing always the finest male, pays

no attention to the improvement of his own race, but intermarries

with the vicious, the ugly, or the old, for considerations of wealth

or ambition.  It is in conformity with the principle adopted

afterwards by the Pythagoreans, and expressed by Ocellus in another

form.  {Peri de tes ek ton allelon anthropon geneseos} etc. -- {oych

edones eneka e} {mixis}.  Which, as literally as intelligibility will

admit, may be thus translated.  `Concerning the interprocreation of

men, how, and of whom it shall be, in a perfect manner, and according

to the laws of modesty and sanctity, conjointly, this is what I think

right.  First to lay it down that we do not commix for the sake of

pleasure, but of the procreation of children.  For the powers, the

organs and desires for coition have not been given by god to man for

the sake of pleasure, but for the procreation of the race.  For as it

were incongruous for a mortal born to partake of divine life, the

immortality of the race being taken away, god fulfilled the purpose

by making the generations uninterrupted and continuous.  This

therefore we are especially to lay down as a principle, that coition

is not for the sake of pleasure.' But Nature, not trusting to this

moral and abstract motive, seems to have provided more securely for

the perpetuation of the species by making it the effect of the

oestrum implanted in the constitution of both sexes.  And not only

has the commerce of love been indulged on this unhallowed impulse,

but made subservient also to wealth and ambition by marriages without

regard to the beauty, the healthiness, the understanding, or virtue

of the subject from which we are to breed.  The selecting the best

male for a Haram of well chosen females also, which Theognis seems to

recommend from the example of our sheep and asses, would doubtless

improve the human, as it does the brute animal, and produce a race of

veritable {aristoi} ["aristocrats"].  For experience proves that the

moral and physical qualities of man, whether good or evil, are

transmissible in a certain degree from father to son.  But I suspect

that the equal rights of men will rise up against this privileged

Solomon, and oblige us to continue acquiescence under the {'Amayrosis

geneos aston} ["the degeneration of the race of men"] which Theognis

complains of, and to content ourselves with the accidental aristoi

produced by the fortuitous concourse of breeders.  For I agree with

you that there is a natural aristocracy among men.  The grounds of

this are virtue and talents.  Formerly bodily powers gave place among

the aristoi.  But since the invention of gunpowder has armed the weak

as well as the strong with missile death, bodily strength, like

beauty, good humor, politeness and other accomplishments, has become

but an auxiliary ground of distinction.  There is also an artificial

aristocracy founded on wealth and birth, without either virtue or

talents; for with these it would belong to the first class.  The

natural aristocracy I consider as the most precious gift of nature

for the instruction, the trusts, and government of society.  And

indeed it would have been inconsistent in creation to have formed man

for the social state, and not to have provided virtue and wisdom

enough to manage the concerns of the society.  May we not even say

that that form of government is the best which provides the most

effectually for a pure selection of these natural aristoi into the

offices of government?  The artificial aristocracy is a mischievous

ingredient in government, and provision should be made to prevent

it's ascendancy.  On the question, What is the best provision, you

and I differ; but we differ as rational friends, using the free

exercise of our own reason, and mutually indulging it's errors.

_You_ think it best to put the Pseudo-aristoi into a separate chamber

of legislation where they may be hindered from doing mischief by

their coordinate branches, and where also they may be a protection to

wealth against the Agrarian and plundering enterprises of the

Majority of the people.  I think that to give them power in order to

prevent them from doing mischief, is arming them for it, and

increasing instead of remedying the evil.  For if the coordinate

branches can arrest their action, so may they that of the

coordinates.  Mischief may be done negatively as well as positively.

Of this a cabal in the Senate of the U.S. has furnished many proofs.

Nor do I believe them necessary to protect the wealthy; because

enough of these will find their way into every branch of the

legislation to protect themselves.  From 15. to 20. legislatures of

our own, in action for 30. years past, have proved that no fears of

an equalisation of property are to be apprehended from them.




        _I_ think the best remedy is exactly that provided by all our

constitutions, to leave to the citizens the free election and

separation of the aristoi from the pseudo-aristoi, of the wheat from

the chaff.  In general they will elect the real good and wise.  In

some instances, wealth may corrupt, and birth blind them; but not in

sufficient degree to endanger the society.




        It is probable that our difference of opinion may in some

measure be produced by a difference of character in those among whom

we live.  From what I have seen of Massachusets and Connecticut

myself, and still more from what I have heard, and the character

given of the former by yourself, [vol. 1. pa. 111.] who know them so

much better, there seems to be in those two states a traditionary

reverence for certain families, which has rendered the offices of the

government nearly hereditary in those families.  I presume that from

an early period of your history, members of these families happening

to possess virtue and talents, have honestly exercised them for the

good of the people, and by their services have endeared their names

to them.




        In coupling Connecticut with you, I mean it politically only,

not morally.  For having made the Bible the Common law of their land

they seem to have modelled their morality on the story of Jacob and

Laban.  But altho' this hereditary succession to office with you may

in some degree be founded in real family merit, yet in a much higher

degree it has proceeded from your strict alliance of church and

state.  These families are canonised in the eyes of the people on the

common principle `you tickle me, and I will tickle you.' In Virginia

we have nothing of this.  Our clergy, before the revolution, having

been secured against rivalship by fixed salaries, did not give

themselves the trouble of acquiring influence over the people.  Of

wealth, there were great accumulations in particular families, handed

down from generation to generation under the English law of entails.

But the only object of ambition for the wealthy was a seat in the

king's council.  All their court then was paid to the crown and it's

creatures; and they Philipised in all collisions between the king and

people.  Hence they were unpopular; and that unpopularity continues

attached to their names.  A Randolph, a Carter, or a Burwell must

have great personal superiority over a common competitor to be

elected by the people, even at this day.




        At the first session of our legislature after the Declaration

of Independance, we passed a law abolishing entails.  And this was

followed by one abolishing the privilege of Primogeniture, and

dividing the lands of intestates equally among all their children, or

other representatives.  These laws, drawn by myself, laid the axe to

the root of Pseudo-aristocracy.  And had another which I prepared

been adopted by the legislature, our work would have been compleat.

It was a Bill for the more general diffusion of learning.  This

proposed to divide every county into wards of 5. or 6. miles square,

like your townships; to establish in each ward a free school for

reading, writing and common arithmetic; to provide for the annual

selection of the best subjects from these schools who might recieve

at the public expence a higher degree of education at a district

school; and from these district schools to select a certain number of

the most promising subjects to be compleated at an University, where

all the useful sciences should be taught.  Worth and genius would

thus have been sought out from every condition of life, and

compleatly prepared by education for defeating the competition of

wealth and birth for public trusts.




        My proposition had for a further object to impart to these

wards those portions of self-government for which they are best

qualified, by confiding to them the care of their poor, their roads,

police, elections, the nomination of jurors, administration of

justice in small cases, elementary exercises of militia, in short, to

have made them little republics, with a Warden at the head of each,

for all those concerns which, being under their eye, they would

better manage than the larger republics of the county or state.  A

general call of ward-meetings by their Wardens on the same day thro'

the state would at any time produce the genuine sense of the people

on any required point, and would enable the state to act in mass, as

your people have so often done, and with so much effect, by their

town meetings.  The law for religious freedom, which made a part of

this system, having put down the aristocracy of the clergy, and

restored to the citizen the freedom of the mind, and those of entails

and descents nurturing an equality of condition among them, this on

Education would have raised the mass of the people to the high ground

of moral respectability necessary to their own safety, and to orderly

government; and would have compleated the great object of qualifying

them to select the veritable aristoi, for the trusts of government,

to the exclusion of the Pseudalists: and the same Theognis who has

furnished the epigraphs of your two letters assures us that

{`oydemian po Kyrn agathoi polin olesan andres,} ["Curnis, good men

have never harmed any city"]'.  Altho' this law has not yet been

acted on but in a small and inefficient degree, it is still

considered as before the legislature, with other bills of the revised

code, not yet taken up, and I have great hope that some patriotic

spirit will, at a favorable moment, call it up, and make it the

key-stone of the arch of our government.




        With respect to Aristocracy, we should further consider that,

before the establishment of the American states, nothing was known to

History but the Man of the old world, crouded within limits either

small or overcharged, and steeped in the vices which that situation

generates.  A government adapted to such men would be one thing; but

a very different one that for the Man of these states.  Here every

one may have land to labor for himself if he chuses; or, preferring

the exercise of any other industry, may exact for it such

compensation as not only to afford a comfortable subsistence, but

where-with to provide for a cessation from labor in old age.  Every

one, by his property, or by his satisfactory situation, is interested

in the support of law and order.  And such men maysafely and

advantageously reserve to themselves a wholsome controul over their

public affairs, and a degree of freedom, which in the hands of the

Canaille of the cities of Europe, would be instantly perverted to the

demolition and destruction of every thing public and private.  The

history of the last 25. years of France, and of the last 40. years in

America, nay of it's last 200. years, proves the truth of both parts

of this observation.




        But even in Europe a change has sensibly taken place in the

mind of Man.  Science had liberated the ideas of those who read and

reflect, and the American example had kindled feelings of right in

the people.  An insurrection has consequently begun, of science,

talents and courage against rank and birth, which have fallen into

contempt.  It has failed in it's first effort, because the mobs of

the cities, the instrument used for it's accomplishment, debased by

ignorance, poverty and vice, could not be restrained to rational

action.  But the world will recover from the panic of this first

catastrophe.  Science is progressive, and talents and enterprize on

the alert.  Resort may be had to the people of the country, a more

governable power from their principles and subordination; and rank,

and birth, and tinsel-aristocracy will finally shrink into

insignificance, even there.  This however we have no right to meddle

with.  It suffices for us, if the moral and physical condition of our

own citizens qualifies them to select the able and good for the

direction of their government, with a recurrence of elections at such

short periods as will enable them to displace an unfaithful servant

before the mischief he meditates may be irremediable.




        I have thus stated my opinion on a point on which we differ,

not with a view to controversy, for we are both too old to change

opinions which are the result of a long life of inquiry and

reflection; but on the suggestion of a former letter of yours, that

we ought not to die before we have explained ourselves to each other.

We acted in perfect harmony thro' a long and perilous contest for our

liberty and independance.  A constitution has been acquired which,

tho neither of us think perfect, yet both consider as competent to

render our fellow-citizens the happiest and the securest on whom the

sun has ever shone.  If we do not think exactly alike as to it's

imperfections, it matters little to our country which, after devoting

to it long lives of disinterested labor, we have delivered over to

our successors in life, who will be able to take care of it, and of

themselves.




        Of the pamphlet on aristocracy which has been sent to you, or

who may be it's author, I have heard nothing but thro' your letter.

If the person you suspect it may be known from the quaint, mystical

and hyperbolical ideas, involved in affected, new-fangled and

pedantic terms, which stamp his writings.  Whatever it be, I hope

your quiet is not to be affected at this day by the rudeness of

intemperance of scribblers; but that you may continue in tranquility

to live and to rejoice in the prosperity of our country until it

shall be your own wish to take your seat among the Aristoi who have

gone beforeyou.  Ever and affectionately yours.




        P. S. Can you assist my memory on the enquiries of my letter of

Aug. 22.?







 




        "A HEMISPHERE TO ITSELF"




        _To Alexander von Humboldt_

        _December 6, 1813_




        MY DEAR FRIEND AND BARON, -- I have to acknowledge your two

letters of December 20 and 26, 1811, by Mr. Correa, and am first to

thank you for making me acquainted with that most excellent

character.  He was so kind as to visit me at Monticello, and I found

him one of the most learned and amiable of men.  It was a subject of

deep regret to separate from so much worth in the moment of its

becoming known to us.




        The livraison of your astronomical observations, and the 6th

and 7th on the subject of New Spain, with the corresponding atlasses,

are duly received, as had been the preceding cahiers.  For these

treasures of a learning so interesting to us, accept my sincere

thanks.  I think it most fortunate that your travels in those

countries were so timed as to make them known to the world in the

moment they were about to become actors on its stage.  That they will

throw off their European dependence I have no doubt; but in what kind

of government their revolution will end I am not so certain.

History, I believe, furnishes no example of a priest-ridden people

maintaining a free civil government.  This marks the lowest grade of

ignorance, of which their civil as well as religious leaders will

always avail themselves for their own purposes.  The vicinity of New

Spain to the United States, and their consequent intercourse, may

furnish schools for the higher, and example for the lower classes of

their citizens.  And Mexico, where we learn from you that men of

science are not wanting, may revolutionize itself under better

auspices than the Southern provinces.  These last, I fear, must end

in military despotisms.  The different casts of their inhabitants,

their mutual hatreds and jealousies, their profound ignorance and

bigotry, will be played off by cunning leaders, and each be made the

instrument of enslaving others.  But of all this you can best judge,

for in truth we have little knowledge of them to be depended on, but

through you.  But in whatever governments they end they will be

_American_ governments, no longer to be involved in the never-ceasing

broils of Europe.  The European nations constitute a separate

division of the globe; their localities make them part of a distinct

system; they have a set of interests of their own in which it is our

business never to engage ourselves.  America has a hemisphere to

itself.  It must have its separate system of interests, which must

not be subordinated to those of Europe.  The insulated state in which

nature has placed the American continent, should so far avail it that

no spark of war kindled in the other quarters of the globe should be

wafted across the wide oceans which separate us from them.  And it

will be so.  In fifty years more the United States alone will contain

fifty millions of inhabitants, and fifty years are soon gone over.

The peace of 1763 is within that period.  I was then twenty years

old, and of course remember well all the transactions of the war

preceding it.  And you will live to see the epoch now equally ahead

of us; and the numbers which will then be spread over the other parts

of the American hemisphere, catching long before that the principles

of our portion of it, and concurring with us in the maintenance of

the same system.  You see how readily we run into ages beyond the

grave; and even those of us to whom that grave is already opening its

quiet bosom.  I am anticipating events of which you will be the

bearer to me in the Elsyian fields fifty years hence.




        You know, my friend, the benevolent plan we were pursuing here

for the happiness of the aboriginal inhabitants in our vicinities.

We spared nothing to keep them at peace with one another.  To teach

them agriculture and the rudiments of the most necessary arts, and to

encourage industry by establishing among them separate property.  In

this way they would have been enabled to subsist and multiply on a

moderate scale of landed possession.  They would have mixed their

blood with ours, and been amalgamated and identified with us within

no distant period of time.  On the commencement of our present war,

we pressed on them the observance of peace and neutrality, but the

interested and unprincipled policy of England has defeated all our

labors for the salvation of these unfortunate people.  They have

seduced the greater part of the tribes within our neighborhood, to

take up the hatchet against us, and the cruel massacres they have

committed on the women and children of our frontiers taken by

surprise, will oblige us now to pursue them to extermination, or

drive them to new seats beyond our reach.  Already we have driven

their patrons and seducers into Montreal, and the opening season will

force them to their last refuge, the walls of Quebec.  We have cut

off all possibility of intercourse and of mutual aid, and may pursue

at our leisure whatever plan we find necessary to secure ourselves

against the future effects of their savage and ruthless warfare.  The

confirmed brutalization, if not the extermination of this race in our

America, is therefore to form an additional chapter in the English

history of the same colored man in Asia, and of the brethren of their

own color in Ireland, and wherever else Anglo-mercantile cupidity can

find a two-penny interest in deluging the earth with human blood.

But let us turn from the loathsome contemplation of the degrading

effects of commercial avarice.




        That their Arrowsmith should have stolen your Map of Mexico,

was in the piratical spirit of his country.  But I should be

sincerely sorry if our Pike has made an ungenerous use of your candid

communications here; and the more so as he died in the arms of

victory gained over the enemies of his country.  Whatever he did was

on a principle of enlarging knowledge, and not for filthy shillings

and pence of which he made none from that work.  If what he has

borrowed has any effect it will be to excite an appeal in his readers

from his defective information to the copious volumes of it with

which you have enriched the world.  I am sorry he omitted even to

acknowledge the source of his information.  It has been an oversight,

and not at all in the spirit of his generous nature.  Let me solicit

your forgiveness then of a deceased hero, of an honest and zealous

patriot, who lived and died for his country.




        You will find it inconceivable that Lewis's journey to the

Pacific should not yet have appeared; nor is it in my power to tell

you the reason.  The measures taken by his surviving companion,

Clarke, for the publication, have not answered our wishes in point of

despatch.  I think, however, from what I have heard, that the mere

journal will be out within a few weeks in two volumes 8vo.  These I

will take care to send you with the tobacco seed you desired, if it

be possible for them to escape the thousand ships of our enemies

spread over the ocean.  The botanical and zoological discoveries of

Lewis will probably experience greater delay, and become known to the

world through other channels before that volume will be ready.  The

Atlas, I believe, waits on the leisure of the engraver.




        Although I do not know whether you are now at Paris or ranging

the regions of Asia to acquire more knowledge for the use of men, I

cannot deny myself the gratification of an endeavor to recall myself

to your recollection, and of assuring you of my constant attachment,

and of renewing to you the just tribute of my affectionate esteem and

high respect and consideration.







        WAR AND BOTANICAL EXCHANGES




        _To Madame de Tesse_

        _December 8, 1813_




        While at war, my dear Madam and friend, with the leviathan of

the ocean, there is little hope of a letter escaping his thousand

ships; yet I cannot permit myself longer to withhold the

acknowledgment of your letter of June 28 of the last year, with which

came the memoirs of the Margrave of Bareuth.  I am much indebted to

you for this singular morsel of history which has given us a certain

view of kings, queens and princes, disrobed of their formalities.  It

is a peep into the state of the Egyptian god Apis.  It would not be

easy to find grosser manners, coarser vices, or more meanness in the

poorest huts of our peasantry.  The princess shows herself the

legitimate sister of Frederic, cynical, selfish, and without a heart.

Notwithstanding your wars with England, I presume you get the

publications of that country.  The memoirs of Mrs. Clarke and of her

_darling_ prince, and the book emphatically so called, because it is

the Biblia Sacra Deorum et Dearum sub-coelestium, the Prince Regent,

his Princess and the minor deities of his sphere, form a worthy

sequel to the memoirs of Bareuth; instead of the vulgarity and penury

of the court of Berlin, giving us the vulgarity and profusion of that

of London, and the gross stupidity and profligacy of the latter, in

lieu of the genius and misanthropism of the former.  The whole might

be published as a supplement of M. de Buffon, under the title of the

"Natural History of Kings and Princes," or as a separate work and

called "Medicine for Monarchists." The "Intercepted Letters," a later

English publication of great wit and humor, has put them to their

proper use by holding them up as butts for the ridicule and contempt

of mankind.  Yet by such worthless beings is a great nation to be

governed and even made to deify their old king because he is only a

fool and a maniac, and to forgive and forget his having lost to them

a great and flourishing empire, added nine hundred millions sterling

to their debt, for which the fee simple of the whole island would not

sell, if offered farm by farm at public auction, and increased their

annual taxes from eight to seventy millions sterling, more than the

whole rent-roll of the island.  What must be the dreary prospect from

the son when such a father is deplored as a national loss.  But let

us drop these odious beings and pass to those of an higher order, the

plants of the field.  I am afraid I have given you a great deal more

trouble than I intended by my inquiries for the Maronnier or Castanea

Sativa, of which I wished to possess my own country, without knowing

how rare its culture was even in yours.  The two plants which your

researches have placed in your own garden, it will be all but

impossible to remove hither.  The war renders their safe passage

across the Atlantic extremely precarious, and, if landed anywhere but

in the Chesapeake, the risk of the additional voyage along the coast

to Virginia, is still greater.  Under these circumstances it is

better they should retain their present station, and compensate to

you the trouble they have cost you.




        I learn with great pleasure the success of your new gardens at

Auenay. No occupation can be more delightful or useful.  They will

have the merit of inducing you to forget those of Chaville.  With the

botanical riches which you mention to have been derived to England

from New Holland, we are as yet unacquainted.  Lewis's journey across

our continent to the Pacific has added a number of new plants to our

former stock.  Some of them are curious, some ornamental, some

useful, and some may by culture be made acceptable to our tables.  I

have growing, which I destine for you, a very handsome little shrub

of the size of a currant bush.  Its beauty consists in a great

produce of berries of the size of currants, and literally as white as

snow, which remain on the bush through the winter, after its leaves

have fallen, and make it an object as singular as it is beautiful.

We call it the snow-berry bush, no botanical name being yet given to

it, but I do not know why we might not call it Chionicoccos, or

Kallicoccos.  All Lewis's plants are growing in the garden of Mr.

McMahon, a gardener of Philadelphia, to whom I consigned them, and

from whom I shall have great pleasure, when peace is restored, in

ordering for you any of these or of our other indigenous plants.  The

port of Philadelphia has great intercourse with Bordeaux and Nantes,

and some little perhaps with Havre.  I was mortified not long since

by receiving a letter from a merchant in Bordeaux, apologizing for

having suffered a box of plants addressed by me to you, to get

accidentally covered in his warehouse by other objects, and to remain

three years undiscovered, when every thing in it was found to be

rotten.  I have learned occasionally that others rotted in the

warehouses of the English pirates.  We are now settling that account

with them.  We have taken their Upper Canada and shall add the Lower

to it when the season will admit; and hope to remove them fully and

finally from our continent.  And what they will feel more, for they

value their colonies only for the bales of cloth they take from them,

we have established manufactures, not only sufficient to supersede

our demand from them, but to rivalize them in foreign markets.  But

for the course of our war I will refer you to M. de La Fayette, to

whom I state it more particularly.




        Our friend Mr. Short is well.  He makes Philadelphia his winter

quarters, and New York or the country, those of the summer.  In his

fortune he is perfectly independent and at ease, and does not trouble

himself with the party politics of our country.  Will you permit me

to place here for M. de Tesse the testimony of my high esteem and

respect, and accept for yourself an assurance of the warm

recollections I retain of your many civilities and courtesies to me,

and the homage of my constant and affectionate attachment and

respect.







        THE CHARACTER OF WASHINGTON




        _To Dr. Walter Jones_

        _Monticello, January 2, 1814_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favor of November the 25th reached this place

December the 21st, having been near a month on the way.  How this

could happen I know not, as we have two mails a week both from

Fredericksburg and Richmond.  It found me just returned from a long

journey and absence, during which so much business had accumulated,

commanding the first attentions, that another week has been added to

the delay.




        I deplore, with you, the putrid state into which our newspapers

have passed, and the malignity, the vulgarity, and mendacious spirit

of those who write for them; and I enclose you a recent sample, the

production of a New England judge, as a proof of the abyss of

degradation into which we are fallen.  These ordures are rapidly

depraving the public taste, and lessening its relish for sound food.

As vehicles of information, and a curb on our functionaries, they

have rendered themselves useless, by forfeiting all title to belief.

That this has, in a great degree, been produced by the violence and

malignity of party spirit, I agree with you; and I have read with

great pleasure the paper you enclosed me on that subject, which I now

return.  It is at the same time a perfect model of the style of

discussion which candor and decency should observe, of the tone which

renders difference of opinion even amiable, and a succinct, correct,

and dispassionate history of the origin and progress of party among

us.  It might be incorporated as it stands, and without changing a

word, into the history of the present epoch, and would give to

posterity a fairer view of the times than they will probably derive

from other sources.  In reading it with great satisfaction, there was

but a single passage where I wished a little more development of a

very sound and catholic idea; a single intercalation to rest it

solidly on true bottom.  It is near the end of the first page, where

you make a statement of genuine republican maxims; saying, "that the

people ought to possess as much political power as can possibly exist

with the order and security of society." Instead of this, I would

say, "that the people, being the only safe depository of power,

should exercise in person every function which their qualifications

enable them to exercise, consistently with the order and security of

society; that we now find them equal to the election of those who

shall be invested with their executive and legislative powers, and to

act themselves in the judiciary, as judges in questions of fact; that

the range of their powers ought to be enlarged," &c.  This gives both

the reason and exemplification of the maxim you express, "that they

ought to possess as much political power," &c.  I see nothing to

correct either in your facts or principles.




        You say that in taking General Washington on your shoulders, to

bear him harmless through the federal coalition, you encounter a

perilous topic.  I do not think so.  You have given the genuine

history of the course of his mind through the trying scenes in which

it was engaged, and of the seductions by which it was deceived, but

not depraved.  I think I knew General Washington intimately and

thoroughly; and were I called on to delineate his character, it

should be in terms like these.




        His mind was great and powerful, without being of the very

first order; his penetration strong, though not so acute as that of a

Newton, Bacon, or Locke; and as far as he saw, no judgment was ever

sounder.  It was slow in operation, being little aided by invention

or imagination, but sure in conclusion.  Hence the common remark of

his officers, of the advantage he derived from councils of war, where

hearing all suggestions, he selected whatever was best; and certainly

no General ever planned his battles more judiciously.  But if

deranged during the course of the action, if any member of his plan

was dislocated by sudden circumstances, he was slow in re-adjustment.

The consequence was, that he often failed in the field, and rarely

against an enemy in station, as at Boston and York.  He was incapable

of fear, meeting personal dangers with the calmest unconcern.

Perhaps the strongest feature in his character was prudence, never

acting until every circumstance, every consideration, was maturely

weighed; refraining if he saw a doubt, but, when once decided, going

through with his purpose, whatever obstacles opposed.  His integrity

was most pure, his justice the most inflexible I have ever known, no

motives of interest or consanguinity, of friendship or hatred, being

able to bias his decision.  He was, indeed, in every sense of the

words, a wise, a good, and a great man.  His temper was naturally

high toned; but reflection and resolution had obtained a firm and

habitual ascendency over it.  If ever, however, it broke its bonds,

he was most tremendous in his wrath.  In his expenses he was

honorable, but exact; liberal in contributions to whatever promised

utility; but frowning and unyielding on all visionary projects and

all unworthy calls on his charity.  His heart was not warm in its

affections; but he exactly calculated every man's value, and gave him

a solid esteem proportioned to it.  His person, you know, was fine,

his stature exactly what one would wish, his deportment easy, erect

and noble; the best horseman of his age, and the most graceful figure

that could be seen on horseback.  Although in the circle of his

friends, where he might be unreserved with safety, he took a free

share in conversation, his colloquial talents were not above

mediocrity, possessing neither copiousness of ideas, nor fluency of

words.  In public, when called on for a sudden opinion, he was

unready, short and embarrassed.  Yet he wrote readily, rather

diffusely, in an easy and correct style.  This he had acquired by

conversation with the world, for his education was merely reading,

writing and common arithmetic, to which he added surveying at a later

day.  His time was employed in action chiefly, reading little, and

that only in agriculture and English history.  His correspondence

became necessarily extensive, and, with journalizing his agricultural

proceedings, occupied most of his leisure hours within doors.  On the

whole, his character was, in its mass, perfect, in nothing bad, in

few points indifferent; and it may truly be said, that never did

nature and fortune combine more perfectly to make a man great, and to

place him in the same constellation with whatever worthies have

merited from man an everlasting remembrance.  For his was the

singular destiny and merit, of leading the armies of his country

successfully through an arduous war, for the establishment of its

independence; of conducting its councils through the birth of a

government, new in its forms and principles, until it had settled

down into a quiet and orderly train; and of scrupulously obeying the

laws through the whole of his career, civil and military, of which

the history of the world furnishes no other example.




        How, then, can it be perilous for you to take such a man on

your shoulders?  I am satisfied the great body of republicans think

of him as I do.  We were, indeed, dissatisfied with him on his

ratification of the British treaty.  But this was short lived.  We

knew his honesty, the wiles with which he was encompassed, and that

age had already begun to relax the firmness of his purposes; and I am

convinced he is more deeply seated in the love and gratitude of the

republicans, than in the Pharisaical homage of the federal

monarchists.  For he was no monarchist from preference of his

judgment.  The soundness of that gave him correct views of the rights

of man, and his severe justice devoted him to them.  He has often

declared to me that he considered our new constitution as an

experiment on the practicability of republican government, and with

what dose of liberty man could be trusted for his own good; that he

was determined the experiment should have a fair trial, and would

lose the last drop of his blood in support of it.  And these

declarations he repeated to me the oftener and more pointedly,

because he knew my suspicions of Colonel Hamilton's views, and

probably had heard from him the same declarations which I had, to

wit, "that the British constitution, with its unequal representation,

corruption and other existing abuses, was the most perfect government

which had ever been established on earth, and that a reformation of

those abuses would make it an impracticable government." I do believe

that General Washington had not a firm confidence in the durability

of our government.  He was naturally distrustful of men, and inclined

to gloomy apprehensions; and I was ever persuaded that a belief that

we must at length end in something like a British constitution, had

some weight in his adoption of the ceremonies of levees, birth-days,

pompous meetings with Congress, and other forms of the same

character, calculated to prepare us gradually for a change which he

believed possible, and to let it come on with as little shock as

might be to the public mind.




        These are my opinions of General Washington, which I would

vouch at the judgment seat of God, having been formed on an

acquaintance of thirty years.  I served with him in the Virginia

legislature from 1769 to the Revolutionary war, and again, a short

time in Congress, until he left us to take command of the army.

During the war and after it we corresponded occasionally, and in the

four years of my continuance in the office of Secretary of State, our

intercourse was daily, confidential and cordial.  After I retired

from that office, great and malignant pains were taken by our federal

monarchists, and not entirely without effect, to make him view me as

a theorist, holding French principles of government, which would lead

infallibly to licentiousness and anarchy.  And to this he listened

the more easily, from my known disapprobation of the British treaty.

I never saw him afterwards, or these malignant insinuations should

have been dissipated before his just judgment, as mists before the

sun.  I felt on his death, with my countrymen, that "verily a great

man hath fallen this day in Israel."




        More time and recollection would enable me to add many other

traits of his character; but why add them to you who knew him well?

And I cannot justify to myself a longer detention of your paper.




        _Vale, proprieque tuum, me esse tibi persuadeas_.


