





        THE GENEVA ACADEMY




        _To Fransois D'Ivernois_

        _Monticello, in Virginia, Feb. 6, 1795_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your several favors on the affairs of Geneva found

me here, in the month of December last.  It is now more than a year

that I have withdrawn myself from public affairs, which I never liked

in my life, but was drawn into by emergencies which threatened our

country with slavery, but ended in establishing it free.  I have

returned, with infinite appetite, to the enjoyment of my farm, my

family & my books, and had determined to meddle in nothing beyond

their limits.  Your proposition, however, for transplanting the

college of Geneva to my own country, was too analogous to all my

attachments to science, & freedom, the first-born daughter of

science, not to excite a lively interest in my mind, and the essays

which were necessary to try it's practicability.  This depended

altogether on the opinions & dispositions of our State legislature,

which was then in session.  I immediately communicated your papers to

a member of the legislature, whose abilities & zeal pointed him out

as proper for it, urging him to sound as many of the leading members

of the legislature as he could, & if he found their opinions

favorable, to bring forward the proposition; but if he should find it

desperate, not to hazard it; because I thought it best not to commit

the honor either of our State or of your college, by an useless act

of eclat.  It was not till within these three days that I have had an

interview with him, and an account of his proceedings.  He

communicated the papers to a great number of the members, and

discussed them maturely, but privately, with them.  They were

generally well-disposed to the proposition, and some of them warmly;

however, there was no difference of opinion in the conclusion, that

it could not be effected.  The reasons which they thought would with

certainty prevail against it, were 1. that our youth, not

familiarized but with their mother tongue, were not prepared to

receive instructions in any other; 2d. that the expence of the

institution would excite uneasiness in their constituents, & endanger

it's permanence; & 3. that it's extent was disproportioned to the

narrow state of the population with us.  Whatever might be urged on

these several subjects, yet as the decision rested with others, there

remained to us only to regret that circumstances were such, or were

thought to be such, as to disappoint your & our wishes.  I should

have seen with peculiar satisfaction the establishment of such a mass

of science in my country, and should probably have been tempted to

approach myself to it, by procuring a residence in it's neighborhood,

at those seasons of the year at least when the operations of

agriculture are less active and interesting.  I sincerely lament the

circumstances which have suggested this emigration.  I had hoped that

Geneva was familiarized to such a degree of liberty, that they might

without difficulty or danger fill up the measure to its maximum; a

term, which, though in the insulated man, bounded only by his natural

powers, must, in society, be so far restricted as to protect himself

against the evil passions of his associates, & consequently, them

against him.  I suspect that the doctrine, that small States alone

are fitted to be republics, will be exploded by experience, with some

other brilliant fallacies accredited by Montesquieu & other political

writers.  Perhaps it will be found, that to obtain a just republic

(and it is to secure our just rights that we resort to government at

all) it must be so extensive as that local egoisms may never reach

it's greater part; that on every particular question, a majority may

be found in it's councils free from particular interests, and giving,

therefore, an uniform prevalence to the principles of justice.  The

smaller the societies, the more violent & more convulsive their

schisms.  We have chanced to live in an age which will probably be

distinguished in history, for it's experiments in government on a

larger scale than has yet taken place.  But we shall not live to see

the result.  The grosser absurdities, such as hereditary

magistracies, we shall see exploded in our day, long experience

having already pronounced condemnation against them.  But what is to

be the substitute?  This our children or grand children will answer.

We may be satisfied with the certain knowledge that none can ever be

tried, so stupid, so unrighteous, so oppressive, so destructive of

every end for which honest men enter into government, as that which

their forefathers had established, & their fathers alone venture to

tumble headlong from the stations they have so long abused.  It is

unfortunate, that the efforts of mankind to recover the freedom of

which they have been so long deprived, will be accompanied with

violence, with errors, & even with crimes.  But while we weep over

the means, we must pray for the end. -- But I have been insensibly

led by the general complexion of the times, from the particular case

of Geneva, to those to which it bears no similitude.  Of that we hope

good things.  Its inhabitants must be too much enlightened, too well

experienced in the blessings of freedom and undisturbed industry, to

tolerate long a contrary state of things.  I shall be happy to hear

that their government perfects itself, and leaves room for the

honest, the industrious & wise; in which case, your own talents, &

those of the persons for whom you have interested yourself, will, I

am sure, find welcome & distinction.  My good wishes will always

attend you, as a consequence of the esteem & regard with which I am,

Dear Sir, your most obedient & most humble servant.







        ABJURING THE PRESIDENCY




        _To James Madison_

        _Monticello, Apr. 27, 1795_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your letter of Mar 23. came to hand the 7th of

April, and notwithstanding the urgent reasons for answering a part of

it immediately, yet as it mentioned that you would leave Philadelphia

within a few days, I feared that the answer might pass you on the

road.  A letter from Philadelphia by the last post having announced

to me your leaving that place the day preceding it's date, I am in

hopes this will find you in Orange.  In mine, to which yours of Mar

23. was an answer, I expressed my hope of the only change of position

I ever wished to see you make, and I expressed it with entire

sincerity, because there is not another person in the U S. who being

placed at the helm of our affairs, my mind would be so completely at

rest for the fortune of our political bark.  The wish too was pure, &

unmixed with anything respecting myself personally.  For as to

myself, the subject had been thoroughly weighed & decided on, & my

retirement from office had been meant from all office high or low,

without exception.  I can say, too, with truth, that the subject had

not been presented to my mind by any vanity of my own.  I know myself

& my fellow citizens too well to have ever thought of it.  But the

idea was forced upon me by continual insinuations in the public

papers, while I was in office.  As all these came from a hostile

quarter, I knew that their object was to poison the public mind as to

my motives, when they were not able to charge me with facts.  But the

idea being once presented to me, my own quiet required that I should

face it & examine it.  I did so thoroughly, & had no difficulty to

see that every reason which had determined me to retire from the

office I then held, operated more strongly against that which was

insinuated to be my object.  I decided then on those general grounds

which could alone be present to my mind at the time, that is to say,

reputation, tranquillity, labor; for as to public duty, it could not

be a topic of consideration in my case.  If these general

considerations were sufficient to ground a firm resolution never to

permit myself to think of the office, or to be thought of for it, the

special ones which have supervened on my retirement, still more

insuperably bar the door to it.  My health is entirely broken down

within the last eight months; my age requires that I should place my

affairs in a clear state; these are sound if taken care of, but

capable of considerable dangers if longer neglected; and above all

things, the delights I feel in the society of my family, and the

agricultural pursuits in which I am so eagerly engaged.  The little

spice of ambition which I had in my younger days has long since

evaporated, and I set still less store by a posthumous than present

name.  In stating to you the heads of reasons which have produced my

determination, I do not mean an opening for future discussion, or

that I may be reasoned out of it.  The question is forever closed

with me; my sole object is to avail myself of the first opening ever

given me from a friendly quarter (and I could not with decency do it

before), of preventing any division or loss of votes, which might be

fatal to the Republican interest.  If that has any chance of

prevailing, it must be by avoiding the loss of a single vote, and by

concentrating all its strength on one object.  Who this should be, is

a question I can more freely discuss with anybody than yourself.  In

this I painfully feel the loss of Monroe.  Had he been here, I should

have been at no loss for a channel through which to make myself

understood; if I have been misunderstood by anybody through the

instrumentality of mr. Fenno & his abettors. -- I long to see you.  I

am proceeding in my agricultural plans with a slow but sure step.  To

get under full way will require 4. or 5.  years.  But patience &

perseverance will accomplish it.  My little essay in red clover, the

last year, has had the most encouraging success.  I sowed then about

40. acres.  I have sowed this year about 120. which the rain now

falling comes very opportunely on.  From 160.  to 200.  acres, will

be my yearly sowing.  The seed-box described in the agricultural

transactions of New York, reduces the expense of seeding from 6/ to

2/3 the acre, and does the business better than is possible to be

done by the human hand.  May we hope a visit from you?  If we may,

let it be after the middle of May, by which time I hope to be

returned from Bedford.  I had had a proposition to meet mr. Henry

there this month, to confer on the subject of a convention, to the

calling of which he is now become a convert.  The session of our

district court furnished me a just excuse for the time; but the

impropriety of my entering into consultation on a measure in which I

would take no part, is a permanent one.




        Present my most respectful compliments to mrs. Madison, & be

assured of the warm attachment of, Dear Sir, yours affectionately.







        A NAIL-MAKER




        _To Jean Nicolas Demeunier_

        _Monticello, Virginia, Apr. 29, 1795_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favor of Mar. 30. from Philadelphia came to

my hands a few days ago.  That which you mention to have written from

London has never been received; nor had I been able to discover what

has been your fortune during the troubles of France after the death

of the King.  Being thoroughly persuaded that under all circumstances

your conduct had been entirely innocent & friendly to the freedom of

your country, I had hopes that you had not been obliged to quit your

own country.  Being myself a warm zealot for the attainment &

enjoiment by all mankind of as much liberty, as each may exercise

without injury to the equal liberty of his fellow citizens, I have

lamented that in France the endeavours to obtain this should have

been attended with the effusion of so much blood.  I was intimate

with the leading characters of the year 1789.  So I was with those of

the Brissotine party who succeeded them: & have always been persuaded

that their views were upright.  Those who have followed have been

less known to me: but I have been willing to hope that they also

meant the establishment of a free government in their country,

excepting perhaps the party which has lately been suppressed.  The

government of those now at the head of affairs appears to hold out

many indications of good sense, moderation & virtue; & I cannot but

presume from their character as well as your own that you would find

a perfect safety in the bosom of your own country.  I think it

fortunate for the United States to have become the asylum for so many

virtuous patriots of different denominations: but their

circumstances, with which you were so well acquainted before, enabled

them to be but a bare asylum, & to offer nothing for them but an

entire freedom to use their own means & faculties as they please.

There is no such thing in this country as what would be called wealth

in Europe.  The richest are but a little at ease, & obliged to pay

the most rigorous attention to their affairs to keep them together.

I do not mean to speak here of the Beaujons of America.  For we have

some of these tho' happily they are but ephemeral.  Our public

oeconomy also is such as to offer drudgery and subsistence only to

those entrusted with its administration, a wise & necessary

precaution against the degeneracy of the public servants.  In our

private pursuits it is a great advantage that every honest employment

is deemed honorable.  I am myself a nail-maker.  On returning home

after an absence of ten years, I found my farms so much deranged that

I saw evidently they would be a burden to me instead of a support

till I could regenerate them; & consequently that it was necessary

for me to find some other resource in the meantime.  I thought for

awhile of taking up the manufacture of pot-ash, which requires but

small advances of money.  I concluded at length however to begin a

manufacture of nails, which needs little or no capital, & I now

employ a dozen little boys from 10. to 16. years of age, overlooking

all the details of their business myself & drawing from it a profit

on which I can get along till I can put my farms into a course of

yielding profit.  My new trade of nail-making is to me in this

country what an additional title of nobility or the ensigns of a new

order are in Europe.  In the commercial line, the grocers business is

that which requires the least capital in this country.  The grocer

generally obtains a credit of three months, & sells for ready money

so as to be able to make his paiments & obtain a new supply.  But I

think I have observed that your countrymen who have been obliged to

work out their own fortunes here, have succeeded best with a small

farm.  Labour indeed is dear here, but rents are low & on the whole a

reasonable profit & comfortable subsistence results.  It is at the

same time the most tranquil, healthy, & independent.  And since you

have been pleased to ask my opinion as to the best way of employing

yourself till you can draw funds from France or return there

yourself, I do presume that this is the business which would yield

the most happiness & contentment to one of your philosophic turn.

But at the distance I am from New York, where you seem disposed to

fix yourself, & little acquainted with the circumstances of that

place I am much less qualified than disposed to suggest to you

emploiments analogous to your turn of mind & at the same time to the

circumstances of your present situation.  Be assured that it will

always give me lively pleasure to learn that your pursuits, whatever

they may be may lead you to contentment & success, being with very

sincere esteem & respect, dear sir, your most obedient servant.







        ROGUES AND A TREATY




        _To Mann Page_

        _Monticello, Aug. 30, 1795_




        It was not in my power to attend at Fredericksburg according to

the kind invitation in your letter, and in that of mr. Ogilvie.  The

heat of the weather, the business of the farm, to which I have made

myself necessary, forbade it; and to give one round reason for all,

_mature sanus_, I have laid up my Rosinante in his stall, before his

unfitness for the road shall expose him faultering to the world.  But

why did not I answer you in time?  Because, in truth, I am

encouraging myself to grow lazy, and I was sure you would ascribe the

delay to anything sooner than a want of affection or respect to you,

for this was not among the possible causes.  In truth, if anything

could ever induce me to sleep another night out of my own house, it

would have been your friendly invitation and my sollicitude for the

subject of it, the education of our youth.  I do most anxiously wish

to see the highest degrees of education given to the higher degrees

of genius, and to all degrees of it, so much as may enable them to

read & understand what is going on in the world, and to keep their

part of it going on right: for nothing can keep it right but their

own vigilant & distrustful superintendence.  I do not believe with

the Rochefoucaults & Montaignes, that fourteen out of fifteen men are

rogues: I believe a great abatement from that proportion may be made

in favor of general honesty.  But I have always found that rogues

would be uppermost, and I do not know that the proportion is too

strong for the higher orders, and for those who, rising above the

swinish multitude, always contrive to nestle themselves into the

places of power & profit.  These rogues set out with stealing the

people's good opinion, and then steal from them the right of

withdrawing it, by contriving laws and associations against the power

of the people themselves.  Our part of the country is in considerable

fermentation, on what they suspect to be a recent roguery of this

kind.  They say that while all hands were below deck mending sails,

splicing ropes, and every one at his own business, & the captain in

his cabbin attending to his log book & chart, a rogue of a pilot has

run them into an enemy's port.  But metaphor apart, there is much

dissatisfaction with mr. Jay & his treaty.  For my part, I consider

myself now but as a passenger, leaving the world, & it's government

to those who are likely to live longer in it.  That you may be among

the longest of these, is my sincere prayer.  After begging you to be

the bearer of my compliments & apologies to mr.  Ogilvie, I bid you

an affectionate farewell, always wishing to hear from you.







        THE LAWS OF VIRGINIA




        _To George Wythe_

        _Monticello, January 16, 1796_




        In my letter which accompanied the box containing my collection

of Printed laws, I promised to send you by post a statement of the

contents of the box.  On taking up the subject I found it better to

take a more general view of the whole of the laws I possess, as well

Manuscript as printed, as also of those which I do not possess, and

suppose to be no longer extant.  This general view you will have in

the enclosed paper, whereof the articles stated to be printed

constitute the contents of the box I sent you.  Those in MS. were not

sent, because not supposed to have been within your view, and because

some of them will not bear removal, being so rotten, that in turning

over a leaf it sometimes falls into powder.  These I preserve by

wrapping & sewing them up in oiled cloth, so that neither air nor

moisture can have access to them.  Very early in the course of my

researches into the laws of Virginia, I observed that many of them

were already lost, and many more on the point of being lost, as

existing only in single copies in the hands of careful or curious

individuals, on whose death they would probably be used for waste

paper.  I set myself therefore to work, to collect all which were

then existing, in order that when the day should come in which the

public should advert to the magnitude of their loss in these precious

monuments of our property, and our history, a part of their regret

might be spared by information that a portion has been saved from the

wreck, which is worthy of their attention & preservation.  In

searching after these remains, I spared neither time, trouble, nor

expense; and am of opinion that scarcely any law escaped me, which

was in being as late as the year 1778 in the middle or Southern parts

of the State.  In the Northern parts, perhaps something might still

be found.  In the clerk's office in the antient counties, some of

these MS. copies of the laws may possibly still exist, which used to

be furnished at the public expense to every county, before the use of

the press was introduced; and in the same places, and in the hands of

antient magistrates or of their families, some of the fugitive sheets

of the laws of separate sessions, which have been usually distributed

since the practice commenced of printing them.  But recurring to what

we actually possess, the question is, what means will be the most

effectual for preserving these remains from future loss?  All the

care I can take of them, will not preserve them from the worm, from

the natural decay of the paper, from the accidents of fire, or those

of removal when it is necessary for any public purposes, as in the

case of those now sent you.  Our experience has proved to us that a

single copy, or a few, deposited in MS. in the public offices, cannot

be relied on for any great length of time.  The ravages of fire and

of ferocious enemies have had but too much part in producing the very

loss we are now deploring.  How many of the precious works of

antiquity were lost while they were preserved only in manuscript?

Has there ever been one lost since the art of printing has rendered

it practicable to multiply & disperse copies?  This leads us then to

the only means of preserving those remains of our laws now under

consideration, that is, a multiplication of printed copies.  I think

therefore that there should be printed at public expense, an edition

of all the laws ever passed by our legislatures which can now be

found; that a copy should be deposited in every public library in

America, in the principal public offices within the State, and some

perhaps in the most distinguished public libraries of Europe, and

that the rest should be sold to individuals, towards reimbursing the

expences of the edition.  Nor do I think that this would be a

voluminous work.  The MSS. would probably furnish matter for one

printed volume in folio, would comprehend all the laws from 1624 to

1701, which period includes Purvis.  My collection of Fugitive sheets

forms, as we know, two volumes, and comprehends all the extant laws

from 1734 to 1783; and the laws which can be gleaned up from the

Revisals to supply the chasm between 1701 & 1734, with those from

1783 to the close of the present century, (by which term the work

might be compleated,) would not be more than the matter of another

volume.  So that four volumes in folio, would give every law ever

passed which is now extant; whereas those who wish to possess as many

of them as can be procured, must now buy the six folio volumes of

Revisals, to wit, Purvis & those of 1732, 1748, 1768, 1783, & 1794,

and in all of them possess not one half of what they wish.  What

would be the expence of the edition I cannot say, nor how much would

be reimbursed by the sales; but I am sure it would be moderate,

compared with the rates which the public have hitherto paid for

printing their laws, provided a sufficient latitude be given as to

printers & places.  The first step would be to make out a single copy

for the MSS., which would employ a clerk about a year or something

more, to which expence about a fourth should be added for the

collation of the MSS., which would employ 3. persons at a time about

half a day, or a day in every week.  As I have already spent more

time in making myself acquainted with the contents & arrangement of

these MSS. than any other person probably ever will, & their

condition does not admit their removal to a distance, I will

chearfully undertake the direction & superintendence of this work, if

it can be done in the neighboring towns of Charlottesville or Milton,

farther than which I could not undertake to go from home.  For the

residue of the work, my printed volumes might be delivered to the

Printer.




        I have troubled you with these details, because you are in the

place where they may be used for the public service, if they admit of

such use, & because the order of assembly, which you mention, shews

they are sensible of the necessity of preserving such of these laws

as relate to our landed property; and a little further consideration

will perhaps convince them that it is better to do the whole work

once for all, than to be recurring to it by piece-meal, as particular

parts of it shall be required, & that too perhaps when the materials

shall be lost.  You are the best judge of the weight of these

observations, & of the mode of giving them any effect they may merit.

Adieu affectionately.







        "AN AGE OF EXPERIMENTS"




        _To John Adams_

        _Monticello, Feb. 28, 1796_




        I am to thank you, my dear Sir, for forwarding Mr. D'Ivernois'

book on the French revolution.  I recieve every thing with respect

which comes from him.  But it is on politics, a subject I never

loved, and now hate.  I will not promise therefore to read it

thoroughly.  I fear the oligarchical executive of the French will not

do.  We have always seen a small council get into cabals and

quarrels, the more bitter and relentless the fewer they are.  We saw

this in our committee of the states; and that they were, from their

bad passions, incapable of doing the business of their country.  I

think that for the prompt, clear and consistent action so necessary

in an Executive, unity of person is necessary as with us.  I am aware

of the objection to this, that the office becoming more important may

bring on serious discord in elections.  In our country I think it

will be long first; not within our day; and we may safely trust to

the wisdom of our successors the remedies of the evil to arise in

theirs.  Both experiments however are now fairly committed, and the

result will be seen.  Never was a finer canvas presented to work on

than our countrymen.  All of them engaged in agriculture or the

pursuits of honest industry, independant in their circumstances,

enlightened as to their rights, and firm in their habits of order and

obedience to the laws.  This I hope will be the age of experiments in

government, and that their basis will be founded on principles of

honesty, not of mere force.  We have seen no instance of this since

the days of the Roman republic, nor do we read of any before that.

Either force or corruption has been the principle of every modern

government, unless the Dutch perhaps be excepted, and I am not well

enough informed to except them absolutely.  If ever the morals of a

people could be made the basis of their own government, it is our

case; and he who could propose to govern such a people by the

corruption of their legislature, before he could have one night of

quiet sleep, must convince himself that the human soul as well as

body is mortal.  I am glad to see that whatever grounds of

apprehension may have appeared of a wish to govern us otherwise than

on principles of reason and honesty, we are getting the better of

them.  I am sure, from the honesty of your heart, you join me in

detestation of the corruption of the English government, and that no

man on earth is more incapable than yourself of seeing that copied

among us, willingly.  I have been among those who have feared the

design to introduce it here, and it has been a strong reason with me

for wishing there was an ocean of fire between that island and us.

But away politics.




        I owe a letter to the Auditor [Richard Harrison] on the subject

of my accounts while a foreign minister, and he informs me yours hang

on the same difficulties with mine.  Before the present government

there was a usage either practised on or understood which regulated

our charges.  This government has directed the future by a law.  But

this is not retrospective, and I cannot conceive why the treasury

cannot settle accounts under the old Congress on the principles that

body acted on.  I shall very shortly write to Mr. Harrison on this

subject, and if we cannot have it settled otherwise I suppose we must

apply to the legislature.  In this I will act in concert with you if

you approve of it.  Present my very affectionate respects to Mrs.

Adams, and be assured that no one more cordially esteems your virtues

than Dear Sir Your sincere friend and servt.







        "THE BOISTEROUS SEA OF LIBERTY"




        _To Philip Mazzei_

        _Monticello, Apr. 24, 1796_




        MY DEAR FRIEND, -- Your letter of Oct. 26. 1795. is just

received and gives me the first information that the bills forwarded

for you to V. S. & H. of Amsterdam on V. Anderson for pound 39-17-10

1/2 & on George Barclay for pound 70-8-6 both of London have been

protested.  I immediately write to the drawers to secure the money if

still unpaid.  I wonder I have never had a letter from our friends of

Amsterdam on that subject as well as acknoleging the subsequent

remittances.  Of these I have apprised you by triplicates, but for

fear of miscarriage will just mention that on Sep. 8. I forwarded

them Hodgden's bill on Robinson Saunderson & Rumney of Whitehaven for

pound 300. and Jan. 31.  that of the same on the same for pound

137-16-6 both received from mr.  Blair for your stock sold out.  I

have now the pleasure to inform you that Dohrman has settled his

account with you, has allowed the New York damage of 20.  per cent

for the protest, & the New York interest of 7. per cent. and after

deducting the partial payments for which he held receipts the balance

was three thousand & eighty-seven dollars which sum he has paid into

mr. Madison's hands & as he (mr.  Madison) is now in Philadelphia, I

have desired him to invest the money in good bills on Amsterdam &

remit them to the V. Staphorsts & H. whom I consider as possessing

your confidence as they do mine beyond any house in London.  The

pyracies of that nation lately extended from the sea to the debts due

from them to other nations renders theirs an unsafe medium to do

business through.  I hope these remittances will place you at your

ease & I will endeavor to execute your wishes as to the settlement of

the other small matters you mention: tho' from them I expect little.

E. R. is bankrupt, or tantamount to it.  Our friend M. P. is

embarrassed, having lately sold the fine lands he lives on, & being

superlatively just & honorable I expect we may get whatever may be in

his hands.  Lomax is under greater difficulties with less means, so

that I apprehend you have little more to expect from this country

except the balance which will remain for Colle after deducting the

little matter due to me, & what will be recovered by Anthony.  This

will be decided this summer.




        I have written to you by triplicates with every remittance I

sent to the V. S. & H. & always recapitulated in each letter the

objects of the preceding ones.  I enclosed in two of them some seeds

of the squash as you desired.  Send me in return some seeds of the

winter vetch, I mean that kind which is sewn in autumn & stands thro

the cold of winter, furnishing a crop of green fodder in March.  Put

a few seeds in every letter you may write to me.  In England only the

spring vetch can be had.  Pray fail not in this.  I have it greatly

at heart.




        The aspect of our politics has wonderfully changed since you

left us.  In place of that noble love of liberty, & republican

government which carried us triumphantly thro' the war, an Anglican

monarchical, & aristocratical party has sprung up, whose avowed

object is to draw over us the substance, as they have already done

the forms, of the British government.  The main body of our citizens,

however, remain true to their republican principles; the whole landed

interest is republican, and so is a great mass of talents.  Against

us are the Executive, the Judiciary, two out of three branches of the

legislature, all the officers of the government, all who want to be

officers, all timid men who prefer the calm of despotism to the

boisterous sea of liberty, British merchants & Americans trading on

British capitals, speculators & holders in the banks & public funds,

a contrivance invented for the purposes of corruption, & for

assimilating us in all things to the rotten as well as the sound

parts of the British model.  It would give you a fever were I to name

to you the apostates who have gone over to these heresies, men who

were Samsons in the field & Solomons in the council, but who have had

their heads shorn by the harlot England.  In short, we are likely to

preserve the liberty we have obtained only by unremitting labors &

perils.  But we shall preserve them; and our mass of weight & wealth

on the good side is so great, as to leave no danger that force will

ever be attempted against us.  We have only to awake and snap the

Lilliputian cords with which they have been entangling us during the

first sleep which succeeded our labors.  I will forward the

testimonial of the death of mrs. Mazzei, which I can do the more

incontrovertibly as she is buried in my grave yard, and I pass her

grave daily.  The formalities of the proof you require, will occasion

delay.  John Page & his son Mann are well.  The father remarried to a

lady from N. York.  Beverley Randolph e la sua consorte living &

well.  Their only child married to the 2d of T. M.  Randolph.  The

eldest son you know married my eldest daughter, is an able learned &

worthy character, but kept down by ill health.  They have two

children & still live with me.  My younger daughter well.  Colo.

Innis is well, & a true republican still as are all those before

named.  Colo. Monroe is our M. P. at Paris a most worthy patriot &

honest man.  These are the persons you inquire after.  I begin to

feel the effects of age.  My health has suddenly broke down, with

symptoms which give me to believe I shall not have much to encounter

of the _tedium vitae_.  While it remains, however, my heart will be

warm in it's friendships, and among these, will always foster the

affection with which I am, dear Sir, your friend and servant.







        AN ENTENTE WITH ADAMS




        _To James Madison, with Enclosure_

        _Jan. 1, 1797_




        Yours of Dec. 19. has come safely.  The event of the election

has never been a matter of doubt in my mind.  I knew that the Eastern

states were disciplined in the schools of their town meetings to

sacrifice differences of opinion to the great object of operating in

phalanx, & that the more free & moral agency practiced in the other

states would always make up the supplement of their weight.  Indeed

the vote comes much nearer an equality than I had expected.  I know

the difficulty of obtaining belief to one's declarations of a

disinclination to honors, & that it is greatest with those who still

remain in the world.  But no arguments were wanting to reconcile me

to a relinquishment of the first office or acquiescence under the

second.  As to the first it was impossible that a more solid

unwillingness settled on full calculation, could have existed in any

man's mind, short of the degree of absolute refusal.  The only view

on which I would have gone into it for awhile was to put our vessel

on her republican tack before she should be thrown too much to

leeward of her true principles.  As to the second, it is the only

office in the world about which I am unable to decide in my own mind

whether I had rather have it or not have it.  Pride does not enter

into the estimate; for I think with the Romans that the general of

today should be a soldier tomorrow if necessary.  I can particularly

have no feelings which would revolt at a secondary position to mr.

Adams.  I am his junior in life, was his junior in Congress, his

junior in the diplomatic line, his junior lately in the civil

government.  Before the receipt of your letter I had written the

enclosed one to him.  I had intended it some time, but had deferred

it from time to time under the discouragement of a despair of making

him believe I could be sincere in it.  The papers by the last post

not rendering it necessary to change anything in the letter I enclose

it open for your perusal, not only that you may possess the actual

state of dispositions between us, but that if anything should render

the delivery of it ineligible in your opinion, you may return it to

me.  If mr. Adams can be induced to administer the government on it's

true principles, & to relinquish his bias to an English constitution,

it is to be considered whether it would not be on the whole for the

public good to come to a good understanding with him as to his future

elections.  He is perhaps the only sure barrier against Hamilton's

getting in.




        Since my last I have received a packet of books & pamphlets,

the choiceness of which testifies that they come from you.  The

incidents of Hamilton's insurrection is a curious work indeed.  The

hero of it exhibits himself in all the attitudes of a dexterous

balance master.




        The Political progress is a work of value & of a singular

complexion.  The eye of the author seems to be a natural achromatic,

which divests every object of the glare of colour.  The preceding

work under the same title had the same merit.  One is disgusted

indeed with the ulcerated state which it presents of the human mind:

but to cure an ulcer we must go to its bottom: & no writer has ever

done this more radically than this one.  The reflections into which

he leads one are not flattering to our species.  In truth I do not

recollect in all the animal kingdom a single species but man which is

eternally & systematically engaged in the destruction of its own

species.  What is called civilization seems to have no other effect

on him than to teach him to pursue the principle of bellum omnium in

omnia on a larger scale, & in place of the little contests of tribe

against tribe, to engage all the quarters of the earth in the same

work of destruction.  When we add to this that as to the other

species of animals, the lions & tigers are mere lambs compared with

man as a destroyer, we must conclude that it is in man alone that

nature has been able to find a sufficient barrier against the too

great multiplication of other animals & of man himself, an

equilibriating power against the fecundity of generation.  My

situation points my views chiefly to his wars in the physical world:

yours perhaps exhibit him as equally warring in the moral one.  We

both, I believe, join in wishing to see him softened.  Adieu.







        ENCLOSURE TO JOHN ADAMS

        _Monticello, Dec. 28, 1796_




        DEAR SIR -- The public and the public papers have been much

occupied lately in placing us in a point of opposition to each other.

I trust with confidence that less of it has been felt by ourselves

personally.  In the retired canton where I am, I learn little of what

is passing: pamphlets I see never; papers but a few; and the fewer

the happier.  Our latest intelligence from Philadelphia at present is

of the 16th. inst. but tho' at that date your election to the first

magistracy seems not to have been known as a fact, yet with me it has

never been doubted.  I knew it impossible you should lose a vote

North of the Delaware, and even if that of Pensylvania should be

against you in the mass, yet that you would get enough South of that

to place your succession out of danger.  I have never one single

moment expected a different issue: and tho' I know I shall not be

believed, yet it is not the less true that I have never wished it.

My neighbors, as my compurgators, could aver that fact, because they

see my occupations and my attachment to them.  Indeed it is possible

that you may be cheated of your succession by a trick worthy the

subtlety of your arch-friend [Alexander Hamilton] of New York, who

has been able to make of your real friends tools to defeat their and

your just wishes.  Most probably he will be disappointed as to you;

and my inclinations place me out of his reach.  I leave to others the

sublime delights of riding in the storm, better pleased with sound

sleep and a warm birth below, with the society of neighbors, friends

and fellow laborers of the earth, than of spies and sycophants.  No

one then will congratulate you with purer disinterestedness than

myself.  The share indeed which I may have had in the late vote, I

shall still value highly, as an evidence of the share I have in the

esteem of my fellow citizens.  But while, in this point of view, a

few votes less would be little sensible, the difference in the effect

of a few more would be very sensible and oppressive to me.  I have no

ambition to govern men.  It is a painful and thankless office.  Since

the day too on which you signed the treaty of Paris our horizon was

never so overcast.  I devoutly wish you may be able to shun for us

this war by which our agriculture, commerce and credit will be

destroyed.  If you are, the glory will be all your own; and that your

administration may be filled with glory and happiness to yourself and

advantage to us is the sincere wish of one who tho', in the course of

our voyage thro' life, various little incidents have happened or been

contrived to separate us, retains still for you the solid esteem of

the moments when we were working for our independance, and sentiments

of respect and affectionate attachment.







        "PERFECTLY NEUTRAL AND INDEPENDENT"




        _To Elbridge Gerry_

        _Philadelphia, May 13, 1797_




        MY DEAR FRIEND, -- Your favor of the 4th instt came to hand

yesterday.  That of the 4th of Apr, with the one for Monroe, has

never been received.  The first, of Mar 27, did not reach me till Apr

21, when I was within a few days of setting out for this place, & I

put off acknoleging it till I should come here.  I entirely commend

your dispositions towards mr. Adams; knowing his worth as intimately

and esteeming it as much as any one, and acknoleging the preference

of his claims, if any I could have had, to the high office conferred

on him.  But in truth, I had neither claims nor wishes on the

subject, tho I know it will be difficult to obtain belief of this.

When I retired from this place & the office of Secy of state, it was

in the firmest contemplation of never more returning here.  There had

indeed been suggestions in the public papers, that I was looking

towards a succession to the President's chair, but feeling a

consciousness of their falsehood, and observing that the suggestions

came from hostile quarters, I considered them as intended merely to

excite public odium against me.  I never in my life exchanged a word

with any person, on the subject, till I found my name brought forward

generally, in competition with that of mr. Adams.  Those with whom I

then communicated, could say, if it were necessary, whether I met the

call with desire, or even with a ready acquiescence, and whether from

the moment of my first acquiescence, I did not devoutly pray that the

very thing might happen which has happened.  The second office of

this government is honorable & easy, the first is but a splendid

misery.




        You express apprehensions that stratagems will be used, to

produce a misunderstanding between the President and myself.  Tho not

a word having this tendency has ever been hazarded to me by any one,

yet I consider as a certainty that nothing will be left untried to

alienate him from me.  These machinations will proceed from the

Hamiltons by whom he is surrounded, and who are only a little less

hostile to him than to me.  It cannot but damp the pleasure of

cordiality, when we suspect that it is suspected.  I cannot help

fearing, that it is impossible for mr. Adams to believe that the

state of my mind is what it really is; that he may think I view him

as an obstacle in my way.  I have no supernatural power to impress

truth on the mind of another, nor he any to discover that the

estimate which he may form, on a just view of the human mind as

generally constituted, may not be just in its application to a

special constitution.  This may be a source of private uneasiness to

us; I honestly confess that it is so to me at this time.  But neither

of us are capable of letting it have effect on our public duties.

Those who may endeavor to separate us, are probably excited by the

fear that I might have influence on the executive councils; but when

they shall know that I consider my office as constitutionally

confined to legislative functions, and that I could not take any part

whatever in executive consultations, even were it proposed, their

fears may perhaps subside, & their object be found not worth a

machination.




        I do sincerely wish with you, that we could take our stand on a

ground perfectly neutral & independent towards all nations.  It has

been my constant object thro public life; and with respect to the

English & French, particularly, I have too often expressed to the

former my wishes, & made to them propositions verbally & in writing,

officially & privately, to official & private characters, for them to

doubt of my views, if they would be content with equality.  Of this

they are in possession of several written & formal proofs, in my own

hand writing.  But they have wished a monopoly of commerce &

influence with us; and they have in fact obtained it.  When we take

notice that theirs is the workshop to which we go for all we want;

that with them centre either immediately or ultimately all the labors

of our hands and lands; that to them belongs either openly or

secretly the great mass of our navigation; that even the factorage of

their affairs here, is kept to themselves by factitious citizenships;

that these foreign & false citizens now constitute the great body of

what are called our merchants, fill our sea ports, are planted in

every little town & district of the interior country, sway everything

in the former places by their own votes, & those of their dependants,

in the latter, by their insinuations & the influence of their

ledgers; that they are advancing fast to a monopoly of our banks &

public funds, and thereby placing our public finances under their

control; that they have in their alliance the most influential

characters in & out of office; when they have shewn that by all these

bearings on the different branches of the government, they can force

it to proceed in whatever direction they dictate, and bend the

interests of this country entirely to the will of another; when all

this, I say, is attended to, it is impossible for us to say we stand

on independent ground, impossible for a free mind not to see & to

groan under the bondage in which it is bound.  If anything after this

could excite surprise, it would be that they have been able so far to

throw dust in the eyes of our own citizens, as to fix on those who

wish merely to recover self-government the charge of subserving one

foreign influence, because they resist submission to another.  But

they possess our printing presses, a powerful engine in their

government of us.  At this very moment, they would have drawn us into

a war on the side of England, had it not been for the failure of her

bank.  Such was their open & loud cry, & that of their gazettes till

this event.  After plunging us in all the broils of the European

nations, there would remain but one act to close our tragedy, that

is, to break up our Union; and even this they have ventured seriously

& solemnly to propose & maintain by arguments in a Connecticut paper.

I have been happy, however, in believing, from the stifling of this

effort, that that dose was found too strong, & excited as much

repugnance there as it did horror in other parts of our country, &

that whatever follies we may be led into as to foreign nations, we

shall never give up our Union, the last anchor of our hope, & that

alone which is to prevent this heavenly country from becoming an

arena of gladiators.  Much as I abhor war, and view it as the

greatest scourge of mankind, and anxiously as I wish to keep out of

the broils of Europe, I would yet go with my brethren into these,

rather than separate from them.  But I hope we may still keep clear

of them, notwithstanding our present thraldom, & that time may be

given us to reflect on the awful crisis we have passed through, and

to find some means of shielding ourselves in future from foreign

influence, political, commercial, or in whatever other form it may be

attempted.  I can scarcely withhold myself from joining in the wish

of Silas Deane, that there were an ocean of fire between us & the old

world.




        A perfect confidence that you are as much attached to peace &

union as myself, that you equally prize independence of all nations,

and the blessings of self-government, has induced me freely to

unbosom myself to you, and let you see the light in which I have

viewed what has been passing among us from the beginning of the war.

And I shall be happy, at all times, in an intercommunication of

sentiments with you, believing that the dispositions of the different

parts of our country have been considerably misrepresented &

misunderstood in each part, as to the other, and that nothing but

good can result from an exchange of information & opinions between

those whose circumstances & morals admit no doubt of the integrity of

their views.




        I remain, with constant and sincere esteem, Dear Sir, your

affectionate friend and servant.







        PEACE AND COMMERCE




        _To Thomas Pinckney_

        _Philadelphia, May 29, 1797_




        DEAR SIR, -- I received from you, before you left England, a

letter enclosing one from the Prince of Parma.  As I learnt soon

after that you were shortly to return to America, I concluded to join

my acknolegments of it to my congratulations on your arrival; & both

have been delayed by a blameable spirit of procrastination, forever

suggesting to our indolence that we need not do to-day what may be

done to-morrow.  Accept these now in all the sincerity of my heart.

It is but lately I have answered the Prince's letter.  It required

some time to establish arrangements which might effect his purpose, &

I wished also to forward a particular article or two of curiosity.

You have found on your return a higher style of political difference

than you had left here.  I fear this is inseparable from the

different constitutions of the human mind, & that degree of freedom

which permits unrestrained expression.  Political dissension is

doubtless a less evil than the lethargy of despotism, but still it is

a great evil, and it would be as worthy the efforts of the patriot as

of the philosopher, to exclude it's influence, if possible, from

social life.  The good are rare enough at best.  There is no reason

to subdivide them by artificial lines.  But whether we shall ever be

able so far to perfect the principles of society, as that political

opinions shall, in it's intercourse, be as inoffensive as those of

philosophy, mechanics, or any other, may well be doubted.  Foreign

influence is the present & just object of public hue and cry, & -- ,

as often happens, the most guilty are foremost & loudest in the cry.

If those who are truly independent, can so trim our vessels as to

beat through the waves now agitating us, they will merit a glory the

greater as it seems less possible.  When I contemplate the spirit

which is driving us on here, & that beyond the water which will view

us as but a mouthful the more, I have little hope of peace.  I

anticipate the burning of our sea ports, havoc of our frontiers,

household insurgency, with a long train of et ceteras, which is

enough for a man to have met once in his life.  The exchange, which

is to give us new neighbors in Louisiana (probably the present French

armies when disbanded) has opened us to combinations of enemies on

that side where we are most vulnerable.  War is not the best engine

for us to resort to, nature has given us one _in our commerce_,

which, if properly managed, will be a better instrument for obliging

the interested nations of Europe to treat us with justice.  If the

commercial regulations had been adopted which our legislature were at

one time proposing, we should at this moment have been standing on

such an eminence of safety & respect as ages can never recover.  But

having wandered from that, our object should now be to get back, with

as little loss as possible, & when peace shall be restored to the

world, endeavor so to form our _commercial_ regulations as that

justice from other nations shall be their mechanical result.  I am

happy to assure you that the conduct of Gen'l. Pinckney has met

universal approbation.  It was marked with that coolness, dignity, &

good sense which we expected from him.  I am told that the French

government had taken up an unhappy idea, that Monroe was recalled for

the candor of his conduct in what related to the British treaty, &

Gen'l. Pinckney was sent as having other dispositions towards them.

I learn further, that some of their well-informed citizens here are

setting them right as to Genl.  Pinckney's dispositions, so well

known to have been just towards them; & I sincerely hope, not only

that he may be employed as envoy extraordinary to them, but that

their minds will be better prepared to receive him.  I candidly

acknolege, however, that I do not think the speech & addresses of

Congress as conciliatory as the preceding irritations on both sides

would have rendered wise.  I shall be happy to hear from you at all

times, to make myself useful to you whenever opportunity offers, and

to give every proof of the sincerity of the sentiments of esteem &

respect with which I am, Dear Sir, your most obedient and most humble

servant.







        DOMESTIC AFFECTIONS




        _To Martha Jefferson Randolph_

        _Philadelphia, June 8, 1797_




        MY DEAR MARTHA -- Yours of May 20 came to hand the 1st. inst. I

imagine you recieved mine of May 18. about six days after the date of

yours.  It was written the first post day after my arrival here.  The

commission you inclosed for Maria is executed, and the things are in

the care of Mr. Boyce of Richmond, who is returning from hence with

some goods of his own, and will deliver them to Mr. Johnston.  I

recieve with inexpressible pleasure the information your letter

contained.  After your own happy establishment, which has given me an

inestimable friend to whom I can leave the care of every thing I

love, the only anxiety I had remaining was to see Maria also so

asociated as to ensure her happiness.  She could not have been more

so to my wishes, if I had had the whole earth free to have chosen a

partner for her.  I now see our fireside formed into a groupe, no one

member of which has a fibre in their composition which can ever

produce any jarring or jealousies among us.  No irregular passions,

no dangerous bias, which may render problematical the future fortunes

and happiness of our descendants.  We are quieted as to their

condition for at least one generation more.  In order to keep us all

together, instead of a present provision in Bedford, as in your case,

I think to open and resettle the plantation of Pantops for them.

When I look to the ineffable pleasures of my family society, I become

more and more disgusted with the jealousies, the hatred, and the

rancorous and malignant passions of this scene, and lament my having

ever again been drawn into public view.  Tranquility is now my

object.  I have seen enough of political honors to know that they are

but splendid torments: and however one might be disposed to render

services on which any of their fellow citizens should set a value;

yet when as many would deprecate them as a public calamity, one may

well entertain a modest doubt of their real importance, and feel the

impulse of duty to be very weak.  The real difficulty is that being

once delivered into the hands of others, whose feelings are friendly

to the individual and warm to the public cause, how to withdraw from

them without leaving a dissatisfaction in their mind, and an

impression of pusillanimity with the public.




        Congress, in all probability will rise on Saturday the 17th.

inst. the day after you will recieve this.  I shall leave

Philadelphia Monday the 19th. pass a day at Georgetown and a day at

Fredericksburg, at which place I wish my _chair_ and horses to be

Sunday evening the 25th.  Of course they must set out Saturday

morning the 24th.  This gives me the chance of another post, as you

will, the evening before that, recieve by the post a letter of a week

later date than this, so that if any thing should happen within a

week to delay the rising of Congress, I may still notify it and

change the time of the departure of my horses.  Jupiter must pursue

the rout by Noel's to which he will come the first day, and by Chew's

to Fredericksburg the next.  I fix his rout because were any accident

to get me along earlier, or him later, we might meet on the road.

Not yet informed that Mr. Randolph is returned I have thought it

safest to commit this article to my letter to you.  The news of the

day I shall write to him.  My warmest love to yourself and Maria.

Adieu affectionately.







        PATIENCE AND THE REIGN OF WITCHES




        _To John Taylor_

        _Philadelphia, June 4, 1798_




        I now inclose you Mr. Martin's patent.  A patent had actually

been made out on the first description, and how to get this

suppressed and another made for a second invention, without a second

fee, was the difficulty.  I practised a little art in a case where

honesty was really on our side, & nothing against us but the rigorous

letter of the law, and having obtained the 1st specification and got

the 2d put in its place, a second patent has been formed, which I now

inclose with the first specification.




        I promised you, long ago, a description of a mould board.  I

now send it; it is a press copy & therefore dim.  It will be less so

by putting a sheet of white paper behind the one you are reading.  I

would recommend to you first to have a model made of about 3 i. to

the foot, or 1/4 the real dimensions, and to have two blocks, the

1'st of which, after taking out the pyramidal piece & sawing it

crosswise above & below, should be preserved in that form to instruct

workmen in making the large & real one.  The 2'd block may be carried

through all the operations, so as to present the form of the mould

board complete.  If I had an opportunity of sending you a model I

would do it.  It has been greatly approved here, as it has been

before by some very good judges at my house, where I have used it for

5 years with entire approbation.




        Mr. New shewed me your letter on the subject of the patent,

which gave me an opportunity of observing what you said as to the

effect with you of public proceedings, and that it was not unusual

now to estimate the separate mass of Virginia and N. Carolina with a

view to their separate existence.  It is true that we are compleatly

under the saddle of Massachusets & Connecticut, and that they ride us

very hard, cruelly insulting our feelings as well as exhausting our

strength and substance.  Their natural friends, the three other

eastern States, join them from a sort of family pride, and they have

the art to divide certain other parts of the Union so as to make use

of them to govern the whole.  This is not new.  It is the old

practice of despots to use a part of the people to keep the rest in

order, and those who have once got an ascendency and possessed

themselves of all the resources of the nation, their revenues and

offices, have immense means for retaining their advantages.  But our

present situation is not a natural one.  The body of our countrymen

is substantially republican through every part of the Union.  It was

the irresistable influence & popularity of Gen'1 Washington, played

off by the cunning of Hamilton, which turned the government over to

anti-republican hands, or turned the republican members, chosen by

the people, into anti-republicans.  He delivered it over to his

successor in this state, and very untoward events, since improved

with great artifice, have produced on the public mind the impression

we see; but still, I repeat it, this is not the natural state.  Time

alone would bring round an order of things more correspondent to the

sentiments of our constituents; but are there not events impending

which will do it within a few months?  The invasion of England, the

public and authentic avowal of sentiments hostile to the leading

principles of our Constitution, the prospect of a war in which we

shall stand alone, land-tax, stamp-tax, increase of public debt, &c.

Be this as it may, in every free & deliberating society there must,

from the nature of man, be opposite parties & violent dissensions &

discords; and one of these, for the most part, must prevail over the

other for a longer or shorter time.  Perhaps this party division is

necessary to induce each to watch & delate to the people the

proceedings of the other.  But if on a temporary superiority of the

one party, the other is to resort to a scission of the Union, no

federal government can ever exist.  If to rid ourselves of the

present rule of Massachusets & Connecticut we break the Union, will

the evil stop there?  Suppose the N.  England States alone cut off,

will our natures be changed? are we not men still to the south of

that, & with all the passions of men?  Immediately we shall see a

Pennsylvania & a Virginia party arise in the residuary confederacy,

and the public mind will be distracted with the same party spirit.

What a game, too, will the one party have in their hands by eternally

threatening the other that unless they do so & so, they will join

their Northern neighbors.  If we reduce our Union to Virginia & N.

Carolina, immediately the conflict will be established between the

representatives of these two States, and they will end by breaking

into their simple units.  Seeing, therefore, that an association of

men who will not quarrel with one another is a thing which never yet

existed, from the greatest confederacy of nations down to a town

meeting or a vestry, seeing that we must have somebody to quarrel

with, I had rather keep our New England associates for that purpose

than to see our bickerings transferred to others.  They are

circumscribed within such narrow limits, & their population so full,

that their numbers will ever be the minority, and they are marked,

like the Jews, with such a peculiarity of character as to constitute

from that circumstance the natural division of our parties.  A little

patience, and we shall see the reign of witches pass over, their

spells dissolve, and the people, recovering their true sight, restore

their government to it's true principles.  It is true that in the

mean time we are suffering deeply in spirit, and incurring the

horrors of a war & long oppressions of enormous public debt.  But who

can say what would be the evils of a scission, and when & where they

would end?  Better keep together as we are, hawl off from Europe as

soon as we can, & from all attachments to any portions of it.  And if

we feel their power just sufficiently to hoop us together, it will be

the happiest situation in which we can exist.  If the game runs

sometimes against us at home we must have patience till luck turns, &

then we shall have an opportunity of winning back the _principles_ we

have lost, for this is a game where principles are the stake.  Better

luck, therefore, to us all; and health, happiness, & friendly

salutations to yourself.  Adieu.




 

        P. S. It is hardly necessary to caution you to let nothing of

mine get before the public.  A single sentence, got hold of by the

Porcupines, will suffice to abuse & persecute me in their papers for

months.







        WILD HORSES




        _To Philip Nolan_

        _Philadelphia, June 24, 1798_




        SIR, -- It is sometime since I have understood that there are

large herds of horses in a wild state, in the country west of the

Mississippi, and have been desirous of obtaining details of their

history in that State.  Mr. Brown, Senator from Kentucky, informs me

it would be in your power to give interesting information on this

subject, and encourages me to ask it.  The circumstances of the old

world have, beyond the records of history, been such as admitted not

that animal to exist in a state of nature.  The condition of America

is rapidly advancing to the same.  The present then is probably the

only moment in the age of the world, and the herds above mentioned

the only subjects, of which we can avail ourselves to obtain what has

never yet been recorded, and never can be again in all probability.

I will add that your information is the sole reliance, as far as I

can at present see, for obtaining this desideratum.  You will render

to natural history a very acceptable service, therefore, if you will

enable our Philosophical society to add so interesting a chapter to

the history of this animal.  I need not specify to you the particular

facts asked for; as your knowledge of the animal in his domesticated,

as well as his wild state, will naturally have led your attention to

those particulars in the manners, habits, and laws of his existence,

which are peculiar to his wild state.  I wish you not to be anxious

about the form of your information, the exactness of the substance

alone is material; and if, after giving in a first letter all the

facts you at present possess, you would be so good, on subsequent

occasions, as to furnish such others in addition, as you may acquire

from time to time, your communications will always be thankfully

received, if addressed to me at Monticello; and put into any post

office in Kentucky or Tennessee, they will reach me speedily and

safely, and will be considered as obligations on, sir, your most

obedient, humble servant.







        SUFFERANCE OF CALUMNY




        _To Samuel Smith_

        _Monticello, Aug. 22, 1798_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favor of Aug 4 came to hand by our last post,

together with the "extract of a letter from a gentleman of

Philadelphia, dated July 10," cut from a newspaper stating some facts

which respect me.  I shall notice these facts.  The writer says that

"the day after the last despatches were communicated to Congress,

Bache, Leib, &c., and a Dr. Reynolds were _closeted_ with me." If the

receipt of visits in my public room, the door continuing free to

every one who should call at the same time, may be called

_closeting_, then it is true that I was _closeted_ with every person

who visited me; in no other sense is it true as to any person.  I

sometimes received visits from Mr. Bache & Dr. Leib.  I received them

always with pleasure, because they are men of abilities, and of

principles the most friendly to liberty & our present form of

government.  Mr. Bache has another claim on my respect, as being the

grandson of Dr. Franklin, the greatest man & ornament of the age and

country in which he lived.  Whether I was visited by Mr. Bache or Dr.

Leib the day after the communication referred to, I do not remember.

I know that all my motions at Philadelphia, here, and everywhere, are

watched & recorded.  Some of these spies, therefore, may remember

better than I do, the dates of these visits.  If they say these two

gentlemen visited me on the day after the communications, as their

trade proves their accuracy, I shall not contradict them, tho' I

affirm that I do not recollect it.  However, as to Dr. Reynolds I can

be more particular, because I never saw him but once, which was on an

introductory visit he was so kind as to pay me.  This, I well

remember, was before the communication alluded to, & that during the

short conversation I had with him, not one word was said on the

subject of any of the communications.  Not that I should not have

spoken freely on their subject to Dr. Reynolds, as I should also have

done to the letter writer, or to any other person who should have

introduced the subject.  I know my own principles to be pure, &

therefore am not ashamed of them.  On the contrary, I wish them

known, & therefore willingly express them to every one.  They are the

same I have acted on from the year 1775 to this day, and are the

same, I am sure, with those of the great body of the American people.

I only wish the real principles of those who censure mine were also

known.  But warring against those of the people, the delusion of the

people is necessary to the dominant party.  I see the extent to which

that delusion has been already carried, and I see there is no length

to which it may not be pushed by a party in possession of the

revenues & the legal authorities of the U S, for a short time indeed,

but yet long enough to admit much particular mischief.  There is no

event, therefore, however atrocious, which may not be expected.  I

have contemplated every event which the Maratists of the day can

perpetrate, and am prepared to meet every one in such a way, as shall

not be derogatory either to the public liberty or my own personal

honor.  The letter writer says, I am "for peace; but it is only with

France." He has told half the truth.  He would have told the whole,

if he had added England.  I am for peace with both countries.  I know

that both of them have given, & are daily giving, sufficient cause of

war; that in defiance of the laws of nations, they are every day

trampling on the rights of all the neutral powers, whenever they can

thereby do the least injury, either to the other.  But, as I view a

peace between France & England the ensuing winter to be certain, I

have thought it would have been better for us to continue to bear

from France through the present summer, what we have been bearing

both from her & England these four years, and still continue to bear

from England, and to have required indemnification in the hour of

peace, when I verily believe it would have been yielded by both.

This seems to be the plan of the other neutral nations; and whether

this, or the commencing war on one of them, as we have done, would

have been wisest, time & events must decide.  But I am quite at a

loss on what ground the letter writer can question the opinion, that

France had no intention of making war on us, & was willing to treat

with Mr. Gerry, when we have this from Taleyrand's letter, and from

the written and verbal information of our envoys.  It is true then,

that, as with England, we might of right have chosen either peace or

war, & have chosen peace, and prudently in my opinion, so with

France, we might also of right have chosen either peace or war, & we

have chosen war.  Whether the choice may be a popular one in the

other States, I know not.  Here it certainly is not; & I have no

doubt the whole American people will rally ere long to the same

sentiment, & rejudge those who, at present, think they have all

judgment in their own hands.




        These observations will show you, how far the imputations in

the paragraph sent me approach the truth.  Yet they are not intended

for a newspaper.  At a very early period of my life, I determined

never to put a sentence into any newspaper.  I have religiously

adhered to the resolution through my life, and have great reason to

be contented with it.  Were I to undertake to answer the calumnies of

the newspapers, it would be more than all my own time, & that of 20.

aids could effect.  For while I should be answering one, twenty new

ones would be invented.  I have thought it better to trust to the

justice of my countrymen, that they would judge me by what they _see_

of my conduct on the stage where they have placed me, & what they

know of me _before_ the epoch since which a particular party has

supposed it might answer some view of theirs to vilify me in the

public eye.  Some, I know, will not reflect how apocryphal is the

testimony of enemies so palpably betraying the views with which they

give it.  But this is an injury to which duty requires every one to

submit whom the public think proper to call inn to it's councils.  I

thank you, my dear Sir, for the interest you have taken for me on

this occasion.  Though I have made up my mind not to suffer calumny

to disturb my tranquillity, yet I retain all my sensibilities for the

approbation of the good & just.  That is, indeed, the chief

consolations for the hatred of so many, who, without the least

personal knowledge, & on the sacred evidence of Porcupine & Fenno

alone, cover me with their implacable hatred.  The only return I will

ever make them, will be to do them all the good I can, in spite of

their teeth.




 

        I have the pleasure to inform you that all your friends in this

quarter are well, and to assure you of the sentiments of sincere

esteem & respect with which I am, dear Sir, your friend and servant.







        A PROFESSION OF POLITICAL FAITH




        _To Elbridge Gerry_

        _Philadelphia, Jan. 26, 1799_




        MY DEAR SIR, -- Your favor of Nov. 12 was safely delivered to

me by mr. Binney, but not till Dec. 28, as I arrived here only three

days before that date.  It was received with great satisfaction.  Our

very long intimacy as fellow-laborers in the same cause, the recent

expressions of mutual confidence which had preceded your mission, the

interesting course which that had taken, & particularly & personally

as it regarded yourself, made me anxious to hear from you on your

return.  I was the more so too, as I had myself during the whole of

your absence, as well as since your return, been a constant butt for

every shaft of calumny which malice & falsehood could form, & the

presses, public speakers, or private letters disseminate.  One of

these, too, was of a nature to touch yourself; as if, wanting

confidence in your efforts, I had been capable of usurping powers

committed to you, & authorizing negociations private & collateral to

yours.  The real truth is, that though Dr Logan, the pretended

missionary, about 4. or 5. days before he sailed for Hamburgh, told

me he was going there, & thence to Paris, & asked & received from me

a certificate of his citizenship, character, & circumstances of life,

merely as a protection, should he be molested on his journey, in the

present turbulent & suspicious state of Europe, yet I had been led to

consider his object as relative to his private affairs; and tho',

from an intimacy of some standing, he knew well my wishes for peace

and my political sentiments in general, he nevertheless received then

no particular declaration of them, no authority to communicate them

to any mortal, nor to speak to any one in my name, or in anybody's

name, on that, or on any other subject whatever; nor did I write by

him a scrip of a pen to any person whatever.  This he has himself

honestly & publicly declared since his return; & from his well-known

character & every other circumstance, every candid man must perceive

that his enterprise was dictated by his own enthusiasm, without

consultation or communication with any one; that he acted in Paris on

his own ground, & made his own way.  Yet to give some color to his

proceedings, which might implicate the republicans in general, &

myself particularly, they have not been ashamed to bring forward a

suppositious paper, drawn by one of their own party in the name of

Logan, and falsely pretended to have been presented by him to the

government of France; counting that the bare mention of my name

therein, would connect that in the eye of the public with this

transaction.  In confutation of these and all future calumnies, by

way of anticipation, I shall make to you a profession of my political

faith; in confidence that you will consider every future imputation

on me of a contrary complexion, as bearing on its front the mark of

falsehood & calumny.




        I do then, with sincere zeal, wish an inviolable preservation

of our present federal constitution, according to the true sense in

which it was adopted by the States, that in which it was advocated by

it's friends, & not that which it's enemies apprehended, who

therefore became it's enemies; and I am opposed to the monarchising

it's features by the forms of it's administration, with a view to

conciliate a first transition to a President & Senate for life, &

from that to a hereditary tenure of these offices, & thus to worm out

the elective principle.  I am for preserving to the States the powers

not yielded by them to the Union, & to the legislature of the Union

it's constitutional share in the division of powers; and I am not for

transferring all the powers of the States to the general government,

& all those of that government to the Executive branch.  I am for a

government rigorously frugal & simple, applying all the possible

savings of the public revenue to the discharge of the national debt;

and not for a multiplication of officers & salaries merely to make

partisans, & for increasing, by every device, the public debt, on the

principle of it's being a public blessing.  I am for relying, for

internal defence, on our militia solely, till actual invasion, and

for such a naval force only as may protect our coasts and harbors

from such depredations as we have experienced; and not for a standing

army in time of peace, which may overawe the public sentiment; nor

for a navy, which, by it's own expenses and the eternal wars in which

it will implicate us, will grind us with public burthens, & sink us

under them.  I am for free commerce with all nations; political

connection with none; & little or no diplomatic establishment.  And I

am not for linking ourselves by new treaties with the quarrels of

Europe; entering that field of slaughter to preserve their balance,

or joining in the confederacy of kings to war against the principles

of liberty.  I am for freedom of religion, & against all maneuvres to

bring about a legal ascendancy of one sect over another: for freedom

of the press, & against all violations of the constitution to silence

by force & not by reason the complaints or criticisms, just or

unjust, of our citizens against the conduct of their agents.  And I

am for encouraging the progress of science in all it's branches; and

not for raising a hue and cry against the sacred name of philosophy;

for awing the human mind by stories of raw-head & bloody bones to a

distrust of its own vision, & to repose implicitly on that of others;

to go backwards instead of forwards to look for improvement; to

believe that government, religion, morality, & every other science

were in the highest perfection in ages of the darkest ignorance, and

that nothing can ever be devised more perfect than what was

established by our forefathers.  To these I will add, that I was a

sincere well-wisher to the success of the French revolution, and

still wish it may end in the establishment of a free & well-ordered

republic; but I have not been insensible under the atrocious

depredations they have committed on our commerce.  The first object

of my heart is my own country.  In that is embarked my family, my

fortune, & my own existence.  I have not one farthing of interest,

nor one fibre of attachment out of it, nor a single motive of

preference of any one nation to another, but in proportion as they

are more or less friendly to us.  But though deeply feeling the

injuries of France, I did not think war the surest means of

redressing them.  I did believe, that a mission sincerely disposed to

preserve peace, would obtain for us a peaceable & honorable

settlement & retribution; and I appeal to you to say, whether this

might not have been obtained, if either of your colleagues had been

of the same sentiment with yourself.




        These, my friend, are my principles; they are unquestionably

the principles of the great body of our fellow citizens, and I know

there is not one of them which is not yours also.  In truth, we never

differed but on one ground, the funding system; and as, from the

moment of it's being adopted by the constituted authorities, I became

religiously principled in the sacred discharge of it to the uttermost

farthing, we are united now even on that single ground of difference.




        I turn now to your inquiries.  The enclosed paper will answer

one of them.  But you also ask for such political information as may

be possessed by me, & interesting to yourself in regard to your

embassy.  As a proof of my entire confidence in you, I shall give it

fully & candidly.  When Pinckney, Marshall, and Dana, were nominated

to settle our differences with France, it was suspected by many, from

what was understood of their dispositions, that their mission would

not result in a settlement of differences, but would produce

circumstances tending to widen the breach, and to provoke our

citizens to consent to a war with that nation, & union with England.

Dana's resignation & your appointment gave the first gleam of hope of

a peaceable issue to the mission.  For it was believed that you were

sincerely disposed to accommodation; & it was not long after your

arrival there, before symptoms were observed of that difference of

views which had been suspected to exist.  In the meantime, however,

the aspect of our government towards the French republic had become

so ardent, that the people of America generally took the alarm.  To

the southward, their apprehensions were early excited.  In the

Eastern States also, they at length began to break out.  Meetings

were held in many of your towns, & addresses to the government agreed

on in opposition to war.  The example was spreading like a wildfire.

Other meetings were called in other places, & a general concurrence

of sentiment against the apparent inclinations of the government was

imminent; when, most critically for the government, the despatches of

Octr 22, prepared by your colleague Marshall, with a view to their

being made public, dropped into their laps.  It was truly a God-send

to them, & they made the most of it.  Many thousands of copies were

printed & dispersed gratis, at the public expence; & the zealots for

war co-operated so heartily, that there were instances of single

individuals who printed & dispersed 10. or 12,000 copies at their own

expence.  The odiousness of the corruption supposed in those papers

excited a general & high indignation among the people.  Unexperienced

in such maneuvres, they did not permit themselves even to suspect

that the turpitude of private swindlers might mingle itself

unobserved, & give it's own hue to the communications of the French

government, of whose participation there was neither proof nor

probability.  It served, however, for a time, the purpose intended.

The people, in many places, gave a loose to the expressions of their

warm indignation, & of their honest preference of war to dishonor.

The fever was long & successfully kept up, and in the meantime, war

measures as ardently crowded.  Still, however, as it was known that

your colleagues were coming away, and yourself to stay, though

disclaiming a separate power to conclude a treaty, it was hoped by

the lovers of peace, that a project of treaty would have been

prepared, ad referendum, on principles which would have satisfied our

citizens, & overawed any bias of the government towards a different

policy.  But the expedition of the Sophia, and, as was supposed, the

suggestions of the person charged with your despatches, & his

probable misrepresentations of the real wishes of the American

people, prevented these hopes.  They had then only to look forward to

your return for such information, either through the Executive, or

from yourself, as might present to our view the other side of the

medal.  The despatches of Oct 22, 97, had presented one face.  That

information, to a certain degree, is now received, & the public will

see from your correspondence with Taleyrand, that France, as you

testify, "was sincere and anxious to obtain a reconciliation, not

wishing us to break the British treaty, but only to give her

equivalent stipulations; and in general was disposed to a liberal

treaty." And they will judge whether mr. Pickering's report shews an

inflexible determination to believe no declarations the French

government can make, nor any opinion which you, judging on the spot &

from actual view, can give of their sincerity, and to meet their

designs of peace with operations of war.  The alien & sedition acts

have already operated in the South as powerful sedatives of the X. Y.

Z. inflammation.  In your quarter, where violations of principle are

either less regarded or more concealed, the direct tax is likely to

have the same effect, & to excite inquiries into the object of the

enormous expences & taxes we are bringing on.  And your information

supervening, that we might have a liberal accommodation if we would,

there can be little doubt of the reproduction of that general

movement, by the despatches of Oct. 22.  And tho' small checks &

stops, like Logan's pretended embassy, may be thrown in the way from

time to time, & may a little retard it's motion, yet the tide is

already turned, and will sweep before it all the feeble obstacles of

art.  The unquestionable republicanism of the American mind will

break through the mist under which it has been clouded, and will

oblige it's agents to reform the principles & practices of their

administration.




        You suppose that you have been abused by both parties.  As far

as has come to my knowledge, you are misinformed.  I have never seen

or heard a sentence of blame uttered against you by the republicans;

unless we were so to construe their wishes that you had more boldly

co-operated in a project of a treaty, and would more explicitly

state, whether there was in your colleages that flexibility, which

persons earnest after peace would have practised?  Whether, on the

contrary, their demeanor was not cold, reserved, and distant, at

least, if not backward?  And whether, if they had yielded to those

informal conferences which Taleyrand seems to have courted, the

liberal accommodation you suppose might not have been effected, even

with their agency?  Your fellow-citizens think they have a right to

full information, in a case of such great concern to them.  It is

their sweat which is to earn all the expences of the war, and their

blood which is to flow in expiation of the causes of it.  It may be

in your power to save them from these miseries by full communications

and unrestrained details, postponing motives of delicacy to those of

duty.  It rests for you to come forward independently; to take your

stand on the high ground of your own character; to disregard calumny,

and to be borne above it on the shoulders of your grateful fellow

citizens; or to sink into the humble oblivion, to which the

Federalists (self-called) have secretly condemned you; and even to be

happy if they will indulge you with oblivion, while they have beamed

on your colleagues meridian splendor.  Pardon me, my dear Sir, if my

expressions are strong.  My feelings are so much more so, that it is

with difficulty I reduce them even to the tone I use.  If you doubt

the dispositions towards you, look into the papers, on both sides,

for the toasts which were given throughout the States on the 4th of

July.  You will there see whose hearts were with you, and whose were

ulcerated against you.  Indeed, as soon as it was known that you had

consented to stay in Paris, there was no measure observed in the

execrations of the war party.  They openly wished you might be

guillotined, or sent to Cayenne, or anything else.  And these

expressions were finally stifled from a principle of policy only, &

to prevent you from being urged to a justification of yourself.  From

this principle alone proceed the silence and cold respect they

observe towards you.  Still, they cannot prevent at times the flames

bursting from under the embers, as mr. Pickering's letters, report, &

conversations testify, as well as the indecent expressions respecting

you, indulged by some of them in the debate on these despatches.

These sufficiently show that you are never more to be honored or

trusted by them, and that they await to crush you for ever, only till

they can do it without danger to themselves.




        When I sat down to answer your letter, but two courses

presented themselves, either to say nothing or everything; for half

confidences are not in my character.  I could not hesitate which was

due to you.  I have unbosomed myself fully; & it will certainly be

highly gratifying if I receive like confidence from you.  For even if

we differ in principle more than I believe we do, you & I know too

well the texture of the human mind, & the slipperiness of human

reason, to consider differences of opinion otherwise than differences

of form or feature.  Integrity of views more than their soundness, is

the basis of esteem.  I shall follow your direction in conveying this

by a private hand; tho' I know not as yet when one worthy of

confidence will occur.  And my trust in you leaves me without a fear

that this letter, meant as a confidential communication of my

impressions, will ever go out of your hand, or be suffered in anywise

to commit my name.  Indeed, besides the accidents which might happen

to it even under your care, considering the accident of death to

which you are liable, I think it safest to pray you, after reading it

as often as you please, to destroy at least the 2d & 3d leaves.  The

1st contains principles only, which I fear not to avow; but the 2d &

3d contain facts stated for your information, and which, though

sacredly conformable to my firm belief, yet would be galling to some,

& expose me to illiberal attacks.  I therefore repeat my prayer to

burn the 2d & 3d leaves.  And did we ever expect to see the day,

when, breathing nothing but sentiments of love to our country & it's

freedom & happiness, our correspondence must be as secret as if we

were hatching it's destruction!  Adieu, my friend, and accept my

sincere & affectionate salutations.  I need not add my signature.

