




        "FREE SHIPS MAKE FREE GOODS"




        _To the U.S. Minister to France_

        (ROBERT R. LIVINGSTON)

        _Monticello, Sep. 9, 1801_




        DEAR SIR, -- You will receive, probably by this post, from the

Secretary of State, his final instructions for your mission to

France.  We have not thought it necessary to say anything in them on

the great question of the maritime law of nations, which at present

agitates Europe; that is to say, whether free ships shall make free

goods; because we do not mean to take any side in it during the war.

But, as I had before communicated to you some loose thoughts on that

subject, and have since considered it with somewhat more attention, I

have thought it might not be unuseful that you should possess my

ideas in a more matured form than that in which they were before

given.  Unforeseen circumstances may perhaps oblige you to hazard an

opinion, on some occasion or other, on this subject, and it is better

that it should not be at variance with ours.  I write this, too,

myself, that it may not be considered as official, but merely my

individual opinion, unadvised by those official counsellors whose

opinions I deem my safest guide, & should unquestionably take in

form, were circumstances to call for a solemn decision of the

question.




        When Europe assumed the general form in which it is occupied by

the nations now composing it, and turned its attention to maritime

commerce, we found among its earliest practices, that of taking the

goods of an enemy from the ship of a friend; and that into this

practice every maritime State went sooner or later, as it appeared on

the theatre of the ocean.  If, therefore, we are to consider the

practice of nations as the sole & sufficient evidence of the law of

nature among nations, we should unquestionably place this principle

among those of natural laws.  But it's inconveniences, as they

affected neutral nations peaceably pursuing their commerce, and it's

tendency to embroil them with the powers happening to be at war, and

thus to extend the flames of war, induced nations to introduce by

special compacts, from time to time, a more convenient rule; that

"free ships should make free goods;" and this latter principle has by

every maritime nation of Europe been established, to a greater or

less degree, in it's treaties with other nations; insomuch, that all

of them have, more or less frequently, assented to it, as a rule of

action in particular cases.  Indeed, it is now urged, and I think

with great appearance of reason, that this is genuine principle

dictated by national morality; & that the first practice arose from

accident, and the particular convenience of the States which first

figured on the water, rather than from well-digested reflections on

the relations of friend and enemy, on the rights of territorial

jurisdiction, & on the dictates of moral law applied to these.  Thus

it had never been supposed lawful, in the territory of a friend to

seize the goods of an enemy.  On an element which nature has not

subjected to the jurisdiction of any particular nation, but has made

common to all for the purposes to which it is fitted, it would seem

that the particular portion of it which happens to be occupied by the

vessel of any nation, in the course of it's voyage, is for the

moment, the exclusive property of that, and nation, with the vessel,

is exempt from intrusion by any other, & from it's jurisdiction, as

much as if it were lying in the harbor of it's sovereign.  In no

country, we believe, is the rule otherwise, as to the subjects of

property common to all.  Thus the place occupied by an individual in

a highway, a church, a theatre, or other public assembly, cannot be

intruded on, while it's occupant holds it for the purposes of it's

institution.  The persons on board a vessel traversing the ocean,

carry with them the laws of their nation, have among themselves a

jurisdiction, a police, not established by their individual will, but

by the authority of their nation, of whose territory their vessel

still seems to compose a part, so long as it does not enter the

exclusive territory of another.  No nation ever pretended a right to

govern by their laws the ship of another nation navigating the ocean.

By what law then can it enter that ship while in peaceable & orderly

use of the common element?  We recognize no natural precept for

submission to such a right; & perceive no distinction between the

movable & immovable jurisdiction of a friend, which would authorize

the entering the one & not the other, to seize the property of an

enemy.




        It may be objected that this proves too much, as it proves you

cannot enter the ship of a friend to search for contraband of war.

But this is not proving too much.  We believe the practice of seizing

what is called contraband of war, is an abusive practice, not founded

in natural right.  War between two nations cannot diminish the rights

of the rest of the world remaining at peace.  The doctrine that the

rights of nations remaining quietly under the exercise of moral &

social duties, are to give way to the convenience of those who prefer

plundering & murdering one another, is a monstrous doctrine; and

ought to yield to the more rational law, that "the wrongs which two

nations endeavor to inflict on each other, must not infringe on the

rights or conveniences of those remaining at peace."  And what is

_contraband_, by the law of nature?  Either everything which may aid

or comfort an enemy, or nothing.  Either all commerce which would

accommodate him is unlawful, or none is.  The difference between

articles of one or another description, is a difference in degree

only.  No line between them can be drawn.  Either all intercourse

must cease between neutrals & belligerents, or all be permitted.  Can

the world hesitate to say which shall be the rule?  Shall two nations

turning tigers, break up in one instant the peaceable relations of

the whole world?  Reason & nature clearly pronounce that the neutral

is to go onin the enjoyment of all it's rights, that it's commerce

remains free, not subject to the jurisdiction of another, nor

consequently it's vessels to search, or to enquiries whether their

contents are the property of an enemy, or are of those which have

been called contraband of war.2




        Nor does this doctrine contravene the right of preventing

vessels from entering a blockaded port.  This right stands on other

ground.  When the fleet of any nation actually beleaguers the port of

its enemy, no other has a right to enter their line, any more than

their line of battle in the open sea, or their lines of

circumvallation, or of encampment, or of battle array on land.  The

space included within their lines in any of those cases, is either

the property of their enemy, or it is common property assumed and

possessed for the moment, which cannot be intruded on, even by a

neutral, without committing the very trespass we are now considering,

that of intruding into the lawful possession of a friend.




        Although I consider the observance of these principles as of

great importance to the interests of peaceable nations, among whom I

hope the U S will ever place themselves, yet in the present state of

things they are not worth a war.  Nor do I believe war the most

certain means of enforcing them.  Those peaceable coercions which are

in the power of every nation, if undertaken in concert & in time of

peace, are more likely to produce the desired effect.




        The opinions I have here given are those which have generally

been sanctioned by our government.  In our treaties with France, the

United Netherlands, Sweden & Prussia, the principle of free bottom,

free goods, was uniformly maintained.  In the instructions of 1784,

given by Congress to their ministers appointed to treat with the

nations of Europe generally, the same principle, and the doing away

contraband of war, were enjoined, and were acceded to in the treaty

signed with Portugal.  In the late treaty with England, indeed, that

power perseveringly refused the principle of free bottoms, free

goods; and it was avoided in the late treaty with Prussia, at the

instance of our then administration, lest it should seem to take side

in a question then threatening decision by the sword.  At the

commencement of the war between France & England, the representative

of the French republic then residing in the U S, complaining that the

British armed ships captured French property in American bottoms,

insisted that the principle of "free bottoms, free goods," was of the

acknowledged law of nations; that the violation of that principle by

the British was a wrong committed on us, and such an one as we ought

to repel by joining in a war against that country.  We denied his

position, and appealed to the universal practice of Europe, in proof

that the principle of "free bottoms, free goods," was not

acknowledged as of the natural law of nations, but only of it's

conventional law.  And I believe we may safely affirm, that not a

single instance can be produced where any nation of Europe, acting

professedly under the law of nations alone, unrestrained by treaty,

has, either by it's executive or judiciary organs, decided on the

principle of "free bottoms, free goods." Judging of the law of

nations by what has been _practised_ among nations, we were

authorized to say that the contrary principle was their rule, and

this but an exception to it, introduced by special treaties in

special cases only; that having no treaty with England substituting

this instead of the ordinary rule, we had neither the right nor the

disposition to go to war for it's establishment.  But though we would

not then, nor will we now, engage in war to establish this principle,

we are nevertheless sincerely friendly to it.  We think that the

nations of Europe have originally set out in error; that experience

has proved the error oppressive to the rights and interests of the

peaceable part of mankind; that every nation but one has acknoleged

this, by consenting to the change, & that one has consented in

particular cases; that nations have a right to correct an erroneous

principle, & to establish that which is right as their rule of

action; and if they should adopt measures for effecting this in a

peaceable way, we shall wish them success, and not stand in their way

to it.  But should it become, at any time, expedient for us to

co-operate in the establishment of this principle, the opinion of the

executive, on the advice of it's constitutional counsellors, must

then be given; & that of the legislature, an independent & essential

organ in the operation, must also be expressed; in forming which,

they will be governed, every man by his own judgment, and may, very

possibly, judge differently from the executive.  With the same honest

views, the most honest men often form different conclusions.  As far,

however, as we can judge, the principle of "free bottoms, free

goods," is that which would carry the wishes of our nation.




        Wishing you smooth seas and prosperous gales, with the

enjoyment of good health, I tender you the assurances of my constant

friendship & high consideration and respect.







        INTERCHANGEABLE PARTS




        _To James Monroe_

        _Washington, Nov. 14, 1801_




        DEAR SIR, -- The bearer hereof is Mr. Whitney at Connecticut a

mechanic of the first order of ingenuity, who invented the cotton gin

now so much used in the South; he is at the head of a considerable

gun manufactory in Connecticut, and furnishes the U.S. with muskets

undoubtedly the best they receive.  He has invented molds and

machines for making all the pieces of his locks so exactly equal,

that take 100 locks to pieces and mingle their parts and the hundred

locks may be put together as well by taking the first pieces which

come to hand.  This is of importance in repairing, because out of 10

locks e.g. disabled for the want of different pieces, 9 good locks

may be put together without employing a smith.  Leblanc in France had

invented a similar process in 1788 and had extended it to the barrel,

mounting & stock.  I endeavored to get the U.S. to bring him over,

which he was ready for on moderate terms.  I failed and I do not know

what became of him.  Mr. Whitney has not yet extended his

improvements beyond the lock.  I think it possible he might be

engaged in our manufactory of Richmd. tho' I have not asked him the

question.  I know nothing of his moral character.  He is now on his

way to S. Carola. on the subject of his gin.  Health & happiness cum

caeteris votis.







        AFRICAN COLONIZATION




        _To the Governor of Virginia_

        (JAMES MONROE)

        _Washington, Nov. 24, 1801_




        DEAR SIR, -- I had not been unmindful of your letter of June

15, covering a resolution of the House of Representatives of

Virginia, and referred to in yours of the 17th inst.  The importance

of the subject, and the belief that it gave us time for consideration

till the next meeting of the Legislature, have induced me to defer

the answer to this date.  You will perceive that some circumstances

connected with the subject, & necessarily presenting themselves to

view, would be improper but for yours' & the legislative ear.  Their

publication might have an ill effect in more than one quarter.  In

confidence of attention to this, I shall indulge greater freedom in

writing.




        Common malefactors, I presume, make no part of the object of

that resolution.  Neither their numbers, nor the nature of their

offences, seem to require any provisions beyond those practised

heretofore, & found adequate to the repression of ordinary crimes.

Conspiracy, insurgency, treason, rebellion, among that description of

persons who brought on us the alarm, and on themselves the tragedy,

of 1800, were doubtless within the view of every one; but many

perhaps contemplated, and one expression of the resolution might

comprehend, a much larger scope.  Respect to both opinions makes it

my duty to understand the resolution in all the extent of which it is

susceptible.




 

        The idea seems to be to provide for these people by a purchase

of lands; and it is asked whether such a purchase can be made of the

U S in their western territory?  A very great extent of country,

north of the Ohio, has been laid off into townships, and is now at

market, according to the provisions of the acts of Congress, with

which you are acquainted.  There is nothing which would restrain the

State of Virginia either in the purchase or the application of these

lands; but a purchase, by the acre, might perhaps be a more expensive

provision than the H of Representatives contemplated.  Questions

would also arise whether the establishment of such a colony within

our limits, and to become a part of our union, would be desirable to

the State of Virginia itself, or to the other States --- especially

those who would be in its vicinity?




        Could we procure lands beyond the limits of the U S to form a

receptacle for these people?  On our northern boundary, the country

not occupied by British subjects, is the property of Indian nations,

whose title would be to be extinguished, with the consent of Great

Britain; & the new settlers would be British subjects.  It is hardly

to be believed that either Great Britain or the Indian proprietors

have so disinterested a regard for us, as to be willing to relieve

us, by receiving such a colony themselves; and as much to be doubted

whether that race of men could long exist in so rigorous a climate.

On our western & southern frontiers, Spain holds an immense country,

the occupancy of which, however, is in the Indian natives, except a

few insulated spots possessed by Spanish subjects.  It is very

questionable, indeed, whether the Indians would sell? whether Spain

would be willing to receive these people? and nearly certain that she

would not alienate the sovereignty.  The same question to ourselves

would recur here also, as did in the first case: should we be willing

to have such a colony in contact with us?  However our present

interests may restrain us within our own limits, it is impossible not

to look forward to distant times, when our rapid multiplication will

expand itself beyond those limits, & cover the whole northern, if not

the southern continent, with a people speaking the same language,

governed in similar forms, & by similar laws; nor can we contemplate

with satisfaction either blot or mixture on that surface.  Spain,

France, and Portugal hold possessions on the southern continent, as

to which I am not well enough informed to say how far they might meet

our views.  But either there or in the northern continent, should the

constituted authorities of Virginia fix their attention, of

preference, I will have the dispositions of those powers sounded in

the first instance.




        The West Indies offer a more probable & practicable retreat for

them.  Inhabited already by a people of their own race & color;

climates congenial with their natural constitution; insulated from

the other descriptions of men; nature seems to have formed these

islands to become the receptacle of the blacks transplanted into this

hemisphere.  Whether we could obtain from the European sovereigns of

those islands leave to send thither the persons under consideration,

I cannot say; but I think it more probable than the former

propositions, because of their being already inhabited more or less

by the same race.  The most promising portion of them is the island

of St. Domingo, where the blacks are established into a sovereignty

_de facto_, & have organized themselves under regular laws &

government.  I should conjecture that their present ruler might be

willing, on many considerations, to receive even that description

which would be exiled for acts deemed criminal by us, but

meritorious, perhaps, by him.  The possibility that these exiles

might stimulate & conduct vindicative or predatory descents on our

coasts, & facilitate concert with their brethren remaining here,

looks to a state of things between that island & us not probable on a

contemplation of our relative strength, and of the disproportion

daily growing; and it is overweighed by the humanity of the measures

proposed, & the advantages of disembarrassing ourselves of such

dangerous characters.  Africa would offer a last & undoubted resort,

if all others more desirable should fail us.  Whenever the

Legislature of Virginia shall have brought it's mind to a point, so

that I may know exactly what to propose to foreign authorities, I

will execute their wishes with fidelity & zeal.  I hope, however,

they will pardon me for suggesting a single question for their own

consideration.  When we contemplate the variety of countries & of

sovereigns towards which we may direct our views, the vast

revolutions & changes of circumstances which are now in a course of

progression, the possibilities that arrangements now to be made, with

a view to any particular plan, may, at no great distance of time, be

totally deranged by a change of sovereignty, of government, or of

other circumstances, it will be for the Legislature to consider

whether, after they shall have made all those general provisions

which may be fixed by legislative authority, it would be reposing too

much confidence in their Executive to leave the place of relegation

to be decided on by _them_.  They could accommodate their

arrangements to the actual state of things, in which countries or

powers may be found to exist at the day; and may prevent the effect

of the law from being defeated by intervening changes.  This,

however, is for them to decide.  Our duty will be to respect their

decision.







        LIMITS OF THE PRACTICABLE




        _To P. S. Dupont de Nemours_

        _Washington, Jan. 18, 1802_







        DEAR SIR, -- It is rare I can indulge myself in the luxury of

philosophy.  Your letters give me a few of those delicious moments.

Placed as you are in a great commercial town, with little opportunity

of discovering the dispositions of the country portions of our

citizens, I do not wonder at your doubts whether they will generally

and sincerely concur in the sentiments and measures developed in my

message of the 7th Jany.  But from 40. years of intimate conversation

with the agricultural inhabitants of my country, I can pronounce them

as different from those of the cities, as those of any two nations

known.  The sentiments of the former can in no degree be inferred

from those of the latter.  You have spoken a profound truth in these

words, "Il y a dans les etats unis un bon sens silencieux, un esprit

de justice froide, qui lorsqu'il est question d'emettre un _vote_

comme les bavardages de ceux qui font les habiles."  A plain country

farmer has written lately a pamphlet on our public affairs.  His

testimony of the sense of the country is the best which can be

produced of the justness of your observation.  His words are "The

tongue of man is not his whole body.  So, in this case, the noisy

part of the community was not all the body politic.  During the

career of fury and contention (in 1800) the sedate, grave part of the

people were still; hearing all, and judging for themselves, what

method to take, when the constitutional time of action should come,

the exercise of the right of suffrage."  The majority of the present

legislature are in unison with the agricultural part of our citizens,

and you will see that there is nothing in the message, to which they

do not accord.  Some things may perhaps be left undone from motives

of compromise for a time, and not to alarm by too sudden a

reformation, but with a view to be resumed at another time.  I am

perfectly satisfied the effect of the proceedings of this session of

congress will be to consolidate the great body of well meaning

citizens together, whether federal or republican, heretofore called.

I do not mean to include royalists or priests.  Their opposition is

immovable.  But they will be vox et preterea nihil, leaders without

followers.  I am satisfied that within one year from this time were

an election to take place between two candidates merely republican

and federal, where no personal opposition existed against either, the

federal candidate would not get the vote of a single elector in the

U.S.  I must here again appeal to the testimony of my farmer, who

says "The great body of the people are one in sentiment.  If the

federal party and the republican party, should each of them choose a

convention to frame a constitution of government or a code of laws,

there would be no radical difference in the results of the two

conventions."  This is most true.  The body of our people, tho'

divided for a short time by an artificial panic, and called by

different names, have ever had the same object in view, to wit, the

maintenance of a federal, republican government, and have never

ceased to be all federalists, all republicans: still excepting the

noisy band of royalists inhabiting cities chiefly, and priests both

of city and country.  When I say that in an election between a

republican and federal candidate, free from personal objection, the

former would probably get every vote, I must not be understood as

placing myself in that view.  It was my destiny to come to the

government when it had for several years been committed to a

particular political sect, to the absolute and entire exclusion of

those who were in sentiment with the body of the nation.  I found the

country entirely in the enemies hands.  It was necessary to dislodge

some of them.  Out of many thousands of officers in the U.S. 9.  only

have been removed for political principle, and 12. for delinquincies

chiefly pecuniary.  The whole herd have squealed out, as if all their

throats were cut.  These acts of justice few as they have been, have

raised great personal objections to me, of which a new character

would be [_faded_].  When this government was first established, it

was possible to have kept it going on true principles, but the

contracted, English, half-lettered ideas of Hamilton, destroyed that

hope in the bud.  We can pay off his debt in 15. years; but we can

never get rid of his financial system.  It mortifies me to be

strengthening principles which I deem radically vicious, but this

vice is entailed on us by the first error.  In other parts of our

government I hope we shall be able by degrees to introduce sound

principles and make them habitual.  What is practicable must often

controul what is pure theory; and the habits of the governed

determine in a great degree what is practicable.  Hence the same

original principles, modified in practice according to the different

habits of different nations, present governments of very different

aspects.  The same principles reduced to forms of practice

accommodated to our habits, and put into forms accommodated to the

habits of the French nation would present governments very unlike

each other.  I have no doubt but that a great man, thoroughly knowing

the habits of France, might so accommodate to them the principles of

free government as to enable them to live free.  But in the hands of

those who have not this coup d'oeil, many unsuccessful experiments I

fear are yet to be tried before they will settle down in freedom and

tranquility.  I applaud therefore your determination to remain here,

tho' for yourself and the adults of your family the dissimilitude of

our manners and the difference of tongue will be sources of real

unhappiness.  Yet less so than the horrors and dangers which France

would present to you, and as to those of your family still in

infancy, they will be formed to the circumstances of the country, and

will, I doubt not, be happier here than they could have been in

Europe under any circumstances.  Be so good as to make my respectful

salutations acceptable to Made. Dupont, and all of your family and to

be assured yourself of my constant and affectionate esteem.







        "TO BE LOVED BY EVERY BODY"




        _To Anne Cary, Thomas Jefferson, and

        Ellen Wayles Randolph_

        _Washington, Mar. 2, 1802_




        MY DEAR CHILDREN -- I am very happy to find that two of you can

write.  I shall now expect that whenever it is inconvenient for your

papa and mama to write, one of you will write on a piece of paper

these words `all is well' and send it for me to the post office.  I

am happy too that Miss Ellen can now read so readily.  If she will

make haste and read through all the books I have given her, and will

let me know when she is through them, I will go and carry her some

more.  I shall now see whether she wishes to see me as much as she

says.  I wish to see you all: and the more I perceive that you are

all advancing in your learning and improving in good dispositions the

more I shall love you, and the more every body will love you.  It is

a charming thing to be loved by every body: and the way to obtain it

is, never to quarrel or be angry with any body and to tell a story.

Do all the kind things you can to your companions, give them every

thing rather than to yourself.  Pity and help any thing you see in

distress and learn your books and improve your minds.  This will make

every body fond of you, and desirous of doing it to you.  Go on then

my dear children, and, when we meet at Monticello, let me see who has

improved most.  I kiss this paper for each of you: it will therefore

deliver the kisses to yourselves, and two over, which one of you must

deliver to your Mama for me; and present my affectionate attachment

to your papa.  Yourselves love and Adieux.







        THE PROGRESS OF REFORM




        _To General Thaddeus Kosciusko_

        _Washington, April 2, 1802_




        DEAR GENERAL, -- It is but lately that I have received your

letter of the 25th Frimaire (December 15) wishing to know whether

some officers of your country could expect to be employed in this

country.  To prevent a suspense injurious to them, I hasten to inform

you, that we are now actually engaged in reducing our military

establishment one third, and discharging one third of our officers.

We keep in service no more than men enough to garrison the small

posts dispersed at great distances on our frontiers, which garrisons

will generally consist of a captain's company only, and in no case of

more than two or three, in not one, of a sufficient number to require

a field officer; and no circumstance whatever can bring these

garrisons together, because it would be an abandonment of their

forts.  Thus circumstanced, you will perceive the entire

impossibility of providing for the persons you recommend.  I wish it

had been in my power to give you a more favorable answer; but next to

the fulfilling your wishes, the most grateful thing I can do is to

give a faithful answer.  The session of the first Congress convened

since republicanism has recovered its ascendancy, is now drawing to a

close.  They will pretty completely fulfil all the desires of the

people.  They have reduced the army and navy to what is barely

necessary.  They are disarming executive patronage and preponderance,

by putting down one half the offices of the United States, which are

no longer necessary.  These economies have enabled them to suppress

all the internal taxes, and still to make such provision for the

payment of their public debt as to discharge that in eighteen years.

They have lopped off a parasite limb, planted by their predecessors

on their judiciary body for party purposes; they are opening the

doors of hospitality to the fugitives from the oppressions of other

countries; and we have suppressed all those public forms and

ceremonies which tended to familiarise the public eye to the

harbingers of another form of government.  The people are nearly all

united; their quondam leaders, infuriated with the sense of their

impotence, will soon be seen or heard only in the newspapers, which

serve as chimnies to carry off noxious vapors and smoke, and all is

now tranquil, firm and well, as it should be.  I add no signature

because unnecessary for you.  God bless you, and preserve you still

for a season of usefulness to your country.







        THE AFFAIR OF LOUISIANA




        _To the U.S. Minister to France_

        (ROBERT R. LIVINGSTON)

        _Washington, Apr. 18, 1802_




        DEAR SIR -- A favorable and a confidential opportunity offering

by Mr. Dupont de Nemours, who is revisiting his native country gives

me an opportunity of sending you a cipher to be used between us,

which will give you some trouble to understand, but, once understood,

is the easiest to use, the most indecipherable, and varied by a new

key with the greatest facility of any one I have ever known.  I am in

hopes the explanation inclosed will be sufficient.  Let our key of

letters be [_some figures which are illegible_] and the key of lines

be [_figures illegible_] and lest we should happen to lose our key or

be absent from it, it is so formed as to be kept in the memory and

put upon paper at pleasure; being produced by writing our names and

residences at full length, each of which containing 27 letters is

divided into two parts of 9. letters each; and each of the 9. letters

is then numbered according to the place it would hold if the 9. were

arranged alphabetically, thus [_so blotted as to be illegible].  The

numbers over the letters being then arranged as the letters to which

they belong stand in our names, we can always construct our key.  But

why a cipher between us, when official things go naturally to the

Secretary of State, and things not political need no cipher.  1.

matters of a public nature, and proper to go on our records, should

go to the secretary of state.  2. matters of a public nature not

proper to be placed on our records may still go to the secretary of

state, headed by the word `private.' But 3. there may be matters

merely personal to ourselves, and which require the cover of a cipher

more than those of any other character.  This last purpose and others

which we cannot foresee may render it convenient and advantageous to

have at hand a mask for whatever may need it.  But writing by Mr.

Dupont I need no cipher.  I require from him to put this into your

own and no other hand, let the delay occasioned by that be what it

will.




        The cession of Louisiana and the Floridas by Spain to France

works most sorely on the U.S.  On this subject the Secretary of State

has written to you fully.  Yet I cannot forbear recurring to it

personally, so deep is the impression it makes in my mind.  It

compleatly reverses all the political relations of the U.S.  and will

form a new epoch in our political course.  Of all nations of any

consideration France is the one which hitherto has offered the fewest

points on which we could have any conflict of right, and the most

points of a communion of interests.  From these causes we have ever

looked to her as our _natural friend_, as one with which we never

could have an occasion of difference.  Her growth therefore we viewed

as our own, her misfortunes ours.  There is on the globe one single

spot, the possessor of which is our natural and habitual enemy.  It

is New Orleans, through which the produce of three-eighths of our

territory must pass to market, and from its fertility it will ere

long yield more than half of our whole produce and contain more than

half our inhabitants.  France placing herself in that door assumes to

us the attitude of defiance.  Spain might have retained it quietly

for years.  Her pacific dispositions, her feeble state, would induce

her to increase our facilities there, so that her possession of the

place would be hardly felt by us, and it would not perhaps be very

long before some circumstance might arise which might make the

cession of it to us the price of something of more worth to her.  Not

so can it ever be in the hands of France.  The impetuosity of her

temper, the energy and restlessness of her character, placed in a

point of eternal friction with us, and our character, which though

quiet, and loving peace and the pursuit of wealth, is high-minded,

despising wealth in competition with insult or injury, enterprising

and energetic as any nation on earth, these circumstances render it

impossible that France and the U.S. can continue long friends when

they meet in so irritable a position.  They as well as we must be

blind if they do not see this; and we must be very improvident if we

do not begin to make arrangements on that hypothesis.  The day that

France takes possession of N. Orleans fixes the sentence which is to

restrain her forever within her low water mark.  It seals the union

of two nations who in conjunction can maintain exclusive possession

of the ocean.  From that moment we must marry ourselves to the

British fleet and nation.  We must turn all our attentions to a

maritime force, for which our resources place us on very high

grounds: and having formed and cemented together a power which may

render reinforcement of her settlements here impossible to France,

make the first cannon, which shall be fired in Europe the signal for

tearing up any settlement she may have made, and for holding the two

continents of America in sequestration for the common purposes of the

united British and American nations.  This is not a state of things

we seek or desire.  It is one which this measure, if adopted by

France, forces on us, as necessarily as any other cause, by the laws

of nature, brings on its necessary effect.  It is not from a fear of

France that we deprecate this measure proposed by her.  For however

greater her force is than ours compared in the abstract, it is

nothing in comparison of ours when to be exerted on our soil.  But it

is from a sincere love of peace, and a firm persuasion that bound to

France by the interests and the strong sympathies still existing in

the minds of our citizens, and holding relative positions which

ensure their continuance we are secure of a long course of peace.

Whereas the change of friends, which will be rendered necessary if

France changes that position, embarks us necessarily as a belligerent

power in the first war of Europe.  In that case France will have held

possession of New Orleans during the interval of a peace, long or

short, at the end of which it will be wrested from her.  Will this

short-lived possession have been an equivalent to her for the

transfer of such a weight into the scale of her enemy?  Will not the

amalgamation of a young, thriving, nation continue to that enemy the

health and force which are at present so evidently on the decline?

And will a few years possession of N. Orleans add equally to the

strength of France?  She may say she needs Louisiana for the supply

of her West Indies.  She does not need it in time of peace.  And in

war she could not depend on them because they would be so easily

intercepted.  I should suppose that all these considerations might in

some proper form be brought into view of the government of France.

Tho' stated by us, it ought not to give offence; because we do not

bring them forward as a menace, but as consequences not controulable

by us, but inevitable from the course of things.  We mention them not

as things which we desire by any means, but as things we deprecate;

and we beseech a friend to look forward and to prevent them for our

common interests.




        If France considers Louisiana however as indispensable for her

views she might perhaps be willing to look about for arrangements

which might reconcile it to our interests.  If anything could do this

it would be the ceding to us the island of New Orleans and the

Floridas.  This would certainly in a great degree remove the causes

of jarring and irritation between us, and perhaps for such a length

of time as might produce other means of making the measure

permanently conciliatory to our interests and friendships.  It would

at any rate relieve us from the necessity of taking immediate

measures for countervailing such an operation by arrangements in

another quarter.  Still we should consider N. Orleans and the

Floridas as equivalent for the risk of a quarrel with France produced

by her vicinage.  I have no doubt you have urged these considerations

on every proper occasion with the government where you are.  They are

such as must have effect if you can find the means of producing

thorough reflection on them by that government.  The idea here is

that the troops sent to St. Domingo, were to proceed to Louisiana

after finishing their work in that island.  If this were the

arrangement, it will give you time to return again and again to the

charge, for the conquest of St. Domingo will not be a short work.  It

will take considerable time to wear down a great number of souldiers.

Every eye in the U.S. is now fixed on this affair of Louisiana.

Perhaps nothing since the revolutionary war has produced more uneasy

sensations through the body of the nation.  Notwithstanding temporary

bickerings have taken place with France, she has still a strong hold

on the affections of our citizens generally.  I have thought it not

amiss, by way of supplement to the letters of the Secretary of State

to write you this private one to impress you with the importance we

affix to this transaction.  I pray you to cherish Dupont.  He has the

best dispositions for the continuance of friendship between the two

nations, and perhaps you may be able to make a good use of him.

Accept assurances of my affectionate esteem and high consideration.







        DRY-DOCKING THE NAVY




        _To Benjamin H. Latrobe_

        _Washington, Nov. 2, 1802_




        DEAR SIR -- The placing of a navy in a state of perfect

preservation, so that at the beginning of a subsequent war it shall

be as sound as at the end of the preceding one when laid up, and the

lessening the expence of repairs, perpetually necessary while they

lie in the water, are objects of the first importance to a nation

which to a certain degree must be maritime.  The dry docks of Europe,

being below the level of tide water, are very expensive in their

construction and in the manner of keeping them clear of water, and

are only practicable at all where they have high tides: insomuch that

no nation has ever proposed to lay up their whole navy in dry docks.

But if the dry dock were above the level of tide water, and there be

any means of raising the vessels up into them, and of covering the

dock with a roof, thus withdrawn from the rot and the sun, they would

last as long as the interior timbers, doors and floors of a house.

The vast command of running water at this place, at different heights

from 30 to 200 feet above tide water, enables us to effect this

desirable object by forming a lower bason into which the tide water

shall float the vessel and then have its gates closed, and adjoining

to this, but 24 feet higher, an upper bason 275 feet wide, and 800 f.

long (sufficient to contain 12 frigates) into which running water can

be introduced from above, so that filling both basons (as in a lock)

the vessel shall be raised up and floated into the upper one, and the

water being discharged leave her dry.  Over a bason not wider than

175 feet, a roof can be thrown, in the manner of that of the Halle au

ble at Paris, which needing no underworks to support it, will permit

the bason to be entirely open and free for the movement of the

vessels.  I mean to propose the construction of one of these to the

National legislature, convinced it will be a work of no great cost,

that it will save us great annual expence, and be an encouragement to

prepare in peace the vessels we shall need in war, when we find they

can be kept in a state of perfect preservation and without expence.




        The first thing to be done is to chuse from which of the

streams we will derive our water for the lock.  These are the Eastern

branch, Tyber, Rock creek, and the Potomak itself.  Then to trace the

canal, draw plans of that and of the two basons, and calculate the

expence of the whole, that we may lead the legislature to no expence

in the execution of which they shall not be apprised in the

beginning.  For this I ask your aid, which will require your coming

here.  Some surveys and elevations have been already made by Mr. N.

King, a very accurate man in that line, and who will assist in any

thing you desire, and execute on the ground any tracings you may

direct, unless you prefer doing them yourself.  It is very material

too that this should be done immediately, as we have little more than

4 weeks to the meeting of the legislature, and there will then be but

2 weeks for them to consider and decide before the day arrives (Jan.

1) at which alone any number of labourers can be hired here.  Should

that pass either the work must lie over for a year, or be executed by

day labourers at double expence.  I propose that such a force shall

be provided as to compleat the work in one year.  If this results, as

it will receive all our present ships, the next work will be a second

one, to build and lay up additional ships.  On the subject of your

superintending the execution of the work it would be premature to say

any thing till the legislature shall have declared their will.  Be so

good as to let me hear from you immediately, if you cannot come so

soon as you can write.  Accept my best wishes and respects.







        "A NOISELESS COURSE"




        _To Thomas Cooper_

        _Washington, Nov. 29, 1802_




        DEAR SIR, -- Your favor of Oct 25 was received in due time, and

I thank you for the long extract you took the trouble of making from

Mr. Stone's letter.  Certainly the information it communicates as to

Alexander kindles a great deal of interest in his existence, and

strong spasms of the heart in his favor.  Tho his means of doing good

are great, yet the materials on which he is to work are refractory.

Whether he engages in private correspondences abroad, as the King of

Prussia did much, his grandmother sometimes, I know not; but

certainly such a correspondence would be very interesting to those

who are sincerely anxious to see mankind raised from their present

abject condition.  It delights me to find that there are persons who

still think that all is not lost in France: that their retrogradation

from a limited to an unlimited despotism, is but to give themselves a

new impulse.  But I see not how or when.  The press, the only tocsin

of a nation, is compleatly silenced there, and all means of a general

effort taken away.  However, I am willing to hope, as long as anybody

will hope with me; and I am entirely persuaded that the agitations of

the public mind advance its powers, and that at every vibration

between the points of liberty and despotism, something will be gained

for the former.  As men become better informed, their rulers must

respect them the more.  I think you will be sensible that our

citizens are fast returning, from the panic into which they were

artfully thrown to the dictates of their own reason; and I believe

the delusions they have seen themselves hurried into will be useful

as a lesson under similar attempts on them in future.  The good

effects of our late fiscal arrangements will certainly tend to unite

them in opinion, and in a confidence as to the views of their public

functionaries, legislative & executive.  The path we have to pursue

is so quiet that we have nothing scarcely to propose to our

Legislature.  A noiseless course, not meddling with the affairs of

others, unattractive of notice, is a mark that society is going on in

happiness.  If we can prevent the government from wasting the labors

of the people, under the pretence of taking care of them, they must

become happy.  Their finances are now under such a course of

application as nothing could derange but war or federalism.  The

gripe of the latter has shown itself as deadly as the jaws of the

former.  Our adversaries say we are indebted to their providence for

the means of paying the public debt.  We never charged them with the

want of foresight in providing money, but with the misapplication of

it after they have levied it.  We say they raised not only enough,

but too much; and that after giving back the surplus we do more with

a part than they did with the whole.




        Your letter of Nov 18 is also received.  The places of

midshipman are so much sought that (being limited) there is never a

vacancy.  Your son shall be set down for the 2d, which shall happen;

the 1st being anticipated.  We are not long generally without

vacancies happening.  As soon as he can be appointed you shall know

it.  I pray you to accept assurances of my great attachment and

respect.




 

        CRISIS ON THE MISSISSIPPI




        _To the Special Envoy to France_

        (JAMES MONROE)

        _Washington, Jan. 13, 1803_




        DEAR SIR, -- I dropped you a line on the 10th informing you of

a nomination I had made of you to the Senate, and yesterday I

enclosed you their approbation not then having time to write.  The

agitation of the public mind on occasion of the late suspension of

our right of deposit at N. Orleans is extreme.  In the western

country it is natural and grounded on honest motives.  In the

seaports it proceeds from a desire for war which increases the

mercantile lottery; in the federalists generally and especially those

of Congress the object is to force us into war if possible, in order

to derange our finances, or if this cannot be done, to attach the

western country to them, as their best friends, and thus get again

into power.  Remonstrances memorials &c. are now circulating through

the whole of the western country and signing by the body of the

people.  The measures we have been pursuing being invisible, do not

satisfy their minds.  Something sensible therefore was become

necessary; and indeed our object of purchasing N. Orleans and the

Floridas is a measure liable to assume so many shapes, that no

instructions could be squared to fit them, it was essential then to

send a minister extraordinary to be joined with the ordinary one,

with discretionary powers, first however well impressed with all our

views and therefore qualified to meet and modify to these every form

of proposition which could come from the other party.  This could be

done only in full and frequent oral communications.  Having

determined on this, there could not be two opinions among the

republicans as to the person.  You possess the unlimited confidence

of the administration and of the western people; and generally of the

republicans everywhere; and were you to refuse to go, no other man

can be found who does this.  The measure has already silenced the

Feds. here.  Congress will no longer be agitated by them: and the

country will become calm as fast as the information extends over it.

All eyes, all hopes, are now fixed on you; and were you to decline,

the chagrin would be universal, and would shake under your feet the

high ground on which you stand with the public.  Indeed I know

nothing which would produce such a shock, for on the event of this

mission depends the future destinies of this republic.  If we cannot

by a purchase of the country insure to ourselves a course of

perpetual peace and friendship with all nations, then as war cannot

be distant, it behooves us immediately to be preparing for that

course, without, however, hastening it, and it may be necessary (on

your failure on the continent) to cross the channel.




        We shall get entangled in European politics, and figuring more,

be much less happy and prosperous.  This can only be prevented by a

successful issue to your present mission.  I am sensible after the

measures you have taken for getting into a different line of

business, that it will be a great sacrifice on your part, and

presents from the season and other circumstances serious

difficulties.  But some men are born for the public.  Nature by

fitting them for the service of the human race on a broad scale, has

stamped with the evidences of her destination and their duty.




        But I am particularly concerned that in the present case you

have more than one sacrifice to make.  To reform the prodigalities of

our predecessors is understood to be peculiarly our duty, and to

bring the government to a simple and economical course.  They, in

order to increase expense, debt, taxation, and patronage tried always

how much they could give.  The outfit given to ministers resident to

enable them to furnish their house, but given by no nation to a

temporary minister, who is never expected to take a house or to

entertain, but considered on a footing of a voyageur, they gave to

their extraordinary missionaries by wholesale.  In the beginning of

our administration, among other articles of reformation in expense,

it was determined not to give an outfit to missionaries

extraordinary, and not to incur the expense with any minister of

sending a frigate to carry him or bring him.  The Boston happened to

be going to the Mediterranean, and was permitted therefore to take up

Mr. Livingstone and touch in a port of France.  A frigate was denied

to Charles Pinckney and has been refused to Mr. King for his return.

Mr. Madison's friendship and mine to you being so well known, the

public will have eagle eyes to watch if we grant you any indulgencies

of the general rule; and on the other hand, the example set in your

case will be more cogent on future ones, and produce greater

approbation to our conduct.  The allowance therefore will be in this

and all similar cases, all the expenses of your journey and voiage,

taking a ship's cabin to yourself, 9,000 D. a year from your leaving

home till the proceedings of your mission are terminated, and then

the quarter's salary for the expenses of the return as prescribed by

law.  As to the time of your going you cannot too much hasten it, as

the moment in France is critical.  St. Domingo delays their taking

possession of Louisiana, and they are in the last distress for money

for current purposes.  You should arrange your affairs for an absence

of a year at least, perhaps for a long one.  It will be necessary for

you to stay here some days on your way to New York.  You will receive

here what advance you chuse.  Accept assurances of my constant and

affectionate attachment.







        CIVILIZATION OF THE INDIANS




        _To Benjamin Hawkins_

        _Washington, Feb. 18, 1803_

 

        DEAR SIR, -- Mr. Hill's return to you offers so safe a

conveyance for a letter, that I feel irresistibly disposed to write

one, tho' there is but little to write about.  You have been so long

absent from this part of the world, and the state of society so

changed in that time, that details respecting those who compose it

are no longer interesting or intelligible to you.  One source of

great change in social intercourse arose while you were with us, tho'

it's effects were as yet scarcely sensible on society or government.

I mean the British treaty, which produced a schism that went on

widening and rankling till the years '98, '99, when a final

dissolution of all bonds, civil & social, appeared imminent.  In that

awful crisis, the people awaked from the phrenzy into which they had

been thrown, began to return to their sober and ancient principles, &

have now become five-sixths of one sentiment, to wit, for peace,

economy, and a government bottomed on popular election in its

legislative & executive branches.  In the public counsels the federal

party hold still one-third.  This, however, will lessen, but not

exactly to the standard of the people; because it will be forever

seen that of bodies of men even elected by the people, there will

always be a greater proportion aristocratic than among their

constituents.  The present administration had a task imposed on it

which was unavoidable, and could not fail to exert the bitterest

hostility in those opposed to it.  The preceding administration left

99. out of every hundred in public offices of the federal sect.

Republicanism had been the mark on Cain which had rendered those who

bore it exiles from all portion in the trusts & authorities of their

country.  This description of citizens called imperiously & justly

for a restoration of right.  It was intended, however, to have

yielded to this in so moderate a degree as might conciliate those who

had obtained exclusive possession; but as soon as they were touched,

they endeavored to set fire to the four corners of the public fabric,

and obliged us to deprive of the influence of office several who were

using it with activity and vigilance to destroy the confidence of the

people in their government, and thus to proceed in the drudgery of

removal farther than would have been, had not their own hostile

enterprises rendered it necessary in self-defence.  But I think it

will not be long before the whole nation will be consolidated in

their ancient principles, excepting a few who have committed

themselves beyond recall, and who will retire to obscurity & settled

disaffection.




        Altho' you will receive, thro' the official channel of the War

Office, every communication necessary to develop to you our views

respecting the Indians, and to direct your conduct, yet, supposing it

will be satisfactory to you, and to those with whom you are placed,

to understand my personal dispositions and opinions in this

particular, I shall avail myself of this private letter to state them

generally.  I consider the business of hunting as already become

insufficient to furnish clothing and subsistence to the Indians.  The

promotion of agriculture, therefore, and household manufacture, are

essential in their preservation, and I am disposed to aid and

encourage it liberally.  This will enable them to live on much

smaller portions of land, and indeed will render their vast forests

useless but for the range of cattle; for which purpose, also, as they

become better farmers, they will be found useless, and even

disadvantageous.  While they are learning to do better on less land,

our increasing numbers will be calling for more land, and thus a

coincidence of interests will be produced between those who have

lands to spare, and want other necessaries, and those who have such

necessaries to spare, and want lands.  This commerce, then, will be

for the good of both, and those who are friends to both ought to

encourage it.  You are in the station peculiarly charged with this

interchange, and who have it peculiarly in your power to promote

among the Indians a sense of the superior value of a little land,

well cultivated, over a great deal, unimproved, and to encourage them

to make this estimate truly.  The wisdom of the animal which

amputates & abandons to the hunter the parts for which he is pursued

should be theirs, with this difference, that the former sacrifices

what is useful, the latter what is not.  In truth, the ultimate point

of rest & happiness for them is to let our settlements and theirs

meet and blend together, to intermix, and become one people.

Incorporating themselves with us as citizens of the U.S., this is

what the natural progress of things will of course bring on, and it

will be better to promote than to retard it.  Surely it will be

better for them to be identified with us, and preserved in the

occupation of their lands, than be exposed to the many casualties

which may endanger them while a separate people.  I have little doubt

but that your reflections must have led you to view the various ways

in which their history may terminate, and to see that this is the one

most for their happiness.  And we have already had an application

from a settlement of Indians to become citizens of the U.S.  It is

possible, perhaps probable, that this idea may be so novel as that it

might shock the Indians, were it even hinted to them.  Of course, you

will keep it for your own reflection; but, convinced of its

soundness, I feel it consistent with pure morality to lead them

towards it, to familiarize them to the idea that it is for their

interest to cede lands at times to the U S, and for us thus to

procure gratifications to our citizens, from time to time, by new

acquisitions of land.  From no quarter is there at present so strong

a pressure on this subject as from Georgia for the residue of the

fork of Oconee & Ockmulgee; and indeed I believe it will be difficult

to resist it.  As it has been mentioned that the Creeks had at one

time made up their minds to sell this, and were only checked in it by

some indiscretions of an individual, I am in hopes you will be able

to bring them to it again.  I beseech you to use your most earnest

endeavors; for it will relieve us here from a great pressure, and

yourself from the unreasonable suspicions of the Georgians which you

notice, that you are more attached to the interests of the Indians

than of the U S, and throw cold water on their willingness to part

with lands.  It is so easy to excite suspicion, that none are to be

wondered at; but I am in hopes it will be in your power to quash them

by effecting the object.




        Mr. Madison enjoys better health since his removal to this

place than he had done in Orange.  Mr. Giles is in a state of health

feared to be irrecoverable, although he may hold on for some time,

and perhaps be re-established.  Browze Trist is now in the

Mississippi territory, forming an establishment for his family, which

is still in Albemarle, and will remove to the Mississippi in the

spring.  Mrs. Trist, his mother, begins to yield a little to time.  I

retain myself very perfect health, having not had 20. hours of fever

in 42 years past.  I have sometimes had a troublesome headache, and

some slight rheumatic pains; but now sixty years old nearly, I have

had as little to complain of in point of health as most people.  I

learn you have the gout.  I did not expect that Indian cookery or

Indian fare would produce that; but it is considered as a security

for good health otherwise.  That it may be so with you, I sincerely

pray, and tender you my friendly and respectful salutations.







        MACHIAVELLIAN BENEVOLENCE AND THE INDIANS




        _To Governor William H. Harrison_

        _Washington, February 27, 1803_




        DEAR SIR, -- While at Monticello in August last I received your

favor of August 8th, and meant to have acknowledged it on my return

to the seat of government at the close of the ensuing month, but on

my return I found that you were expected to be on here in person, and

this expectation continued till winter.  I have since received your

favor of December 30th.




        In the former you mentioned the plan of the town which you had

done me the honor to name after me, and to lay out according to an

idea I had formerly expressed to you.  I am thoroughly persuaded that

it will be found handsome and pleasant, and I do believe it to be the

best means of preserving the cities of America from the scourge of

the yellow fever, which being peculiar to our country, must be

derived from some peculiarity in it.  That peculiarity I take to be

our cloudless skies.  In Europe, where the sun does not shine more

than half the number of days in the year which it does in America,

they can build their town in a solid block with impunity; buthere a

constant sun produces too great an accumulation ofheat to admit that.

Ventilation is indispensably necessary.  Experience has taught us

that in the open air of the country the yellow fever is not only not

generated,but ceases to be infectious.  I cannot decidefrom the

drawing you sent me, whether you havelaid off streets round the

squares thus: (Illustration omitted) or only the diagonal streets

therein marked.  The former was my idea, and is, I imagine, most

convenient.




        You will receive herewith an answer to your letter as President

of the Convention; and from the Secretary of War you receive from

time to time information and instructions as to our Indian affairs.

These communications being for the public records, are restrained

always to particular objects and occasions; but this letter being

unofficial and private, I may with safety give you a more extensive

view of our policy respecting the Indians, that you may the better

comprehend the parts dealt out to you in detail through the official

channel, and observing the system of which they make a part, conduct

yourself in unison with it in cases where you are obliged to act

without instruction.  Our system is to live in perpetual peace with

the Indians, to cultivate an affectionate attachment from them, by

everything just and liberal which we can do for them within the

bounds of reason, and by giving them effectual protection against

wrongs from our own people.  The decrease of game rendering their

subsistence by hunting insufficient, we wish to draw them to

agriculture, to spinning and weaving.  The latter branches they take

up with great readiness, because they fall to the women, who gain by

quitting the labors of the field for those which are exercised within

doors.  When they withdraw themselves to the culture of a small piece

of land, they will perceive how useless to them are their extensive

forests, and will be willing to pare them off from time to time in

exchange for necessaries for their farms and families.  To promote

this disposition to ex-change lands, which they have to spare and we

want, for necessaries, which we have to spare and they want, we

shallpush our trading uses, and be glad to see the good and

influential individuals among them run in debt, because we ob-serve

that when these debts get beyond what the individuals can pay, they

become willing to lop them off by a cession of lands.  At our trading

houses, too, we mean to sell so low as merely to repay us cost and

charges, so as neither to lessen or enlarge our capital.  This is

what private traders cannot do, for they must gain; they will

consequently retire from the competition, and we shall thus get clear

of this pest without giving offence or umbrage to the Indians.  In

this way our settlements will gradually circumscribe and approach the

Indians, and they will in time either incorporate with us as citizens

of the United States, or remove beyond the Mississippi.  The former

is certainly the termination of their history most happy for

themselves; but, in the whole course of this, it is essential to

cultivate their love.  As to their fear, we presume that our strength

and their weakness is now so visible that they must see we have only

to shut our hand to crush them, and that all our liberalities to them

proceed from motives of pure humanity only.  Should any tribe be

fool-hardy enough to take up the hatchet at any time, the seizing the

whole country of that tribe, and driving them across the Mississippi,

as the only condition of peace, would be an example to others, and a

furtherance of our final consolidation.




        Combined with these views, and to be prepared against the

occupation of Louisiana by a powerful and enterprising people, it is

important that, setting less value on interior extension of purchases

from the Indians, we bend our whole views to the purchase and

settlement of the country on the Mississippi, from its mouth to its

northern regions, that we may be able to present as strong a front on

our western as on our eastern border, and plant on the Mississippi

itself the means of its own defence.  We now own from 31 to the

Yazoo, and hope this summer to purchase what belongs to the Choctaws

from the Yazoo up to their boundary, supposed to be about opposite

the mouth of Acanza.  We wish at the same time to begin in your

quarter, for which there is at present a favorable opening.  The

Cahokias extinct, we are entitled to their country by our paramount

sovereignty.  The Piorias, we understand, have all been driven off

from their country, and we might claim it in the same way; but as we

understand there is one chief remaining, who would, as the survivor

of the tribe, sell the right, it is better to give him such terms as

will make him easy for life, and take a conveyance from him.  The

Kaskaskias being reduced to a few families, I presume we may purchase

their whole country for what would place every individual of them at

his ease, and be a small price to us, -- say by laying off for each

family, whenever they would choose it, as much rich land as they

could cultivate, adjacent to each other, enclosing the whole in a

single fence, and giving them such an annuity in money or goods

forever as would place them in happiness; and we might take them also

under the protection of the United States.  Thus possessed of the

rights of these tribes, we should proceed to the settling their

boundaries with the Poutewatamies and Kickapoos; claiming all

doubtful territory, but paying them a price for the relinquishment of

their concurrent claim, and even prevailing on them, if possible, to

_cede_, for a price, such of their own unquestioned territory as

would give us a convenient northern boundary.  Before broaching this,

and while we are bargaining with the Kaskaskies, the minds of the

Poutewatamies and Kickapoos should be soothed and conciliated by

liberalities and sincere assurances of friendship.  Perhaps by

sending a well-qualified character to stay some time in Decoigne's

village, as if on other business, and to sound him and introduce the

subject by degrees to his mind and that of the other heads of

families, inculcating in the way of conversation, all those

considerations which prove the advantages they would receive by a

cession on these terms, the object might be more easily and

effectually obtained than by abruptly proposing it to them at a

formal treaty.  Of the means, however, of obtaining what we wish, you

will be the best judge; and I have given you this view of the system

which we suppose will best promote the interests of the Indians and

ourselves, and finally consolidate our whole country to one nation

only; that you may be enabled the better to adapt your means to the

object, for this purpose we have given you a general commission for

treating.  The crisis is pressing: whatever can now be obtained must

be obtained quickly.  The occupation of New Orleans, hourly expected,

by the French, is already felt like a light breeze by the Indians.

You know the sentiments they entertain of that nation; under the hope

of their protection they will immediately stiffen against cessions of

lands to us.  We had better, therefore, do at once what can now be

done.




        I must repeat that this letter is to be considered as private

and friendly, and is not to control any particular instructions which

you may receive through official channel.  You will also perceive how

sacredly it must be kept within your own breast, and especially how

improper to be understood by the Indians.  For their interests and

their tranquillity it is best they should see only the present age of

their history.  I pray you to accept assurances of my esteem and high

consideration.







        JESUS, SOCRATES, AND OTHERS




        _To Dr. Joseph Priestley_

        _Washington, Apr. 9, 1803_




        DEAR SIR, -- While on a short visit lately to Monticello, I

received from you a copy of your comparative view of Socrates &

Jesus, and I avail myself of the first moment of leisure after my

return to acknolege the pleasure I had in the perusal of it, and the

desire it excited to see you take up the subject on a more extensive

scale.  In consequence of some conversation with Dr. Rush, in the

year 1798-99, I had promised some day to write him a letter giving

him my view of the Christian system.  I have reflected often on it

since, & even sketched the outlines in my own mind.  I should first

take a general view of the moral doctrines of the most remarkable of

the antient philosophers, of whose ethics we have sufficient

information to make an estimate, say of Pythagoras, Epicurus,

Epictetus, Socrates, Cicero, Seneca, Antoninus.  I should do justice

to the branches of morality they have treated well; but point out the

importance of those in which they are deficient.  I should then take

a view of the deism and ethics of the Jews, and show in what a

degraded state they were, and the necessity they presented of a

reformation.  I should proceed to a view of the life, character, &

doctrines of Jesus, who sensible of incorrectness of their ideas of

the Deity, and of morality, endeavored to bring them to the

principles of a pure deism, and juster notions of the attributes of

God, to reform their moral doctrines to the standard of reason,

justice & philanthropy, and to inculcate the belief of a future

state.  This view would purposely omit the question of his divinity,

& even his inspiration.  To do him justice, it would be necessary to

remark the disadvantages his doctrines have to encounter, not having

been committed to writing by himself, but by the most unlettered of

men, by memory, long after they had heard them from him; when much

was forgotten, much misunderstood, & presented in very paradoxical

shapes.  Yet such are the fragments remaining as to show a master

workman, and that his system of morality was the most benevolent &

sublime probably that has been ever taught, and consequently more

perfect than those of any of the antient philosophers.  His character

& doctrines have received still greater injury from those who pretend

to be his special disciples, and who have disfigured and

sophisticated his actions & precepts, from views of personal

interest, so as to induce the unthinking part of mankind to throw off

the whole system in disgust, and to pass sentence as an impostor on

the most innocent, the most benevolent, the most eloquent and sublime

character that ever has been exhibited to man.  This is the outline;

but I have not the time, & still less the information which the

subject needs.  It will therefore rest with me in contemplation only.

You are the person who of all others would do it best, and most

promptly.  You have all the materials at hand, and you put together

with ease.  I wish you could be induced to extend your late work to

the whole subject.  I have not heard particularly what is the state

of your health; but as it has been equal to the journey to

Philadelphia, perhaps it might encourage the curiosity you must feel

to see for once this place, which nature has formed on a beautiful

scale, and circumstances destine for a great one.  As yet we are but

a cluster of villages; we cannot offer you the learned society of

Philadelphia; but you will have that of a few characters whom you

esteem, & a bed & hearty welcome with one who will rejoice in every

opportunity of testifying to you his high veneration & affectionate

attachment.







        THE MORALS OF JESUS




        _To Dr. Benjamin Rush, with a Syllabus_

        _Washington, Apr. 21, 1803_




        DEAR SIR, -- In some of the delightful conversations with you,

in the evenings of 1798-99, and which served as an anodyne to the

afflictions of the crisis through which our country was then

laboring, the Christian religion was sometimes our topic; and I then

promised you, that one day or other, I would give you my views of it.

They are the result of a life of inquiry & reflection, and very

different from that anti-Christian system imputed to me by those who

know nothing ofmy opinions.  To the corruptions of Christianity I am

indeed opposed; but not to the genuine precepts of Jesus himself.  I

am a Christian, in the only sense he wished any one to be; sincerely

attached to his doctrines, in preference to all others; ascribing to

himself every _human_ excellence; & believing he never claimed any

other.  At the short intervals since these conversations, when I

could justifiably abstract my mind from public affairs, the subject

has been under my contemplation.  But the more I considered it, the

more it expanded beyond the measure of either my time or information.

In the moment of my late departure from Monticello, I received from

Doctr Priestley, his little treatise of "Socrates & Jesus compared."

This being a section of the general view I had taken of the field, it

became a subject of reflection while on the road, and unoccupied

otherwise.  The result was, to arrange in my mind a syllabus, or

outline of such an estimate of the comparative merits of

Christianity, as I wished to see executed by some one of more leisure

and information for the task, than myself.  This I now send you, as

the only discharge of my promise I can probably ever execute.  And in

confiding it to you, I know it will not be exposed to the malignant

perversions of those who make every word from me a text for new

misrepresentations & calumnies.  I am moreover averse to the

communication of my religious tenets to the public; because it would

countenance the presumption of those who have endeavored to draw them

before that tribunal, and to seduce public opinion to erect itself

into that inquisition over the rights of conscience, which the laws

have so justly proscribed.  It behoves every man who values liberty

of conscience for himself, to resist invasions of it in the case of

others; or their case may, by change of circumstances, become his

own.  It behoves him, too, in his own case, to give no example of

concession, betraying the common right of independent opinion, by

answering questions of faith, which the laws have left between God &

himself.  Accept my affectionate salutations.




        SYLLABUS OF AN ESTIMATE OF THE MERIT OF THE DOCTRINES OF JESUS,

COMPARED WITH THOSE OF OTHERS

        _April, 1803_




        In a comparative view of the Ethics of the enlightened nations

of antiquity, of the Jews and of Jesus, no notice should be taken of

the corruptions of reason among the ancients, to wit, the idolatry &

superstition of the vulgar, nor of the corruptions of Christianity by

the learned among its professors.




        Let a just view be taken of the moral principles inculcated by

the most esteemed of the sects of ancient philosophy, or of their

individuals; particularly Pythagoras, Socrates, Epicurus, Cicero,

Epictetus, Seneca, Antoninus.




        I. PHILOSOPHERS. 1. Their precepts related chiefly to

ourselves, and the government of those passions which, unrestrained,

would disturb our tranquillity of mind.  In this branch of philosophy

they were really great.




        2. In developing our duties to others, they were short and

defective.  They embraced, indeed, the circles of kindred & friends,

and inculcated patriotism, or the love of our country in the

aggregate, as a primary obligation: toward our neighbors & countrymen

they taught justice, but scarcely viewed them as within the circle of

benevolence.  Still less have they inculcated peace, charity & love

to our fellow men, or embraced with benevolence the whole family of

mankind.




        II. JEWS. 1. Their system was Deism; that is, the belief of one

only God.  But their ideas of him & of his attributes were degrading

& injurious.




        2. Their Ethics were not only imperfect, but often

irreconcilable with the sound dictates of reason & morality, as they

respect intercourse with those around us; & repulsive & anti-social,

as respecting other nations.  They needed reformation, therefore, in

an eminent degree.




        III. JESUS. In this state of things among the Jews, Jesus

appeared.  His parentage was obscure; his condition poor; his

education null; his natural endowments great; his life correct and

innocent: he was meek, benevolent, patient, firm, disinterested, & of

the sublimest eloquence.




        The disadvantages under which his doctrines appear are

remarkable.




        1. Like Socrates & Epictetus, he wrote nothing himself.




        2. But he had not, like them, a Xenophon or an Arrian to write

for him.  On the contrary, all the learned of his country, entrenched

in its power and riches, were opposed to him, lest his labors should

undermine their advantages; and the committing to writing his life &

doctrines fell on the most unlettered & ignorant men; who wrote, too,

from memory, & not till long after the transactions had passed.




        3. According to the ordinary fate of those who attempt to

enlighten and reform mankind, he fell an early victim to the jealousy

& combination of the altar and the throne, at about 33. years of age,

his reason having not yet attained the _maximum_ of its energy, nor

the course of his preaching, which was but of 3.  years at most,

presented occasions for developing a complete system of morals.




        4. Hence the doctrines which he really delivered were defective

as a whole, and fragments only of what he did deliver have come to us

mutilated, misstated, & often unintelligible.




        5. They have been still more disfigured by the corruptions of

schismatising followers, who have found an interest in sophisticating

& perverting the simple doctrines he taught by engrafting on them the

mysticisms of a Grecian sophist, frittering them into subtleties, &

obscuring them with jargon, until they have caused good men to reject

the whole in disgust, & to view Jesus himself as an impostor.




        Notwithstanding these disadvantages, a system of morals is

presented to us, which, if filled up in the true style and spirit of

the rich fragments he left us, would be the most perfect and sublime

that has ever been taught by man.




        The question of his being a member of the Godhead, or in direct

communication with it, claimed for him by some of his followers, and

denied by others, is foreign to the present view, which is merely an

estimate of the intrinsic merit of his doctrines.




        1. He corrected the Deism of the Jews, confirming them in their

belief of one only God, and giving them juster notions of his

attributes and government.




        2. His moral doctrines, relating to kindred & friends, were

more pure & perfect than those of the most correct of the

philosophers, and greatly more so than those of the Jews; and they

went far beyond both in inculcating universal philanthropy, not only

to kindred and friends, to neighbors and countrymen, but to all

mankind, gathering all into one family, under the bonds of love,

charity, peace, common wants and common aids.  A development of this

head will evince the peculiar superiority of the system of Jesus over

all others.




        3. The precepts of philosophy, & of the Hebrew code, laid hold

of actions only.  He pushed his scrutinies into the heart of man;

erected his tribunal in the region of his thoughts, and purified the

waters at the fountain head.




 

        4. He taught, emphatically, the doctrines of a future state,

which was either doubted, or disbelieved by the Jews; and wielded it

with efficacy, as an important incentive, supplementary to the other

motives to moral conduct.







        EXPEDITION TO THE PACIFIC




        _Instructions to Captain Lewis_

        _June 20, 1803_




        To Merryweather Lewis, Esq., Captain of the 1st Regiment of

Infantry of the United States of America.




        Your situation as Secretary of the President of the United

States has made you acquainted with the objects of my confidential

message of Jan. 18, 1803, to the legislature.  You have seen the act

they passed, which, tho' expressed in general terms, was meant to

sanction those objects, and you are appointed to carry them into

execution.




        Instruments for ascertaining by celestial observations the

geography of the country thro' which you will pass, have been already

provided.  Light articles for barter, & presents among the Indians,

arms for your attendants, say for from 10 to 12 men, boats, tents, &

other travelling apparatus, with ammunition, medicine, surgical

instruments & provision you will have prepared with such aids as the

Secretary at War can yield in his department; & from him also you

will receive authority to engage among our troops, by voluntary

agreement, the number of attendants above mentioned, over whom you,

as their commanding officer are invested with all the powers the laws

give in such a case.




        As your movements while within the limits of the U.S. will be

better directed by occasional communications, adapted to

circumstances as they arise, they will not be noticed here.  What

follows will respect your proceedings after your departure from the

U.S.




        Your mission has been communicated to the Ministers here from

France, Spain, & Great Britain, and through them to their

governments: and such assurances given them as to it's objects as we

trust will satisfy them.  The country of Louisiana having been ceded

by Spain to France, the passport you have from the Minister of

France, the representative of the present sovereign of the country,

will be a protection with all it's subjects: And that from the

Minister of England will entitle you to the friendly aid of any

traders of that allegiance with whom you may happen to meet.




        The object of your mission is to explore the Missouri river, &

such principal stream of it, as, by it's course & communication with

the water of the Pacific Ocean may offer the most direct &

practicable water communication across this continent, for the

purposes of commerce.




        Beginning at the mouth of the Missouri, you will take

observations of latitude and longitude at all remarkable points on

the river, & especially at the mouths of rivers, at rapids, at

islands & other places & objects distinguished by such natural marks

& characters of a durable kind, as that they may with certainty be

recognized hereafter.  The courses of the river between these points

of observation may be supplied by the compass, the log-line & by

time, corrected by the observations themselves.  The variations of

the compass too, in different places should be noticed.




        The interesting points of the portage between the heads of the

Missouri & the water offering the best communication with the Pacific

Ocean should be fixed by observation & the course of that water to

the ocean, in the same manner as that of the Missouri.




        Your observations are to be taken with great pains & accuracy,

to be entered distinctly, & intelligibly for others as well as

yourself, to comprehend all the elements necessary, with the aid of

the usual tables to fix the latitude & longitude of the places at

which they were taken, & are to be rendered to the war office, for

the purpose of having the calculations made concurrently by proper

persons within the U.S.  Several copies of these as well as of your

other notes, should be made at leisure times & put into the care of

the most trustworthy of your attendants, to guard by multiplying them

against the accidental losses to which they will be exposed.  A

further guard would be that one of these copies be written on the

paper of the birch, as less liable to injury from damp than common

paper.




 

        The commerce which may be carried on with the people inhabiting

the line you will pursue, renders a knolege of these people

important.  You will therefore endeavor to make yourself acquainted,

as far as a diligent pursuit of your journey shall admit.

        with the names of the nations & their numbers;

        the extent & limits of their possessions;

        their relations with other tribes or nations;

        their language, traditions, monuments;

        their ordinary occupations in agriculture, fishing, hunting,

                war, arts, & the implements for these;

        their food, clothing, & domestic accommodations;

        the diseases prevalent among them, & the remedies they

                use;

        moral and physical circumstance which distinguish them

                from the tribes they know;

        peculiarities in their laws, customs & dispositions;

        and articles of commerce they may need or furnish & to

                what extent.




        And considering the interest which every nation has in

extending & strengthening the authority of reason & justice among the

people around them, it will be useful to acquire what knolege you can

of the state of morality, religion & information among them, as it

may better enable those who endeavor to civilize & instruct them, to

adapt their measures to the existing notions & practises of those on

whom they are to operate.




        Other objects worthy of notice will be

        the soil & face of the country, its growth & vegetable

productions; especially those not of the U.S.

        the animals of the country generally, & especially those not

known in the U.S.

        The remains & accounts of any which may be deemed rare or

extinct;

        the mineral productions of every kind; but more particularly

metals, limestone, pit coal & saltpetre; salines & mineral waters,

noting the temperature of the last & such circumstances as may

indicate their character; volcanic appearances;

        climate as characterized by the thermometer, by the proportion

of rainy, cloudy & clear days, by lightening, hail, snow, ice, by the

access & recess of frost, by the winds, prevailing at different

seasons, the dates at which particular plants put forth or lose their

flowers, or leaf, times of appearance of particular birds, reptiles

or insects.




        Altho' your route will be along the channel of the Missouri,

yet you will endeavor to inform yourself by inquiry, of the character

and extent of the country watered by its branches, and especially on

it's southern side.  The north river or Rio Bravo which runs into the

gulph of Mexico, and the north river, or Rio colorado, which runs

into the gulph of California, are understood to be the principal

streams heading opposite to the waters of the Missouri, & running

Southwardly.  Whether the dividing grounds between the Missouri &

them are mountains or flatlands, what are their distance from the

Missouri, the character of the intermediate country, & the people

inhabiting it, are worthy of particular enquiry.  The northern waters

of the Missouri are less to be enquired after, because they have been

ascertained to a considerable degree, and are still in a course of

ascertainment by English traders & travellers.  But if you can learn

anything certain of the most northern source of the Mississippi, & of

it's position relative to the lake of the woods, it will be

interesting to us.  Some account too of the path of the Canadian

traders from the Mississippi, at the mouth of the Ouisconsin river,

to where it strikes the Missouri and of the soil and rivers in it's

course, is desirable.




        In all your intercourse with the natives treat them in the most

friendly & conciliatory manner which their own conduct will admit;

allay all jealousies as to the object of your journey, satisfy them

of it's innocence, make them acquainted with the position, extent,

character, peaceable & commercial dispositions of the U.S., of our

wish to be neighborly, friendly & useful to them, & of our

dispositions to a commercial intercourse with them; confer with them

on the points most convenient as mutual emporiums, & the articles of

most desirable interchange for them & us.  If a few of their

influential chiefs, within practicable distance, wish to visit us,

arrange such a visit with them, and furnish them with authority to

call on our officers, on their entering the U.S. to have them

conveyed to this place at the public expense.  If any of them should

wish to have some of their young people brought up with us, & taught

such arts as may be useful to them, we will receive, instruct & take

care of them.  Such a mission, whether of influential chiefs, or of

young people, would give some security to your own party.  Carry with

you some matter of the kine-pox, inform those of them with whom you

may be of it's efficacy as a preservative from the small-pox; and

instruct & encourage them in the use of it.  This may be especially

done wherever you may winter.




        As it is impossible for us to foresee in what manner you will

be received by those people, whether with hospitality or hostility,

so is it impossible to prescribe the exact degree of perseverance

with which you are to pursue your journey.  We value too much the

lives of citizens to offer them to probably destruction.  Your

numbers will be sufficient to secure you against the unauthorized

opposition of individuals, or of small parties: but if a superior

force, authorized or not authorized, by a nation, should be arrayed

against your further passage, & inflexibly determined to arrest it,

you must decline it's further pursuit, & return.  In the loss of

yourselves, we should lose also the information you will have

acquired.  By returning safely with that, you may enable us to renew

the essay with better calculated means.  To your own discretion

therefore must be left the degree of danger you may risk, & the point

at which you should decline, only saying we wish you to err on the

side of your safety, & to bring back your party safe, even if it be

with less information.




        As far up the Missouri as the white settlements extend, an

intercourse will probably be found to exist between them and the

Spanish posts at St. Louis, opposite Cahokia, or Ste. Genevieve

opposite Kaskaskia.  From still farther up the river, the traders may

furnish a conveyance for letters.  Beyond that you may perhaps be

able to engage Indians to bring letters for the government to Cahokia

or Kaskaskia on promising that they shall there receive such special

compensation as you shall have stipulated with them.  Avail yourself

of these means to communicate to us at seasonable intervals a copy of

your journal, notes & observations of every kind, putting into cipher

whatever might do injury if betrayed.




 

        Should you reach the Pacific Ocean inform yourself of the

circumstances which may decide whether the furs of those parts may

not be collected as advantageously at the head of the Missouri

(convenient as is supposed to the waters of the Colorado & Oregon or

Columbia) as at Nootka Sound or any other point of that coast; & that

trade be consequently conducted through the Missouri & U.S. more

beneficially than by the circumnavigation now practised.




        On your arrival on that coast endeavor to learn if there be any

port within your reach frequented by the sea-vessels of any nation,

and to send two of your trusted people back by sea, in such way as

shall appear practicable, with a copy of your notes.  And should you

be of opinion that the return of your party by the way they went will

be eminently dangerous, then ship the whole, & return by sea by way

of Cape Horn or the Cape of Good Hope, as you shall be able.  As you

will be without money, clothes or provisions, you must endeavor to

use the credit of the U.S. to obtain them; for which purpose open

letters of credit shall be furnished you authorizing you to draw on

the Executive of the U.S. or any of its officers in any part of the

world, in which drafts can be disposed of, and to apply with our

recommendations to the consuls, agents, merchants or citizens of any

nation with which we have intercourse, assuring them in our name that

any aids they may furnish you, shall be honorably repaid and on

demand.  Our consuls Thomas Howes at Batavia in Java, William

Buchanan of the Isles of France and Bourbon & John Elmslie at the

Cape of Good Hope will be able to supply your necessities by drafts

on us.




        Should you find it safe to return by the way you go, after

sending two of your party round by sea, or with your whole party, if

no conveyance by sea can be found, do so; making such observations on

your return as may serve to supply, correct or confirm those made on

your outward journey.




        In re-entering the U.S. and reaching a place of safety,

discharge any of your attendants who may desire & deserve it:

procuring for them immediate paiment of all arrears of pay &

cloathing which may have incurred since their departure & assure them

that they shall be recommended to the liberality of the Legislature

for the grant of a souldier's portion of land each, as proposed in my

message to Congress: & repair yourself with your papers to the seat

of government.




        To provide, on the accident of your death, against anarchy,

dispersion & the consequent danger to your party, and total failure

of the enterprise, you are hereby authorized by any instrument signed

& written in your own hand to name the person among them who shall

succeed to the command on your decease, & by like instruments to

change the nomination from time to time, as further experience of the

characters accompanying you shall point out superior fitness: and all

the powers & authorities given to yourself are, in the event of your

death transferred to & vested in the successor so named, with further

power to him, & his successors in like manner to name each his

successor, who, on the death of his predecessor shall be invested

with all the powers & authorities given to yourself.




        Given under my hand at the city of Washington, this 20th day of

June, 1803.

