








BOOK 3.V.



TERROR THE ORDER OF THE DAY





Chapter 3.5.I.



Rushing down.



We are now, therefore, got to that black precipitous Abyss; whither all

things have long been tending; where, having now arrived on the giddy

verge, they hurl down, in confused ruin; headlong, pellmell, down, down;--

till Sansculottism have consummated itself; and in this wondrous French

Revolution, as in a Doomsday, a World have been rapidly, if not born again,

yet destroyed and engulphed.  Terror has long been terrible:  but to the

actors themselves it has now become manifest that their appointed course is

one of Terror; and they say, Be it so.  "Que la Terreur soit a l'ordre du

jour."



So many centuries, say only from Hugh Capet downwards, had been adding

together, century transmitting it with increase to century, the sum of

Wickedness, of Falsehood, Oppression of man by man.  Kings were sinners,

and Priests were, and People.  Open-Scoundrels rode triumphant, bediademed,

becoronetted, bemitred; or the still fataller species of Secret-Scoundrels,

in their fair-sounding formulas, speciosities, respectabilities, hollow

within:  the race of Quacks was grown many as the sands of the sea.  Till

at length such a sum of Quackery had accumulated itself as, in brief, the

Earth and the Heavens were weary of.  Slow seemed the Day of Settlement: 

coming on, all imperceptible, across the bluster and fanfaronade of

Courtierisms, Conquering-Heroisms, Most-Christian Grand Monarque-isms. 

Well-beloved Pompadourisms:  yet behold it was always coming; behold it has

come, suddenly, unlooked for by any man!  The harvest of long centuries was

ripening and whitening so rapidly of late; and now it is grown white, and

is reaped rapidly, as it were, in one day.  Reaped, in this Reign of

Terror; and carried home, to Hades and the Pit!--Unhappy Sons of Adam:  it

is ever so; and never do they know it, nor will they know it.  With

cheerfully smoothed countenances, day after day, and generation after

generation, they, calling cheerfully to one another, "Well-speed-ye," are

at work, sowing the wind.  And yet, as God lives, they shall reap the

whirlwind:  no other thing, we say, is possible,--since God is a Truth and

His World is a Truth.



History, however, in dealing with this Reign of Terror, has had her own

difficulties.  While the Phenomenon continued in its primary state, as mere

'Horrors of the French Revolution,' there was abundance to be said and

shrieked.  With and also without profit.  Heaven knows there were terrors

and horrors enough:  yet that was not all the Phenomenon; nay, more

properly, that was not the Phenomenon at all, but rather was the shadow of

it, the negative part of it.  And now, in a new stage of the business, when

History, ceasing to shriek, would try rather to include under her old Forms

of speech or speculation this new amazing Thing; that so some accredited

scientific Law of Nature might suffice for the unexpected Product of

Nature, and History might get to speak of it articulately, and draw

inferences and profit from it; in this new stage, History, we must say,

babbles and flounders perhaps in a still painfuller manner.  Take, for

example, the latest Form of speech we have seen propounded on the subject

as adequate to it, almost in these months, by our worthy M. Roux, in his

Histoire Parlementaire.  The latest and the strangest:  that the French

Revolution was a dead-lift effort, after eighteen hundred years of

preparation, to realise--the Christian Religion!  (Hist. Parl. (Introd.),

i. 1 et seqq.)  Unity, Indivisibility, Brotherhood or Death did indeed

stand printed on all Houses of the Living; also, on Cemeteries, or Houses

of the Dead, stood printed, by order of Procureur Chaumette, Here is

eternal Sleep: (Deux Amis, xii. 78.)  but a Christian Religion realised by

the Guillotine and Death-Eternal, 'is suspect to me,' as Robespierre was

wont to say, 'm'est suspecte.'



Alas, no, M. Roux!  A Gospel of Brotherhood, not according to any of the

Four old Evangelists, and calling on men to repent, and amend each his own

wicked existence, that they might be saved; but a Gospel rather, as we

often hint, according to a new Fifth Evangelist Jean-Jacques, calling on

men to amend each the whole world's wicked existence, and be saved by

making the Constitution.  A thing different and distant toto coelo, as they

say:  the whole breadth of the sky, and further if possible!--It is thus,

however, that History, and indeed all human Speech and Reason does yet,

what Father Adam began life by doing:  strive to name the new Things it

sees of Nature's producing,--often helplessly enough.



But what if History were to admit, for once, that all the Names and

Theorems yet known to her fall short?  That this grand Product of Nature

was even grand, and new, in that it came not to range itself under old

recorded Laws-of-Nature at all; but to disclose new ones?  In that case,

History renouncing the pretention to name it at present, will look honestly

at it, and name what she can of it!  Any approximation to the right Name

has value:  were the right name itself once here, the Thing is known

thenceforth; the Thing is then ours, and can be dealt with.



Now surely not realization, of Christianity, or of aught earthly, do we

discern in this Reign of Terror, in this French Revolution of which it is

the consummating.  Destruction rather we discern--of all that was

destructible.  It is as if Twenty-five millions, risen at length into the

Pythian mood, had stood up simultaneously to say, with a sound which goes

through far lands and times, that this Untruth of an Existence had become

insupportable.  O ye Hypocrisies and Speciosities, Royal mantles, Cardinal

plushcloaks, ye Credos, Formulas, Respectabilities, fair-painted Sepulchres

full of dead men's bones,--behold, ye appear to us to be altogether a Lie. 

Yet our Life is not a Lie; yet our Hunger and Misery is not a Lie!  Behold

we lift up, one and all, our Twenty-five million right-hands; and take the

Heavens, and the Earth and also the Pit of Tophet to witness, that either

ye shall be abolished, or else we shall be abolished!



No inconsiderable Oath, truly; forming, as has been often said, the most

remarkable transaction in these last thousand years.  Wherefrom likewise

there follow, and will follow, results.  The fulfilment of this Oath; that

is to say, the black desperate battle of Men against their whole Condition

and Environment,--a battle, alas, withal, against the Sin and Darkness that

was in themselves as in others:  this is the Reign of Terror. 

Transcendental despair was the purport of it, though not consciously so. 

False hopes, of Fraternity, Political Millennium, and what not, we have

always seen:  but the unseen heart of the whole, the transcendental

despair, was not false; neither has it been of no effect.  Despair, pushed

far enough, completes the circle, so to speak; and becomes a kind of

genuine productive hope again.



Doctrine of Fraternity, out of old Catholicism, does, it is true, very

strangely in the vehicle of a Jean-Jacques Evangel, suddenly plump down out

of its cloud-firmament; and from a theorem determine to make itself a

practice.  But just so do all creeds, intentions, customs, knowledges,

thoughts and things, which the French have, suddenly plump down;

Catholicism, Classicism, Sentimentalism, Cannibalism:  all isms that make

up Man in France, are rushing and roaring in that gulf; and the theorem has

become a practice, and whatsoever cannot swim sinks.  Not Evangelist Jean-

Jacques alone; there is not a Village Schoolmaster but has contributed his

quota:  do we not 'thou' one another, according to the Free Peoples of

Antiquity?  The French Patriot, in red phrygian nightcap of Liberty,

christens his poor little red infant Cato,--Censor, or else of Utica. 

Gracchus has become Baboeuf and edits Newspapers; Mutius Scaevola,

Cordwainer of that ilk, presides in the Section Mutius-Scaevola:  and in

brief, there is a world wholly jumbling itself, to try what will swim!



Wherefore we will, at all events, call this Reign of Terror a very strange

one.  Dominant Sansculottism makes, as it were, free arena; one of the

strangest temporary states Humanity was ever seen in.  A nation of men,

full of wants and void of habits!  The old habits are gone to wreck because

they were old:  men, driven forward by Necessity and fierce Pythian

Madness, have, on the spur of the instant, to devise for the want the way

of satisfying it.  The wonted tumbles down; by imitation, by invention, the

Unwonted hastily builds itself up.  What the French National head has in it

comes out:  if not a great result, surely one of the strangest.



Neither shall the reader fancy that it was all blank, this Reign of Terror: 

far from it.  How many hammermen and squaremen, bakers and brewers, washers

and wringers, over this France, must ply their old daily work, let the

Government be one of Terror or one of Joy!  In this Paris there are Twenty-

three Theatres nightly; some count as many as Sixty Places of Dancing. 

(Mercier. ii. 124.)  The Playwright manufactures:  pieces of a strictly

Republican character.  Ever fresh Novelgarbage, as of old, fodders the

Circulating Libraries.  (Moniteur of these months, passim.)  The 'Cesspool

of Agio,' now in the time of Paper Money, works with a vivacity unexampled,

unimagined; exhales from itself 'sudden fortunes,' like Alladin-Palaces:

really a kind of miraculous Fata-Morganas, since you can live in them, for

a time.  Terror is as a sable ground, on which the most variegated of

scenes paints itself.  In startling transitions, in colours all intensated,

the sublime, the ludicrous, the horrible succeed one another; or rather, in

crowding tumult, accompany one another.



Here, accordingly, if anywhere, the 'hundred tongues,' which the old Poets

often clamour for, were of supreme service!  In defect of any such organ on

our part, let the Reader stir up his own imaginative organ:  let us snatch

for him this or the other significant glimpse of things, in the fittest

sequence we can.







Chapter 3.5.II.



Death.



In the early days of November, there is one transient glimpse of things

that is to be noted:  the last transit to his long home of Philippe

d'Orleans Egalite.  Philippe was 'decreed accused,' along with the

Girondins, much to his and their surprise; but not tried along with them. 

They are doomed and dead, some three days, when Philippe, after his long

half-year of durance at Marseilles, arrives in Paris.  It is, as we

calculate, the third of November 1793.



On which same day, two notable Female Prisoners are also put in ward there: 

Dame Dubarry and Josephine Beauharnais!  Dame whilom Countess Dubarry,

Unfortunate-female, had returned from London; they snatched her, not only

as Ex-harlot of a whilom Majesty, and therefore suspect; but as having

'furnished the Emigrants with money.'  Contemporaneously with whom, there

comes the wife of Beauharnais, soon to be the widow:  she that is Josephine

Tascher Beauharnais; that shall be Josephine Empress Buonaparte, for a

black Divineress of the Tropics prophesied long since that she should be a

Queen and more.  Likewise, in the same hours, poor Adam Lux, nigh turned in

the head, who, according to Foster, 'has taken no food these three weeks,'

marches to the Guillotine for his Pamphlet on Charlotte Corday:  he 'sprang

to the scaffold;' said he 'died for her with great joy.'  Amid such fellow-

travellers does Philippe arrive.  For, be the month named Brumaire year 2

of Liberty, or November year 1793 of Slavery, the Guillotine goes always,

Guillotine va toujours.



Enough, Philippe's indictment is soon drawn, his jury soon convinced.  He

finds himself made guilty of Royalism, Conspiracy and much else; nay, it is

a guilt in him that he voted Louis's Death, though he answers, "I voted in

my soul and conscience."  The doom he finds is death forthwith; this

present sixth dim day of November is the last day that Philippe is to see.

Philippe, says Montgaillard, thereupon called for breakfast:  sufficiency

of 'oysters, two cutlets, best part of an excellent bottle of claret;' and

consumed the same with apparent relish.  A Revolutionary Judge, or some

official Convention Emissary, then arrived, to signify that he might still

do the State some service by revealing the truth about a plot or two. 

Philippe answered that, on him, in the pass things had come to, the State

had, he thought, small claim; that nevertheless, in the interest of

Liberty, he, having still some leisure on his hands, was willing, were a

reasonable question asked him, to give reasonable answer.  And so, says

Montgaillard, he lent his elbow on the mantel-piece, and conversed in an

under-tone, with great seeming composure; till the leisure was done, or the

Emissary went his ways.



At the door of the Conciergerie, Philippe's attitude was erect and easy,

almost commanding.  It is five years, all but a few days, since Philippe,

within these same stone walls, stood up with an air of graciosity, and

asked King Louis, "Whether it was a Royal Session, then, or a Bed of

Justice?"  O Heaven!--Three poor blackguards were to ride and die with him: 

some say, they objected to such company, and had to be flung in, neck and

heels; (Foster, ii. 628; Montgaillard, iv. 141-57.) but it seems not true.  

Objecting or not objecting, the gallows-vehicle gets under way.  Philippe's

dress is remarked for its elegance; greenfrock, waistcoat of white pique,

yellow buckskins, boots clear as Warren:  his air, as before, entirely

composed, impassive, not to say easy and Brummellean-polite.  Through

street after street; slowly, amid execrations;--past the Palais Egalite

whilom Palais-Royal!  The cruel Populace stopped him there, some minutes: 

Dame de Buffon, it is said, looked out on him, in Jezebel head-tire; along

the ashlar Wall, there ran these words in huge tricolor print, REPUBLIC ONE

AND INDIVISIBLE; LIBERTY, EQUALITY, FRATERNITY OR DEATH:  National

Property.  Philippe's eyes flashed hellfire, one instant; but the next

instant it was gone, and he sat impassive, Brummellean-polite.  On the

scaffold, Samson was for drawing of his boots:  "tush," said Philippe,

"they will come better off after; let us have done, depechons-nous!"



So Philippe was not without virtue, then?  God forbid that there should be

any living man without it!  He had the virtue to keep living for five-and-

forty years;--other virtues perhaps more than we know of.  Probably no

mortal ever had such things recorded of him:  such facts, and also such

lies.  For he was a Jacobin Prince of the Blood; consider what a

combination!  Also, unlike any Nero, any Borgia, he lived in the Age of

Pamphlets.  Enough for us:  Chaos has reabsorbed him; may it late or never

bear his like again!--Brave young Orleans Egalite, deprived of all, only

not deprived of himself, is gone to Coire in the Grisons, under the name of

Corby, to teach Mathematics.  The Egalite Family is at the darkest depths

of the Nadir.



A far nobler Victim follows; one who will claim remembrance from several

centuries:  Jeanne-Marie Phlipon, the Wife of Roland.  Queenly, sublime in

her uncomplaining sorrow, seemed she to Riouffe in her Prison.  'Something

more than is usually found in the looks of women painted itself,' says

Riouffe, (Memoires (Sur les Prisons, i.), pp. 55-7.) 'in those large black

eyes of hers, full of expression and sweetness.  She spoke to me often, at

the Grate:  we were all attentive round her, in a sort of admiration and

astonishment; she expressed herself with a purity, with a harmony and

prosody that made her language like music, of which the ear could never

have enough.  Her conversation was serious, not cold; coming from the mouth

of a beautiful woman, it was frank and courageous as that of a great men.'  

'And yet her maid said:  "Before you, she collects her strength; but in her

own room, she will sit three hours sometimes, leaning on the window, and

weeping."'  She had been in Prison, liberated once, but recaptured the same

hour, ever since the first of June:  in agitation and uncertainty; which

has gradually settled down into the last stern certainty, that of death. 

In the Abbaye Prison, she occupied Charlotte Corday's apartment.  Here in

the Conciergerie, she speaks with Riouffe, with Ex-Minister Claviere; calls

the beheaded Twenty-two "Nos amis, our Friends,"--whom we are soon to

follow.  During these five months, those Memoirs of hers were written,

which all the world still reads.



But now, on the 8th of November, 'clad in white,' says Riouffe, 'with her

long black hair hanging down to her girdle,' she is gone to the Judgment

Bar.  She returned with a quick step; lifted her finger, to signify to us

that she was doomed:  her eyes seemed to have been wet.  Fouquier-

Tinville's questions had been 'brutal;' offended female honour flung them

back on him, with scorn, not without tears.  And now, short preparation

soon done, she shall go her last road.  There went with her a certain

Lamarche, 'Director of Assignat printing;' whose dejection she endeavoured

to cheer.  Arrived at the foot of the scaffold, she asked for pen and

paper, "to write the strange thoughts that were rising in her;" (Memoires

de Madame Roland (Introd.), i. 68.) a remarkable request; which was

refused.  Looking at the Statue of Liberty which stands there, she says

bitterly:  "O Liberty, what things are done in thy name!"  For Lamarche's

seek, she will die first; shew him how easy it is to die:  "Contrary to the

order" said Samson.--"Pshaw, you cannot refuse the last request of a Lady;"

and Samson yielded.



Noble white Vision, with its high queenly face, its soft proud eyes, long

black hair flowing down to the girdle; and as brave a heart as ever beat in

woman's bosom!  Like a white Grecian Statue, serenely complete, she shines

in that black wreck of things;--long memorable.  Honour to great Nature

who, in Paris City, in the Era of Noble-Sentiment and Pompadourism, can

make a Jeanne Phlipon, and nourish her to clear perennial Womanhood, though

but on Logics, Encyclopedies, and the Gospel according to Jean-Jacques! 

Biography will long remember that trait of asking for a pen "to write the

strange thoughts that were rising in her."  It is as a little light-beam,

shedding softness, and a kind of sacredness, over all that preceded:  so in

her too there was an Unnameable; she too was a Daughter of the Infinite;

there were mysteries which Philosophism had not dreamt of!--She left long

written counsels to her little Girl; she said her Husband would not survive

her.



Still crueller was the fate of poor Bailly, First National President, First

Mayor of Paris:  doomed now for Royalism, Fayettism; for that Red-Flag

Business of the Champ-de-Mars;--one may say in general, for leaving his

Astronomy to meddle with Revolution.  It is the 10th of November 1793, a

cold bitter drizzling rain, as poor Bailly is led through the streets;

howling Populace covering him with curses, with mud; waving over his face a

burning or smoking mockery of a Red Flag.  Silent, unpitied, sits the

innocent old man.  Slow faring through the sleety drizzle, they have got to

the Champ-de-Mars:  Not there! vociferates the cursing Populace; Such blood

ought not to stain an Altar of the Fatherland; not there; but on that

dungheap by the River-side!  So vociferates the cursing Populace;

Officiality gives ear to them.  The Guillotine is taken down, though with

hands numbed by the sleety drizzle; is carried to the River-side, is there

set up again, with slow numbness; pulse after pulse still counting itself

out in the old man's weary heart.  For hours long; amid curses and bitter

frost-rain!  "Bailly, thou tremblest," said one.  "Mon ami, it is for

cold," said Bailly, "c'est de froid."  Crueller end had no mortal.  (Vie de

Bailly (in Memoires, i.), p. 29.)



Some days afterwards, Roland hearing the news of what happened on the 8th,

embraces his kind Friends at Rouen, leaves their kind house which had given

him refuge; goes forth, with farewell too sad for tears.  On the morrow

morning, 16th of the month, 'some four leagues from Rouen, Paris-ward, near

Bourg-Baudoin, in M. Normand's Avenue,' there is seen sitting leant against

a tree, the figure of rigorous wrinkled man; stiff now in the rigour of

death; a cane-sword run through his heart; and at his feet this writing: 

'Whoever thou art that findest me lying, respect my remains:  they are

those of a man who consecrated all his life to being useful; and who has

died as he lived, virtuous and honest.'  'Not fear, but indignation, made

me quit my retreat, on learning that my Wife had been murdered.  I wished

not to remain longer on an Earth polluted with crimes.'  (Memoires de

Madame Roland (Introd.), i. 88.)



Barnave's appearance at the Revolutionary Tribunal was of the bravest; but

it could not stead him.  They have sent for him from Grenoble; to pay the

common smart, Vain is eloquence, forensic or other, against the dumb

Clotho-shears of Tinville.  He is still but two-and-thirty, this Barnave,

and has known such changes.  Short while ago, we saw him at the top of

Fortune's Wheel, his word a law to all Patriots:  and now surely he is at

the bottom of the Wheel; in stormful altercation with a Tinville Tribunal,

which is dooming him to die!  (Foster, ii. 629.)  And Petion, once also of

the Extreme Left, and named Petion Virtue, where is he?  Civilly dead; in

the Caves of Saint-Emilion; to be devoured of dogs.  And Robespierre, who

rode along with him on the shoulders of the people, is in Committee of

Salut; civilly alive:  not to live always.  So giddy-swift whirls and spins

this immeasurable tormentum of a Revolution; wild-booming; not to be

followed by the eye.  Barnave, on the Scaffold, stamped his foot; and

looking upwards was heard to ejaculate, "This then is my reward?"



Deputy Ex-Procureur Manuel is already gone; and Deputy Osselin, famed also

in August and September, is about to go:  and Rabaut, discovered

treacherously between his two walls, and the Brother of Rabaut.  National

Deputies not a few!  And Generals:  the memory of General Custine cannot be

defended by his Son; his Son is already guillotined.  Custine the Ex-Noble

was replaced by Houchard the Plebeian:  he too could not prosper in the

North; for him too there was no mercy; he has perished in the Place de la

Revolution, after attempting suicide in Prison.  And Generals Biron,

Beauharnais, Brunet, whatsoever General prospers not; tough old Luckner,

with his eyes grown rheumy; Alsatian Westermann, valiant and diligent in La

Vendee:  none of them can, as the Psalmist sings, his soul from death

deliver.



How busy are the Revolutionary Committees; Sections with their Forty

Halfpence a-day!  Arrestment on arrestment falls quick, continual; followed

by death.  Ex-Minister Claviere has killed himself in Prison.  Ex-Minister

Lebrun, seized in a hayloft, under the disguise of a working man, is

instantly conducted to death.  (Moniteur, 11 Decembre, 30 Decembre, 1793;

Louvet, p. 287.)  Nay, withal, is it not what Barrere calls 'coining money

on the Place de la Revolution?'  For always the 'property of the guilty, if

property he have,' is confiscated.  To avoid accidents, we even make a Law

that suicide shall not defraud us; that a criminal who kills himself does

not the less incur forfeiture of goods.  Let the guilty tremble, therefore,

and the suspect, and the rich, and in a word all manner of culottic men! 

Luxembourg Palace, once Monsieur's, has become a huge loathsome Prison;

Chantilly Palace too, once Conde's:--and their Landlords are at

Blankenberg, on the wrong side of the Rhine.  In Paris are now some Twelve

Prisons; in France some Forty-four Thousand:  thitherward, thick as brown

leaves in Autumn, rustle and travel the suspect; shaken down by

Revolutionary Committees, they are swept thitherward, as into their

storehouse,--to be consumed by Samson and Tinville.  'The Guillotine goes

not ill, ne va pas mal.'







Chapter 3.5.III.



Destruction.



The suspect may well tremble; but how much more the open rebels;--the

Girondin Cities of the South!  Revolutionary Army is gone forth, under

Ronsin the Playwright; six thousand strong; in 'red nightcap, in tricolor

waistcoat, in black-shag trousers, black-shag spencer, with enormous

moustachioes, enormous sabre,--in carmagnole complete;' (See Louvet, p.

301.) and has portable guillotines.  Representative Carrier has got to

Nantes, by the edge of blazing La Vendee, which Rossignol has literally set

on fire:  Carrier will try what captives you make, what accomplices they

have, Royalist or Girondin:  his guillotine goes always, va toujours; and

his wool-capped 'Company of Marat.'  Little children are guillotined, and

aged men.  Swift as the machine is, it will not serve; the Headsman and all

his valets sink, worn down with work; declare that the human muscles can no

more.  (Deux Amis, xii. 249-51.)  Whereupon you must try fusillading; to

which perhaps still frightfuller methods may succeed.



In Brest, to like purpose, rules Jean-Bon Saint-Andre; with an Army of Red

Nightcaps.  In Bourdeaux rules Tallien, with his Isabeau and henchmen: 

Guadets, Cussys, Salleses, may fall; the bloody Pike and Nightcap bearing

supreme sway; the Guillotine coining money.  Bristly fox-haired Tallien,

once Able Editor, still young in years, is now become most gloomy, potent;

a Pluto on Earth, and has the keys of Tartarus.  One remarks, however, that

a certain Senhorina Cabarus, or call her rather Senhora and wedded not yet

widowed Dame de Fontenai, brown beautiful woman, daughter of Cabarus the

Spanish merchant,--has softened the red bristly countenance; pleading for

herself and friends; and prevailing.  The keys of Tartarus, or any kind of

power, are something to a woman; gloomy Pluto himself is not insensible to

love.  Like a new Proserpine, she, by this red gloomy Dis, is gathered;

and, they say, softens his stone heart a little.



Maignet, at Orange in the South; Lebon, at Arras in the North, become

world's wonders.  Jacobin Popular Tribunal, with its National

Representative, perhaps where Girondin Popular Tribunal had lately been,

rises here and rises there; wheresoever needed.  Fouches, Maignets,

Barrases, Frerons scour the Southern Departments; like reapers, with their

guillotine-sickle.  Many are the labourers, great is the harvest.  By the

hundred and the thousand, men's lives are cropt; cast like brands into the

burning.



Marseilles is taken, and put under martial law:  lo, at Marseilles, what

one besmutted red-bearded corn-ear is this which they cut;--one gross Man,

we mean, with copper-studded face; plenteous beard, or beard-stubble, of a

tile-colour?  By Nemesis and the Fatal Sisters, it is Jourdan Coupe-tete! 

Him they have clutched, in these martial-law districts; him too, with their

'national razor,' their rasoir national, they sternly shave away.  Low now

is Jourdan the Headsman's own head;--low as Deshuttes's and Varigny's,

which he sent on pikes, in the Insurrection of Women!  No more shall he, as

a copper Portent, be seen gyrating through the Cities of the South; no more

sit judging, with pipes and brandy, in the Ice-tower of Avignon.  The all-

hiding Earth has received him, the bloated Tilebeard:  may we never look

upon his like again!--Jourdan one names; the other Hundreds are not named.

Alas, they, like confused faggots, lie massed together for us; counted by

the cartload:  and yet not an individual faggot-twig of them but had a Life

and History; and was cut, not without pangs as when a Kaiser dies!



Least of all cities can Lyons escape.  Lyons, which we saw in dread

sunblaze, that Autumn night when the Powder-tower sprang aloft, was clearly

verging towards a sad end.  Inevitable:  what could desperate valour and

Precy do; Dubois-Crance, deaf as Destiny, stern as Doom, capturing their

'redouts of cotton-bags;' hemming them in, ever closer, with his Artillery-

lava?  Never would that Ci-devant d'Autichamp arrive; never any help from

Blankenberg.  The Lyons Jacobins were hidden in cellars; the Girondin

Municipality waxed pale, in famine, treason and red fire.  Precy drew his

sword, and some Fifteen Hundred with him; sprang to saddle, to cut their

way to Switzerland.  They cut fiercely; and were fiercely cut, and cut

down; not hundreds, hardly units of them ever saw Switzerland.  (Deux Amis,

xi. 145.)  Lyons, on the 9th of October, surrenders at discretion; it is

become a devoted Town.  Abbe Lamourette, now Bishop Lamourette, whilom

Legislator, he of the old Baiser-l'Amourette or Delilah-Kiss, is seized

here, is sent to Paris to be guillotined:  'he made the sign of the cross,'

they say when Tinville intimated his death-sentence to him; and died as an

eloquent Constitutional Bishop.  But wo now to all Bishops, Priests,

Aristocrats and Federalists that are in Lyons!  The manes of Chalier are to

be appeased; the Republic, maddened to the Sibylline pitch, has bared her

right arm.  Behold!  Representative Fouche, it is Fouche of Nantes, a name

to become well known; he with a Patriot company goes duly, in wondrous

Procession, to raise the corpse of Chalier.  An Ass, housed in Priest's

cloak, with a mitre on its head, and trailing the Mass-Books, some say the

very Bible, at its tail, paces through Lyons streets; escorted by

multitudinous Patriotism, by clangour as of the Pit; towards the grave of

Martyr Chalier.  The body is dug up and burnt:  the ashes are collected in

an Urn; to be worshipped of Paris Patriotism.  The Holy Books were part of

the funeral pile; their ashes are scattered to the wind.  Amid cries of

"Vengeance!  Vengeance!"--which, writes Fouche, shall be satisfied. 

(Moniteur (du 17 Novembre 1793), &c.)



Lyons in fact is a Town to be abolished; not Lyons henceforth but 'Commune

Affranchie, Township Freed;' the very name of it shall perish.  It is to be

razed, this once great City, if Jacobinism prophesy right; and a Pillar to

be erected on the ruins, with this Inscription, Lyons rebelled against the

Republic; Lyons is no more.  Fouche, Couthon, Collot, Convention

Representatives succeed one another:  there is work for the hangman; work

for the hammerman, not in building.  The very Houses of Aristocrats, we

say, are doomed.  Paralytic Couthon, borne in a chair, taps on the wall,

with emblematic mallet, saying, "La Loi te frappe, The Law strikes thee;"

masons, with wedge and crowbar, begin demolition.  Crash of downfall, dim

ruin and dust-clouds fly in the winter wind.  Had Lyons been of soft stuff,

it had all vanished in those weeks, and the Jacobin prophecy had been

fulfilled.  But Towns are not built of soap-froth; Lyons Town is built of

stone.  Lyons, though it rebelled against the Republic, is to this day.



Neither have the Lyons Girondins all one neck, that you could despatch it

at one swoop.  Revolutionary Tribunal here, and Military Commission,

guillotining, fusillading, do what they can:  the kennels of the Place des

Terreaux run red; mangled corpses roll down the Rhone.  Collot d'Herbois,

they say, was once hissed on the Lyons stage:  but with what sibilation, of

world-catcall or hoarse Tartarean Trumpet, will ye hiss him now, in this

his new character of Convention Representative,--not to be repeated!  Two

hundred and nine men are marched forth over the River, to be shot in mass,

by musket and cannon, in the Promenade of the Brotteaux.  It is the second

of such scenes; the first was of some Seventy.  The corpses of the first

were flung into the Rhone, but the Rhone stranded some; so these now, of

the second lot, are to be buried on land.  Their one long grave is dug;

they stand ranked, by the loose mould-ridge; the younger of them singing

the Marseillaise.  Jacobin National Guards give fire; but have again to

give fire, and again; and to take the bayonet and the spade, for though the

doomed all fall, they do not all die;--and it becomes a butchery too

horrible for speech.  So that the very Nationals, as they fire, turn away

their faces.  Collot, snatching the musket from one such National, and

levelling it with unmoved countenance, says "It is thus a Republican ought

to fire."



This is the second Fusillade, and happily the last:  it is found too

hideous; even inconvenient.  They were Two hundred and nine marched out;

one escaped at the end of the Bridge:  yet behold, when you count the

corpses, they are Two hundred and ten.  Rede us this riddle, O Collot? 

After long guessing, it is called to mind that two individuals, here in the

Brotteaux ground, did attempt to leave the rank, protesting with agony that

they were not condemned men, that they were Police Commissaries:  which two

we repulsed, and disbelieved, and shot with the rest!  (Deux Amis, xii.

251-62.)  Such is the vengeance of an enraged Republic.  Surely this,

according to Barrere's phrase, is Justice 'under rough forms, sous des

formes acerbes.'  But the Republic, as Fouche says, must "march to Liberty

over corpses."  Or again as Barrere has it:  "None but the dead do not come

back, Il n'y a que les morts qui ne reviennent pas."  Terror hovers far and

wide:  'The Guillotine goes not ill.'



But before quitting those Southern regions, over which History can cast

only glances from aloft, she will alight for a moment, and look fixedly at

one point:  the Siege of Toulon.  Much battering and bombarding, heating of

balls in furnaces or farm-houses, serving of artillery well and ill,

attacking of Ollioules Passes, Forts Malbosquet, there has been:  as yet to

small purpose.  We have had General Cartaux here, a whilom Painter elevated

in the troubles of Marseilles; General Doppet, a whilom Medical man

elevated in the troubles of Piemont, who, under Crance, took Lyons, but

cannot take Toulon.  Finally we have General Dugommier, a pupil of

Washington.  Convention Representans also we have had; Barrases,

Salicettis, Robespierres the Younger:--also an Artillery Chef de brigade,

of extreme diligence, who often takes his nap of sleep among the guns; a

short taciturn, olive-complexioned young man, not unknown to us, by name

Buonaparte:  one of the best Artillery-officers yet met with.  And still

Toulon is not taken.  It is the fourth month now; December, in slave-style;

Frostarious or Frimaire, in new-style:  and still their cursed Red-Blue

Flag flies there.  They are provisioned from the Sea; they have seized all

heights, felling wood, and fortifying themselves; like the coney, they have

built their nest in the rocks.



Meanwhile, Frostarious is not yet become Snowous or Nivose, when a Council

of War is called; Instructions have just arrived from Government and Salut

Public.  Carnot, in Salut Public, has sent us a plan of siege:  on which

plan General Dugommier has this criticism to make, Commissioner Salicetti

has that; and criticisms and plans are very various; when that young

Artillery Officer ventures to speak; the same whom we saw snatching sleep

among the guns, who has emerged several times in this History,--the name of

him Napoleon Buonaparte.  It is his humble opinion, for he has been gliding

about with spy-glasses, with thoughts, That a certain Fort l'Eguillette can

be clutched, as with lion-spring, on the sudden; wherefrom, were it once

ours, the very heart of Toulon might be battered, the English Lines were,

so to speak, turned inside out, and Hood and our Natural Enemies must next

day either put to sea, or be burnt to ashes.  Commissioners arch their

eyebrows, with negatory sniff:  who is this young gentleman with more wit

than we all?  Brave veteran Dugommier, however, thinks the idea worth a

word; questions the young gentleman; becomes convinced; and there is for

issue, Try it.



On the taciturn bronze-countenance, therefore, things being now all ready,

there sits a grimmer gravity than ever, compressing a hotter central-fire

than ever.  Yonder, thou seest, is Fort l'Eguillette; a desperate lion-

spring, yet a possible one; this day to be tried!--Tried it is; and found

good.  By stratagem and valour, stealing through ravines, plunging fiery

through the fire-tempest, Fort l'Eguillette is clutched at, is carried; the

smoke having cleared, wiser the Tricolor fly on it:  the bronze-

complexioned young man was right.  Next morning, Hood, finding the interior

of his lines exposed, his defences turned inside out, makes for his

shipping.  Taking such Royalists as wished it on board with him, he weighs

anchor:  on this 19th of December 1793, Toulon is once more the Republic's!



Cannonading has ceased at Toulon; and now the guillotining and fusillading

may begin.  Civil horrors, truly:  but at least that infamy of an English

domination is purged away.  Let there be Civic Feast universally over

France:  so reports Barrere, or Painter David; and the Convention assist in

a body.  (Moniteur, 1793, Nos. 101 (31 Decembre), 95, 96, 98, &c.)  Nay, it

is said, these infamous English (with an attention rather to their own

interests than to ours) set fire to our store-houses, arsenals, warships in

Toulon Harbour, before weighing; some score of brave warships, the only

ones we now had!  However, it did not prosper, though the flame spread far

and high; some two ships were burnt, not more; the very galley-slaves ran

with buckets to quench.  These same proud Ships, Ships l'Orient and the

rest, have to carry this same young Man to Egypt first:  not yet can they

be changed to ashes, or to Sea-Nymphs; not yet to sky-rockets, O Ship

l'Orient, nor became the prey of England,--before their time!



And so, over France universally, there is Civic Feast and high-tide:  and

Toulon sees fusillading, grape-shotting in mass, as Lyons saw; and 'death

is poured out in great floods, vomie a grands flots' and Twelve thousand

Masons are requisitioned from the neighbouring country, to raze Toulon from

the face of the Earth.  For it is to be razed, so reports Barrere; all but

the National Shipping Establishments; and to be called henceforth not

Toulon, but Port of the Mountain.  There in black death-cloud we must leave

it;--hoping only that Toulon too is built of stone; that perhaps even

Twelve thousand Masons cannot pull it down, till the fit pass.



One begins to be sick of 'death vomited in great floods.'  Nevertheless

hearest thou not, O reader (for the sound reaches through centuries), in

the dead December and January nights, over Nantes Town,--confused noises,

as of musketry and tumult, as of rage and lamentation; mingling with the

everlasting moan of the Loire waters there?  Nantes Town is sunk in sleep;

but Representant Carrier is not sleeping, the wool-capped Company of Marat

is not sleeping.  Why unmoors that flatbottomed craft, that gabarre; about

eleven at night; with Ninety Priests under hatches?  They are going to

Belle Isle?  In the middle of the Loire stream, on signal given, the

gabarre is scuttled; she sinks with all her cargo.  'Sentence of

Deportation,' writes Carrier, 'was executed vertically.'  The Ninety

Priests, with their gabarre-coffin, lie deep!  It is the first of the

Noyades, what we may call Drownages, of Carrier; which have become famous

forever.



Guillotining there was at Nantes, till the Headsman sank worn out:  then

fusillading 'in the Plain of Saint-Mauve;' little children fusilladed, and

women with children at the breast; children and women, by the hundred and

twenty; and by the five hundred, so hot is La Vendee:  till the very

Jacobins grew sick, and all but the Company of Marat cried, Hold! 

Wherefore now we have got Noyading; and on the 24th night of Frostarious

year 2, which is 14th of December 1793, we have a second Noyade: 

consisting of 'a Hundred and Thirty-eight persons.'  (Deux Amis, xii. 266-

72; Moniteur, du 2 Janvier 1794.)



Or why waste a gabarre, sinking it with them?  Fling them out; fling them

out, with their hands tied:  pour a continual hail of lead over all the

space, till the last struggler of them be sunk!  Unsound sleepers of

Nantes, and the Sea-Villages thereabouts, hear the musketry amid the night-

winds; wonder what the meaning of it is.  And women were in that gabarre;

whom the Red Nightcaps were stripping naked; who begged, in their agony,

that their smocks might not be stript from them.  And young children were

thrown in, their mothers vainly pleading:  "Wolflings," answered the

Company of Marat, "who would grow to be wolves."



By degrees, daylight itself witnesses Noyades:  women and men are tied

together, feet and feet, hands and hands:  and flung in:  this they call

Mariage Republicain, Republican Marriage.  Cruel is the panther of the

woods, the she-bear bereaved of her whelps:  but there is in man a hatred

crueller than that.  Dumb, out of suffering now, as pale swoln corpses, the

victims tumble confusedly seaward along the Loire stream; the tide rolling

them back:  clouds of ravens darken the River; wolves prowl on the shoal-

places:  Carrier writes, 'Quel torrent revolutionnaire, What a torrent of

Revolution!'  For the man is rabid; and the Time is rabid.  These are the

Noyades of Carrier; twenty-five by the tale, for what is done in darkness

comes to be investigated in sunlight:  (Proces de Carrier (4 tomes, Paris,

1795.)  not to be forgotten for centuries,--We will turn to another aspect

of the Consummation of Sansculottism; leaving this as the blackest.



But indeed men are all rabid; as the Time is.  Representative Lebon, at

Arras, dashes his sword into the blood flowing from the Guillotine;

exclaims, "How I like it!"  Mothers, they say, by his order, have to stand

by while the Guillotine devours their children:  a band of music is

stationed near; and, at the fall of every head, strikes up its ca-ira. 

(Les Horreures des Prisons d'Arras (Paris, 1823).)  In the Burgh of

Bedouin, in the Orange region, the Liberty-tree has been cut down over

night.  Representative Maignet, at Orange, hears of it; burns Bedouin Burgh

to the last dog-hutch; guillotines the inhabitants, or drives them into the

caves and hills.  (Montgaillard, iv. 200.)  Republic One and Indivisible! 

She is the newest Birth of Nature's waste inorganic Deep, which men name

Orcus, Chaos, primeval Night; and knows one law, that of self-preservation. 

Tigresse Nationale:  meddle not with a whisker of her!  Swift-crushing is

her stroke; look what a paw she spreads;--pity has not entered her heart.



Prudhomme, the dull-blustering Printer and Able Editor, as yet a Jacobin

Editor, will become a renegade one, and publish large volumes on these

matters, Crimes of the Revolution; adding innumerable lies withal, as if

the truth were not sufficient.  We, for our part, find it more edifying to

know, one good time, that this Republic and National Tigress is a New

Birth; a Fact of Nature among Formulas, in an Age of Formulas; and to look,

oftenest in silence, how the so genuine Nature-Fact will demean itself

among these.  For the Formulas are partly genuine, partly delusive,

supposititious:  we call them, in the language of metaphor, regulated

modelled shapes; some of which have bodies and life still in them; most of

which, according to a German Writer, have only emptiness, 'glass-eyes

glaring on you with a ghastly affectation of life, and in their interior

unclean accumulation of beetles and spiders!'  But the Fact, let all men

observe, is a genuine and sincere one; the sincerest of Facts:  terrible in

its sincerity, as very Death.  Whatsoever is equally sincere may front it,

and beard it; but whatsoever is not?--







Chapter 3.5.IV.



Carmagnole complete.



Simultaneously with this Tophet-black aspect, there unfolds itself another

aspect, which one may call a Tophet-red aspect:  the Destruction of the

Catholic Religion; and indeed, for the time being of Religion itself.  We

saw Romme's New Calendar establish its Tenth Day of Rest; and asked, what

would become of the Christian Sabbath?  The Calendar is hardly a month old,

till all this is set at rest.  Very singular, as Mercier observes:  last

Corpus-Christi Day 1792, the whole world, and Sovereign Authority itself,

walked in religious gala, with a quite devout air;--Butcher Legendre,

supposed to be irreverent, was like to be massacred in his Gig, as the

thing went by.  A Gallican Hierarchy, and Church, and Church Formulas

seemed to flourish, a little brown-leaved or so, but not browner than of

late years or decades; to flourish, far and wide, in the sympathies of an

unsophisticated People; defying Philosophism, Legislature and the

Encyclopedie.  Far and wide, alas, like a brown-leaved Vallombrosa; which

waits but one whirlblast of the November wind, and in an hour stands bare! 

Since that Corpus-Christi Day, Brunswick has come, and the Emigrants, and

La Vendee, and eighteen months of Time:  to all flourishing, especially to

brown-leaved flourishing, there comes, were it never so slowly, an end.



On the 7th of November, a certain Citoyen Parens, Curate of Boissise-le-

Bertrand, writes to the Convention that he has all his life been preaching

a lie, and is grown weary of doing it; wherefore he will now lay down his

Curacy and stipend, and begs that an august Convention would give him

something else to live upon.  'Mention honorable,' shall we give him?  Or

'reference to Committee of Finances?'  Hardly is this got decided, when

goose Gobel, Constitutional Bishop of Paris, with his Chapter, with

Municipal and Departmental escort in red nightcaps, makes his appearance,

to do as Parens has done.  Goose Gobel will now acknowledge 'no Religion

but Liberty;' therefore he doffs his Priest-gear, and receives the

Fraternal embrace.  To the joy of Departmental Momoro, of Municipal

Chaumettes and Heberts, of Vincent and the Revolutionary Army!  Chaumette

asks, Ought there not, in these circumstances, to be among our intercalary

Days Sans-breeches, a Feast of Reason?  (Moniteur, Seance du 17 Brumaire

(7th November), 1793.)  Proper surely!  Let Atheist Marechal, Lalande, and

little Atheist Naigeon rejoice; let Clootz, Speaker of Mankind, present to

the Convention his Evidences of the Mahometan Religion, 'a work evincing

the nullity of all Religions,'--with thanks.  There shall be Universal

Republic now, thinks Clootz; and 'one God only, Le Peuple.'



The French Nation is of gregarious imitative nature; it needed but a fugle-

motion in this matter; and goose Gobel, driven by Municipality and force of

circumstances, has given one.  What Cure will be behind him of Boissise;

what Bishop behind him of Paris?  Bishop Gregoire, indeed, courageously

declines; to the sound of "We force no one; let Gregoire consult his

conscience;" but Protestant and Romish by the hundred volunteer and assent.

From far and near, all through November into December, till the work is

accomplished, come Letters of renegation, come Curates who are 'learning to

be Carpenters,' Curates with their new-wedded Nuns:  has not the Day of

Reason dawned, very swiftly, and become noon?  From sequestered Townships

comes Addresses, stating plainly, though in Patois dialect, That 'they will

have no more to do with the black animal called Curay, animal noir, appelle

Curay.'  (Analyse du Moniteur (Paris, 1801), ii. 280.)



Above all things there come Patriotic Gifts, of Church-furniture.  The

remnant of bells, except for tocsin, descend from their belfries, into the

National meltingpot, to make cannon.  Censers and all sacred vessels are

beaten broad; of silver, they are fit for the poverty-stricken Mint; of

pewter, let them become bullets to shoot the 'enemies of du genre humain.' 

Dalmatics of plush make breeches for him who has none; linen stoles will

clip into shirts for the Defenders of the Country:  old-clothesmen, Jew or

Heathen, drive the briskest trade.  Chalier's Ass Procession, at Lyons, was

but a type of what went on, in those same days, in all Towns.  In all Towns

and Townships as quick as the guillotine may go, so quick goes the axe and

the wrench:  sacristies, lutrins, altar-rails are pulled down; the Mass

Books torn into cartridge papers: men dance the Carmagnole all night about

the bonfire.  All highways jingle with metallic Priest-tackle, beaten

broad; sent to the Convention, to the poverty-stricken Mint.  Good Sainte

Genevieve's Chasse is let down:  alas, to be burst open, this time, and

burnt on the Place de Greve.  Saint Louis's shirt is burnt;--might not a

Defender of the Country have had it?  At Saint-Denis Town, no longer Saint-

Denis but Franciade, Patriotism has been down among the Tombs, rummaging;

the Revolutionary Army has taken spoil.  This, accordingly, is what the

streets of Paris saw:



'Most of these persons were still drunk, with the brandy they had swallowed

out of chalices;--eating mackerel on the patenas!  Mounted on Asses, which

were housed with Priests' cloaks, they reined them with Priests' stoles: 

they held clutched with the same hand communion-cup and sacred wafer.  They

stopped at the doors of Dramshops; held out ciboriums:  and the landlord,

stoop in hand, had to fill them thrice.  Next came Mules high-laden with

crosses, chandeliers, censers, holy-water vessels, hyssops;--recalling to

mind the Priests of Cybele, whose panniers, filled with the instruments of

their worship, served at once as storehouse, sacristy and temple.  In such

equipage did these profaners advance towards the Convention.  They enter

there, in an immense train, ranged in two rows; all masked like mummers in

fantastic sacerdotal vestments; bearing on hand-barrows their heaped

plunder,--ciboriums, suns, candelabras, plates of gold and silver.' 

(Mercier, iv. 134.  See Moniteur, Seance du 10 Novembre.)



The Address we do not give; for indeed it was in strophes, sung viva voce,

with all the parts;--Danton glooming considerably, in his place; and

demanding that there be prose and decency in future.  (See also Moniteur,

Seance du 26 Novembre.)  Nevertheless the captors of such spolia opima

crave, not untouched with liquor, permission to dance the Carmagnole also

on the spot:  whereto an exhilarated Convention cannot but accede.  Nay,

'several Members,' continues the exaggerative Mercier, who was not there to

witness, being in Limbo now, as one of Duperret's Seventy-three, 'several

Members, quitting their curule chairs, took the hand of girls flaunting in

Priest's vestures, and danced the Carmagnole along with them.'  Such Old-

Hallow-tide have they, in this year, once named of Grace, 1793.



Out of which strange fall of Formulas, tumbling there in confused welter,

betrampled by the Patriotic dance, is it not passing strange to see a new

Formula arise?  For the human tongue is not adequate to speak what

'triviality run distracted' there is in human nature.  Black Mumbo-Jumbo of

the woods, and most Indian Wau-waus, one can understand:  but this of

Procureur Anaxagoras whilom John-Peter Chaumette?  We will say only:  Man

is a born idol-worshipper, sight-worshipper, so sensuous-imaginative is he;

and also partakes much of the nature of the ape.



For the same day, while this brave Carmagnole dance has hardly jigged

itself out, there arrive Procureur Chaumette and Municipals and

Departmentals, and with them the strangest freightage:  a New Religion! 

Demoiselle Candeille, of the Opera; a woman fair to look upon, when well

rouged:  she, borne on palanquin shoulder-high; with red woolen nightcap;

in azure mantle; garlanded with oak; holding in her hand the Pike of the

Jupiter-Peuple, sails in; heralded by white young women girt in tricolor. 

Let the world consider it!  This, O National Convention wonder of the

universe, is our New Divinity; Goddess of Reason, worthy, and alone worthy

of revering.  Nay, were it too much to ask of an august National

Representation that it also went with us to the ci-devant Cathedral called

of Notre-Dame, and executed a few strophes in worship of her?



President and Secretaries give Goddess Candeille, borne at due height round

their platform, successively the fraternal kiss; whereupon she, by decree,

sails to the right-hand of the President and there alights.  And now, after

due pause and flourishes of oratory, the Convention, gathering its limbs,

does get under way in the required procession towards Notre-Dame;--Reason,

again in her litter, sitting in the van of them, borne, as one judges, by

men in the Roman costume; escorted by wind-music, red nightcaps, and the

madness of the world.  And so straightway, Reason taking seat on the high-

altar of Notre-Dame, the requisite worship or quasi-worship is, say the

Newspapers, executed; National Convention chanting 'the Hymn to Liberty,

words by Chenier, music by Gossec.'  It is the first of the Feasts of

Reason; first communion-service of the New Religion of Chaumette.



'The corresponding Festival in the Church of Saint-Eustache,' says Mercier,

'offered the spectacle of a great tavern.  The interior of the choir

represented a landscape decorated with cottages and boskets of trees. 

Round the choir stood tables over-loaded with bottles, with sausages, pork-

puddings, pastries and other meats.  The guests flowed in and out through

all doors:  whosoever presented himself took part of the good things: 

children of eight, girls as well as boys, put hand to plate, in sign of

Liberty; they drank also of the bottles, and their prompt intoxication

created laughter.  Reason sat in azure mantle aloft, in a serene manner;

Cannoneers, pipe in mouth, serving her as acolytes.  And out of doors,'

continues the exaggerative man, 'were mad multitudes dancing round the

bonfire of Chapel-balustrades, of Priests' and Canons' stalls; and the

dancers, I exaggerate nothing, the dancers nigh bare of breeches, neck and

breast naked, stockings down, went whirling and spinning, like those Dust-

vortexes, forerunners of Tempest and Destruction.'  (Mercier, iv. 127-146.)

At Saint-Gervais Church again there was a terrible 'smell of herrings;'

Section or Municipality having provided no food, no condiment, but left it

to chance.  Other mysteries, seemingly of a Cabiric or even Paphian

character, we heave under the Veil, which appropriately stretches itself

'along the pillars of the aisles,'--not to be lifted aside by the hand of

History.



But there is one thing we should like almost better to understand than any

other:  what Reason herself thought of it, all the while.  What articulate

words poor Mrs. Momoro, for example, uttered; when she had become

ungoddessed again, and the Bibliopolist and she sat quiet at home, at

supper?  For he was an earnest man, Bookseller Momoro; and had notions of

Agrarian Law.  Mrs. Momoro, it is admitted, made one of the best Goddesses

of Reason; though her teeth were a little defective.  And now if the reader

will represent to himself that such visible Adoration of Reason went on

'all over the Republic,' through these November and December weeks, till

the Church woodwork was burnt out, and the business otherwise completed, he

will feel sufficiently what an adoring Republic it was, and without

reluctance quit this part of the subject.



Such gifts of Church-spoil are chiefly the work of the Armee

Revolutionnaire; raised, as we said, some time ago.  It is an Army with

portable guillotine:  commanded by Playwright Ronsin in terrible

moustachioes; and even by some uncertain shadow of Usher Maillard, the old

Bastille Hero, Leader of the Menads, September Man in Grey!  Clerk Vincent

of the War-Office, one of Pache's old Clerks, 'with a head heated by the

ancient orators,' had a main hand in the appointments, at least in the

staff-appointments.



But of the marchings and retreatings of these Six Thousand no Xenophon

exists.  Nothing, but an inarticulate hum, of cursing and sooty frenzy,

surviving dubious in the memory of ages!  They scour the country round

Paris; seeking Prisoners; raising Requisitions; seeing that Edicts are

executed, that the Farmers have thrashed sufficiently; lowering Church-

bells or metallic Virgins.  Detachments shoot forth dim, towards remote

parts of France; nay new Provincial Revolutionary Armies rise dim, here and

there, as Carrier's Company of Marat, as Tallien's Bourdeaux Troop; like

sympathetic clouds in an atmosphere all electric.  Ronsin, they say,

admitted, in candid moments, that his troops were the elixir of the

Rascality of the Earth.  One sees them drawn up in market-places; travel-

plashed, rough-bearded, in carmagnole complete:  the first exploit is to

prostrate what Royal or Ecclesiastical monument, crucifix or the like,

there may be; to plant a cannon at the steeple, fetch down the bell without

climbing for it, bell and belfry together.  This, however, it is said,

depends somewhat on the size of the town:  if the town contains much

population, and these perhaps of a dubious choleric aspect, the

Revolutionary Army will do its work gently, by ladder and wrench; nay

perhaps will take its billet without work at all; and, refreshing itself

with a little liquor and sleep, pass on to the next stage.  (Deux Amis,

xii. 62-5.)  Pipe in cheek, sabre on thigh; in carmagnole complete!



Such things have been; and may again be.  Charles Second sent out his

Highland Host over the Western Scotch Whigs; Jamaica Planters got Dogs from

the Spanish Main to hunt their Maroons with:  France too is bescoured with

a Devil's Pack, the baying of which, at this distance of half a century,

still sounds in the mind's ear.







Chapter 3.5.V.



Like a Thunder-Cloud.



But the grand, and indeed substantially primary and generic aspect of the

Consummation of Terror remains still to be looked at; nay blinkard History

has for most part all but overlooked this aspect, the soul of the whole: 

that which makes it terrible to the Enemies of France.  Let Despotism and

Cimmerian Coalitions consider.  All French men and French things are in a

State of Requisition; Fourteen Armies are got on foot; Patriotism, with all

that it has of faculty in heart or in head, in soul or body or breeches-

pocket, is rushing to the frontiers, to prevail or die!  Busy sits Carnot,

in Salut Public; busy for his share, in 'organising victory.'  Not swifter

pulses that Guillotine, in dread systole-diastole in the Place de la

Revolution, than smites the Sword of Patriotism, smiting Cimmeria back to

its own borders, from the sacred soil.



In fact the Government is what we can call Revolutionary; and some men are

'a la hauteur,' on a level with the circumstances; and others are not a la

hauteur,--so much the worse for them.  But the Anarchy, we may say, has

organised itself:  Society is literally overset; its old forces working

with mad activity, but in the inverse order; destructive and self-

destructive.



Curious to see how all still refers itself to some head and fountain; not

even an Anarchy but must have a centre to revolve round.  It is now some

six months since the Committee of Salut Public came into existence:  some

three months since Danton proposed that all power should be given it and 'a

sum of fifty millions,' and the 'Government be declared Revolutionary.'  He

himself, since that day, would take no hand in it, though again and again

solicited; but sits private in his place on the Mountain.  Since that day,

the Nine, or if they should even rise to Twelve have become permanent,

always re-elected when their term runs out; Salut Public, Surete Generale

have assumed their ulterior form and mode of operating.



Committee of Public Salvation, as supreme; of General Surety, as subaltern: 

these like a Lesser and Greater Council, most harmonious hitherto, have

become the centre of all things.  They ride this Whirlwind; they, raised by

force of circumstances, insensibly, very strangely, thither to that dread

height;--and guide it, and seem to guide it.  Stranger set of Cloud-

Compellers the Earth never saw.  A Robespierre, a Billaud, a Collot,

Couthon, Saint-Just; not to mention still meaner Amars, Vadiers, in Surete

Generale:  these are your Cloud-Compellers.  Small intellectual talent is

necessary:  indeed where among them, except in the head of Carnot, busied

organising victory, would you find any?  The talent is one of instinct

rather.  It is that of divining aright what this great dumb Whirlwind

wishes and wills; that of willing, with more frenzy than any one, what all

the world wills.  To stand at no obstacles; to heed no considerations human

or divine; to know well that, of divine or human, there is one thing

needful, Triumph of the Republic, Destruction of the Enemies of the

Republic!  With this one spiritual endowment, and so few others, it is

strange to see how a dumb inarticulately storming Whirlwind of things puts,

as it were, its reins into your hand, and invites and compels you to be

leader of it.



Hard by, sits a Municipality of Paris; all in red nightcaps since the

fourth of November last:  a set of men fully 'on a level with

circumstances,' or even beyond it.  Sleek Mayor Pache, studious to be safe

in the middle; Chaumettes, Heberts, Varlets, and Henriot their great

Commandant; not to speak of Vincent the War-clerk, of Momoros, Dobsents,

and such like:  all intent to have Churches plundered, to have Reason

adored, Suspects cut down, and the Revolution triumph.  Perhaps carrying

the matter too far?  Danton was heard to grumble at the civic strophes; and

to recommend prose and decency.  Robespierre also grumbles that in

overturning Superstition we did not mean to make a religion of Atheism.  In

fact, your Chaumette and Company constitute a kind of Hyper-Jacobinism, or

rabid 'Faction des Enrages;' which has given orthodox Patriotism some

umbrage, of late months.  To 'know a Suspect on the streets:'  what is this

but bringing the Law of the Suspect itself into ill odour?  Men half-

frantic, men zealous overmuch,--they toil there, in their red nightcaps,

restlessly, rapidly, accomplishing what of Life is allotted them.



And the Forty-four Thousand other Townships, each with revolutionary

Committee, based on Jacobin Daughter Society; enlightened by the spirit of

Jacobinism; quickened by the Forty Sous a-day!--The French Constitution

spurned always at any thing like Two Chambers; and yet behold, has it not

verily got Two Chambers?  National Convention, elected for one; Mother of

Patriotism, self-elected, for another!  Mother of Patriotism has her

Debates reported in the Moniteur, as important state-procedures; which

indisputably they are.  A Second Chamber of Legislature we call this Mother

Society;--if perhaps it were not rather comparable to that old Scotch Body

named Lords of the Articles, without whose origination, and signal given,

the so-called Parliament could introduce no bill, could do no work? 

Robespierre himself, whose words are a law, opens his incorruptible lips

copiously in the Jacobins Hall.  Smaller Council of Salut Public, Greater

Council of Surete Generale, all active Parties, come here to plead; to

shape beforehand what decision they must arrive at, what destiny they have

to expect.  Now if a question arose, Which of those Two Chambers,

Convention, or Lords of the Articles, was the stronger?  Happily they as

yet go hand in hand.



As for the National Convention, truly it has become a most composed Body. 

Quenched now the old effervescence; the Seventy-three locked in ward; once

noisy Friends of the Girondins sunk all into silent men of the Plain,

called even 'Frogs of the Marsh,' Crapauds du Marais!  Addresses come,

Revolutionary Church-plunder comes; Deputations, with prose, or strophes: 

these the Convention receives.  But beyond this, the Convention has one

thing mainly to do:  to listen what Salut Public proposes, and say, Yea.



Bazire followed by Chabot, with some impetuosity, declared, one morning,

that this was not the way of a Free Assembly.  "There ought to be an

Opposition side, a Cote Droit," cried Chabot; "if none else will form it, I

will:  people say to me, You will all get guillotined in your turn, first

you and Bazire, then Danton, then Robespierre himself."  (Debats, du 10

Novembre, 1723.)  So spake the Disfrocked, with a loud voice:  next week,

Bazire and he lie in the Abbaye; wending, one may fear, towards Tinville

and the Axe; and 'people say to me'--what seems to be proving true! 

Bazire's blood was all inflamed with Revolution fever; with coffee and

spasmodic dreams.  (Dictionnaire des Hommes Marquans, i. 115.)  Chabot,

again, how happy with his rich Jew-Austrian wife, late Fraulein Frey!  But

he lies in Prison; and his two Jew-Austrian Brothers-in-Law, the Bankers

Frey, lie with him; waiting the urn of doom.  Let a National Convention,

therefore, take warning, and know its function.  Let the Convention, all as

one man, set its shoulder to the work; not with bursts of Parliamentary

eloquence, but in quite other and serviceable ways!



Convention Commissioners, what we ought to call Representatives,

'Representans on mission,' fly, like the Herald Mercury, to all points of

the Territory; carrying your behests far and wide.  In their 'round hat

plumed with tricolor feathers, girt with flowing tricolor taffeta; in close

frock, tricolor sash, sword and jack-boots,' these men are powerfuller than

King or Kaiser.  They say to whomso they meet, Do; and he must do it:  all

men's goods are at their disposal; for France is as one huge City in Siege.

They smite with Requisitions, and Forced-loan; they have the power of life

and death.  Saint-Just and Lebas order the rich classes of Strasburg to

'strip off their shoes,' and send them to the Armies where as many as 'ten

thousand pairs' are needed.  Also, that within four and twenty hours, 'a

thousand beds' are to be got ready; (Moniteur, du 27 Novembre 1793.) wrapt

in matting, and sent under way.  For the time presses!--Like swift bolts,

issuing from the fuliginous Olympus of Salut Public rush these men,

oftenest in pairs; scatter your thunder-orders over France; make France one

enormous Revolutionary thunder-cloud.







Chapter 3.5.VI.



Do thy Duty.



Accordingly alongside of these bonfires of Church balustrades, and sounds

of fusillading and noyading, there rise quite another sort of fires and

sounds:  Smithy-fires and Proof-volleys for the manufacture of arms.



Cut off from Sweden and the world, the Republic must learn to make steel

for itself; and, by aid of Chemists, she has learnt it.  Towns that knew

only iron, now know steel:  from their new dungeons at Chantilly,

Aristocrats may hear the rustle of our new steel furnace there.  Do not

bells transmute themselves into cannon; iron stancheons into the white-

weapon (arme blanche), by sword-cutlery?  The wheels of Langres scream,

amid their sputtering fire halo; grinding mere swords.  The stithies of

Charleville ring with gun-making.  What say we, Charleville?  Two hundred

and fifty-eight Forges stand in the open spaces of Paris itself; a hundred

and forty of them in the Esplanade of the Invalides, fifty-four in the

Luxembourg Garden:  so many Forges stand; grim Smiths beating and forging

at lock and barrel there.  The Clockmakers have come, requisitioned, to do

the touch-holes, the hard-solder and filework.  Five great Barges swing at

anchor on the Seine Stream, loud with boring; the great press-drills

grating harsh thunder to the general ear and heart.  And deft Stock-makers

do gouge and rasp; and all men bestir themselves, according to their

cunning:--in the language of hope, it is reckoned that a 'thousand finished

muskets can be delivered daily.'  (Choix des Rapports, xiii. 189.) 

Chemists of the Republic have taught us miracles of swift tanning; (Ibid.

xv. 360.) the cordwainer bores and stitches;--not of 'wood and pasteboard,'

or he shall answer it to Tinville!  The women sew tents and coats, the

children scrape surgeon's-lint, the old men sit in the market-places; able

men are on march; all men in requisition:  from Town to Town flutters, on

the Heaven's winds, this Banner, THE FRENCH PEOPLE RISEN AGAINST TYRANTS.



All which is well.  But now arises the question:  What is to be done for

saltpetre?  Interrupted Commerce and the English Navy shut us out from

saltpetre; and without saltpetre there is no gunpowder.  Republican Science

again sits meditative; discovers that saltpetre exists here and there,

though in attenuated quantity:  that old plaster of walls holds a

sprinkling of it;--that the earth of the Paris Cellars holds a sprinkling

of it, diffused through the common rubbish; that were these dug up and

washed, saltpetre might be had.  Whereupon swiftly, see! the Citoyens, with

upshoved bonnet rouge, or with doffed bonnet, and hair toil-wetted; digging

fiercely, each in his own cellar, for saltpetre.  The Earth-heap rises at

every door; the Citoyennes with hod and bucket carrying it up; the

Citoyens, pith in every muscle, shovelling and digging:  for life and

saltpetre.  Dig my braves; and right well speed ye.  What of saltpetre is

essential the Republic shall not want.



Consummation of Sansculottism has many aspects and tints:  but the

brightest tint, really of a solar or stellar brightness, is this which the

Armies give it.  That same fervour of Jacobinism which internally fills

France with hatred, suspicions, scaffolds and Reason-worship, does, on the

Frontiers, shew itself as a glorious Pro patria mori.  Ever since

Dumouriez's defection, three Convention Representatives attend every

General.  Committee of Salut has sent them, often with this Laconic order

only:  "Do thy duty, Fais ton devoir."  It is strange, under what

impediments the fire of Jacobinism, like other such fires, will burn. 

These Soldiers have shoes of wood and pasteboard, or go booted in hayropes,

in dead of winter; they skewer a bass mat round their shoulders, and are

destitute of most things.  What then?  It is for Rights of Frenchhood, of

Manhood, that they fight:  the unquenchable spirit, here as elsewhere,

works miracles.  "With steel and bread," says the Convention

Representative, "one may get to China."  The Generals go fast to the

guillotine; justly and unjustly.  From which what inference?  This among

others:  That ill-success is death; that in victory alone is life!  To

conquer or die is no theatrical palabra, in these circumstances:  but a

practical truth and necessity.  All Girondism, Halfness, Compromise is

swept away.  Forward, ye Soldiers of the Republic, captain and man!  Dash

with your Gaelic impetuosity, on Austria, England, Prussia, Spain,

Sardinia; Pitt, Cobourg, York, and the Devil and the World!  Behind us is

but the Guillotine; before us is Victory, Apotheosis and Millennium without

end!



See accordingly, on all Frontiers, how the Sons of Night, astonished after

short triumph, do recoil;--the Sons of the Republic flying at them, with

wild ca-ira or Marseillese Aux armes, with the temper of cat-o'-mountain,

or demon incarnate; which no Son of Night can stand!  Spain, which came

bursting through the Pyrenees, rustling with Bourbon banners, and went

conquering here and there for a season, falters at such cat-o'-mountain

welcome; draws itself in again; too happy now were the Pyrenees impassable.

Not only does Dugommier, conqueror of Toulon, drive Spain back; he invades

Spain.  General Dugommier invades it by the Eastern Pyrenees; General

Dugommier invades it by the Eastern Pyrenees; General Muller shall invade

it by the Western.  Shall, that is the word:  Committee of Salut Public has

said it; Representative Cavaignac, on mission there, must see it done. 

Impossible! cries Muller,--Infallible! answers Cavaignac.  Difficulty,

impossibility, is to no purpose.  "The Committee is deaf on that side of

its head," answers Cavaignac, "n'entend pas de cette oreille la.  How many

wantest thou, of men, of horses, cannons?  Thou shalt have them. 

Conquerors, conquered or hanged, forward we must."  (There is, in

Prudhomme, an atrocity a la Captain-Kirk reported of this Cavaignac; which

has been copied into Dictionaries of Hommes Marquans, of Biographie

Universelle, &c.; which not only has no truth in it, but, much more

singular, is still capable of being proved to have none.)  Which things

also, even as the Representative spake them, were done.  The Spring of the

new Year sees Spain invaded:  and redoubts are carried, and Passes and

Heights of the most scarped description; Spanish Field-officerism struck

mute at such cat-o'-mountain spirit, the cannon forgetting to fire.  (Deux

Amis, xiii. 205-30; Toulongeon, &c.)   Swept are the Pyrenees; Town after

Town flies up, burst by terror or the petard.  In the course of another

year, Spain will crave Peace; acknowledge its sins and the Republic; nay,

in Madrid, there will be joy as for a victory, that even Peace is got.



Few things, we repeat, can be notabler than these Convention

Representatives, with their power more than kingly.  Nay at bottom are they

not Kings, Ablemen, of a sort; chosen from the Seven Hundred and Forty-nine

French Kings; with this order, Do thy duty?  Representative Levasseur, of

small stature, by trade a mere pacific Surgeon-Accoucheur, has mutinies to

quell; mad hosts (mad at the Doom of Custine) bellowing far and wide; he

alone amid them, the one small Representative,--small, but as hard as

flint, which also carries fire in it!  So too, at Hondschooten, far in the

afternoon, he declares that the battle is not lost; that it must be gained;

and fights, himself, with his own obstetric hand;--horse shot under him, or

say on foot, 'up to the haunches in tide-water;' cutting stoccado and

passado there, in defiance of Water, Earth, Air and Fire, the choleric

little Representative that he was!  Whereby, as natural, Royal Highness of

York had to withdraw,--occasionally at full gallop; like to be swallowed by

the tide:  and his Siege of Dunkirk became a dream, realising only much

loss of beautiful siege-artillery and of brave lives.  (Levasseur,

Memoires, ii. c. 2-7.)



General Houchard, it would appear, stood behind a hedge, on this

Hondschooten occasion; wherefore they have since guillotined him.  A new

General Jourdan, late Serjeant Jourdan, commands in his stead:  he, in

long-winded Battles of Watigny, 'murderous artillery-fire mingling itself

with sound of Revolutionary battle-hymns,' forces Austria behind the Sambre

again; has hopes of purging the soil of Liberty.  With hard wrestling, with

artillerying and ca-ira-ing, it shall be done.  In the course of a new

Summer, Valenciennes will see itself beleaguered; Conde beleaguered;

whatsoever is yet in the hands of Austria beleaguered and bombarded:  nay,

by Convention Decree, we even summon them all 'either to surrender in

twenty-four hours, or else be put to the sword;'--a high saying, which,

though it remains unfulfilled, may shew what spirit one is of.



Representative Drouet, as an Old-Dragoon, could fight by a kind of second

nature; but he was unlucky.  Him, in a night-foray at Maubeuge, the

Austrians took alive, in October last.  They stript him almost naked, he

says; making a shew of him, as King-taker of Varennes.  They flung him into

carts; sent him far into the interior of Cimmeria, to 'a Fortress called

Spitzberg' on the Danube River; and left him there, at an elevation of

perhaps a hundred and fifty feet, to his own bitter reflections. 

Reflections; and also devices!  For the indomitable Old-dragoon constructs

wing-machinery, of Paperkite; saws window-bars:  determines to fly down. 

He will seize a boat, will follow the River's course:  land somewhere in

Crim Tartary, in the Black Sea or Constantinople region:  a la Sindbad! 

Authentic History, accordingly, looking far into Cimmeria, discerns dimly a

phenomenon.  In the dead night-watches, the Spitzberg sentry is near

fainting with terror:  Is it a huge vague Portent descending through the

night air?  It is a huge National Representative Old-dragoon, descending by

Paperkite; too rapidly, alas!  For Drouet had taken with him 'a small

provision-store, twenty pounds weight or thereby;' which proved

accelerative:  so he fell, fracturing his leg; and lay there, moaning, till

day dawned, till you could discern clearly that he was not a Portent but a

Representative!  (His narrative (in Deux Amis, xiv. 177-86).)



Or see Saint-Just, in the Lines of Weissembourg, though physically of a

timid apprehensive nature, how he charges with his 'Alsatian Peasants armed

hastily' for the nonce; the solemn face of him blazing into flame; his

black hair and tricolor hat-taffeta flowing in the breeze; These our Lines

of Weissembourg were indeed forced, and Prussia and the Emigrants rolled

through:  but we re-force the Lines of Weissembourg; and Prussia and the

Emigrants roll back again still faster,--hurled with bayonet charges and

fiery ca-ira-ing.



Ci-devant Serjeant Pichegru, ci-devant Serjeant Hoche, risen now to be

Generals, have done wonders here.  Tall Pichegru was meant for the Church;

was Teacher of Mathematics once, in Brienne School,--his remarkablest Pupil

there was the Boy Napoleon Buonaparte.  He then, not in the sweetest

humour, enlisted exchanging ferula for musket; and had got the length of

the halberd, beyond which nothing could be hoped; when the Bastille

barriers falling made passage for him, and he is here.  Hoche bore a hand

at the literal overturn of the Bastille; he was, as we saw, a Serjeant of

the Gardes Francaises, spending his pay in rushlights and cheap editions of

books.  How the Mountains are burst, and many an Enceladus is

disemprisoned:  and Captains founding on Four parchments of Nobility, are

blown with their parchments across the Rhine, into Lunar Limbo!



What high feats of arms, therefore, were done in these Fourteen Armies; and

how, for love of Liberty and hope of Promotion, low-born valour cut its

desperate way to Generalship; and, from the central Carnot in Salut Public

to the outmost drummer on the Frontiers, men strove for their Republic, let

readers fancy.  The snows of Winter, the flowers of Summer continue to be

stained with warlike blood.  Gaelic impetuosity mounts ever higher with

victory; spirit of Jacobinism weds itself to national vanity:  the Soldiers

of the Republic are becoming, as we prophesied, very Sons of Fire. 

Barefooted, barebacked:  but with bread and iron you can get to China!  It

is one Nation against the whole world; but the Nation has that within her

which the whole world will not conquer.  Cimmeria, astonished, recoils

faster or slower; all round the Republic there rises fiery, as it were, a

magic ring of musket-volleying and ca-ira-ing.  Majesty of Prussia, as

Majesty of Spain, will by and by acknowledge his sins and the Republic: 

and make a Peace of Bale.



Foreign Commerce, Colonies, Factories in the East and in the West, are

fallen or falling into the hands of sea-ruling Pitt, enemy of human nature. 

Nevertheless what sound is this that we hear, on the first of June, 1794; 

sound of as war-thunder borne from the Ocean too; of tone most piercing? 

War-thunder from off the Brest waters:  Villaret-Joyeuse and English Howe,

after long manoeuvring have ranked themselves there; and are belching fire. 

The enemies of human nature are on their own element; cannot be conquered;

cannot be kept from conquering.  Twelve hours of raging cannonade; sun now

sinking westward through the battle-smoke:  six French Ships taken, the

Battle lost; what Ship soever can still sail, making off!  But how is it,

then, with that Vengeur Ship, she neither strikes nor makes off?  She is

lamed, she cannot make off; strike she will not.  Fire rakes her fore and

aft, from victorious enemies; the Vengeur is sinking.  Strong are ye,

Tyrants of the Sea; yet we also, are we weak?  Lo! all flags, streamers,

jacks, every rag of tricolor that will yet run on rope, fly rustling aloft: 

the whole crew crowds to the upper deck; and, with universal soul-maddening

yell, shouts Vive la Republique,--sinking, sinking.  She staggers, she

lurches, her last drunk whirl; Ocean yawns abysmal:  down rushes the

Vengeur, carrying Vive la Republique along with her, unconquerable, into

Eternity!  (Compare Barrere (Chois des Rapports, xiv. 416-21); Lord Howe

(Annual Register of 1794, p. 86), &c.)  Let foreign Despots think of that. 

There is an Unconquerable in man, when he stands on his Rights of Man:  let

Despots and Slaves and all people know this, and only them that stand on

the Wrongs of Man tremble to know it.







Chapter 3.5.VII.



Flame-Picture.





In this manner, mad-blazing with flame of all imaginable tints, from the

red of Tophet to the stellar-bright, blazes off this Consummation of

Sansculottism.



But the hundredth part of the things that were done, and the thousandth

part of the things that were projected and decreed to be done, would tire

the tongue of History.  Statue of the Peuple Souverain, high as Strasburg

Steeple; which shall fling its shadow from the Pont Neuf over Jardin

National and Convention Hall;--enormous, in Painter David's head!  With

other the like enormous Statues not a few:  realised in paper Decree.  For,

indeed, the Statue of Liberty herself is still but Plaster in the Place de

la Revolution!  Then Equalisation of Weights and Measures, with decimal

division; Institutions, of Music and of much else; Institute in general;

School of Arts, School of Mars, Eleves de la Patrie, Normal Schools:  amid

such Gun-boring, Altar-burning, Saltpetre-digging, and miraculous

improvements in Tannery!



What, for example, is this that Engineer Chappe is doing, in the Park of

Vincennes?  In the Park of Vincennes; and onwards, they say, in the Park of

Lepelletier Saint-Fargeau the assassinated Deputy; and still onwards to the

Heights of Ecouen and further, he has scaffolding set up, has posts driven

in; wooden arms with elbow joints are jerking and fugling in the air, in

the most rapid mysterious manner!  Citoyens ran up suspicious.  Yes, O

Citoyens, we are signaling:  it is a device this, worthy of the Republic; a

thing for what we will call Far-writing without the aid of postbags; in

Greek, it shall be named Telegraph.--Telegraphe sacre! answers Citoyenism: 

For writing to Traitors, to Austria?--and tears it down.  Chappe had to

escape, and get a new Legislative Decree.  Nevertheless he has accomplished

it, the indefatigable Chappe:  this Far-writer, with its wooden arms and

elbow-joints, can intelligibly signal; and lines of them are set up, to the

North Frontiers and elsewhither.  On an Autumn evening of the Year Two,

Far-writer having just written that Conde Town has surrendered to us, we

send from Tuileries Convention Hall this response in the shape of Decree: 

'The name of Conde is changed to Nord-Libre, North-Free.  The Army of the

North ceases not to merit well of the country.'--To the admiration of men!

For lo, in some half hour, while the Convention yet debates, there arrives

this new answer:  'I inform thee, je t'annonce, Citizen President, that the

decree of Convention, ordering change of the name Conde into North-Free;

and the other declaring that the Army of the North ceases not to merit well

of the country, are transmitted and acknowledged by Telegraph.  I have

instructed my Officer at Lille to forward them to North-Free by express. 

Signed, CHAPPE.'  (Choix des Rapports, xv. 378, 384.)



Or see, over Fleurus in the Netherlands, where General Jourdan, having now

swept the soil of Liberty, and advanced thus far, is just about to fight,

and sweep or be swept, things there not in the Heaven's Vault, some

Prodigy, seen by Austrian eyes and spyglasses:  in the similitude of an

enormous Windbag, with netting and enormous Saucer depending from it?  A

Jove's Balance, O ye Austrian spyglasses?  One saucer-hole of a Jove's

Balance; your poor Austrian scale having kicked itself quite aloft, out of

sight?  By Heaven, answer the spyglasses, it is a Montgolfier, a Balloon,

and they are making signals!  Austrian cannon-battery barks at this

Montgolfier; harmless as dog at the Moon:  the Montgolfier makes its

signals; detects what Austrian ambuscade there may be, and descends at its

ease.  (26th June, 1794 (see Rapport de Guyton-Morveau sur les aerostats,

in Moniteur du 6 Vendemiaire, An 2).)  What will not these devils incarnate

contrive?



On the whole, is it not, O Reader, one of the strangest Flame-Pictures that

ever painted itself; flaming off there, on its ground of Guillotine-black? 

And the nightly Theatres are Twenty-three; and the Salons de danse are

sixty:  full of mere Egalite, Fraternite and Carmagnole.  And Section

Committee-rooms are Forty-eight; redolent of tobacco and brandy:  vigorous

with twenty-pence a-day, coercing the suspect.  And the Houses of Arrest

are Twelve for Paris alone; crowded and even crammed.  And at all turns,

you need your 'Certificate of Civism;' be it for going out, or for coming

in; nay without it you cannot, for money, get your daily ounces of bread. 

Dusky red-capped Baker's-queues; wagging themselves; not in silence!  For

we still live by Maximum, in all things; waited on by these two, Scarcity

and Confusion.  The faces of men are darkened with suspicion; with

suspecting, or being suspect.  The streets lie unswept; the ways unmended. 

Law has shut her Books; speaks little, save impromptu, through the throat

of Tinville.  Crimes go unpunished:  not crimes against the Revolution. 

(Mercier, v. 25; Deux Amis, xii. 142-199.)  'The number of foundling

children,' as some compute, 'is doubled.'



How silent now sits Royalism; sits all Aristocratism; Respectability that

kept its Gig!  The honour now, and the safety, is to Poverty, not to

Wealth.  Your Citizen, who would be fashionable, walks abroad, with his

Wife on his arm, in red wool nightcap, black shag spencer, and carmagnole

complete.  Aristocratism crouches low, in what shelter is still left;

submitting to all requisitions, vexations; too happy to escape with life. 

Ghastly chateaus stare on you by the wayside; disroofed, diswindowed; which

the National House-broker is peeling for the lead and ashlar.  The old

tenants hover disconsolate, over the Rhine with Conde; a spectacle to men. 

Ci-devant Seigneur, exquisite in palate, will become an exquisite

Restaurateur Cook in Hamburg; Ci-devant Madame, exquisite in dress, a

successful Marchande des Modes in London.  In Newgate-Street, you meet M.

le Marquis, with a rough deal on his shoulder, adze and jack-plane under

arm; he has taken to the joiner trade; it being necessary to live (faut

vivre).  (See Deux Amis, xv. 189-192; Memoires de Genlis; Founders of the

French Republic, &c. &c.)--Higher than all Frenchmen the domestic Stock-

jobber flourishes,--in a day of Paper-money.  The Farmer also flourishes: 

'Farmers' houses,' says Mercier, 'have become like Pawn-brokers' shops;'

all manner of furniture, apparel, vessels of gold and silver accumulate

themselves there:  bread is precious.  The Farmer's rent is Paper-money,

and he alone of men has bread:  Farmer is better than Landlord, and will

himself become Landlord.



And daily, we say, like a black Spectre, silently through that Life-tumult,

passes the Revolution Cart; writing on the walls its MENE, MENE, Thou art

weighed, and found wanting!  A Spectre with which one has grown familiar. 

Men have adjusted themselves:  complaint issues not from that Death-

tumbril.  Weak women and ci-devants, their plumage and finery all

tarnished, sit there; with a silent gaze, as if looking into the Infinite

Black.  The once light lip wears a curl of irony, uttering no word; and the

Tumbril fares along.  They may be guilty before Heaven, or not; they are

guilty, we suppose, before the Revolution.  Then, does not the Republic

'coin money' of them, with its great axe?  Red Nightcaps howl dire

approval: the rest of Paris looks on; if with a sigh, that is much; Fellow-

creatures whom sighing cannot help; whom black Necessity and Tinville have

clutched.



One other thing, or rather two other things, we will still mention; and no

more:  The Blond Perukes; the Tannery at Meudon.  Great talk is of these

Perruques blondes:  O Reader, they are made from the Heads of Guillotined

women!  The locks of a Duchess, in this way, may come to cover the scalp of

a Cordwainer:  her blond German Frankism his black Gaelic poll, if it be

bald.  Or they may be worn affectionately, as relics; rendering one

suspect?  (Mercier, ii. 134.)  Citizens use them, not without mockery; of a

rather cannibal sort.



Still deeper into one's heart goes that Tannery at Meudon; not mentioned

among the other miracles of tanning!  'At Meudon,' says Montgaillard with

considerable calmness, 'there was a Tannery of Human Skins; such of the

Guillotined as seemed worth flaying:  of which perfectly good wash-leather

was made:' for breeches, and other uses.  The skin of the men, he remarks,

was superior in toughness (consistance) and quality to shamoy; that of

women was good for almost nothing, being so soft in texture! 

(Montgaillard, iv. 290.)--History looking back over Cannibalism, through

Purchas's Pilgrims and all early and late Records, will perhaps find no

terrestrial Cannibalism of a sort on the whole so detestable.  It is a

manufactured, soft-feeling, quietly elegant sort; a sort perfide!  Alas

then, is man's civilisation only a wrappage, through which the savage

nature of him can still burst, infernal as ever?  Nature still makes him;

and has an Infernal in her as well as a Celestial.
