








BOOK 2.IV.         



VARENNES





Chapter 2.4.I.



Easter at Saint-Cloud.



The French Monarchy may now therefore be considered as, in all human

probability, lost; as struggling henceforth in blindness as well as

weakness, the last light of reasonable guidance having gone out.  What

remains of resources their poor Majesties will waste still further, in

uncertain loitering and wavering.  Mirabeau himself had to complain that

they only gave him half confidence, and always had some plan within his

plan.  Had they fled frankly with him, to Rouen or anywhither, long ago! 

They may fly now with chance immeasurably lessened; which will go on

lessening towards absolute zero.  Decide, O Queen; poor Louis can decide

nothing:  execute this Flight-project, or at least abandon it. 

Correspondence with Bouille there has been enough; what profits consulting,

and hypothesis, while all around is in fierce activity of practice?  The

Rustic sits waiting till the river run dry:  alas with you it is not a

common river, but a Nile Inundation; snow melting in the unseen mountains;

till all, and you where you sit, be submerged.



Many things invite to flight.  The voice Journals invites; Royalist

Journals proudly hinting it as a threat, Patriot Journals rabidly

denouncing it as a terror.  Mother Society, waxing more and more emphatic,

invites;--so emphatic that, as was prophesied, Lafayette and your limited

Patriots have ere long to branch off from her, and form themselves into

Feuillans; with infinite public controversy; the victory in which, doubtful

though it look, will remain with the unlimited Mother.  Moreover, ever

since the Day of Poniards, we have seen unlimited Patriotism openly

equipping itself with arms.  Citizens denied 'activity,' which is

facetiously made to signify a certain weight of purse, cannot buy blue

uniforms, and be Guardsmen; but man is greater than blue cloth; man can

fight, if need be, in multiform cloth, or even almost without cloth--as

Sansculotte.  So Pikes continued to be hammered, whether those Dirks of

improved structure with barbs be 'meant for the West-India market,' or not

meant.  Men beat, the wrong way, their ploughshares into swords.  Is there

not what we may call an 'Austrian Committee,' Comite Autrichein, sitting

daily and nightly in the Tuileries?  Patriotism, by vision and suspicion,

knows it too well!  If the King fly, will there not be Aristocrat-Austrian

Invasion; butchery, replacement of Feudalism; wars more than civil?  The

hearts of men are saddened and maddened.



Dissident Priests likewise give trouble enough.  Expelled from their Parish

Churches, where Constitutional Priests, elected by the Public, have

replaced  them, these unhappy persons resort to Convents of Nuns, or other

such receptacles; and there, on Sabbath, collecting assemblages of Anti-

Constitutional individuals, who have grown devout all on a sudden,

(Toulongeon, i. 262.) they worship or pretend to worship in their strait-

laced contumacious manner; to the scandal of Patriotism.  Dissident

Priests, passing along with their sacred wafer for the dying, seem wishful

to be massacred in the streets; wherein Patriotism will not gratify them. 

Slighter palm of martyrdom, however, shall not be denied:  martyrdom not of

massacre, yet of fustigation.  At the refractory places of worship, Patriot

men appear; Patriot women with strong hazel wands, which they apply.  Shut

thy eyes, O Reader; see not this misery, peculiar to these later times,--of

martyrdom without sincerity, with only cant and contumacy!  A dead Catholic

Church is not allowed to lie dead; no, it is galvanised into the

detestablest death-life; whereat Humanity, we say, shuts its eyes.  For the

Patriot women take their hazel wands, and fustigate, amid laughter of

bystanders, with alacrity:  broad bottom of Priests; alas, Nuns too

reversed, and cotillons retrousses!  The National Guard does what it can: 

Municipality 'invokes the Principles of Toleration;' grants Dissident

worshippers the Church of the Theatins; promising protection.  But it is to

no purpose:  at the door of that Theatins Church, appears a Placard, and

suspended atop, like Plebeian Consular fasces,--a Bundle of Rods!  The

Principles of Toleration must do the best they may:  but no Dissident man

shall worship contumaciously; there is a Plebiscitum to that effect; which,

though unspoken, is like the laws of the Medes and Persians.  Dissident

contumacious Priests ought not to be harboured, even in private, by any

man:  the Club of the Cordeliers openly denounces Majesty himself as doing

it.  (Newspapers of April and June, 1791 (in Hist. Parl. ix. 449; x, 217).)



Many things invite to flight:  but probably this thing above all others,

that it has become impossible!  On the 15th of April, notice is given that

his Majesty, who has suffered much from catarrh lately, will enjoy the

Spring weather, for a few days, at Saint-Cloud.  Out at Saint-Cloud? 

Wishing to celebrate his Easter, his Paques, or Pasch, there; with

refractory Anti-Constitutional Dissidents?--Wishing rather to make off for

Compiegne, and thence to the Frontiers?  As were, in good sooth, perhaps

feasible, or would once have been; nothing but some two chasseurs attending

you; chasseurs easily corrupted!  It is a pleasant possibility, execute it

or not.  Men say there are thirty thousand Chevaliers of the Poniard

lurking in the woods there:  lurking in the woods, and thirty thousand,--

for the human Imagination is not fettered.  But now, how easily might

these, dashing out on Lafayette, snatch off the Hereditary Representative;

and roll away with him, after the manner of a whirlblast, whither they

listed!--Enough, it were well the King did not go.  Lafayette is forewarned

and forearmed:  but, indeed, is the risk his only; or his and all France's?



Monday the eighteenth of April is come; the Easter Journey to Saint-Cloud

shall take effect.  National Guard has got its orders; a First Division, as

Advanced Guard, has even marched, and probably arrived.  His Majesty's

Maison-bouche, they say, is all busy stewing and frying at Saint-Cloud; the

King's Dinner not far from ready there.  About one o'clock, the Royal

Carriage, with its eight royal blacks, shoots stately into the Place du

Carrousel; draws up to receive its royal burden.  But hark!  From the

neighbouring Church of Saint-Roch, the tocsin begins ding-donging.  Is the

King stolen then; he is going; gone?  Multitudes of persons crowd the

Carrousel:  the Royal Carriage still stands there;--and, by Heaven's

strength, shall stand!



Lafayette comes up, with aide-de-camps and oratory; pervading the groups: 

"Taisez vous," answer the groups, "the King shall not go."  Monsieur

appears, at an upper window:  ten thousand voices bray and shriek, "Nous ne

voulons pas que le Roi parte."  Their Majesties have mounted.  Crack go the

whips; but twenty Patriot arms have seized each of the eight bridles: 

there is rearing, rocking, vociferation; not the smallest headway.  In vain

does Lafayette fret, indignant; and perorate and strive:  Patriots in the

passion of terror, bellow round the Royal Carriage; it is one bellowing sea

of Patriot terror run frantic.  Will Royalty fly off towards Austria; like

a lit rocket, towards endless Conflagration of Civil War?  Stop it, ye

Patriots, in the name of Heaven!  Rude voices passionately apostrophise

Royalty itself.  Usher Campan, and other the like official persons,

pressing forward with help or advice, are clutched by the sashes, and

hurled and whirled, in a confused perilous manner; so that her Majesty has

to plead passionately from the carriage-window.



Order cannot be heard, cannot be followed; National Guards know not how to

act.  Centre Grenadiers, of the Observatoire Battalion, are there; not on

duty; alas, in quasi-mutiny; speaking rude disobedient words; threatening

the mounted Guards with sharp shot if they hurt the people.  Lafayette

mounts and dismounts; runs haranguing, panting; on the verge of despair. 

For an hour and three-quarters; 'seven quarters of an hour,' by the

Tuileries Clock!  Desperate Lafayette will open a passage, were it by the

cannon's mouth, if his Majesty will order.  Their Majesties, counselled to

it by Royalist friends, by Patriot foes, dismount; and retire in, with

heavy indignant heart; giving up the enterprise.  Maison-bouche may eat

that cooked dinner themselves; his Majesty shall not see Saint-Cloud this

day,--or any day.  (Deux Amis, vi. c. 1; Hist. Parl. ix. 407-14.)



The pathetic fable of imprisonment in one's own Palace has become a sad

fact, then?  Majesty complains to Assembly; Municipality deliberates,

proposes to petition or address; Sections respond with sullen brevity of

negation.  Lafayette flings down his Commission; appears in civic pepper-

and-salt frock; and cannot be flattered back again;--not in less than three

days; and by unheard-of entreaty; National Guards kneeling to him, and

declaring that it is not sycophancy, that they are free men kneeling here

to the Statue of Liberty.  For the rest, those Centre Grenadiers of the

Observatoire are disbanded,--yet indeed are reinlisted, all but fourteen,

under a new name, and with new quarters.  The King must keep his Easter in

Paris:  meditating much on this singular posture of things:  but as good as

determined now to fly from it, desire being whetted by difficulty.







Chapter 2.4.II.



Easter at Paris.



For above a year, ever since March 1790, it would seem, there has hovered a

project of Flight before the royal mind; and ever and anon has been

condensing itself into something like a purpose; but this or the other

difficulty always vaporised it again.  It seems so full of risks, perhaps

of civil war itself; above all, it cannot be done without effort. 

Somnolent laziness will not serve:  to fly, if not in a leather vache, one

must verily stir himself.  Better to adopt that Constitution of theirs;

execute it so as to shew all men that it is inexecutable?  Better or not so

good; surely it is easier.  To all difficulties you need only say, There is

a lion in the path, behold your Constitution will not act!  For a somnolent

person it requires no effort to counterfeit death,--as Dame de Stael and

Friends of Liberty can see the King's Government long doing, faisant le

mort.



Nay now, when desire whetted by difficulty has brought the matter to a

head, and the royal mind no longer halts between two, what can come of it? 

Grant that poor Louis were safe with Bouille, what on the whole could he

look for there?  Exasperated Tickets of Entry answer, Much, all.  But cold

Reason answers, Little almost nothing.  Is not loyalty a law of Nature? ask

the Tickets of Entry.  Is not love of your King, and even death for him,

the glory of all Frenchmen,--except these few Democrats?  Let Democrat

Constitution-builders see what they will do without their Keystone; and

France rend its hair, having lost the Hereditary Representative!



Thus will King Louis fly; one sees not reasonably towards what.  As a

maltreated Boy, shall we say, who, having a Stepmother, rushes sulky into

the wide world; and will wring the paternal heart?--Poor Louis escapes from

known unsupportable evils, to an unknown mixture of good and evil, coloured

by Hope.  He goes, as Rabelais did when dying, to seek a great May-be:  je

vais chercher un grand Peut-etre!  As not only the sulky Boy but the wise

grown Man is obliged to do, so often, in emergencies.



For the rest, there is still no lack of stimulants, and stepdame

maltreatments, to keep one's resolution at the due pitch.  Factious

disturbance ceases not:  as indeed how can they, unless authoritatively

conjured, in a Revolt which is by nature bottomless?  If the ceasing of

faction be the price of the King's somnolence, he may awake when he will,

and take wing.



Remark, in any case, what somersets and contortions a dead Catholicism is

making,--skilfully galvanised:  hideous, and even piteous, to behold! 

Jurant and Dissident, with their shaved crowns, argue frothing everywhere;

or are ceasing to argue, and stripping for battle.  In Paris was scourging

while need continued:  contrariwise, in the Morbihan of Brittany, without

scourging, armed Peasants are up, roused by pulpit-drum, they know not why.

General Dumouriez, who has got missioned thitherward, finds all in sour

heat of darkness; finds also that explanation and conciliation will still

do much.  (Deux Amis, v. 410-21; Dumouriez, ii. c. 5.)



But again, consider this:  that his Holiness, Pius Sixth, has seen good to

excommunicate Bishop Talleyrand!  Surely, we will say then, considering it,

there is no living or dead Church in the Earth that has not the

indubitablest right to excommunicate Talleyrand.  Pope Pius has right and

might, in his way.  But truly so likewise has Father Adam, ci-devant

Marquis Saint-Huruge, in his way.  Behold, therefore, on the Fourth of May,

in the Palais-Royal, a mixed loud-sounding multitude; in the middle of

whom, Father Adam, bull-voiced Saint-Huruge, in white hat, towers visible

and audible.  With him, it is said, walks Journalist Gorsas, walk many

others of the washed sort; for no authority will interfere.  Pius Sixth,

with his plush and tiara, and power of the Keys, they bear aloft:  of

natural size,--made of lath and combustible gum.  Royou, the King's Friend,

is borne too in effigy; with a pile of Newspaper King's-Friends, condemned

numbers of the Ami-du-Roi; fit fuel of the sacrifice.  Speeches are spoken;

a judgment is held, a doom proclaimed, audible in bull-voice, towards the

four winds.  And thus, amid great shouting, the holocaust is consummated,

under the summer sky; and our lath-and-gum Holiness, with the attendant

victims, mounts up in flame, and sinks down in ashes; a decomposed Pope: 

and right or might, among all the parties, has better or worse accomplished

itself, as it could.  (Hist. Parl. x. 99-102.)  But, on the whole,

reckoning from Martin Luther in the Marketplace of Wittenberg to Marquis

Saint-Huruge in this Palais-Royal of Paris, what a journey have we gone;

into what strange territories has it carried us!  No Authority can now

interfere.  Nay Religion herself, mourning for such things, may after all

ask, What have I to do with them?



In such extraordinary manner does dead Catholicism somerset and caper,

skilfully galvanised.  For, does the reader inquire into the subject-matter

of controversy in this case; what the difference between Orthodoxy or My-

doxy and Heterodoxy or Thy-doxy might here be?  My-doxy is that an august

National Assembly can equalize the extent of Bishopricks; that an equalized

Bishop, his Creed and Formularies being left quite as they were, can swear

Fidelity to King, Law and Nation, and so become a Constitutional Bishop.

Thy-doxy, if thou be Dissident, is that he cannot; but that he must become

an accursed thing.  Human ill-nature needs but some Homoiousian iota, or

even the pretence of one; and will flow copiously through the eye of a

needle:  thus always must mortals go jargoning and fuming,



  And, like the ancient Stoics in their porches

  With fierce dispute maintain their churches.



This Auto-da-fe of Saint-Huruge's was on the Fourth of May, 1791.  Royalty

sees it; but says nothing.







Chapter 2.4.III.



Count Fersen.



Royalty, in fact, should, by this time, be far on with its preparations. 

Unhappily much preparation is needful:  could a Hereditary Representative

be carried in leather vache, how easy were it!  But it is not so.



New clothes are needed, as usual, in all Epic transactions, were it in the

grimmest iron ages; consider 'Queen Chrimhilde, with her sixty

semstresses,' in that iron Nibelungen Song!  No Queen can stir without new

clothes.  Therefore, now, Dame Campan whisks assiduous to this mantua-maker

and to that:  and there is clipping of frocks and gowns, upper clothes and

under, great and small; such a clipping and sewing, as might have been

dispensed with.  Moreover, her Majesty cannot go a step anywhither without

her Necessaire; dear Necessaire, of inlaid ivory and rosewood; cunningly

devised; which holds perfumes, toilet-implements, infinite small queenlike

furnitures:  Necessary to terrestrial life.  Not without a cost of some

five hundred louis, of much precious time, and difficult hoodwinking which

does not blind, can this same Necessary of life be forwarded by the

Flanders Carriers,--never to get to hand.  (Campan, ii. c. 18.)  All which,

you would say, augurs ill for the prospering of the enterprise.  But the

whims of women and queens must be humoured.



Bouille, on his side, is making a fortified Camp at Montmedi; gathering

Royal-Allemand, and all manner of other German and true French Troops

thither, 'to watch the Austrians.'  His Majesty will not cross the

Frontiers, unless on compulsion.  Neither shall the Emigrants be much

employed, hateful as they are to all people.  (Bouille, Memoires, ii. c.

10.)  Nor shall old war-god Broglie have any hand in the business; but

solely our brave Bouille; to whom, on the day of meeting, a Marshal's Baton

shall be delivered, by a rescued King, amid the shouting of all the troops. 

In the meanwhile, Paris being so suspicious, were it not perhaps good to

write your Foreign Ambassadors an ostensible Constitutional Letter;

desiring all Kings and men to take heed that King Louis loves the

Constitution, that he has voluntarily sworn, and does again swear, to

maintain the same, and will reckon those his enemies who affect to say

otherwise?  Such a Constitutional circular is despatched by Couriers, is

communicated confidentially to the Assembly, and printed in all Newspapers;

with the finest effect.  (Moniteur, Seance du 23 Avril, 1791.)  Simulation

and dissimulation mingle extensively in human affairs.



We observe, however, that Count Fersen is often using his Ticket of Entry;

which surely he has clear right to do.  A gallant Soldier and Swede,

devoted to this fair Queen;--as indeed the Highest Swede now is.  Has not

King Gustav, famed fiery Chevalier du Nord, sworn himself, by the old laws

of chivalry, her Knight?  He will descend on fire-wings, of Swedish

musketry, and deliver her from these foul dragons,--if, alas, the

assassin's pistol intervene not!



But, in fact, Count Fersen does seem a likely young soldier, of alert

decisive ways:  he circulates widely, seen, unseen; and has business on

hand.  Also Colonel the Duke de Choiseul, nephew of Choiseul the great, of

Choiseul the now deceased; he and Engineer Goguelat are passing and

repassing between Metz and the Tuileries; and Letters go in cipher,--one of

them, a most important one, hard to decipher; Fersen having ciphered it in

haste.  (Choiseul, Relation du Depart de Louis XVI. (Paris, 1822), p. 39.) 

As for Duke de Villequier, he is gone ever since the Day of Poniards; but

his Apartment is useful for her Majesty.



On the other side, poor Commandment Gouvion, watching at the Tuileries,

second in National Command, sees several things hard to interpret.  It is

the same Gouvion who sat, long months ago, at the Townhall, gazing helpless

into that Insurrection of Women; motionless, as the brave stabled steed

when conflagration rises, till Usher Maillard snatched his drum.  Sincerer

Patriot there is not; but many a shiftier.  He, if Dame Campan gossip

credibly, is paying some similitude of love-court to a certain false

Chambermaid of the Palace, who betrays much to him:  the Necessaire, the

clothes, the packing of the jewels, (Campan, ii. 141.)--could he understand

it when betrayed.  Helpless Gouvion gazes with sincere glassy eyes into it;

stirs up his sentries to vigilence; walks restless to and fro; and hopes

the best.



But, on the whole, one finds that, in the second week of June, Colonel de

Choiseul is privately in Paris; having come 'to see his children.'  Also

that Fersen has got a stupendous new Coach built, of the kind named

Berline; done by the first artists; according to a model:  they bring it

home to him, in Choiseul's presence; the two friends take a proof-drive in

it, along the streets; in meditative mood; then send it up to 'Madame

Sullivan's, in the Rue de Clichy,' far North, to wait there till wanted. 

Apparently a certain Russian Baroness de Korff, with Waiting-woman, Valet,

and two Children, will travel homewards with some state:  in whom these

young military gentlemen take interest?  A Passport has been procured for

her; and much assistance shewn, with Coach-builders and such like;--so

helpful polite are young military men.  Fersen has likewise purchased a

Chaise fit for two, at least for two waiting-maids; further, certain

necessary horses: one would say, he is himself quitting France, not without

outlay?  We observe finally that their Majesties, Heaven willing, will

assist at Corpus-Christi Day, this blessed Summer Solstice, in Assumption

Church, here at Paris, to the joy of all the world.  For which same day,

moreover, brave Bouille, at Metz, as we find, has invited a party of

friends to dinner; but indeed is gone from home, in the interim, over to

Montmedi.



These are of the Phenomena, or visual Appearances, of this wide-working

terrestrial world:  which truly is all phenomenal, what they call spectral;

and never rests at any moment; one never at any moment can know why.



On Monday night, the Twentieth of June 1791, about eleven o'clock, there is

many a hackney-coach, and glass-coach (carrosse de remise), still rumbling,

or at rest, on the streets of Paris.  But of all Glass-coaches, we

recommend this to thee, O Reader, which stands drawn up, in the Rue de

l'Echelle, hard by the Carrousel and outgate of the Tuileries; in the Rue

de l'Echelle that then was; 'opposite Ronsin the saddler's door,' as if

waiting for a fare there!  Not long does it wait:  a hooded Dame, with two

hooded Children has issued from Villequier's door, where no sentry walks,

into the Tuileries Court-of-Princes; into the Carrousel; into the Rue de

l'Echelle; where the Glass-coachman readily admits them; and again waits.

Not long; another Dame, likewise hooded or shrouded, leaning on a servant,

issues in the same manner, by the Glass-coachman, cheerfully admitted. 

Whither go, so many Dames?  'Tis His Majesty's Couchee, Majesty just gone

to bed, and all the Palace-world is retiring home.  But the Glass-coachman

still waits; his fare seemingly incomplete.



By and by, we note a thickset Individual, in round hat and peruke, arm-and-

arm with some servant, seemingly of the Runner or Courier sort; he also

issues through Villequier's door; starts a shoebuckle as he passes one of

the sentries, stoops down to clasp it again; is however, by the Glass-

coachman, still more cheerfully admitted.  And now, is his fare complete? 

Not yet; the Glass-coachman still waits.--Alas! and the false Chambermaid

has warned Gouvion that she thinks the Royal Family will fly this very

night; and Gouvion distrusting his own glazed eyes, has sent express for


Lafayette; and Lafayette's Carriage, flaring with lights, rolls this moment

through the inner Arch of the Carrousel,--where a Lady shaded in broad

gypsy-hat, and leaning on the arm of a servant, also of the Runner or

Courier sort, stands aside to let it pass, and has even the whim to touch a

spoke of it with her badine,--light little magic rod which she calls

badine, such as the Beautiful then wore.  The flare of Lafayette's

Carriage, rolls past:  all is found quiet in the Court-of-Princes; sentries

at their post; Majesties' Apartments closed in smooth rest.  Your false

Chambermaid must have been mistaken?  Watch thou, Gouvion, with Argus'

vigilance; for, of a truth, treachery is within these walls.



But where is the Lady that stood aside in gypsy hat, and touched the wheel-

spoke with her badine?  O Reader, that Lady that touched the wheel-spoke

was the Queen of France!  She has issued safe through that inner Arch, into

the Carrousel itself; but not into the Rue de l'Echelle.  Flurried by the

rattle and rencounter, she took the right hand not the left; neither she

nor her Courier knows Paris; he indeed is no Courier, but a loyal stupid

ci-devant Bodyguard disguised as one.  They are off, quite wrong, over the

Pont Royal and River; roaming disconsolate in the Rue du Bac; far from the

Glass-coachman, who still waits.  Waits, with flutter of heart; with

thoughts--which he must button close up, under his jarvie surtout!



Midnight clangs from all the City-steeples; one precious hour has been

spent so; most mortals are asleep.  The Glass-coachman waits; and what

mood!  A brother jarvie drives up, enters into conversation; is answered

cheerfully in jarvie dialect:  the brothers of the whip exchange a pinch of

snuff; (Weber, ii. 340-2; Choiseul, p. 44-56.) decline drinking together;

and part with good night.  Be the Heavens blest! here at length is the

Queen-lady, in gypsy-hat; safe after perils; who has had to inquire her

way.  She too is admitted; her Courier jumps aloft, as the other, who is

also a disguised Bodyguard, has done:  and now, O Glass-coachman of a

thousand,--Count Fersen, for the Reader sees it is thou,--drive!



Dust shall not stick to the hoofs of Fersen:  crack! crack! the Glass-coach

rattles, and every soul breathes lighter.  But is Fersen on the right road? 

Northeastward, to the Barrier of Saint-Martin and Metz Highway, thither

were we bound:  and lo, he drives right Northward!  The royal Individual,

in round hat and peruke, sits astonished; but right or wrong, there is no

remedy.  Crack, crack, we go incessant, through the slumbering City. 

Seldom, since Paris rose out of mud, or the Longhaired Kings went in

Bullock-carts, was there such a drive.  Mortals on each hand of you, close

by, stretched out horizontal, dormant; and we alive and quaking!  Crack,

crack, through the Rue de Grammont; across the Boulevard; up the Rue de la

Chaussee d'Antin,--these windows, all silent, of Number 42, were

Mirabeau's.  Towards the Barrier not of Saint-Martin, but of Clichy on the

utmost North!  Patience, ye royal Individuals; Fersen understands what he

is about.  Passing up the Rue de Clichy, he alights for one moment at

Madame Sullivan's:  "Did Count Fersen's Coachman get the Baroness de

Korff's new Berline?"--"Gone with it an hour-and-half ago," grumbles

responsive the drowsy Porter.--"C'est bien."  Yes, it is well;--though had

not such hour-and half been lost, it were still better.  Forth therefore, O

Fersen, fast, by the Barrier de Clichy; then Eastward along the Outward

Boulevard, what horses and whipcord can do!



Thus Fersen drives, through the ambrosial night.  Sleeping Paris is now all

on the right hand of him; silent except for some snoring hum; and now he is

Eastward as far as the Barrier de Saint-Martin; looking earnestly for

Baroness de Korff's Berline.  This Heaven's Berline he at length does

descry, drawn up with its six horses, his own German Coachman waiting on

the box.  Right, thou good German:  now haste, whither thou knowest!--And

as for us of the Glass-coach, haste too, O haste; much time is already

lost!  The august Glass-coach fare, six Insides, hastily packs itself into

the new Berline; two Bodyguard Couriers behind.  The Glass-coach itself is

turned adrift, its head towards the City; to wander whither it lists,--and

be found next morning tumbled in a ditch.  But Fersen is on the new box,

with its brave new hammer-cloths; flourishing his whip; he bolts forward

towards Bondy.  There a third and final Bodyguard Courier of ours ought

surely to be, with post-horses ready-ordered.  There likewise ought that

purchased Chaise, with the two Waiting-maids and their bandboxes to be;

whom also her Majesty could not travel without.  Swift, thou deft Fersen,

and may the Heavens turn it well!



Once more, by Heaven's blessing, it is all well.  Here is the sleeping

Hamlet of Bondy; Chaise with Waiting-women; horses all ready, and

postillions with their churn-boots, impatient in the dewy dawn.  Brief

harnessing done, the postillions with their churn-boots vault into the

saddles; brandish circularly their little noisy whips.  Fersen, under his

jarvie-surtout, bends in lowly silent reverence of adieu; royal hands wave

speechless in expressible response; Baroness de Korff's Berline, with the

Royalty of France, bounds off:  for ever, as it proved.  Deft Fersen dashes

obliquely Northward, through the country, towards Bougret; gains Bougret,

finds his German Coachman and chariot waiting there; cracks off, and drives

undiscovered into unknown space.  A deft active man, we say; what he

undertook to do is nimbly and successfully done.



A so the Royalty of France is actually fled?  This precious night, the

shortest of the year, it flies and drives!  Baroness de Korff is, at

bottom, Dame de Tourzel, Governess of the Royal Children:  she who came

hooded with the two hooded little ones; little Dauphin; little Madame

Royale, known long afterwards as Duchess d'Angouleme.  Baroness de Korff's

Waiting-maid is the Queen in gypsy-hat.  The royal Individual in round hat

and peruke, he is Valet, for the time being.  That other hooded Dame,

styled Travelling-companion, is kind Sister Elizabeth; she had sworn, long

since, when the Insurrection of Women was, that only death should part her

and them.  And so they rush there, not too impetuously, through the Wood of

Bondy:--over a Rubicon in their own and France's History.



Great; though the future is all vague!  If we reach Bouille?  If we do not

reach him?  O Louis! and this all round thee is the great slumbering Earth

(and overhead, the great watchful Heaven); the slumbering Wood of Bondy,--

where Longhaired Childeric Donothing was struck through with iron;

(Henault, Abrege Chronologique, p. 36.) not unreasonably.  These peaked

stone-towers are Raincy; towers of wicked d'Orleans.  All slumbers save the

multiplex rustle of our new Berline.  Loose-skirted scarecrow of an Herb-

merchant, with his ass and early greens, toilsomely plodding, seems the

only creature we meet.  But right ahead the great North-East sends up

evermore his gray brindled dawn:  from dewy branch, birds here and there,

with short deep warble, salute the coming Sun.  Stars fade out, and

Galaxies; Street-lamps of the City of God.  The Universe, O my brothers, is

flinging wide its portals for the Levee of the GREAT HIGH KING.  Thou, poor

King Louis, farest nevertheless, as mortals do, towards Orient lands of

Hope; and the Tuileries with its Levees, and France and the Earth itself,

is but a larger kind of doghutch,--occasionally going rabid.







Chapter 2.4.IV.



Attitude.



But in Paris, at six in the morning; when some Patriot Deputy, warned by a

billet, awoke Lafayette, and they went to the Tuileries?--Imagination may

paint, but words cannot, the surprise of Lafayette; or with what

bewilderment helpless Gouvion rolled glassy Argus's eyes, discerning now

that his false Chambermaid told true!



However, it is to be recorded that Paris, thanks to an august National

Assembly, did, on this seeming doomsday, surpass itself.  Never, according

to Historian eye-witnesses, was there seen such an 'imposing attitude.' 

(Deux Amis, vi. 67-178; Toulongeon, ii. 1-38; Camille, Prudhomme and

Editors (in Hist. Parl. x. 240-4.)  Sections all 'in permanence;' our

Townhall, too, having first, about ten o'clock, fired three solemn alarm-

cannons:  above all, our National Assembly!  National Assembly, likewise

permanent, decides what is needful; with unanimous consent, for the Cote

Droit sits dumb, afraid of the Lanterne.  Decides with a calm promptitude,

which rises towards the sublime.  One must needs vote, for the thing is

self-evident, that his Majesty has been abducted, or spirited away,

'enleve,' by some person or persons unknown:  in which case, what will the

Constitution have us do?  Let us return to first principles, as we always

say; "revenons aux principes."



By first or by second principles, much is promptly decided:  Ministers are

sent for, instructed how to continue their functions; Lafayette is

examined; and Gouvion, who gives a most helpless account, the best he can. 

Letters are found written:  one Letter, of immense magnitude; all in his

Majesty's hand, and evidently of his Majesty's own composition; addressed

to the National Assembly.  It details, with earnestness, with a childlike

simplicity, what woes his Majesty has suffered.  Woes great and small:  A

Necker seen applauded, a Majesty not; then insurrection; want of due cash

in Civil List; general want of cash, furniture and order; anarchy

everywhere; Deficit never yet, in the smallest, 'choked or comble:'--

wherefore in brief His Majesty has retired towards a Place of Liberty; and,

leaving Sanctions, Federation, and what Oaths there may be, to shift for

themselves, does now refer--to what, thinks an august Assembly?  To that

'Declaration of the Twenty-third of June,' with its "Seul il fera, He alone

will make his People happy."  As if that were not buried, deep enough,

under two irrevocable Twelvemonths, and the wreck and rubbish of a whole

Feudal World!  This strange autograph Letter the National Assembly decides

on printing; on transmitting to the Eighty-three Departments, with exegetic

commentary, short but pithy.  Commissioners also shall go forth on all

sides; the People be exhorted; the Armies be increased; care taken that the

Commonweal suffer no damage.--And now, with a sublime air of calmness, nay

of indifference, we 'pass to the order of the day!'



By such sublime calmness, the terror of the People is calmed.  These

gleaming Pike forests, which bristled fateful in the early sun, disappear

again; the far-sounding Street-orators cease, or spout milder.  We are to

have a civil war; let us have it then.  The King is gone; but National

Assembly, but France and we remain.  The People also takes a great

attitude; the People also is calm; motionless as a couchant lion.  With but

a few broolings, some waggings of the tail; to shew what it will do! 

Cazales, for instance, was beset by street-groups, and cries of Lanterne;

but National Patrols easily delivered him.  Likewise all King's effigies

and statues, at least stucco ones, get abolished.  Even King's names; the

word Roi fades suddenly out of all shop-signs; the Royal Bengal Tiger

itself, on the Boulevards, becomes the National Bengal one, Tigre National.

(Walpoliana.)



How great is a calm couchant People!  On the morrow, men will say to one

another:  "We have no King, yet we slept sound enough."  On the morrow,

fervent Achille de Chatelet, and Thomas Paine the rebellious Needleman,

shall have the walls of Paris profusely plastered with their Placard;

announcing that there must be a Republic!  (Dumont,c. 16.)--Need we add

that Lafayette too, though at first menaced by Pikes, has taken a great

attitude, or indeed the greatest of all?  Scouts and Aides-de-camp fly

forth, vague, in quest and pursuit; young Romoeuf towards Valenciennes,

though with small hope.



Thus Paris; sublimely calmed, in its bereavement.  But from the Messageries

Royales, in all Mail-bags, radiates forth far-darting the electric news: 

Our Hereditary Representative is flown.  Laugh, black Royalists:  yet be it

in your sleeve only; lest Patriotism notice, and waxing frantic, lower the

Lanterne!  In Paris alone is a sublime National Assembly with its calmness;

truly, other places must take it as they can:  with open mouth and eyes;

with panic cackling, with wrath, with conjecture.  How each one of those

dull leathern Diligences, with its leathern bag and 'The King is fled,'

furrows up smooth France as it goes; through town and hamlet, ruffles the

smooth public mind into quivering agitation of death-terror; then lumbers

on, as if nothing had happened!  Along all highways; towards the utmost

borders; till all France is ruffled,--roughened up (metaphorically

speaking) into one enormous, desperate-minded, red-guggling Turkey Cock!



For example, it is under cloud of night that the leathern Monster reaches

Nantes; deep sunk in sleep.  The word spoken rouses all Patriot men: 

General Dumouriez, enveloped in roquelaures, has to descend from his

bedroom; finds the street covered with 'four or five thousand citizens in

their shirts.'  (Dumouriez, Memoires, ii. 109.)  Here and there a faint

farthing rushlight, hastily kindled; and so many swart-featured haggard

faces, with nightcaps pushed back; and the more or less flowing drapery of

night-shirt:  open-mouthed till the General say his word!  And overhead, as

always, the Great Bear is turning so quiet round Bootes; steady,

indifferent as the leathern Diligence itself.  Take comfort, ye men of

Nantes:  Bootes and the steady Bear are turning; ancient Atlantic still

sends his brine, loud-billowing, up your Loire-stream; brandy shall be hot

in the stomach:  this is not the Last of the Days, but one before the

Last.--The fools!  If they knew what was doing, in these very instants,

also by candle-light, in the far North-East!



Perhaps we may say the most terrified man in Paris or France is--who thinks

the Reader?--seagreen Robespierre.  Double paleness, with the shadow of

gibbets and halters, overcasts the seagreen features:  it is too clear to

him that there is to be 'a Saint-Bartholomew of Patriots,' that in four-

and-twenty hours he will not be in life.  These horrid anticipations of the

soul he is heard uttering at Petion's; by a notable witness.  By Madame

Roland, namely; her whom we saw, last year, radiant at the Lyons

Federation!  These four months, the Rolands have been in Paris; arranging

with Assembly Committees the Municipal affairs of Lyons, affairs all sunk

in debt;--communing, the while, as was most natural, with the best Patriots

to be found here, with our Brissots, Petions, Buzots, Robespierres; who

were wont to come to us, says the fair Hostess, four evenings in the week.

They, running about, busier than ever this day, would fain have comforted

the seagreen man: spake of Achille du Chatelet's Placard; of a Journal to

be called The Republican; of preparing men's minds for a Republic.  "A

Republic?" said the Seagreen, with one of his dry husky unsportful laughs,

"What is that?"  (Madame Roland, ii. 70.)  O seagreen Incorruptible, thou

shalt see!







Chapter 2.4.V.



The New Berline.



But scouts all this while and aide-de-camps, have flown forth faster than

the leathern Diligences.  Young Romoeuf, as we said, was off early towards

Valenciennes:  distracted Villagers seize him, as a traitor with a finger

of his own in the plot; drag him back to the Townhall; to the National

Assembly, which speedily grants a new passport.  Nay now, that same

scarecrow of an Herb-merchant with his ass has bethought him of the grand

new Berline seen in the Wood of Bondy; and delivered evidence of it:

(Moniteur, &c. (in Hist. Parl. x. 244-313.)  Romoeuf, furnished with new

passport, is sent forth with double speed on a hopefuller track; by Bondy,

Claye, and Chalons, towards Metz, to track the new Berline; and gallops a

franc etrier.



Miserable new Berline!  Why could not Royalty go in some old Berline

similar to that of other men?  Flying for life, one does not stickle about

his vehicle.  Monsieur, in a commonplace travelling-carriage is off

Northwards; Madame, his Princess, in another, with variation of route: 

they cross one another while changing horses, without look of recognition;

and reach Flanders, no man questioning them.  Precisely in the same manner,

beautiful Princess de Lamballe set off, about the same hour; and will reach

England safe:--would she had continued there!  The beautiful, the good, but

the unfortunate; reserved for a frightful end!



All runs along, unmolested, speedy, except only the new Berline.  Huge

leathern vehicle;--huge Argosy, let us say, or Acapulco-ship; with its

heavy stern-boat of Chaise-and-pair; with its three yellow Pilot-boats of

mounted Bodyguard Couriers, rocking aimless round it and ahead of it, to

bewilder, not to guide!  It lumbers along, lurchingly with stress, at a

snail's pace; noted of all the world.  The Bodyguard Couriers, in their

yellow liveries, go prancing and clattering; loyal but stupid; unacquainted

with all things.  Stoppages occur; and breakages to be repaired at Etoges. 

King Louis too will dismount, will walk up hills, and enjoy the blessed

sunshine:--with eleven horses and double drink money, and all furtherances

of Nature and Art, it will be found that Royalty, flying for life,

accomplishes Sixty-nine miles in Twenty-two incessant hours.  Slow Royalty! 

And yet not a minute of these hours but is precious:  on minutes hang the

destinies of Royalty now.



Readers, therefore, can judge in what humour Duke de Choiseul might stand

waiting, in the Village of Pont-de-Sommevelle, some leagues beyond Chalons,

hour after hour, now when the day bends visibly westward.  Choiseul drove

out of Paris, in all privity, ten hours before their Majesties' fixed time;

his Hussars, led by Engineer Goguelat, are here duly, come 'to escort a

Treasure that is expected:'  but, hour after hour, is no Baroness de

Korff's Berline.  Indeed, over all that North-east Region, on the skirts of

Champagne and of Lorraine, where the Great Road runs, the agitation is

considerable.  For all along, from this Pont-de-Sommevelle Northeastward as

far as Montmedi, at Post-villages and Towns, escorts of Hussars and

Dragoons do lounge waiting:  a train or chain of Military Escorts; at the

Montmedi end of it our brave Bouille:  an electric thunder-chain; which the

invisible Bouille, like a Father Jove, holds in his hand--for wise

purposes!  Brave Bouille has done what man could; has spread out his

electric thunder-chain of Military Escorts, onwards to the threshold of

Chalons:  it waits but for the new Korff Berline; to receive it, escort it,

and, if need be, bear it off in whirlwind of military fire.  They lie and

lounge there, we say, these fierce Troopers; from Montmedi and Stenai,

through Clermont, Sainte-Menehould to utmost Pont-de-Sommevelle, in all

Post-villages; for the route shall avoid Verdun and great Towns:  they

loiter impatient 'till the Treasure arrive.'



Judge what a day this is for brave Bouille:  perhaps the first day of a new

glorious life; surely the last day of the old!  Also, and indeed still

more, what a day, beautiful and terrible, for your young full-blooded

Captains:  your Dandoins, Comte de Damas, Duke de Choiseul, Engineer

Goguelat, and the like; entrusted with the secret!--Alas, the day bends

ever more westward; and no Korff Berline comes to sight.  It is four hours

beyond the time, and still no Berline.  In all Village-streets, Royalist

Captains go lounging, looking often Paris-ward; with face of unconcern,

with heart full of black care:  rigorous Quartermasters can hardly keep the

private dragoons from cafes and dramshops.  (Declaration du Sieur La Gache

du Regiment Royal-Dragoons (in Choiseul, pp. 125-39.)  Dawn on our

bewilderment, thou new Berline; dawn on us, thou Sun-chariot of a new

Berline, with the destinies of France!



It was of His Majesty's ordering, this military array of Escorts:  a thing

solacing the Royal imagination with a look of security and rescue; yet, in

reality, creating only alarm, and where there was otherwise no danger,

danger without end.  For each Patriot, in these Post-villages, asks

naturally:  This clatter of cavalry, and marching and lounging of troops,

what means it?  To escort a Treasure?  Why escort, when no Patriot will

steal from the Nation; or where is your Treasure?--There has been such

marching and counter-marching:  for it is another fatality, that certain of

these Military Escorts came out so early as yesterday; the Nineteenth not

the Twentieth of the month being the day first appointed, which her

Majesty, for some necessity or other, saw good to alter.  And now consider

the suspicious nature of Patriotism; suspicious, above all, of Bouille the

Aristocrat; and how the sour doubting humour has had leave to accumulate

and exacerbate for four-and-twenty hours!



At Pont-de-Sommevelle, these Forty foreign Hussars of Goguelat and Duke

Choiseul are becoming an unspeakable mystery to all men.  They lounged long

enough, already, at Sainte-Menehould; lounged and loitered till our

National Volunteers there, all risen into hot wrath of doubt, 'demanded

three hundred fusils of their Townhall,' and got them.  At which same

moment too, as it chanced, our Captain Dandoins was just coming in, from

Clermont with his troop, at the other end of the Village.  A fresh troop;

alarming enough; though happily they are only Dragoons and French!  So that

Goguelat with his Hussars had to ride, and even to do it fast; till here at

Pont-de-Sommevelle, where Choiseul lay waiting, he found resting-place. 

Resting-place, as on burning marle.  For the rumour of him flies abroad;

and men run to and fro in fright and anger:  Chalons sends forth

exploratory pickets, coming from Sainte-Menehould, on that.  What is it, ye

whiskered Hussars, men of foreign guttural speech; in the name of Heaven,

what is it that brings you?  A Treasure?--exploratory pickets shake their

heads.  The hungry Peasants, however, know too well what Treasure it is: 

Military seizure for rents, feudalities; which no Bailiff could make us

pay!  This they know;--and set to jingling their Parish-bell by way of

tocsin; with rapid effect!  Choiseul and Goguelat, if the whole country is

not to take fire, must needs, be there Berline, be there no Berline, saddle

and ride.



They mount; and this Parish tocsin happily ceases.  They ride slowly

Eastward, towards Sainte-Menehould; still hoping the Sun-Chariot of a

Berline may overtake them.  Ah me, no Berline!  And near now is that

Sainte-Menehould, which expelled us in the morning, with its 'three hundred

National fusils;' which looks, belike, not too lovingly on Captain Dandoins

and his fresh Dragoons, though only French;--which, in a word, one dare not

enter the second time, under pain of explosion!  With rather heavy heart,

our Hussar Party strikes off to the left; through byways, through pathless

hills and woods, they, avoiding Sainte-Menehould and all places which have

seen them heretofore, will make direct for the distant Village of Varennes. 

It is probable they will have a rough evening-ride.



This first military post, therefore, in the long thunder-chain, has gone

off with no effect; or with worse, and your chain threatens to entangle

itself!--The Great Road, however, is got hushed again into a kind of

quietude, though one of the wakefullest.  Indolent Dragoons cannot, by any

Quartermaster, be kept altogether from the dramshop; where Patriots drink,

and will even treat, eager enough for news.  Captains, in a state near

distraction, beat the dusky highway, with a face of indifference; and no

Sun-Chariot appears.  Why lingers it?  Incredible, that with eleven horses

and such yellow Couriers and furtherances, its rate should be under the

weightiest dray-rate, some three miles an hour!  Alas, one knows not

whether it ever even got out of Paris;--and yet also one knows not whether,

this very moment, it is not at the Village-end!  One's heart flutters on

the verge of unutterabilities.







Chapter 2.4.VI.



Old-Dragoon Drouet.



In this manner, however, has the Day bent downwards.  Wearied mortals are

creeping home from their field-labour; the village-artisan eats with relish

his supper of herbs, or has strolled forth to the village-street for a

sweet mouthful of air and human news.  Still summer-eventide everywhere! 

The great Sun hangs flaming on the utmost North-West; for it is his longest

day this year.  The hill-tops rejoicing will ere long be at their ruddiest,

and blush Good-night.  The thrush, in green dells, on long-shadowed leafy

spray, pours gushing his glad serenade, to the babble of brooks grown

audibler; silence is stealing over the Earth.  Your dusty Mill of Valmy, as

all other mills and drudgeries, may furl its canvass, and cease swashing

and circling.  The swenkt grinders in this Treadmill of an Earth have

ground out another Day; and lounge there, as we say, in village-groups;

movable, or ranked on social stone-seats; (Rapport de M. Remy (in Choiseul,

p. 143.) their children, mischievous imps, sporting about their feet. 

Unnotable hum of sweet human gossip rises from this Village of Sainte-

Menehould, as from all other villages.  Gossip mostly sweet, unnotable; for

the very Dragoons are French and gallant; nor as yet has the Paris-and-

Verdun Diligence, with its leathern bag, rumbled in, to terrify the minds

of men.



One figure nevertheless we do note at the last door of the Village:  that

figure in loose-flowing nightgown, of Jean Baptiste Drouet, Master of the

Post here.  An acrid choleric man, rather dangerous-looking; still in the

prime of life, though he has served, in his time as a Conde Dragoon.  This

day from an early hour, Drouet got his choler stirred, and has been kept

fretting.  Hussar Goguelat in the morning saw good, by way of thrift, to

bargain with his own Innkeeper, not with Drouet regular Maitre de Poste,

about some gig-horse for the sending back of his gig; which thing Drouet

perceiving came over in red ire, menacing the Inn-keeper, and would not be

appeased.  Wholly an unsatisfactory day.  For Drouet is an acrid Patriot

too, was at the Paris Feast of Pikes:  and what do these Bouille Soldiers

mean?  Hussars, with their gig, and a vengeance to it!--have hardly been

thrust out, when Dandoins and his fresh Dragoons arrive from Clermont, and

stroll.  For what purpose?  Choleric Drouet steps out and steps in, with

long-flowing nightgown; looking abroad, with that sharpness of faculty

which stirred choler gives to man.



On the other hand, mark Captain Dandoins on the street of that same

Village; sauntering with a face of indifference, a heart eaten of black

care!  For no Korff Berline makes its appearance.  The great Sun flames

broader towards setting:  one's heart flutters on the verge of dread

unutterabilities.



By Heaven!  Here is the yellow Bodyguard Courier; spurring fast, in the

ruddy evening light!  Steady, O Dandoins, stand with inscrutable

indifferent face; though the yellow blockhead spurs past the Post-house;

inquires to find it; and stirs the Village, all delighted with his fine

livery.--Lumbering along with its mountains of bandboxes, and Chaise

behind, the Korff Berline rolls in; huge Acapulco-ship with its Cockboat,

having got thus far.  The eyes of the Villagers look enlightened, as such

eyes do when a coach-transit, which is an event, occurs for them. 

Strolling Dragoons respectfully, so fine are the yellow liveries, bring

hand to helmet; and a lady in gipsy-hat responds with a grace peculiar to

her.  (Declaration de la Gache (in Choiseul ubi supra.)  Dandoins stands

with folded arms, and what look of indifference and disdainful garrison-air

a man can, while the heart is like leaping out of him.  Curled disdainful

moustachio; careless glance,--which however surveys the Village-groups, and

does not like them.  With his eye he bespeaks the yellow Courier.  Be

quick, be quick!  Thick-headed Yellow cannot understand the eye; comes up

mumbling, to ask in words:  seen of the Village!



Nor is Post-master Drouet unobservant, all this while; but steps out and

steps in, with his long-flowing nightgown, in the level sunlight; prying

into several things.  When a man's faculties, at the right time, are

sharpened by choler, it may lead to much.  That Lady in slouched gypsy-hat,

though sitting back in the Carriage, does she not resemble some one we have

seen, some time;--at the Feast of Pikes, or elsewhere?  And this Grosse-

Tete in round hat and peruke, which, looking rearward, pokes itself out

from time to time, methinks there are features in it--?  Quick, Sieur

Guillaume, Clerk of the Directoire, bring me a new Assignat!  Drouet scans

the new Assignat; compares the Paper-money Picture with the Gross-Head in

round hat there:  by Day and Night! you might say the one was an attempted

Engraving of the other.  And this march of Troops; this sauntering and

whispering,--I see it!



Drouet Post-master of this Village, hot Patriot, Old Dragoon of Conde,

consider, therefore, what thou wilt do.  And fast:  for behold the new

Berline, expeditiously yoked, cracks whipcord, and rolls away!--Drouet dare

not, on the spur of the instant, clutch the bridles in his own two hands;

Dandoins, with broadsword, might hew you off.  Our poor Nationals, not one

of them here, have three hundred fusils but then no powder; besides one is

not sure, only morally-certain.  Drouet, as an adroit Old-Dragoon of Conde

does what is advisablest:  privily bespeaks Clerk Guillaume, Old-Dragoon of

Conde he too; privily, while Clerk Guillaume is saddling two of the

fleetest horses, slips over to the Townhall to whisper a word; then mounts

with Clerk Guillaume; and the two bound eastward in pursuit, to see what

can be done.



They bound eastward, in sharp trot; their moral-certainty permeating the

Village, from the Townhall outwards, in busy whispers.  Alas!  Captain

Dandoins orders his Dragoons to mount; but they, complaining of long fast,

demand bread-and-cheese first;--before which brief repast can be eaten, the

whole Village is permeated; not whispering now, but blustering and

shrieking!  National Volunteers, in hurried muster, shriek for gunpowder;

Dragoons halt between Patriotism and Rule of the Service, between bread and

cheese and fixed bayonets:  Dandoins hands secretly his Pocket-book, with

its secret despatches, to the rigorous Quartermaster:  the very Ostlers

have stable-forks and flails.  The rigorous Quartermaster, half-saddled,

cuts out his way with the sword's edge, amid levelled bayonets, amid

Patriot vociferations, adjurations, flail-strokes; and rides frantic;

(Declaration de La Gache (in Choiseul), p. 134.)--few or even none

following him; the rest, so sweetly constrained consenting to stay there.



And thus the new Berline rolls; and Drouet and Guillaume gallop after it,

and Dandoins's Troopers or Trooper gallops after them; and Sainte-

Menehould, with some leagues of the King's Highway, is in explosion;--and

your Military thunder-chain has gone off in a self-destructive manner; one

may fear with the frightfullest issues!







Chapter 2.4.VII.



The Night of Spurs.



This comes of mysterious Escorts, and a new Berline with eleven horses: 

'he that has a secret should not only hide it, but hide that he has it to

hide.'  Your first Military Escort has exploded self-destructive; and all

Military Escorts, and a suspicious Country will now be up, explosive;

comparable not to victorious thunder.  Comparable, say rather, to the first

stirring of an Alpine Avalanche; which, once stir it, as here at Sainte-

Menehould, will spread,--all round, and on and on, as far as Stenai;

thundering with wild ruin, till Patriot Villagers, Peasantry, Military

Escorts, new Berline and Royalty are down,--jumbling in the Abyss!



The thick shades of Night are falling.  Postillions crack the whip:  the

Royal Berline is through Clermont, where Colonel Comte de Damas got a word

whispered to it; is safe through, towards Varennes; rushing at the rate of

double drink-money:  an Unknown 'Inconnu on horseback' shrieks earnestly

some hoarse whisper, not audible, into the rushing Carriage-window, and

vanishes, left in the night.  (Campan, ii. 159.)  August Travellers

palpitate; nevertheless overwearied Nature sinks every one of them into a

kind of sleep.  Alas, and Drouet and Clerk Guillaume spur; taking side-

roads, for shortness, for safety; scattering abroad that moral-certainty of

theirs; which flies, a bird of the air carrying it!



And your rigorous Quartermaster spurs; awakening hoarse trumpet-tone, as

here at Clermont, calling out Dragoons gone to bed.  Brave Colonel de Damas

has them mounted, in part, these Clermont men; young Cornet Remy dashes off

with a few.  But the Patriot Magistracy is out here at Clermont too;

National Guards shrieking for ball-cartridges; and the Village 'illuminates

itself;'--deft Patriots springing out of bed; alertly, in shirt or shift,

striking a light; sticking up each his farthing candle, or penurious oil-

cruise, till all glitters and glimmers; so deft are they!  A camisado, or

shirt-tumult, every where:  stormbell set a-ringing; village-drum beating

furious generale, as here at Clermont, under illumination; distracted

Patriots pleading and menacing!  Brave young Colonel de Damas, in that

uproar of distracted Patriotism, speaks some fire-sentences to what

Troopers he has:  "Comrades insulted at Sainte-Menehould; King and Country

calling on the brave;" then gives the fire-word, Draw swords.  Whereupon,

alas, the Troopers only smite their sword-handles, driving them further

home!  "To me, whoever is for the King!" cries Damas in despair; and

gallops, he with some poor loyal Two, of the subaltern sort, into the bosom

of the Night.  (Proces-verbal du Directoire de Clermont (in Choiseul, p.

189-95).)



Night unexampled in the Clermontais; shortest of the year; remarkablest of

the century:  Night deserving to be named of Spurs!  Cornet Remy, and those

Few he dashed off with, has missed his road; is galloping for hours towards

Verdun; then, for hours, across hedged country, through roused hamlets,

towards Varennes.  Unlucky Cornet Remy; unluckier Colonel Damas, with whom

there ride desperate only some loyal Two!  More ride not of that Clermont

Escort:  of other Escorts, in other Villages, not even Two may ride; but

only all curvet and prance,--impeded by stormbell and your Village

illuminating itself.



And Drouet rides and Clerk Guillaume; and the Country runs.--Goguelat and

Duke Choiseul are plunging through morasses, over cliffs, over stock and

stone, in the shaggy woods of the Clermontais; by tracks; or trackless,

with guides; Hussars tumbling into pitfalls, and lying 'swooned three

quarters of an hour,' the rest refusing to march without them.  What an

evening-ride from Pont-de-Sommerville; what a thirty hours, since Choiseul

quitted Paris, with Queen's-valet Leonard in the chaise by him!  Black Care

sits behind the rider.  Thus go they plunging; rustle the owlet from his

branchy nest; champ the sweet-scented forest-herb, queen-of-the-meadows

spilling her spikenard; and frighten the ear of Night.  But hark! towards

twelve o'clock, as one guesses, for the very stars are gone out:  sound of

the tocsin from Varennes?  Checking bridle, the Hussar Officer listens: 

"Some fire undoubtedly!"--yet rides on, with double breathlessness, to

verify.



Yes, gallant friends that do your utmost, it is a certain sort of fire: 

difficult to quench.--The Korff Berline, fairly ahead of all this riding


Avalanche, reached the little paltry Village of Varennes about eleven

o'clock; hopeful, in spite of that horse-whispering Unknown.  Do not all

towns now lie behind us; Verdun avoided, on our right?  Within wind of

Bouille himself, in a manner; and the darkest of midsummer nights favouring

us!  And so we halt on the hill-top at the South end of the Village;

expecting our relay; which young Bouille, Bouille's own son, with his

Escort of Hussars, was to have ready; for in this Village is no Post. 

Distracting to think of:  neither horse nor Hussar is here!  Ah, and stout

horses, a proper relay belonging to Duke Choiseul, do stand at hay, but in

the Upper Village over the Bridge; and we know not of them.  Hussars

likewise do wait, but drinking in the taverns.  For indeed it is six hours

beyond the time; young Bouille, silly stripling, thinking the matter over

for this night, has retired to bed.  And so our yellow Couriers,

inexperienced, must rove, groping, bungling, through a Village mostly

asleep:  Postillions will not, for any money, go on with the tired horses;

not at least without refreshment; not they, let the Valet in round hat

argue as he likes.



Miserable!  'For five-and-thirty minutes' by the King's watch, the Berline

is at a dead stand; Round-hat arguing with Churnboots; tired horses

slobbering their meal-and-water; yellow Couriers groping, bungling;--young

Bouille asleep, all the while, in the Upper Village, and Choiseul's fine

team standing there at hay.  No help for it; not with a King's ransom:  the

horses deliberately slobber, Round-hat argues, Bouille sleeps.  And mark

now, in the thick night, do not two Horsemen, with jaded trot, come clank-

clanking; and start with half-pause, if one noticed them, at sight of this

dim mass of a Berline, and its dull slobbering and arguing; then prick off

faster, into the Village?  It is Drouet, he and Clerk Guillaume!  Still

ahead, they two, of the whole riding hurlyburly; unshot, though some brag

of having chased them.  Perilous is Drouet's errand also; but he is an Old-

Dragoon, with his wits shaken thoroughly awake.



The Village of Varennes lies dark and slumberous; a most unlevel Village,

of inverse saddle-shape, as men write.  It sleeps; the rushing of the River

Aire singing lullaby to it.  Nevertheless from the Golden Arms, Bras d'Or

Tavern, across that sloping marketplace, there still comes shine of social

light; comes voice of rude drovers, or the like, who have not yet taken the

stirrup-cup; Boniface Le Blanc, in white apron, serving them:  cheerful to

behold.  To this Bras d'Or, Drouet enters, alacrity looking through his

eyes:  he nudges Boniface, in all privacy, "Camarade, es tu bon Patriote,

Art thou a good Patriot?"--"Si je suis!" answers Boniface.--"In that case,"

eagerly whispers Drouet--what whisper is needful, heard of Boniface alone. 

(Deux Amis, vi. 139-78.)



And now see Boniface Le Blanc bustling, as he never did for the jolliest

toper.  See Drouet and Guillaume, dexterous Old-Dragoons, instantly down

blocking the Bridge, with a 'furniture waggon they find there,' with

whatever waggons, tumbrils, barrels, barrows their hands can lay hold of;--

till no carriage can pass.  Then swiftly, the Bridge once blocked, see them

take station hard by, under Varennes Archway:  joined by Le Blanc, Le

Blanc's Brother, and one or two alert Patriots he has roused.  Some half-

dozen in all, with National Muskets, they stand close, waiting under the

Archway, till that same Korff Berline rumble up.



It rumbles up:  Alte la! lanterns flash out from under coat-skirts, bridles

chuck in strong fists, two National Muskets level themselves fore and aft

through the two Coach-doors:  "Mesdames, your Passports?"--Alas! Alas! 

Sieur Sausse, Procureur of the Township, Tallow-chandler also and Grocer is

there, with official grocer-politeness; Drouet with fierce logic and ready

wit:--The respected Travelling Party, be it Baroness de Korff's, or persons

of still higher consequence, will perhaps please to rest itself in M.

Sausse's till the dawn strike up!



O Louis; O hapless Marie-Antoinette, fated to pass thy life with such men! 

Phlegmatic Louis, art thou but lazy semi-animate phlegm then, to the centre

of thee?  King, Captain-General, Sovereign Frank!  If thy heart ever

formed, since it began beating under the name of heart, any resolution at

all, be it now then, or never in this world:  "Violent nocturnal

individuals, and if it were persons of high consequence?  And if it were

the King himself?  Has the King not the power, which all beggars have, of

travelling unmolested on his own Highway?  Yes:  it is the King; and

tremble ye to know it!  The King has said, in this one small matter; and in

France, or under God's Throne, is no power that shall gainsay.  Not the

King shall ye stop here under this your miserable Archway; but his dead

body only, and answer it to Heaven and Earth.  To me, Bodyguards: 

Postillions, en avant!"--One fancies in that case the pale paralysis of

these two Le Blanc musketeers; the drooping of Drouet's under-jaw; and how

Procureur Sausse had melted like tallow in furnace-heat:  Louis faring on;

in some few steps awakening Young Bouille, awakening relays and hussars: 

triumphant entry, with cavalcading high-brandishing Escort, and Escorts,

into Montmedi; and the whole course of French History different!



Alas, it was not in the poor phlegmatic man.  Had it been in him, French

History had never come under this Varennes Archway to decide itself.--He

steps out; all step out.  Procureur Sausse gives his grocer-arms to the

Queen and Sister Elizabeth; Majesty taking the two children by the hand. 

And thus they walk, coolly back, over the Marketplace, to Procureur

Sausse's; mount into his small upper story; where straightway his Majesty

'demands refreshments.'  Demands refreshments, as is written; gets bread-

and-cheese with a bottle of Burgundy; and remarks, that it is the best

Burgundy he ever drank!



Meanwhile, the Varennes Notables, and all men, official, and non-official,

are hastily drawing on their breeches; getting their fighting-gear. 

Mortals half-dressed tumble out barrels, lay felled trees; scouts dart off

to all the four winds,--the tocsin begins clanging, 'the Village

illuminates itself.'  Very singular:  how these little Villages do manage,

so adroit are they, when startled in midnight alarm of war.  Like little

adroit municipal rattle-snakes, suddenly awakened:  for their stormbell

rattles and rings; their eyes glisten luminous (with tallow-light), as in

rattle-snake ire; and the Village will sting!  Old-Dragoon Drouet is our

engineer and generalissimo; valiant as a Ruy Diaz:--Now or never, ye

Patriots, for the Soldiery is coming; massacre by Austrians, by

Aristocrats, wars more than civil, it all depends on you and the hour!--

National Guards rank themselves, half-buttoned:  mortals, we say, still

only in breeches, in under-petticoat, tumble out barrels and lumber, lay

felled trees for barricades:  the Village will sting.  Rabid Democracy, it

would seem, is not confined to Paris, then?  Ah no, whatsoever Courtiers

might talk; too clearly no.  This of dying for one's King is grown into a

dying for one's self, against the King, if need be.



And so our riding and running Avalanche and Hurlyburly has reached the

Abyss, Korff Berline foremost; and may pour itself thither, and jumble: 

endless!  For the next six hours, need we ask if there was a clattering far

and wide?  Clattering and tocsining and hot tumult, over all the

Clermontais, spreading through the Three Bishopricks:  Dragoon and Hussar

Troops galloping on roads and no-roads; National Guards arming and starting

in the dead of night; tocsin after tocsin transmitting the alarm.  In some

forty minutes, Goguelat and Choiseul, with their wearied Hussars, reach

Varennes.  Ah, it is no fire then; or a fire difficult to quench!  They

leap the tree-barricades, in spite of National serjeant; they enter the

village, Choiseul instructing his Troopers how the matter really is; who

respond interjectionally, in their guttural dialect, "Der Konig; die

Koniginn!" and seem stanch.  These now, in their stanch humour, will, for

one thing, beset Procureur Sausse's house.  Most beneficial:  had not

Drouet stormfully ordered otherwise; and even bellowed, in his extremity,

"Cannoneers to your guns!"--two old honey-combed Field-pieces, empty of all

but cobwebs; the rattle whereof, as the Cannoneers with assured countenance

trundled them up, did nevertheless abate the Hussar ardour, and produce a

respectfuller ranking further back.  Jugs of wine, handed over the ranks,

for the German throat too has sensibility, will complete the business. 

When Engineer Goguelat, some hour or so afterwards, steps forth, the

response to him is--a hiccuping Vive la Nation!



What boots it?  Goguelat, Choiseul, now also Count Damas, and all the

Varennes Officiality are with the King; and the King can give no order,

form no opinion; but sits there, as he has ever done, like clay on potter's

wheel; perhaps the absurdest of all pitiable and pardonable clay-figures

that now circle under the Moon.  He will go on, next morning, and take the

National Guard with him; Sausse permitting!  Hapless Queen:  with her two

children laid there on the mean bed, old Mother Sausse kneeling to Heaven,

with tears and an audible prayer, to bless them; imperial Marie-Antoinette

near kneeling to Son Sausse and Wife Sausse, amid candle-boxes and treacle-

barrels,--in vain!  There are Three-thousand National Guards got in; before

long they will count Ten-thousand; tocsins spreading like fire on dry

heath, or far faster.



Young Bouille, roused by this Varennes tocsin, has taken horse, and--fled

towards his Father.  Thitherward also rides, in an almost hysterically

desperate manner, a certain Sieur Aubriot, Choiseul's Orderly; swimming

dark rivers, our Bridge being blocked; spurring as if the Hell-hunt were at

his heels.  (Rapport de M. Aubriot (Choiseul, p. 150-7.)  Through the

village of Dun, he, galloping still on, scatters the alarm; at Dun, brave

Captain Deslons and his Escort of a Hundred, saddle and ride.  Deslons too

gets into Varennes; leaving his Hundred outside, at the tree-barricade;

offers to cut King Louis out, if he will order it:  but unfortunately "the

work will prove hot;" whereupon King Louis has "no orders to give." 

(Extrait d'un Rapport de M. Deslons (Choiseul, p. 164-7.)



And so the tocsin clangs, and Dragoons gallop; and can do nothing, having

gallopped:  National Guards stream in like the gathering of ravens:  your

exploding Thunder-chain, falling Avalanche, or what else we liken it to,

does play, with a vengeance,--up now as far as Stenai and Bouille himself. 

(Bouille, ii. 74-6.)  Brave Bouille, son of the whirlwind, he saddles Royal

Allemand; speaks fire-words, kindling heart and eyes; distributes twenty-

five gold-louis a company:--Ride, Royal-Allemand, long-famed:  no Tuileries

Charge and Necker-Orleans Bust-Procession; a very King made captive, and

world all to win!--Such is the Night deserving to be named of Spurs.



At six o'clock two things have happened.  Lafayette's Aide-de-camp,

Romoeuf, riding a franc etrier, on that old Herb-merchant's route,

quickened during the last stages, has got to Varennes; where the Ten

thousand now furiously demand, with fury of panic terror, that Royalty

shall forthwith return Paris-ward, that there be not infinite bloodshed. 

Also, on the other side, 'English Tom,' Choiseul's jokei, flying with that

Choiseul relay, has met Bouille on the heights of Dun; the adamantine brow

flushed with dark thunder; thunderous rattle of Royal Allemand at his

heels.  English Tom answers as he can the brief question, How it is at

Varennes?--then asks in turn what he, English Tom, with M. de Choiseul's

horses, is to do, and whither to ride?--To the Bottomless Pool! answers a

thunder-voice; then again speaking and spurring, orders Royal Allemand to

the gallop; and vanishes, swearing (en jurant).  (Declaration du Sieur

Thomas (in Choiseul, p. 188).)  'Tis the last of our brave Bouille.  Within

sight of Varennes, he having drawn bridle, calls a council of officers;

finds that it is in vain.  King Louis has departed, consenting:  amid the

clangour of universal stormbell; amid the tramp of Ten thousand armed men,

already arrived; and say, of Sixty thousand flocking thither.  Brave

Deslons, even without 'orders,' darted at the River Aire with his Hundred!

(Weber, ii. 386.) swam one branch of it, could not the other; and stood

there, dripping and panting, with inflated nostril; the Ten thousand

answering him with a shout of mockery, the new Berline lumbering Paris-ward

its weary inevitable way.  No help, then in Earth; nor in an age, not of

miracles, in Heaven!



That night, 'Marquis de Bouille and twenty-one more of us rode over the

Frontiers; the Bernardine monks at Orval in Luxemburg gave us supper and

lodging.'  (Aubriot, ut supra, p. 158.)  With little of speech, Bouille

rides; with thoughts that do not brook speech.  Northward, towards

uncertainty, and the Cimmerian Night:  towards West-Indian Isles, for with

thin Emigrant delirium the son of the whirlwind cannot act; towards

England, towards premature Stoical death; not towards France any more. 

Honour to the Brave; who, be it in this quarrel or in that, is a substance

and articulate-speaking piece of Human Valour, not a fanfaronading hollow

Spectrum and squeaking and gibbering Shadow!  One of the few Royalist

Chief-actors this Bouille, of whom so much can be said.



The brave Bouille too, then, vanishes from the tissue of our Story.  Story

and tissue, faint ineffectual Emblem of that grand Miraculous Tissue, and

Living Tapestry named French Revolution, which did weave itself then in

very fact, 'on the loud-sounding 'LOOM OF TIME!'  The old Brave drop out

from it, with their strivings; and new acrid Drouets, of new strivings and

colour, come in:--as is the manner of that weaving.







Chapter 2.4.VIII.



The Return.



So then our grand Royalist Plot, of Flight to Metz, has executed itself. 

Long hovering in the background, as a dread royal ultimatum, it has rushed

forward in its terrors:  verily to some purpose.  How many Royalist Plots

and Projects, one after another, cunningly-devised, that were to explode

like powder-mines and thunderclaps; not one solitary Plot of which has

issued otherwise!  Powder-mine of a Seance Royale on the Twenty-third of

June 1789, which exploded as we then said, 'through the touchhole;' which

next, your wargod Broglie having reloaded it, brought a Bastille about your

ears.  Then came fervent Opera-Repast, with flourishing of sabres, and O

Richard, O my King; which, aided by Hunger, produces Insurrection of Women,

and Pallas Athene in the shape of Demoiselle Theroigne.  Valour profits

not; neither has fortune smiled on Fanfaronade.  The Bouille Armament ends

as the Broglie one had done.  Man after man spends himself in this cause,

only to work it quicker ruin; it seems a cause doomed, forsaken of Earth

and Heaven.



On the Sixth of October gone a year, King Louis, escorted by Demoiselle

Theroigne and some two hundred thousand, made a Royal Progress and Entrance

into Paris, such as man had never witnessed:  we prophesied him Two more

such; and accordingly another of them, after this Flight to Metz, is now

coming to pass.  Theroigne will not escort here, neither does Mirabeau now

'sit in one of the accompanying carriages.'  Mirabeau lies dead, in the

Pantheon of Great Men.  Theroigne lies living, in dark Austrian Prison;

having gone to Liege, professionally, and been seized there.  Bemurmured

now by the hoarse-flowing Danube; the light of her Patriot Supper-Parties

gone quite out; so lies Theroigne:  she shall speak with the Kaiser face to

face, and return.  And France lies how!  Fleeting Time shears down the

great and the little; and in two years alters many things.



But at all events, here, we say, is a second Ignominious Royal Procession,

though much altered; to be witnessed also by its hundreds of thousands. 

Patience, ye Paris Patriots; the Royal Berline is returning.  Not till

Saturday:  for the Royal Berline travels by slow stages; amid such loud-

voiced confluent sea of National Guards, sixty thousand as they count; amid

such tumult of all people.  Three National-Assembly Commissioners, famed

Barnave, famed Petion, generally-respectable Latour-Maubourg, have gone to

meet it; of whom the two former ride in the Berline itself beside Majesty,

day after day.  Latour, as a mere respectability, and man of whom all men

speak well, can ride in the rear, with Dame Tourzel and the Soubrettes.



So on Saturday evening, about seven o'clock, Paris by hundreds of thousands

is again drawn up:  not now dancing the tricolor joy-dance of hope; nor as

yet dancing in fury-dance of hate and revenge; but in silence, with vague

look of conjecture and curiosity mostly scientific.  A Sainte-Antoine

Placard has given notice this morning that 'whosoever insults Louis shall

be caned, whosoever applauds him shall be hanged.'  Behold then, at last,

that wonderful New Berline; encircled by blue National sea with fixed

bayonets, which flows slowly, floating it on, through the silent assembled

hundreds of thousands.  Three yellow Couriers sit atop bound with ropes;

Petion, Barnave, their Majesties, with Sister Elizabeth, and the Children

of France, are within.



Smile of embarrassment, or cloud of dull sourness, is on the broad

phlegmatic face of his Majesty:  who keeps declaring to the successive

Official-persons, what is evident, "Eh bien, me voila, Well, here you have

me;" and what is not evident, "I do assure you I did not mean to pass the

frontiers;" and so forth:  speeches natural for that poor Royal man; which

Decency would veil.  Silent is her Majesty, with a look of grief and scorn;

natural for that Royal Woman.  Thus lumbers and creeps the ignominious

Royal Procession, through many streets, amid a silent-gazing people: 

comparable, Mercier thinks, (Nouveau Paris, iii. 22.) to some Procession de

Roi de Bazoche; or say, Procession of King Crispin, with his Dukes of

Sutor-mania and royal blazonry of Cordwainery.  Except indeed that this is

not comic; ah no, it is comico-tragic; with bound Couriers, and a Doom

hanging over it; most fantastic, yet most miserably real.  Miserablest

flebile ludibrium of a Pickleherring Tragedy!  It sweeps along there, in

most ungorgeous pall, through many streets, in the dusty summer evening;

gets itself at length wriggled out of sight; vanishing in the Tuileries

Palace--towards its doom, of slow torture, peine forte et dure.



Populace, it is true, seizes the three rope-bound yellow Couriers; will at

least massacre them.  But our august Assembly, which is sitting at this

great moment, sends out Deputation of rescue; and the whole is got huddled

up.  Barnave, 'all dusty,' is already there, in the National Hall; making

brief discreet address and report.  As indeed, through the whole journey,

this Barnave has been most discreet, sympathetic; and has gained the

Queen's trust, whose noble instinct teaches her always who is to be

trusted.  Very different from heavy Petion; who, if Campan speak truth, ate

his luncheon, comfortably filled his wine-glass, in the Royal Berline;

flung out his chicken-bones past the nose of Royalty itself; and, on the

King's saying "France cannot be a Republic," answered "No, it is not ripe

yet."  Barnave is henceforth a Queen's adviser, if advice could profit: 

and her Majesty astonishes Dame Campan by signifying almost a regard for

Barnave:  and that, in a day of retribution and Royal triumph, Barnave

shall not be executed.  (Campan, ii. c. 18.)



On Monday night Royalty went; on Saturday evening it returns:  so much,

within one short week, has Royalty accomplished for itself.  The

Pickleherring Tragedy has vanished in the Tuileries Palace, towards 'pain

strong and hard.'  Watched, fettered, and humbled, as Royalty never was. 

Watched even in its sleeping-apartments and inmost recesses:  for it has to

sleep with door set ajar, blue National Argus watching, his eye fixed on

the Queen's curtains; nay, on one occasion, as the Queen cannot sleep, he

offers to sit by her pillow, and converse a little!  (Ibid. ii. 149.)







Chapter 2.4.IX.



Sharp Shot.



In regard to all which, this most pressing question arises:  What is to be

done with it?  "Depose it!" resolutely answer Robespierre and the

thoroughgoing few.  For truly, with a King who runs away, and needs to be

watched in his very bedroom that he may stay and govern you, what other

reasonable thing can be done?  Had Philippe d'Orleans not been a caput

mortuum!  But of him, known as one defunct, no man now dreams.  "Depose it

not; say that it is inviolable, that it was spirited away, was enleve; at

any cost of sophistry and solecism, reestablish it!" so answer with loud

vehemence all manner of Constitutional Royalists; as all your Pure

Royalists do naturally likewise, with low vehemence, and rage compressed by

fear, still more passionately answer.  Nay Barnave and the two Lameths, and

what will follow them, do likewise answer so.  Answer, with their whole

might:  terror-struck at the unknown Abysses on the verge of which, driven

thither by themselves mainly, all now reels, ready to plunge.



By mighty effort and combination this latter course, of reestablish it, is

the course fixed on; and it shall by the strong arm, if not by the clearest

logic, be made good.  With the sacrifice of all their hard-earned

popularity, this notable Triumvirate, says Toulongeon, 'set the Throne up

again, which they had so toiled to overturn:  as one might set up an

overturned pyramid, on its vertex; to stand so long as it is held.'



Unhappy France; unhappy in King, Queen, and Constitution; one knows not in

which unhappiest!  Was the meaning of our so glorious French Revolution

this, and no other, That when Shams and Delusions, long soul-killing, had

become body-killing, and got the length of Bankruptcy and Inanition, a

great People rose and, with one voice, said, in the Name of the Highest: 

Shams shall be no more?  So many sorrows and bloody horrors, endured, and

to be yet endured through dismal coming centuries, were they not the heavy

price paid and payable for this same:  Total Destruction of Shams from

among men?  And now, O Barnave Triumvirate! is it in such double-distilled

Delusion, and Sham even of a Sham, that an Effort of this kind will rest

acquiescent?  Messieurs of the popular Triumvirate:  Never!  But, after

all, what can poor popular Triumvirates and fallible august Senators do? 

They can, when the Truth is all too-horrible, stick their heads ostrich-

like into what sheltering Fallacy is nearest:  and wait there, a

posteriori!



Readers who saw the Clermontais and Three-Bishopricks gallop, in the Night

of Spurs; Diligences ruffling up all France into one terrific terrified

Cock of India; and the Town of Nantes in its shirt,--may fancy what an

affair to settle this was.  Robespierre, on the extreme Left, with perhaps

Petion and lean old Goupil, for the very Triumvirate has defalcated, are

shrieking hoarse; drowned in Constitutional clamour.  But the debate and

arguing of a whole Nation; the bellowings through all Journals, for and

against; the reverberant voice of Danton; the Hyperion-shafts of Camille;

the porcupine-quills of implacable Marat:--conceive all this.



Constitutionalists in a body, as we often predicted, do now recede from the

Mother Society, and become Feuillans; threatening her with inanition, the

rank and respectability being mostly gone.  Petition after Petition,

forwarded by Post, or borne in Deputation, comes praying for Judgment and

Decheance, which is our name for Deposition; praying, at lowest, for

Reference to the Eighty-three Departments of France.  Hot Marseillese

Deputation comes declaring, among other things:  "Our Phocean Ancestors

flung a Bar of Iron into the Bay at their first landing; this Bar will

float again on the Mediterranean brine before we consent to be slaves."  

All this for four weeks or more, while the matter still hangs doubtful;

Emigration streaming with double violence over the frontiers; (Bouille, ii.

101.) France seething in fierce agitation of this question and prize-

question:  What is to be done with the fugitive Hereditary Representative?



Finally, on Friday the 15th of July 1791, the National Assembly decides; in

what negatory manner we know.  Whereupon the Theatres all close, the

Bourne-stones and Portable-chairs begin spouting, Municipal Placards

flaming on the walls, and Proclamations published by sound of trumpet,

'invite to repose;' with small effect.  And so, on Sunday the 17th, there

shall be a thing seen, worthy of remembering.  Scroll of a Petition, drawn

up by Brissots, Dantons, by Cordeliers, Jacobins; for the thing was

infinitely shaken and manipulated, and many had a hand in it:  such Scroll

lies now visible, on the wooden framework of the Fatherland's Altar, for

signature.  Unworking Paris, male and female, is crowding thither, all day,

to sign or to see.  Our fair Roland herself the eye of History can discern

there, 'in the morning;' (Madame Roland, ii. 74.) not without interest.  In

few weeks the fair Patriot will quit Paris; yet perhaps only to return.



But, what with sorrow of baulked Patriotism, what with closed theatres, and

Proclamations still publishing themselves by sound of trumpet, the fervour

of men's minds, this day, is great.  Nay, over and above, there has fallen

out an incident, of the nature of Farce-Tragedy and Riddle; enough to

stimulate all creatures.  Early in the day, a Patriot (or some say, it was

a Patriotess, and indeed Truth is undiscoverable), while standing on the

firm deal-board of Fatherland's Altar, feels suddenly, with indescribable

torpedo-shock of amazement, his bootsole pricked through from below; he

clutches up suddenly this electrified bootsole and foot; discerns next

instant--the point of a gimlet or brad-awl playing up, through the firm

deal-board, and now hastily drawing itself back!  Mystery, perhaps Treason? 

The wooden frame-work is impetuously broken up; and behold, verily a

mystery; never explicable fully to the end of the world!  Two human

individuals, of mean aspect, one of them with a wooden leg, lie ensconced

there, gimlet in hand:  they must have come in overnight; they have a

supply of provisions,--no 'barrel of gunpowder' that one can see; they

affect to be asleep; look blank enough, and give the lamest account of

themselves.  "Mere curiosity; they were boring up to get an eye-hole; to

see, perhaps 'with lubricity,' whatsoever, from that new point of vision,

could be seen:"--little that was edifying, one would think!  But indeed

what stupidest thing may not human Dulness, Pruriency, Lubricity, Chance

and the Devil, choosing Two out of Half-a-million idle human heads, tempt

them to?  (Hist. Parl. xi. 104-7.)



Sure enough, the two human individuals with their gimlet are there.  Ill-

starred pair of individuals!  For the result of it all is that Patriotism,

fretting itself, in this state of nervous excitability, with hypotheses,

suspicions and reports, keeps questioning these two distracted human

individuals, and again questioning them; claps them into the nearest

Guardhouse, clutches them out again; one hypothetic group snatching them

from another:  till finally, in such extreme state of nervous excitability,

Patriotism hangs them as spies of Sieur Motier; and the life and secret is

choked out of them forevermore.  Forevermore, alas!  Or is a day to be

looked for when these two evidently mean individuals, who are human

nevertheless, will become Historical Riddles; and, like him of the Iron

Mask (also a human individual, and evidently nothing more),--have their

Dissertations?  To us this only is certain, that they had a gimlet,

provisions and a wooden leg; and have died there on the Lanterne, as the

unluckiest fools might die.



And so the signature goes on, in a still more excited manner.  And

Chaumette, for Antiquarians possess the very Paper to this hour, (Ibid. xi.

113, &c.)--has signed himself 'in a flowing saucy hand slightly leaned;'

and Hebert, detestable Pere Duchene, as if 'an inked spider had dropped on

the paper;' Usher Maillard also has signed, and many Crosses, which cannot

write.  And Paris, through its thousand avenues, is welling to the Champ-

de-Mars and from it, in the utmost excitability of humour; central

Fatherland's Altar quite heaped with signing Patriots and Patriotesses; the

Thirty-benches and whole internal Space crowded with onlookers, with comers

and goers; one regurgitating whirlpool of men and women in their Sunday

clothes.  All which a Constitutional Sieur Motier sees; and Bailly, looking

into it with his long visage made still longer.  Auguring no good; perhaps

Decheance and Deposition after all!  Stop it, ye Constitutional Patriots;

fire itself is quenchable, yet only quenchable at first!



Stop it, truly:  but how stop it?  Have not the first Free People of the

Universe a right to petition?--Happily, if also unhappily, here is one

proof of riot:  these two human individuals, hanged at the Lanterne. 

Proof, O treacherous Sieur Motier?  Were they not two human individuals

sent thither by thee to be hanged; to be a pretext for thy bloody Drapeau

Rouge?  This question shall many a Patriot, one day, ask; and answer

affirmatively, strong in Preternatural Suspicion.



Enough, towards half past seven in the evening, the mere natural eye can

behold this thing:  Sieur Motier, with Municipals in scarf, with blue

National Patrollotism, rank after rank, to the clang of drums; wending

resolutely to the Champ-de-Mars; Mayor Bailly, with elongated visage,

bearing, as in sad duty bound, the Drapeau Rouge!  Howl of angry derision

rises in treble and bass from a hundred thousand throats, at the sight of

Martial Law; which nevertheless waving its Red sanguinary Flag, advances

there, from the Gros-Caillou Entrance; advances, drumming and waving,

towards Altar of Fatherland.  Amid still wilder howls, with objurgation,

obtestation; with flights of pebbles and mud, saxa et faeces; with crackle

of a pistol-shot;--finally with volley-fire of Patrollotism; levelled

muskets; roll of volley on volley!  Precisely after one year and three

days, our sublime Federation Field is wetted, in this manner, with French

blood.



Some 'Twelve unfortunately shot,' reports Bailly, counting by units; but

Patriotism counts by tens and even by hundreds.  Not to be forgotten, nor

forgiven!  Patriotism flies, shrieking, execrating.  Camille ceases

Journalising, this day; great Danton with Camille and Freron have taken

wing, for their life; Marat burrows deep in the Earth, and is silent.  Once

more Patrollotism has triumphed:  one other time; but it is the last.



This was the Royal Flight to Varennes.  Thus was the Throne overturned

thereby; but thus also was it victoriously set up again--on its vertex; and

will stand while it can be held.
