







BOOK 3.VII.



VENDEMIAIRE





Chapter 3.7.I.



Decadent.



How little did any one suppose that here was the end not of Robespierre

only, but of the Revolution System itself!  Least of all did the mutinying

Committee-men suppose it; who had mutinied with no view whatever except to

continue the National Regeneration with their own heads on their shoulders.

And yet so it verily was.  The insignificant stone they had struck out, so

insignificant anywhere else, proved to be the Keystone:  the whole arch-

work and edifice of Sansculottism began to loosen, to crack, to yawn; and

tumbled, piecemeal, with considerable rapidity, plunge after plunge; till

the Abyss had swallowed it all, and in this upper world Sansculottism was

no more.



For despicable as Robespierre himself might be, the death of Robespierre

was a signal at which great multitudes of men, struck dumb with terror

heretofore, rose out of their hiding places:  and, as it were, saw one

another, how multitudinous they were; and began speaking and complaining.

They are countable by the thousand and the million; who have suffered cruel

wrong.  Ever louder rises the plaint of such a multitude; into a universal

sound, into a universal continuous peal, of what they call Public Opinion.

Camille had demanded a 'Committee of Mercy,' and could not get it; but now

the whole nation resolves itself into a Committee of Mercy:  the Nation has

tried Sansculottism, and is weary of it.  Force of Public Opinion!  What

King or Convention can withstand it?  You in vain struggle:  the thing that

is rejected as 'calumnious' to-day must pass as veracious with triumph

another day:  gods and men have declared that Sansculottism cannot be. 

Sansculottism, on that Ninth night of Thermidor suicidally 'fractured its

under jaw;' and lies writhing, never to rise more.



Through the next fifteenth months, it is what we may call the death-agony

of Sansculottism.  Sansculottism, Anarchy of the Jean-Jacques Evangel,

having now got deep enough, is to perish in a new singular system of

Culottism and Arrangement.  For Arrangement is indispensable to man;

Arrangement, were it grounded only on that old primary Evangel of Force,

with Sceptre in the shape of Hammer.  Be there method, be there order, cry

all men; were it that of the Drill-serjeant!  More tolerable is the drilled

Bayonet-rank, than that undrilled Guillotine, incalculable as the wind.--

How Sansculottism, writhing in death-throes, strove some twice, or even

three times, to get on its feet again; but fell always, and was flung

resupine, the next instant; and finally breathed out the life of it, and

stirred no more:  this we are now, from a due distance, with due brevity,

to glance at; and then--O Reader!--Courage, I see land!



Two of the first acts of the Convention, very natural for it after this

Thermidor, are to be specified here:  the first is renewal of the Governing

Committees.  Both Surete Generale and Salut Public, thinned by the

Guillotine, need filling up:  we naturally fill them up with Talliens,

Frerons, victorious Thermidorian men.  Still more to the purpose, we

appoint that they shall, as Law directs, not in name only but in deed, be

renewed and changed from period to period; a fourth part of them going out

monthly.  The Convention will no more lie under bondage of Committees,

under terror of death; but be a free Convention; free to follow its own

judgment, and the Force of Public Opinion.  Not less natural is it to enact

that Prisoners and Persons under Accusation shall have right to demand some

'Writ of Accusation,' and see clearly what they are accused of.  Very

natural acts:  the harbingers of hundreds not less so.



For now Fouquier's trade, shackled by Writ of Accusation, and legal proof,

is as good as gone; effectual only against Robespierre's Tail.  The Prisons

give up their Suspects; emit them faster and faster.  The Committees see

themselves besieged with Prisoners' friends; complain that they are

hindered in their work:  it is as with men rushing out of a crowded place;

and obstructing one another.  Turned are the tables:  Prisoners pouring out

in floods; Jailors, Moutons and the Tail of Robespierre going now whither

they were wont to send!--The Hundred and thirty-two Nantese Republicans,

whom we saw marching in irons, have arrived; shrunk to Ninety-four, the

fifth man of them choked by the road.  They arrive:  and suddenly find

themselves not pleaders for life, but denouncers to death.  Their Trial is

for acquittal, and more.  As the voice of a trumpet, their testimony sounds

far and wide, mere atrocities of a Reign of Terror.  For a space of

nineteen days; with all solemnity and publicity.  Representative Carrier,

Company of Marat; Noyadings, Loire Marriages, things done in darkness, come

forth into light:  clear is the voice of these poor resuscitated Nantese;

and Journals and Speech and universal Committee of Mercy reverberate it

loud enough, into all ears and hearts.  Deputation arrives from Arras;

denouncing the atrocities of Representative Lebon.  A tamed Convention

loves its own life:  yet what help?  Representative Lebon, Representative

Carrier must wend towards the Revolutionary Tribunal; struggle and delay as

we will, the cry of a Nation pursues them louder and louder.  Them also

Tinville must abolish;--if indeed Tinville himself be not abolished.



We must note moreover the decrepit condition into which a once omnipotent

Mother Society has fallen.  Legendre flung her keys on the Convention

table, that Thermidor night; her President was guillotined with

Robespierre.  The once mighty Mother came, some time after, with a subdued

countenance, begging back her keys:  the keys were restored her; but the

strength could not be restored her; the strength had departed forever. 

Alas, one's day is done.  Vain that the Tribune in mid air sounds as of

old:  to the general ear it has become a horror, and even a weariness.  By

and by, Affiliation is prohibited:  the mighty Mother sees herself suddenly

childless; mourns, as so hoarse a Rachel may.



The Revolutionary Committees, without Suspects to prey upon, perish fast;

as it were of famine.  In Paris the whole Forty-eight of them are reduced

to Twelve, their Forty sous are abolished:  yet a little while, and

Revolutionary Committees are no more.  Maximum will be abolished; let

Sansculottism find food where it can.  (24th December 1794 (Moniteur, No. 

97).)  Neither is there now any Municipality; any centre at the Townhall.

Mayor Fleuriot and Company perished; whom we shall not be in haste to

replace.  The Townhall remains in a broken submissive state; knows not well

what it is growing to; knows only that it is grown weak, and must obey. 

What if we should split Paris into, say, a Dozen separate Municipalities;

incapable of concert!  The Sections were thus rendered safe to act with:--

or indeed might not the Sections themselves be abolished?  You had then

merely your Twelve manageable pacific Townships, without centre or

subdivision; (October 1795 (Dulaure, viii. 454-6).) and sacred right of

Insurrection fell into abeyance!



So much is getting abolished; fleeting swiftly into the Inane.  For the

Press speaks, and the human tongue; Journals, heavy and light, in Philippic

and Burlesque:  a renegade Freron, a renegade Prudhomme, loud they as ever,

only the contrary way.  And Ci-devants shew themselves, almost parade

themselves; resuscitated as from death-sleep; publish what death-pains they

have had.  The very Frogs of the Marsh croak with emphasis.  Your

protesting Seventy-three shall, with a struggle, be emitted out of Prison,

back to their seats; your Louvets, Isnards, Lanjuinais, and wrecks of

Girondism, recalled from their haylofts, and caves in Switzerland, will

resume their place in the Convention:  (Deux Amis, xiii. 3-39.) natural

foes of Terror!



Thermidorian Talliens, and mere foes of Terror, rule in this Convention,

and out of it.  The compressed Mountain shrinks silent more and more. 

Moderatism rises louder and louder:  not as a tempest, with threatenings;

say rather, as the rushing of a mighty organ-blast, and melodious deafening

Force of Public Opinion, from the Twenty-five million windpipes of a Nation

all in Committee of Mercy:  which how shall any detached body of

individuals withstand?







Chapter 3.7.II.



La Cabarus.



How, above all, shall a poor National Convention, withstand it?  In this

poor National Convention, broken, bewildered by long terror, perturbations,

and guillotinement, there is no Pilot, there is not now even a Danton, who

could undertake to steer you anywhither, in such press of weather.  The

utmost a bewildered Convention can do, is to veer, and trim, and try to

keep itself steady:  and rush, undrowned, before the wind.  Needless to

struggle; to fling helm a-lee, and make 'bout ship!  A bewildered

Convention sails not in the teeth of the wind; but is rapidly blown round

again.  So strong is the wind, we say; and so changed; blowing fresher and

fresher, as from the sweet South-West; your devastating North-Easters, and

wild tornado-gusts of Terror, blown utterly out!  All Sansculottic things

are passing away; all things are becoming Culottic.



Do but look at the cut of clothes; that light visible Result, significant

of a thousand things which are not so visible.  In winter 1793, men went in

red nightcaps; Municipals themselves in sabots:  the very Citoyennes had to

petition against such headgear.  But now in this winter 1794, where is the

red nightcap?  With the thing beyond the Flood.  Your monied Citoyen

ponders in what elegantest style he shall dress himself:  whether he shall

not even dress himself as the Free Peoples of Antiquity.  The more

adventurous Citoyenne has already done it.  Behold her, that beautiful

adventurous Citoyenne:  in costume of the Ancient Greeks, such Greek as

Painter David could teach; her sweeping tresses snooded by glittering

antique fillet; bright-eyed tunic of the Greek women; her little feet

naked, as in Antique Statues, with mere sandals, and winding-strings of

riband,--defying the frost!



There is such an effervescence of Luxury.  For your Emigrant Ci-devants

carried not their mansions and furnitures out of the country with them; but

left them standing here:  and in the swift changes of property, what with

money coined on the Place de la Revolution, what with Army-furnishings,

sales of Emigrant Domain and Church Lands and King's Lands, and then with

the Aladdin's-lamp of Agio in a time of Paper-money, such mansions have

found new occupants.  Old wine, drawn from Ci-devant bottles, descends new

throats.  Paris has swept herself, relighted herself; Salons, Soupers not

Fraternal, beam once more with suitable effulgence, very singular in

colour.  The fair Cabarus is come out of Prison; wedded to her red-gloomy

Dis, whom they say she treats too loftily:  fair Cabarus gives the most

brilliant soirees.  Round her is gathered a new Republican Army, of

Citoyennes in sandals; Ci-devants or other:  what remnants soever of the

old grace survive, are rallied there.  At her right-hand, in this cause,

labours fair Josephine the Widow Beauharnais, though in straitened

circumstances:  intent, both of them, to blandish down the grimness of

Republican austerity, and recivilise mankind.



Recivilise, as of old they were civilised:  by witchery of the Orphic

fiddle-bow, and Euterpean rhythm; by the Graces, by the Smiles! 

Thermidorian Deputies are there in those soirees; Editor Freron, Orateur du

Peuple; Barras, who has known other dances than the Carmagnole.  Grim

Generals of the Republic are there; in enormous horse-collar neckcloth,

good against sabre-cuts; the hair gathered all into one knot, 'flowing down

behind, fixed with a comb.'  Among which latter do we not recognise, once

more, the little bronzed-complexioned Artillery-Officer of Toulon, home

from the Italian Wars!  Grim enough; of lean, almost cruel aspect:  for he

has been in trouble, in ill health; also in ill favour, as a man promoted,

deservingly or not, by the Terrorists and Robespierre Junior.  But does not

Barras know him?  Will not Barras speak a word for him?  Yes,--if at any

time it will serve Barras so to do.  Somewhat forlorn of fortune, for the

present, stands that Artillery-Officer; looks, with those deep earnest eyes

of his, into a future as waste as the most.  Taciturn; yet with the

strangest utterances in him, if you awaken him, which smite home, like

light or lightning:--on the whole, rather dangerous?  A 'dissociable' man? 

Dissociable enough; a natural terror and horror to all Phantasms, being

himself of the genus Reality!  He stands here, without work or outlook, in

this forsaken manner;--glances nevertheless, it would seem, at the kind

glance of Josephine Beauharnais; and, for the rest, with severe

countenance, with open eyes and closed lips, waits what will betide.



That the Balls, therefore, have a new figure this winter, we can see.  Not

Carmagnoles, rude 'whirlblasts of rags,' as Mercier called them 'precursors

of storm and destruction:'  no, soft Ionic motions; fit for the light

sandal, and antique Grecian tunic!  Efflorescence of Luxury has come out: 

for men have wealth; nay new-got wealth; and under the Terror you durst not

dance except in rags.  Among the innumerable kinds of Balls, let the hasty

reader mark only this single one:  the kind they call Victim Balls, Bals a

Victime.  The dancers, in choice costume, have all crape round the left

arm:  to be admitted, it needs that you be a Victime; that you have lost a

relative under the Terror.  Peace to the Dead; let us dance to their

memory!  For in all ways one must dance.



It is very remarkable, according to Mercier, under what varieties of figure

this great business of dancing goes on.  'The women,' says he, 'are Nymphs,

Sultanas; sometimes Minervas, Junos, even Dianas.  In light-unerring

gyrations they swim there; with such earnestness of purpose; with perfect

silence, so absorbed are they.  What is singular,' continues he, 'the

onlookers are as it were mingled with the dancers; form as it were a

circumambient element round the different contre-dances, yet without

deranging them.  It is rare, in fact, that a Sultana in such circumstances

experience  the smallest collision.  Her pretty foot darts down, an inch

from mine; she is off again; she is as a flash of light:  but soon the

measure recalls her to the point she set out from.  Like a glittering comet

she travels her eclipse, revolving on herself, as by a double effect of

gravitation and attraction.'  (Mercier, Nouveau Paris, iii. 138, 153.) 

Looking forward a little way, into Time, the same Mercier discerns

Merveilleuses in 'flesh-coloured drawers' with gold circlets; mere dancing

Houris of an artificial Mahomet's-Paradise: much too Mahometan. 

Montgaillard, with his splenetic eye, notes a no less strange thing; that

every fashionable Citoyenne you meet is in an interesting situation.  Good

Heavens, every!  Mere pillows and stuffing! adds the acrid man;--such, in a

time of depopulation by war and guillotine, being the fashion. 

(Montgaillard, iv. 436-42.)  No further seek its merits to disclose.



Behold also instead of the old grim Tappe-durs of Robespierre, what new

street-groups are these?  Young men habited not in black-shag Carmagnole

spencer, but in superfine habit carre or spencer with rectangular tail

appended to it; 'square-tailed coat,' with elegant antiguillotinish

specialty of collar; 'the hair plaited at the temples,' and knotted back,

long-flowing, in military wise:  young men of what they call the Muscadin

or Dandy species!  Freron, in his fondness names them Jeunesse doree,

Golden, or Gilt Youth.  They have come out, these Gilt Youths, in a kind of

resuscitated state; they wear crape round the left arm, such of them as

were Victims.  More they carry clubs loaded with lead; in an angry manner: 

any Tappe-dur or remnant of Jacobinism they may fall in with, shall fare

the worse.  They have suffered much:  their friends guillotined; their

pleasures, frolics, superfine collars ruthlessly repressed:  'ware now the

base Red Nightcaps who did it!  Fair Cabarus and the Army of Greek sandals

smile approval.  In the Theatre Feydeau, young Valour in square-tailed coat

eyes Beauty in Greek sandals, and kindles by her glances:  Down with

Jacobinism!  No Jacobin hymn or demonstration, only Thermidorian ones,

shall be permitted here:  we beat down Jacobinism with clubs loaded with

lead.



But let any one who has examined the Dandy nature, how petulant it is,

especially in the gregarious state, think what an element, in sacred right

of insurrection, this Gilt Youth was!  Broils and battery; war without

truce or measure!  Hateful is Sansculottism, as Death and Night.  For

indeed is not the Dandy culottic, habilatory, by law of existence; 'a

cloth-animal:  one that lives, moves, and has his being in cloth?'--



So goes it, waltzing, bickering; fair Cabarus, by Orphic witchery,

struggling to recivilise mankind.  Not unsuccessfully, we hear.  What

utmost Republican grimness can resist Greek sandals, in Ionic motion, the

very toes covered with gold rings?  (Ibid. Mercier (ubi supra).)  By

degrees the indisputablest new-politeness rises; grows, with vigour.  And

yet, whether, even to this day, that inexpressible tone of society known

under the old Kings, when Sin had 'lost all its deformity' (with or without

advantage to us), and airy Nothing had obtained such a local habitation and

establishment as she never had,--be recovered?  Or even, whether it be not

lost beyond recovery?  (De Stael, Considerations iii. c. 10, &c.)--Either

way, the world must contrive to struggle on.







Chapter 3.7.III.



Quiberon.





But indeed do not these long-flowing hair-queues of a Jeunesse Doree in

semi-military costume betoken, unconsciously, another still more important

tendency?  The Republic, abhorrent of her Guillotine, loves her Army.



And with cause.  For, surely, if good fighting be a kind of honour, as it

is, in its season; and be with the vulgar of men, even the chief kind of

honour, then here is good fighting, in good season, if there ever was. 

These Sons of the Republic, they rose, in mad wrath, to deliver her from

Slavery and Cimmeria.  And have they not done it?  Through Maritime Alps,

through gorges of Pyrenees, through Low Countries, Northward along the

Rhine-valley, far is Cimmeria hurled back from the sacred Motherland. 

Fierce as fire, they have carried her Tricolor over the faces of all her

enemies;--over scarped heights, over cannon-batteries; down, as with the

Vengeur, into the dead deep sea.  She has 'Eleven hundred thousand fighters

on foot,' this Republic:  'At one particular moment she had,' or supposed

she had, 'seventeen hundred thousand.'  (Toulongeon, iii. c. 7; v. c. 10

(p. 194).)  Like a ring of lightning, they, volleying and ca-ira-ing,

begirdle her from shore to shore.  Cimmerian Coalition of Despots recoils;

smitten with astonishment, and strange pangs.



Such a fire is in these Gaelic Republican men; high-blazing; which no

Coalition can withstand!  Not scutcheons, with four degrees of nobility;

but ci-devant Serjeants, who have had to clutch Generalship out of the

cannon's throat, a Pichegru, a Jourdan, a Hoche, lead them on.  They have

bread, they have iron; 'with bread and iron you can get to China.'--See

Pichegru's soldiers, this hard winter, in their looped and windowed

destitution, in their 'straw-rope shoes and cloaks of bass-mat,' how they

overrun Holland, like a demon-host, the ice having bridged all waters; and

rush shouting from victory to victory!  Ships in the Texel are taken by

huzzars on horseback:  fled is York; fled is the Stadtholder, glad to

escape to England, and leave Holland to fraternise.  (19th January, 1795

(Montgaillard, iv. 287-311).)  Such a Gaelic fire, we say, blazes in this

People, like the conflagration of grass and dry-jungle; which no mortal can

withstand--for the moment.



And even so it will blaze and run, scorching all things; and, from Cadiz to

Archangel, mad Sansculottism, drilled now into Soldiership, led on by some

'armed Soldier of Democracy' (say, that Monosyllabic Artillery-Officer),

will set its foot cruelly on the necks of its enemies; and its shouting and

their shrieking shall fill the world!--Rash Coalised Kings, such a fire

have ye kindled; yourselves fireless, your fighters animated only by drill-

serjeants, messroom moralities, and the drummer's cat!  However, it is

begun, and will not end:  not for a matter of twenty years.  So long, this

Gaelic fire, through its successive changes of colour and character, will

blaze over the face of Europe, and afflict the scorch all men:--till it

provoke all men; till it kindle another kind of fire, the Teutonic kind,

namely; and be swallowed up, so to speak, in a day!  For there is a fire

comparable to the burning of dry-jungle and grass; most sudden, high-

blazing:  and another fire which we liken to the burning of coal, or even

of anthracite coal; difficult to kindle, but then which nothing will put

out.  The ready Gaelic fire, we can remark further, and remark not in

Pichegrus only, but in innumerable Voltaires, Racines, Laplaces, no less;

for a man, whether he fight, or sing, or think, will remain the same unity

of a man,--is admirable for roasting eggs, in every conceivable sense.  The

Teutonic anthracite again, as we see in Luthers, Leibnitzes, Shakespeares,

is preferable for smelting metals.  How happy is our Europe that has both

kinds!--



But be this as it may, the Republic is clearly triumphing.  In the spring

of the year Mentz Town again sees itself besieged; will again change

master:  did not Merlin the Thionviller, 'with wild beard and look,' say it

was not for the last time they saw him there?  The Elector of Mentz

circulates among his brother Potentates this pertinent query, Were it not

advisable to treat of Peace?  Yes! answers many an Elector from the bottom

of his heart.  But, on the other hand, Austria hesitates; finally refuses,

being subsidied by Pitt.  As to Pitt, whoever hesitate, he, suspending his

Habeas-corpus, suspending his Cash-payments, stands inflexible,--spite of

foreign reverses; spite of domestic obstacles, of Scotch National

Conventions and English Friends of the People, whom he is obliged to

arraign, to hang, or even to see acquitted with jubilee:  a lean inflexible

man.  The Majesty of Spain, as we predicted, makes Peace; also the Majesty

of Prussia:  and there is a Treaty of Bale.  (5th April, 1795

(Montgaillard, iv. 319).)  Treaty with black Anarchists and Regicides! 

Alas, what help?  You cannot hang this Anarchy; it is like to hang you: 

you must needs treat with it.



Likewise, General Hoche has even succeeded in pacificating La Vendee. 

Rogue Rossignol and his 'Infernal Columns' have vanished:  by firmness and

justice, by sagacity and industry, General Hoche has done it.  Taking

'Movable Columns,' not infernal; girdling-in the Country; pardoning the

submissive, cutting down the resistive, limb after limb of the Revolt is

brought under.  La Rochejacquelin, last of our Nobles, fell in battle;

Stofflet himself makes terms; Georges-Cadoudal is back to Brittany, among

his Chouans:  the frightful gangrene of La Vendee seems veritably

extirpated.  It has cost, as they reckon in round numbers, the lives of a

Hundred Thousand fellow-mortals; with noyadings, conflagratings by infernal

column, which defy arithmetic.  This is the La Vendee War.  (Histoire de la

Guerre de la Vendee, par M. le Comte de Vauban, Memoires de Madame de la

Rochejacquelin, &c.)



Nay in few months, it does burst up once more, but once only:--blown upon

by Pitt, by our Ci-devant Puisaye of Calvados, and others.  In the month of

July 1795, English Ships will ride in Quiberon roads.  There will be

debarkation of chivalrous Ci-devants, of volunteer Prisoners-of-war--eager

to desert; of fire-arms, Proclamations, clothes-chests, Royalists and

specie.  Whereupon also, on the Republican side, there will be rapid stand-

to-arms; with ambuscade marchings by Quiberon beach, at midnight; storming

of Fort Penthievre; war-thunder mingling with the roar of the nightly main;

and such a morning light as has seldom dawned; debarkation hurled back into

its boats, or into the devouring billows, with wreck and wail;--in one

word, a Ci-devant Puisaye as totally ineffectual here as he was in

Calvados, when he rode from Vernon Castle without boots.  (Deux Amis, xiv.

94-106; Puisaye, Memoires, iii-vii.)



Again, therefore, it has cost the lives of many a brave man.  Among whom

the whole world laments the brave Son of Sombreuil.  Ill-fated family!  The

father and younger son went to the guillotine; the heroic daughter

languishes, reduced to want, hides her woes from History:  the elder son

perishes here; shot by military tribunal as an Emigrant; Hoche himself

cannot save him.  If all wars, civil and other, are misunderstandings, what

a thing must right-understanding be!







Chapter 3.7.IV.



Lion not dead.



The Convention, borne on the tide of Fortune towards foreign Victory, and

driven by the strong wind of Public Opinion towards Clemency and Luxury, is

rushing fast; all skill of pilotage is needed, and more than all, in such a

velocity.



Curious to see, how we veer and whirl, yet must ever whirl round again, and

scud before the wind.  If, on the one hand, we re-admit the Protesting

Seventy-Three, we, on the other hand, agree to consummate the Apotheosis of

Marat; lift his body from the Cordeliers Church, and transport it to the

Pantheon of Great Men,--flinging out Mirabeau to make room for him.  To no

purpose:  so strong blows Public Opinion!  A Gilt Youthhood, in plaited

hair-tresses, tears down his Busts from the Theatre Feydeau; tramples them

under foot; scatters them, with vociferation into the Cesspool of

Montmartre.  (Moniteur, du 25 Septembre 1794, du 4 Fevrier 1795.)  Swept is

his Chapel from the Place du Carrousel; the Cesspool of Montmartre will

receive his very dust.  Shorter godhood had no divine man.  Some four

months in this Pantheon, Temple of All the Immortals; then to the Cesspool,

grand Cloaca of Paris and the World!  'His Busts at one time amounted to

four thousand.'  Between Temple of All the Immortals and Cloaca of the

World, how are poor human creatures whirled!



Furthermore the question arises, When will the Constitution of Ninety-

three, of 1793, come into action?  Considerate heads surmise, in all

privacy, that the Constitution of Ninety-three will never come into action.

Let them busy themselves to get ready a better.



Or, again, where now are the Jacobins?  Childless, most decrepit, as we

saw, sat the mighty Mother; gnashing not teeth, but empty gums, against a

traitorous Thermidorian Convention and the current of things.  Twice were

Billaud, Collot and Company accused in Convention, by a Lecointre, by a

Legendre; and the second time, it was not voted calumnious.  Billaud from

the Jacobin tribune says, "The lion is not dead, he is only sleeping." 

They ask him in Convention, What he means by the awakening of the lion? 

And bickerings, of an extensive sort, arose in the Palais-Egalite between

Tappe-durs and the Gilt Youthhood; cries of "Down with the Jacobins, the

Jacoquins," coquin meaning scoundrel!  The Tribune in mid-air gave battle-

sound; answered only by silence and uncertain gasps.  Talk was, in

Government Committees, of 'suspending' the Jacobin Sessions.  Hark, there!-

-it is in Allhallow-time, or on the Hallow-eve itself, month ci-devant

November, year once named of Grace 1794, sad eve for Jacobinism,--volley of

stones dashing through our windows, with jingle and execration!  The female

Jacobins, famed Tricoteuses with knitting-needles, take flight; are met at

the doors by a Gilt Youthhood and 'mob of four thousand persons;' are

hooted, flouted, hustled; fustigated, in a scandalous manner, cotillons

retrousses;--and vanish in mere hysterics.  Sally out ye male Jacobins! 

The male Jacobins sally out; but only to battle, disaster and confusion. 

So that armed Authority has to intervene:  and again on the morrow to

intervene; and suspend the Jacobin Sessions forever and a day.  (Moniteur,

Seances du 10-12 Novembre 1794:  Deux Amis, xiii. 43-49.)  Gone are the

Jacobins; into invisibility; in a storm of laughter and howls.  Their place

is made a Normal School, the first of the kind seen; it then vanishes into

a 'Market of Thermidor Ninth;' into a Market of Saint-Honore, where is now

peaceable chaffering for poultry and greens.  The solemn temples, the great

globe itself; the baseless fabric!  Are not we such stuff, we and this

world of ours, as Dreams are made of?



Maximum being abrogated, Trade was to take its own free course.  Alas,

Trade, shackled, topsyturvied in the way we saw, and now suddenly let go

again, can for the present take no course at all; but only reel and

stagger.  There is, so to speak, no Trade whatever for the time being. 

Assignats, long sinking, emitted in such quantities, sink now with an

alacrity beyond parallel.  "Combien?" said one, to a Hackney-coachman,

"What fare?"  "Six thousand livres," answered he:  some three hundred

pounds sterling, in Paper-money.  (Mercier, ii. 94.  ('1st February, 1796: 

at the Bourse of Paris, the gold louis,' of 20 francs in silver, 'costs

5,300 francs in assignats.'  Montgaillard, iv. 419).)  Pressure of Maximum

withdrawn, the things it compressed likewise withdraw.  'Two ounces of

bread per day' in the modicum allotted:  wide-waving, doleful are the

Bakers' Queues; Farmers' houses are become pawnbrokers' shops.



One can imagine, in these circumstances, with what humour Sansculottism

growled in its throat, "La Cabarus;" beheld Ci-devants return dancing, the

Thermidor effulgence of recivilisation, and Balls in flesh-coloured

drawers.  Greek tunics and sandals; hosts of Muscadins parading, with their

clubs loaded with lead;--and we here, cast out, abhorred, 'picking offals

from the street;' (Fantin Desodoards, Histoire de la Revolution, vii. c.

4.) agitating in Baker's Queue for our two ounces of bread!  Will the

Jacobin lion, which they say is meeting secretly 'at the Acheveche, in

bonnet rouge with loaded pistols,' not awaken?  Seemingly not.  Our Collot,

our Billaud, Barrere, Vadier, in these last days of March 1795, are found

worthy of Deportation, of Banishment beyond seas; and shall, for the

present, be trundled off to the Castle of Ham.  The lion is dead;--or

writhing in death-throes!



Behold, accordingly, on the day they call Twelfth of Germinal (which is

also called First of April, not a lucky day), how lively are these streets

of Paris once more!  Floods of hungry women, of squalid hungry men;

ejaculating:  "Bread, Bread and the Constitution of Ninety-three!"  Paris

has risen, once again, like the Ocean-tide; is flowing towards the

Tuileries, for Bread and a Constitution.  Tuileries Sentries do their best;

but it serves not:  the Ocean-tide sweeps them away; inundates the

Convention Hall itself; howling, "Bread, and the Constitution!"



Unhappy Senators, unhappy People, there is yet, after all toils and broils,

no Bread, no Constitution.  "Du pain, pas tant de longs discours, Bread,

not bursts of Parliamentary eloquence!" so wailed the Menads of Maillard,

five years ago and more; so wail ye to this hour.  The Convention, with

unalterable countenance, with what thought one knows not, keeps its seat in

this waste howling chaos; rings its stormbell from the Pavilion of Unity. 

Section Lepelletier, old Filles Saint-Thomas, who are of the money-changing

species; these and Gilt Youthhood fly to the rescue; sweep chaos forth

again, with levelled bayonets.  Paris is declared 'in a state of siege.' 

Pichegru, Conqueror of Holland, who happens to be here, is named

Commandant, till the disturbance end.  He, in one day, so to speak, ends

it.  He accomplishes the transfer of Billaud, Collot and Company;

dissipating all opposition 'by two cannon-shots,' blank cannon-shots, and

the terror of his name; and thereupon announcing, with a Laconicism which

should be imitated, "Representatives, your decrees are executed,"

(Moniteur, Seance du 13 Germinal (2d April) 1795.) lays down his

Commandantship.



This Revolt of Germinal, therefore, has passed, like a vain cry.  The

Prisoners rest safe in Ham, waiting for ships; some nine hundred 'chief

Terrorists of Paris' are disarmed.  Sansculottism, swept forth with

bayonets, has vanished, with its misery, to the bottom of Saint-Antoine and

Saint-Marceau.--Time was when Usher Maillard with Menads could alter the

course of Legislation; but that time is not.  Legislation seems to have got

bayonets; Section Lepelletier takes its firelock, not for us!  We retire to

our dark dens; our cry of hunger is called a Plot of Pitt; the Saloons

glitter, the flesh-coloured Drawers gyrate as before.  It was for "The

Cabarus" then, and her Muscadins and Money-changers, that we fought?  It

was for Balls in flesh-coloured drawers that we took Feudalism by the

beard, and did, and dared, shedding our blood like water?  Expressive

Silence, muse thou their praise!--







Chapter 3.7.V.



Lion sprawling its last.



Representative Carrier went to the Guillotine, in December last; protesting

that he acted by orders.  The Revolutionary Tribunal, after all it has

devoured, has now only, as Anarchic things do, to devour itself.  In the

early days of May, men see a remarkable thing:  Fouquier-Tinville pleading

at the Bar once his own.  He and his chief Jurymen, Leroi August-Tenth,

Juryman Vilate, a Batch of Sixteen; pleading hard, protesting that they

acted by orders:  but pleading in vain.  Thus men break the axe with which

they have done hateful things; the axe itself having grown hateful.  For

the rest, Fouquier died hard enough:  "Where are thy Batches?" howled the

People.--"Hungry canaille," asked Fouquier, "is thy Bread cheaper, wanting

them?"



Remarkable Fouquier; once but as other Attorneys and Law-beagles, which

hunt ravenous on this Earth, a well-known phasis of human nature; and now

thou art and remainest the most remarkable Attorney that ever lived and

hunted in the Upper Air!  For, in this terrestrial Course of Time, there

was to be an Avatar of Attorneyism; the Heavens had said, Let there be an

Incarnation, not divine, of the venatory Attorney-spirit which keeps its

eye on the bond only;--and lo, this was it; and they have attorneyed it in

its turn.  Vanish, then, thou rat-eyed Incarnation of Attorneyism; who at

bottom wert but as other Attorneys, and too hungry Sons of Adam!  Juryman

Vilate had striven hard for life, and published, from his Prison, an

ingenious Book, not unknown to us; but it would not stead:  he also had to

vanish; and this his Book of the Secret Causes of Thermidor, full of lies,

with particles of truth in it undiscoverable otherwise, is all that remains

of him.



Revolutionary Tribunal has done; but vengeance has not done. 

Representative Lebon, after long struggling, is handed over to the ordinary

Law Courts, and by them guillotined.  Nay, at Lyons and elsewhere,

resuscitated Moderatism, in its vengeance, will not wait the slow process

of Law; but bursts into the Prisons, sets fire to the prisons; burns some

three score imprisoned Jacobins to dire death, or chokes them 'with the

smoke of straw.'  There go vengeful truculent 'Companies of Jesus,'

'Companies of the Sun;' slaying Jacobinism wherever they meet with it;

flinging it into the Rhone-stream; which, once more, bears seaward a horrid

cargo.  (Moniteur, du 27 Juin, du 31 Aout, 1795; Deux Amis, xiii. 121-9.) 

Whereupon, at Toulon, Jacobinism rises in revolt; and is like to hang the

National Representatives.--With such action and reaction, is not a poor

National Convention hard bested?  It is like the settlement of winds and

waters, of seas long tornado-beaten; and goes on with jumble and with

jangle.  Now flung aloft, now sunk in trough of the sea, your Vessel of the

Republic has need of all pilotage and more.



What Parliament that ever sat under the Moon had such a series of

destinies, as this National Convention of France?  It came together to make

the Constitution; and instead of that, it has had to make nothing but

destruction and confusion:  to burn up Catholicisms, Aristocratisms, to

worship Reason and dig Saltpetre, to fight Titanically with itself and with

the whole world.  A Convention decimated by the Guillotine; above the tenth

man has bowed his neck to the axe.  Which has seen Carmagnoles danced

before it, and patriotic strophes sung amid Church-spoils; the wounded of

the Tenth of August defile in handbarrows; and, in the Pandemonial

Midnight, Egalite's dames in tricolor drink lemonade, and spectrum of

Sieyes mount, saying, Death sans phrase.  A Convention which has

effervesced, and which has congealed; which has been red with rage, and

also pale with rage:  sitting with pistols in its pocket, drawing sword (in

a moment of effervescence):  now storming to the four winds, through a

Danton-voice, Awake, O France, and smite the tyrants; now frozen mute under

its Robespierre, and answering his dirge-voice by a dubious gasp. 

Assassinated, decimated; stabbed at, shot at, in baths, on streets and

staircases; which has been the nucleus of Chaos.  Has it not heard the

chimes at midnight?  It has deliberated, beset by a Hundred thousand armed

men with artillery-furnaces and provision-carts.  It has been betocsined,

bestormed; over-flooded by black deluges of Sansculottism; and has heard

the shrill cry, Bread and Soap.  For, as we say, its the nucleus of Chaos;

it sat as the centre of Sansculottism; and had spread its pavilion on the

waste Deep, where is neither path nor landmark, neither bottom nor shore. 

In intrinsic valour, ingenuity, fidelity, and general force and manhood, it

has perhaps not far surpassed the average of Parliaments:  but in frankness

of purpose, in singularity of position, it seeks its fellow.  One other

Sansculottic submersion, or at most two, and this wearied vessel of a

Convention reaches land.



Revolt of Germinal Twelfth ended as a vain cry; moribund Sansculottism was

swept back into invisibility.  There it has lain moaning, these six weeks: 

moaning, and also scheming.  Jacobins disarmed, flung forth from their

Tribune in mid air, must needs try to help themselves, in secret conclave

under ground.  Lo, therefore, on the First day of the Month Prairial, 20th

of May 1795, sound of the generale once more; beating sharp, ran-tan, To

arms, To arms!



Sansculottism has risen, yet again, from its death-lair; waste wild-

flowing, as the unfruitful Sea.  Saint-Antoine is a-foot:  "Bread and the

Constitution of Ninety-three," so sounds it; so stands it written with

chalk on the hats of men.  They have their pikes, their firelocks; Paper of

Grievances; standards; printed Proclamation, drawn up in quite official

manner,--considering this, and also considering that, they, a much-enduring

Sovereign People, are in Insurrection; will have Bread and the Constitution

of Ninety-three.  And so the Barriers are seized, and the generale beats,

and tocsins discourse discord.  Black deluges overflow the Tuileries; spite

of sentries, the Sanctuary itself is invaded:  enter, to our Order of the

Day, a torrent of dishevelled women, wailing, "Bread!  Bread!"  President

may well cover himself; and have his own tocsin rung in 'the Pavilion of

Unity;' the ship of the State again labours and leaks; overwashed, near to

swamping, with unfruitful brine.



What a day, once more!  Women are driven out:  men storm irresistibly in;

choke all corridors, thunder at all gates.  Deputies, putting forth head,

obtest, conjure; Saint-Antoine rages, "Bread and Constitution."  Report has

risen that the 'Convention is assassinating the women:' crushing and

rushing, clangor and furor!  The oak doors have become as oak tambourines,

sounding under the axe of Saint-Antoine; plaster-work crackles, woodwork

booms and jingles; door starts up;--bursts-in Saint-Antoine with frenzy and

vociferation, Rag-standards, printed Proclamation, drum-music: 

astonishment to eye and ear.  Gendarmes, loyal Sectioners charge through

the other door; they are recharged; musketry exploding:  Saint-Antoine

cannot be expelled.  Obtesting Deputies obtest vainly; Respect the

President; approach not the President!  Deputy Feraud, stretching out his

hands, baring his bosom scarred in the Spanish wars, obtests vainly: 

threatens and resists vainly.  Rebellious Deputy of the Sovereign, if thou

have fought, have not we too?  We have no bread, no Constitution!  They

wrench poor Feraud; they tumble him, trample him, wrath waxing to see

itself work:  they drag him into the corridor, dead or near it; sever his

head, and fix it on a pike.  Ah, did an unexampled Convention want this

variety of destiny too, then?  Feraud's bloody head goes on a pike.  Such a

game has begun; Paris and the Earth may wait how it will end.



And so it billows free though all Corridors; within, and without, far as

the eye reaches, nothing but Bedlam, and the great Deep broken loose! 

President Boissy d'Anglas sits like a rock:  the rest of the Convention is

floated 'to the upper benches;' Sectioners and Gendarmes still ranking

there to form a kind of wall for them.  And Insurrection rages; rolls its

drums; will read its Paper of Grievances, will have this decreed, will have

that.  Covered sits President Boissy, unyielding; like a rock in the

beating of seas.  They menace him, level muskets at him, he yields not;

they hold up Feraud's bloody head to him, with grave stern air he bows to

it, and yields not.



And the Paper of Grievances cannot get itself read for uproar; and the

drums roll, and the throats bawl; and Insurrection, like sphere-music, is

inaudible for very noise:  Decree us this, Decree us that.  One man we

discern bawling 'for the space of an hour at all intervals,' "Je demande

l'arrestation des coquins et des laches."  Really one of the most

comprehensive Petitions ever put up:  which indeed, to this hour, includes

all that you can reasonably ask Constitution of the Year One, Rotten-

Borough, Ballot-Box, or other miraculous Political Ark of the Covenant to

do for you to the end of the world!  I also demand arrestment of the Knaves

and Dastards, and nothing more whatever.  National Representation, deluged

with black Sansculottism glides out; for help elsewhere, for safety

elsewhere:  here is no help.



About four in the afternoon, there remain hardly more than some Sixty

Members:  mere friends, or even secret-leaders; a remnant of the Mountain-

crest, held in silence by Thermidorian thraldom.  Now is the time for them;

now or never let them descend, and speak!  They descend, these Sixty,

invited by Sansculottism:  Romme of the New Calendar, Ruhl of the Sacred

Phial, Goujon, Duquesnoy, Soubrany, and the rest.  Glad Sansculottism forms

a ring for them; Romme takes the President's chair; they begin resolving

and decreeing.  Fast enough now comes Decree after Decree, in alternate

brief strains, or strophe and antistrophe,--what will cheapen bread, what

will awaken the dormant lion.  And at every new Decree, Sansculottism

shouts, Decreed, Decreed; and rolls its drums.



Fast enough; the work of months in hours,--when see, a Figure enters, whom

in the lamp-light we recognise to be Legendre; and utters words:  fit to be

hissed out!  And then see, Section Lepelletier or other Muscadin Section

enters, and Gilt Youth, with levelled bayonets, countenances screwed to the

sticking-place!  Tramp, tramp, with bayonets gleaming in the lamp-light: 

what can one do, worn down with long riot, grown heartless, dark, hungry,

but roll back, but rush back, and escape who can?  The very windows need to

be thrown up, that Sansculottism may escape fast enough.  Money-changer

Sections and Gilt Youth sweep them forth, with steel besom, far into the

depths of Saint-Antoine.  Triumph once more!  The Decrees of that Sixty are

not so much as rescinded; they are declared null and non-extant.  Romme,

Ruhl, Goujon and the ringleaders, some thirteen in all, are decreed

Accused.  Permanent-session ends at three in the morning.  (Deux Amis,

xiii. 129-46.)  Sansculottism, once more flung resupine, lies sprawling;

sprawling its last.



Such was the First of Prairial, 20th May, 1795.  Second and Third of

Prairial, during which Sansculottism still sprawled, and unexpectedly rang

its tocsin, and assembled in arms, availed Sansculottism nothing.  What

though with our Rommes and Ruhls, accused but not yet arrested, we make a

new 'True National Convention' of our own, over in the East; and put the

others Out of Law?  What though we rank in arms and march?  Armed Force and

Muscadin Sections, some thirty thousand men, environ that old False

Convention:  we can but bully one another:  bandying nicknames,

"Muscadins," against "Blooddrinkers, Buveurs de Sang."  Feraud's Assassin,

taken with the red hand, and sentenced, and now near to Guillotine and

Place de Greve, is retaken; is carried back into Saint-Antoine:  to no

purpose.  Convention Sectionaries and Gilt Youth come, according to Decree,

to seek him; nay to disarm Saint-Antoine!  And they do disarm it:  by

rolling of cannon, by springing upon enemy's cannon; by military audacity,

and terror of the Law.  Saint-Antoine surrenders its arms; Santerre even

advising it, anxious for life and brewhouse.  Feraud's Assassin flings

himself from a high roof: and all is lost.  (Toulongeon, v. 297; Moniteur,

Nos. 244, 5, 6.)



Discerning which things, old Ruhl shot a pistol through his old white head;

dashed his life in pieces, as he had done the Sacred Phial of Rheims. 

Romme, Goujon and the others stand ranked before a swiftly-appointed, swift

Military Tribunal.  Hearing the sentence, Goujon drew a knife, struck it

into his breast, passed it to his neighbour Romme; and fell dead.  Romme

did the like; and another all but did it; Roman-death rushing on there, as

in electric-chain, before your Bailiffs could intervene!  The Guillotine

had the rest.



They were the Ultimi Romanorum.  Billaud, Collot and Company are now

ordered to be tried for life; but are found to be already off, shipped for

Sinamarri, and the hot mud of Surinam.  There let Billaud surround himself

with flocks of tame parrots; Collot take the yellow fever, and drinking a

whole bottle of brandy, burn up his entrails.  (Dictionnaire des Hommes

Marquans, paras Billaud, Collot.)  Sansculottism spraws no more.  The

dormant lion has become a dead one; and now, as we see, any hoof may smite

him.







Chapter 3.7.VI.



Grilled Herrings.



So dies Sansculottism, the body of Sansculottism, or is changed.  Its

ragged Pythian Carmagnole-dance has transformed itself into a Pyrrhic, into

a dance of Cabarus Balls.  Sansculottism is dead; extinguished by new isms

of that kind, which were its own natural progeny; and is buried, we may

say, with such deafening jubilation and disharmony of funeral-knell on

their part, that only after some half century or so does one begin to learn

clearly why it ever was alive.



And yet a meaning lay in it:  Sansculottism verily was alive, a New-Birth

of TIME; nay it still lives, and is not dead, but changed.  The soul of it

still lives; still works far and wide, through one bodily shape into

another less amorphous, as is the way of cunning Time with his New-Births:-

-till, in some perfected shape, it embrace the whole circuit of the world!

For the wise man may now everywhere discern that he must found on his

manhood, not on the garnitures of his manhood.  He who, in these Epochs of

our Europe, founds on garnitures, formulas, culottisms of what sort soever,

is founding on old cloth and sheep-skin, and cannot endure.  But as for the

body of Sansculottism, that is dead and buried,--and, one hopes, need not

reappear, in primary amorphous shape, for another thousand years!



It was the frightfullest thing ever borne of Time?  One of the

frightfullest.  This Convention, now grown Anti-Jacobin, did, with an eye

to justify and fortify itself, publish Lists of what the Reign of Terror

had perpetrated:  Lists of Persons Guillotined.  The Lists, cries splenetic

Abbe Montgaillard, were not complete.  They contain the names of, How many

persons thinks the reader?--Two Thousand all but a few.  There were above

Four Thousand, cries Montgaillard:  so many were guillotined, fusilladed,

noyaded, done to dire death; of whom Nine Hundred were women. 

(Montgaillard, iv. 241.)  It is a horrible sum of human lives, M. l'Abbe:--

some ten times as many shot rightly on a field of battle, and one might

have had his Glorious-Victory with Te-Deum.  It is not far from the two-

hundredth part of what perished in the entire Seven Years War.  By which

Seven Years War, did not the great Fritz wrench Silesia from the great

Theresa; and a Pompadour, stung by epigrams, satisfy herself that she could

not be an Agnes Sorel?  The head of man is a strange vacant sounding-shell,

M. l'Abbe; and studies Cocker to small purpose.



But what if History, somewhere on this Planet, were to hear of a Nation,

the third soul of whom had not for thirty weeks each year as many third-

rate potatoes as would sustain him?  (Report of the Irish Poor-Law

Commission, 1836.)  History, in that case, feels bound to consider that

starvation is starvation; that starvation from age to age presupposes much: 

History ventures to assert that the French Sansculotte of Ninety-three,

who, roused from long death-sleep, could rush at once to the frontiers, and

die fighting for an immortal Hope and Faith of Deliverance for him and his,

was but the second-miserablest of men!  The Irish Sans-potato, had he not

senses then, nay a soul?  In his frozen darkness, it was bitter for him to

die famishing; bitter to see his children famish.  It was bitter for him to

be a beggar, a liar and a knave.  Nay, if that dreary Greenland-wind of

benighted Want, perennial from sire to son, had frozen him into a kind of

torpor and numb callosity, so that he saw not, felt not, was this, for a

creature with a soul in it, some assuagement; or the cruellest wretchedness

of all?



Such things were, such things are; and they go on in silence peaceably: 

and Sansculottisms follow them.  History, looking back over this France

through long times, back to Turgot's time for instance, when dumb Drudgery

staggered up to its King's Palace, and in wide expanse of sallow faces,

squalor and winged raggedness, presented hieroglyphically its Petition of

Grievances; and for answer got hanged on a 'new gallows forty feet high,'--

confesses mournfully that there is no period to be met with, in which the

general Twenty-five Millions of France suffered less than in this period

which they name Reign of Terror!  But it was not the Dumb Millions that

suffered here; it was the Speaking Thousands, and Hundreds, and Units; who

shrieked and published, and made the world ring with their wail, as they

could and should:  that is the grand peculiarity.  The frightfullest Births

of Time are never the loud-speaking ones, for these soon die; they are the

silent ones, which can live from century to century!  Anarchy, hateful as

Death, is abhorrent to the whole nature of man; and must itself soon die.



Wherefore let all men know what of depth and of height is still revealed in

man; and, with fear and wonder, with just sympathy and just antipathy, with

clear eye and open heart, contemplate it and appropriate it; and draw

innumerable inferences from it.  This inference, for example, among the

first:  'That if the gods of this lower world will sit on their glittering

thrones, indolent as Epicurus' gods, with the living Chaos of Ignorance and

Hunger weltering uncared for at their feet, and smooth Parasites preaching,

Peace, peace, when there is no peace,' then the dark Chaos, it would seem,

will rise; has risen, and O Heavens! has it not tanned their skins into

breeches for itself?  That there be no second Sansculottism in our Earth

for a thousand years, let us understand well what the first was; and let

Rich and Poor of us go and do otherwise.--But to our tale.



The Muscadin Sections greatly rejoice; Cabarus Balls gyrate:  the well-nigh

insoluble problem Republic without Anarchy, have we not solved it?--Law of

Fraternity or Death is gone:  chimerical Obtain-who-need has become

practical Hold-who-have.  To anarchic Republic of the Poverties there has

succeeded orderly Republic of the Luxuries; which will continue as long as

it can.



On the Pont au Change, on the Place de Greve, in long sheds, Mercier, in

these summer evenings, saw working men at their repast.  One's allotment of

daily bread has sunk to an ounce and a half.  'Plates containing each three

grilled herrings, sprinkled with shorn onions, wetted with a little

vinegar; to this add some morsel of boiled prunes, and lentils swimming in

a clear sauce:  at these frugal tables, the cook's gridiron hissing near

by, and the pot simmering on a fire between two stones, I have seen them

ranged by the hundred; consuming, without bread, their scant messes, far

too moderate for the keenness of their appetite, and the extent of their

stomach.'  (Nouveau Paris, iv. 118.)  Seine water, rushing plenteous by,

will supply the deficiency.



O man of Toil, thy struggling and thy daring, these six long years of

insurrection and tribulation, thou hast profited nothing by it, then?  Thou

consumest thy herring and water, in the blessed gold-red evening.  O why

was the Earth so beautiful, becrimsoned with dawn and twilight, if man's

dealings with man were to make it a vale of scarcity, of tears, not even

soft tears?  Destroying of Bastilles, discomfiting of Brunswicks, fronting

of Principalities and Powers, of Earth and Tophet, all that thou hast dared

and endured,--it was for a Republic of the Cabarus Saloons?  Patience; thou

must have patience:  the end is not yet.







Chapter 3.7.VII.



The Whiff of Grapeshot.



In fact, what can be more natural, one may say inevitable, as a Post-

Sansculottic transitionary state, than even this?  Confused wreck of a

Republic of the Poverties, which ended in Reign of Terror, is arranging

itself into such composure as it can.  Evangel of Jean-Jacques, and most

other Evangels, becoming incredible, what is there for it but return to the

old Evangel of Mammon?  Contrat-Social is true or untrue, Brotherhood is

Brotherhood or Death; but money always will buy money's worth:  in the

wreck of human dubitations, this remains indubitable, that Pleasure is

pleasant.  Aristocracy of Feudal Parchment has passed away with a mighty

rushing; and now, by a natural course, we arrive at Aristocracy of the

Moneybag.  It is the course through which all European Societies are at

this hour travelling.  Apparently a still baser sort of Aristocracy?  An

infinitely baser; the basest yet known!



In which however there is this advantage, that, like Anarchy itself, it

cannot continue.  Hast thou considered how Thought is stronger than

Artillery-parks, and (were it fifty years after death and martyrdom, or

were it two thousand years) writes and unwrites Acts of Parliament, removes

mountains; models the World like soft clay?  Also how the beginning of all

Thought, worth the name, is Love; and the wise head never yet was, without

first the generous heart?  The Heavens cease not their bounty:  they send

us generous hearts into every generation.  And now what generous heart can

pretend to itself, or be hoodwinked into believing, that Loyalty to the

Moneybag is a noble Loyalty?  Mammon, cries the generous heart out of all

ages and countries, is the basest of known Gods, even of known Devils.  In

him what glory is there, that ye should worship him?  No glory discernable;

not even terror:  at best, detestability, ill-matched with despicability!--

Generous hearts, discerning, on this hand, widespread Wretchedness, dark

without and within, moistening its ounce-and-half of bread with tears; and

on that hand, mere Balls in fleshcoloured drawers, and inane or foul

glitter of such sort,--cannot but ejaculate, cannot but announce:  Too

much, O divine Mammon; somewhat too much!--The voice of these, once

announcing itself, carries fiat and pereat in it, for all things here

below.



Meanwhile, we will hate Anarchy as Death, which it is; and the things worse

than Anarchy shall be hated more!  Surely Peace alone is fruitful.  Anarchy

is destruction:  a burning up, say, of Shams and Insupportabilities; but

which leaves Vacancy behind.  Know this also, that out of a world of Unwise

nothing but an Unwisdom can be made.  Arrange it, Constitution-build it,

sift it through Ballot-Boxes as thou wilt, it is and remains an Unwisdom,--

the new prey of new quacks and unclean things, the latter end of it

slightly better than the beginning.  Who can bring a wise thing out of men

unwise?  Not one.  And so Vacancy and general Abolition having come for

this France, what can Anarchy do more?  Let there be Order, were it under

the Soldier's Sword; let there be Peace, that the bounty of the Heavens be

not spilt; that what of Wisdom they do send us bring fruit in its season!--

It remains to be seen how the quellers of Sansculottism were themselves

quelled, and sacred right of Insurrection was blown away by gunpowder: 

wherewith this singular eventful History called French Revolution ends.



The Convention, driven such a course by wild wind, wild tide, and steerage

and non-steerage, these three years, has become weary of its own existence,

sees all men weary of it; and wishes heartily to finish.  To the last, it

has to strive with contradictions:  it is now getting fast ready with a

Constitution, yet knows no peace.  Sieyes, we say, is making the

Constitution once more; has as good as made it.  Warned by experience, the

great Architect alters much, admits much.  Distinction of Active and

Passive Citizen, that is, Money-qualification for Electors:  nay Two

Chambers, 'Council of Ancients,' as well as 'Council of Five Hundred;' to

that conclusion have we come!  In a like spirit, eschewing that fatal self-

denying ordinance of your Old Constituents, we enact not only that actual

Convention Members are re-eligible, but that Two-thirds of them must be re-

elected.  The Active Citizen Electors shall for this time have free choice

of only One-third of their National Assembly.  Such enactment, of Two-

thirds to be re-elected, we append to our Constitution; we submit our

Constitution to the Townships of France, and say, Accept both, or reject

both.  Unsavoury as this appendix may be, the Townships, by overwhelming

majority, accept and ratify.  With Directory of Five; with Two good

Chambers, double-majority of them nominated by ourselves, one hopes this

Constitution may prove final.  March it will; for the legs of it, the re-

elected Two-thirds, are already there, able to march.  Sieyes looks at his

Paper Fabric with just pride.



But now see how the contumacious Sections, Lepelletier foremost, kick

against the pricks!  Is it not manifest infraction of one's Elective

Franchise, Rights of Man, and Sovereignty of the People, this appendix of

re-electing your Two-thirds?  Greedy tyrants who would perpetuate

yourselves!--For the truth is, victory over Saint-Antoine, and long right

of Insurrection, has spoiled these men.  Nay spoiled all men.  Consider too

how each man was free to hope what he liked; and now there is to be no

hope, there is to be fruition, fruition of this.



In men spoiled by long right of Insurrection, what confused ferments will

rise, tongues once begun wagging!  Journalists declaim, your Lacretelles,

Laharpes; Orators spout.  There is Royalism traceable in it, and

Jacobinism.  On the West Frontier, in deep secrecy, Pichegru, durst he

trust his Army, is treating with Conde:  in these Sections, there spout

wolves in sheep's clothing, masked Emigrants and Royalists!  (Napoleon, Las

Cases (Choix des Rapports, xvii. 398-411).)  All men, as we say, had hoped,

each that the Election would do something for his own side:  and now there

is no Election, or only the third of one.  Black is united with white

against this clause of the Two-thirds; all the Unruly of France, who see

their trade thereby near ending.



Section Lepelletier, after Addresses enough, finds that such clause is a

manifest infraction; that it, Lepelletier, for one, will simply not conform

thereto; and invites all other free Sections to join it, 'in central

Committee,' in resistance to oppression.  (Deux Amis, xiii. 375-406.)  The

Sections join it, nearly all; strong with their Forty Thousand fighting

men.  The Convention therefore may look to itself!  Lepelletier, on this

12th day of Vendemiaire, 4th of October 1795, is sitting in open

contravention, in its Convent of Filles Saint-Thomas, Rue Vivienne, with

guns primed.  The Convention has some Five Thousand regular troops at hand;

Generals in abundance; and a Fifteen Hundred of miscellaneous persecuted

Ultra-Jacobins, whom in this crisis it has hastily got together and armed,

under the title Patriots of Eighty-nine.  Strong in Law, it sends its

General Menou to disarm Lepelletier.



General Menou marches accordingly, with due summons and demonstration; with

no result.  General Menou, about eight in the evening, finds that he is

standing ranked in the Rue Vivienne, emitting vain summonses; with primed

guns pointed out of every window at him; and that he cannot disarm

Lepelletier.  He has to return, with whole skin, but without success; and

be thrown into arrest as 'a traitor.'  Whereupon the whole Forty Thousand

join this Lepelletier which cannot be vanquished:  to what hand shall a

quaking Convention now turn?  Our poor Convention, after such voyaging,

just entering harbour, so to speak, has struck on the bar;--and labours

there frightfully, with breakers roaring round it, Forty thousand of them,

like to wash it, and its Sieyes Cargo and the whole future of France, into

the deep!  Yet one last time, it struggles, ready to perish.



Some call for Barras to be made Commandant; he conquered in Thermidor. 

Some, what is more to the purpose, bethink them of the Citizen Buonaparte,

unemployed Artillery Officer, who took Toulon.  A man of head, a man of

action:  Barras is named Commandant's-Cloak; this young Artillery Officer

is named Commandant.  He was in the Gallery at the moment, and heard it; he

withdrew, some half hour, to consider with himself:  after a half hour of

grim compressed considering, to be or not to be, he answers Yea.



And now, a man of head being at the centre of it, the whole matter gets

vital.  Swift, to Camp of Sablons; to secure the Artillery, there are not

twenty men guarding it!  A swift Adjutant, Murat is the name of him,

gallops; gets thither some minutes within time, for Lepelletier was also on

march that way:  the Cannon are ours.  And now beset this post, and beset

that; rapid and firm:  at Wicket of the Louvre, in Cul de Sac Dauphin, in

Rue Saint-Honore, from Pont Neuf all along the north Quays, southward to

Pont ci-devant Royal,--rank round the Sanctuary of the Tuileries, a ring of

steel discipline; let every gunner have his match burning, and all men

stand to their arms!



Thus there is Permanent-session through night; and thus at sunrise of the

morrow, there is seen sacred Insurrection once again:  vessel of State

labouring on the bar; and tumultuous sea all round her, beating generale,

arming and sounding,--not ringing tocsin, for we have left no tocsin but

our own in the Pavilion of Unity.  It is an imminence of shipwreck, for the

whole world to gaze at.  Frightfully she labours, that poor ship, within

cable-length of port; huge peril for her.  However, she has a man at the

helm.  Insurgent messages, received, and not received; messenger admitted

blindfolded; counsel and counter-counsel:  the poor ship labours!--

Vendemiaire 13th, year 4:  curious enough, of all days, it is the Fifth day

of October, anniversary of that Menad-march, six years ago; by sacred right

of Insurrection we are got thus far.



Lepelletier has seized the Church of Saint-Roch; has seized the Pont Neuf,

our piquet there retreating without fire.  Stray shots fall from

Lepelletier; rattle down on the very Tuileries staircase.  On the other

hand, women advance dishevelled, shrieking, Peace; Lepelletier behind them

waving its hat in sign that we shall fraternise.  Steady!  The Artillery

Officer is steady as bronze; can be quick as lightning.  He sends eight

hundred muskets with ball-cartridges to the Convention itself; honourable

Members shall act with these in case of extremity:  whereat they look grave

enough.  Four of the afternoon is struck.  (Moniteur, Seance du 5 Octobre

1795.)  Lepelletier, making nothing by messengers, by fraternity or hat-

waving, bursts out, along the Southern Quai Voltaire, along streets, and

passages, treble-quick, in huge veritable onslaught!  Whereupon, thou

bronze Artillery Officer--?  "Fire!" say the bronze lips.  Roar and again

roar, continual, volcano-like, goes his great gun, in the Cul de Sac

Dauphin against the Church of Saint-Roch; go his great guns on the Pont

Royal; go all his great guns;--blow to air some two hundred men, mainly

about the Church of Saint-Roch!  Lepelletier cannot stand such horse-play;

no Sectioner can stand it; the Forty-thousand yield on all sides, scour

towards covert.  'Some hundred or so of them gathered both Theatre de la

Republique; but,' says he, 'a few shells dislodged them.  It was all

finished at six.'



The Ship is over the bar, then; free she bounds shoreward,--amid shouting

and vivats!  Citoyen Buonaparte is 'named General of the Interior, by

acclamation;' quelled Sections have to disarm in such humour as they may;

sacred right of Insurrection is gone for ever!  The Sieyes Constitution can

disembark itself, and begin marching.  The miraculous Convention Ship has

got to land;--and is there, shall we figuratively say, changed, as Epic

Ships are wont, into a kind of Sea Nymph, never to sail more; to roam the

waste Azure, a Miracle in History!



'It is false,' says Napoleon, 'that we fired first with blank charge; it

had been a waste of life to do that.'  Most false:  the firing was with

sharp and sharpest shot:  to all men it was plain that here was no sport;

the rabbets and plinths of Saint-Roch Church show splintered by it, to this

hour.--Singular:  in old Broglie's time, six years ago, this Whiff of

Grapeshot was promised; but it could not be given then, could not have

profited then.  Now, however, the time is come for it, and the man; and

behold, you have it; and the thing we specifically call French Revolution

is blown into space by it, and become a thing that was!--



Homer's Epos, it is remarked, is like a Bas-relief sculpture:  it does not

conclude, but merely ceases.  Such, indeed, is the Epos of Universal

History itself.  Directorates, Consulates, Emperorships, Restorations,

Citizen-Kingships succeed this Business in due series, in due genesis one

out of the other.  Nevertheless the First-parent of all these may be said

to have gone to air in the way we see.  A Baboeuf Insurrection, next year,

will die in the birth; stifled by the Soldiery.  A Senate, if tinged with

Royalism, can be purged by the Soldiery; and an Eighteenth of Fructidor

transacted by the mere shew of bayonets.  (Moniteur, du 5 Septembre 1797.) 

Nay Soldiers' bayonets can be used a posteriori on a Senate, and make it

leap out of window,--still bloodless; and produce an Eighteenth of

Brumaire.  (9th November 1799 (Choix des Rapports, xvii. 1-96).)  Such

changes must happen:  but they are managed by intriguings, caballings, and

then by orderly word of command; almost like mere changes of Ministry.  Not

in general by sacred right of Insurrection, but by milder methods growing

ever milder, shall the Events of French history be henceforth brought to

pass.



It is admitted that this Directorate, which owned, at its starting, these

three things, an 'old table, a sheet of paper, and an ink-bottle,' and no

visible money or arrangement whatever, (Bailleul, Examen critique des

Considerations de Madame de Stael, ii. 275.) did wonders:  that France,

since the Reign of Terror hushed itself, has been a new France, awakened

like a giant out of torpor; and has gone on, in the Internal Life of it,

with continual progress.  As for the External form and forms of Life,--what

can we say except that out of the Eater there comes Strength; out of the

Unwise there comes not Wisdom!  Shams are burnt up; nay, what as yet is the

peculiarity of France, the very Cant of them is burnt up.  The new

Realities are not yet come:  ah no, only Phantasms, Paper models, tentative

Prefigurements of such!  In France there are now Four Million Landed

Properties; that black portent of an Agrarian Law is as it were realised! 

What is still stranger, we understand all Frenchmen have 'the right of

duel;' the Hackney-coachman with the Peer, if insult be given: such is the

law of Public Opinion.  Equality at least in death!  The Form of Government

is by Citizen King, frequently shot at, not yet shot.



On the whole, therefore, has it not been fulfilled what was prophesied, ex-

postfacto indeed, by the Archquack Cagliostro, or another?  He, as he

looked in rapt vision and amazement into these things, thus spake: 

(Diamond Necklace, p. 35.)  'Ha!  What is this?  Angels, Uriel, Anachiel,

and the other Five; Pentagon of Rejuvenescence; Power that destroyed

Original Sin; Earth, Heaven, and thou Outer Limbo, which men name Hell! 

Does the EMPIRE Of IMPOSTURE waver?  Burst there, in starry sheen

updarting, Light-rays from out its dark foundations; as it rocks and

heaves, not in travail-throes, but in death-throes?  Yea, Light-rays,

piercing, clear, that salute the Heavens,--lo, they kindle it; their starry

clearness becomes as red Hellfire!



'IMPOSTURE is burnt up:  one Red-sea of Fire, wild-billowing enwraps the

World; with its fire-tongue, licks at the very Stars.  Thrones are hurled

into it, and Dubois mitres, and Prebendal Stalls that drop fatness, and--

ha! what see I?--all the Gigs of Creation; all, all!  Wo is me!  Never

since Pharaoh's Chariots, in the Red-sea of water, was there wreck of

Wheel-vehicles like this in the Sea of Fire.  Desolate, as ashes, as gases,

shall they wander in the wind.  Higher, higher yet flames the Fire-Sea;

crackling with new dislocated timber; hissing with leather and prunella. 

The metal Images are molten; the marble Images become mortar-lime; the

stone Mountains sulkily explode.  RESPECTABILITY, with all her collected

Gigs inflamed for funeral pyre, wailing, leaves the earth:  not to return

save under new Avatar.  Imposture, how it burns, through generations:  how

it is burnt up; for a time.  The World is black ashes; which, ah, when will

they grow green?  The Images all run into amorphous Corinthian brass; all

Dwellings of men destroyed; the very mountains peeled and riven, the

valleys black and dead:  it is an empty World!  Wo to them that shall be

born then!--A King, a Queen (ah me!) were hurled in; did rustle once; flew

aloft, crackling, like paper-scroll.  Iscariot Egalite was hurled in; thou

grim De Launay, with thy grim Bastille; whole kindreds and peoples; five

millions of mutually destroying Men.  For it is the End of the Dominion of

IMPOSTURE (which is Darkness and opaque Firedamp); and the burning up, with

unquenchable fire, of all the Gigs that are in the Earth.'  This Prophecy,

we say, has it not been fulfilled, is it not fulfilling?



And so here, O Reader, has the time come for us two to part.  Toilsome was

our journeying together; not without offence; but it is done.  To me thou

wert as a beloved shade, the disembodied or not yet embodied spirit of a

Brother.  To thee I was but as a Voice.  Yet was our relation a kind of

sacred one; doubt not that!  Whatsoever once sacred things become hollow

jargons, yet while the Voice of Man speaks with Man, hast thou not there

the living fountain out of which all sacrednesses sprang, and will yet

spring?  Man, by the nature of him, is definable as 'an incarnated Word.' 

Ill stands it with me if I have spoken falsely:  thine also it was to hear

truly.  Farewell.





THE END.
