







BOOK VII.



THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN





Chapter 1.7.I.



Patrollotism.



No, Friends, this Revolution is not of the consolidating kind.  Do not

fires, fevers, sown seeds, chemical mixtures, men, events; all embodiments

of Force that work in this miraculous Complex of Forces, named Universe,--

go on growing, through their natural phases and developments, each

according to its kind; reach their height, reach their visible decline;

finally sink under, vanishing, and what we call die?  They all grow; there

is nothing but what grows, and shoots forth into its special expansion,--

once give it leave to spring.  Observe too that each grows with a rapidity

proportioned, in general, to the madness and unhealthiness there is in it: 

slow regular growth, though this also ends in death, is what we name health

and sanity.



A Sansculottism, which has prostrated Bastilles, which has got pike and

musket, and now goes burning Chateaus, passing resolutions and haranguing

under roof and sky, may be said to have sprung; and, by law of Nature, must

grow.  To judge by the madness and diseasedness both of itself, and of the

soil and element it is in, one might expect the rapidity and monstrosity

would be extreme.



Many things too, especially all diseased things, grow by shoots and fits. 

The first grand fit and shooting forth of Sansculottism with that of Paris

conquering its King; for Bailly's figure of rhetoric was all-too sad a

reality.  The King is conquered; going at large on his parole; on

condition, say, of absolutely good behaviour,--which, in these

circumstances, will unhappily mean no behaviour whatever.  A quite

untenable position, that of Majesty put on its good behaviour!  Alas, is it

not natural that whatever lives try to keep itself living?  Whereupon his

Majesty's behaviour will soon become exceptionable; and so the Second grand

Fit of Sansculottism, that of putting him in durance, cannot be distant.



Necker, in the National Assembly, is making moan, as usual about his

Deficit:  Barriers and Customhouses burnt; the Tax-gatherer hunted, not

hunting; his Majesty's Exchequer all but empty.  The remedy is a Loan of

thirty millions; then, on still more enticing terms, a Loan of eighty

millions:  neither of which Loans, unhappily, will the Stockjobbers venture

to lend.  The Stockjobber has no country, except his own black pool of

Agio.



And yet, in those days, for men that have a country, what a glow of

patriotism burns in many a heart; penetrating inwards to the very purse! 

So early as the 7th of August, a Don Patriotique, 'a Patriotic Gift of

jewels to a considerable extent,' has been solemnly made by certain

Parisian women; and solemnly accepted, with honourable mention.  Whom

forthwith all the world takes to imitating and emulating.  Patriotic Gifts,

always with some heroic eloquence, which the President must answer and the

Assembly listen to, flow in from far and near:  in such number that the

honourable mention can only be performed in 'lists published at stated

epochs.'  Each gives what he can:  the very cordwainers have behaved

munificently; one landed proprietor gives a forest; fashionable society

gives its shoebuckles, takes cheerfully to shoe-ties.  Unfortunate females

give what they 'have amassed in loving.'  (Histoire Parlementaire, ii.

427.)  The smell of all cash, as Vespasian thought, is good.



Beautiful, and yet inadequate!  The Clergy must be 'invited' to melt their

superfluous Church-plate,--in the Royal Mint.  Nay finally, a Patriotic

Contribution, of the forcible sort, must be determined on, though

unwillingly:  let the fourth part of your declared yearly revenue, for this

once only, be paid down; so shall a National Assembly make the

Constitution, undistracted at least by insolvency.  Their own wages, as

settled on the 17th of August, are but Eighteen Francs a day, each man; but

the Public Service must have sinews, must have money.  To appease the

Deficit; not to 'combler, or choke the Deficit,' if you or mortal could! 

For withal, as Mirabeau was heard saying, "it is the Deficit that saves

us."



Towards the end of August, our National Assembly in its constitutional

labours, has got so far as the question of Veto:  shall Majesty have a Veto

on the National Enactments; or not have a Veto?  What speeches were spoken,

within doors and without; clear, and also passionate logic; imprecations,

comminations; gone happily, for most part, to Limbo!  Through the cracked

brain, and uncracked lungs of Saint-Huruge, the Palais Royal rebellows with

Veto.  Journalism is busy, France rings with Veto.  'I shall never forget,'

says Dumont, 'my going to Paris, one of these days, with Mirabeau; and the

crowd of people we found waiting for his carriage, about Le Jay the

Bookseller's shop.  They flung themselves before him; conjuring him with

tears in their eyes not to suffer the Veto Absolu.  They were in a frenzy: 

"Monsieur le Comte, you are the people's father; you must save us; you must

defend us against those villains who are bringing back Despotism.  If the

King get this Veto, what is the use of National Assembly?  We are slaves,

all is done."'  (Souvenirs sur Mirabeau, p. 156.)  Friends, if the sky

fall, there will be catching of larks!  Mirabeau, adds Dumont, was eminent

on such occasions:  he answered vaguely, with a Patrician imperturbability,

and bound himself to nothing.



Deputations go to the Hotel-de-Ville; anonymous Letters to Aristocrats in

the National Assembly, threatening that fifteen thousand, or sometimes that

sixty thousand, 'will march to illuminate you.'  The Paris Districts are

astir; Petitions signing:  Saint-Huruge sets forth from the Palais Royal,

with an escort of fifteen hundred individuals, to petition in person. 

Resolute, or seemingly so, is the tall shaggy Marquis, is the Cafe de Foy: 

but resolute also is Commandant-General Lafayette.  The streets are all

beset by Patrols:  Saint-Huruge is stopped at the Barriere des Bon Hommes;

he may bellow like the bulls of Bashan; but absolutely must return.  The

brethren of the Palais Royal 'circulate all night,' and make motions, under

the open canopy; all Coffee-houses being shut.  Nevertheless Lafayette and

the Townhall do prevail:  Saint-Huruge is thrown into prison; Veto Absolu

adjusts itself into Suspensive Veto, prohibition not forever, but for a

term of time; and this doom's-clamour will grow silent, as the others have

done.



So far has Consolidation prospered, though with difficulty; repressing the

Nether Sansculottic world; and the Constitution shall be made.  With

difficulty: amid jubilee and scarcity; Patriotic Gifts, Bakers'-queues;

Abbe-Fauchet Harangues, with their Amen of platoon-musketry!  Scipio

Americanus has deserved thanks from the National Assembly and France.  They

offer him stipends and emoluments, to a handsome extent; all which stipends

and emoluments he, covetous of far other blessedness than mere money, does,

in his chivalrous way, without scruple, refuse.



To the Parisian common man, meanwhile, one thing remains inconceivable: 

that now when the Bastille is down, and French Liberty restored, grain

should continue so dear.  Our Rights of Man are voted, Feudalism and all

Tyranny abolished; yet behold we stand in queue!  Is it Aristocrat

forestallers; a Court still bent on intrigues?  Something is rotten,

somewhere.



And yet, alas, what to do?  Lafayette, with his Patrols prohibits every

thing, even complaint.  Saint-Huruge and other heroes of the Veto lie in

durance.  People's-Friend Marat was seized; Printers of Patriotic Journals

are fettered and forbidden; the very Hawkers cannot cry, till they get

license, and leaden badges.  Blue National Guards ruthlessly dissipate all

groups; scour, with levelled bayonets, the Palais Royal itself.  Pass, on

your affairs, along the Rue Taranne, the Patrol, presenting his bayonet,

cries, To the left!  Turn into the Rue Saint-Benoit, he cries, To the

right!  A judicious Patriot (like Camille Desmoulins, in this instance) is

driven, for quietness's sake, to take the gutter.



O much-suffering People, our glorious Revolution is evaporating in tricolor

ceremonies, and complimentary harangues!  Of which latter, as Loustalot

acridly calculates, 'upwards of two thousand have been delivered within the

last month, at the Townhall alone.'  (Revolutions de Paris Newspaper (cited

in Histoire Parlementaire, ii. 357).)  And our mouths, unfilled with bread,

are to be shut, under penalties?  The Caricaturist promulgates his

emblematic Tablature:  Le Patrouillotisme chassant le Patriotisme,

Patriotism driven out by Patrollotism.  Ruthless Patrols; long superfine

harangues; and scanty ill-baked loaves, more like baked Bath bricks,--which

produce an effect on the intestines!  Where will this end?  In

consolidation?







Chapter 1.7.II.



O Richard, O my King.



For, alas, neither is the Townhall itself without misgivings.  The Nether

Sansculottic world has been suppressed hitherto:  but then the Upper Court-

world!  Symptoms there are that the Oeil-de-Boeuf is rallying.



More than once in the Townhall Sanhedrim; often enough, from those

outspoken Bakers'-queues, has the wish uttered itself:  O that our Restorer

of French Liberty were here; that he could see with his own eyes, not with

the false eyes of Queens and Cabals, and his really good heart be

enlightened!  For falsehood still environs him; intriguing Dukes de Guiche,

with Bodyguards; scouts of Bouille; a new flight of intriguers, now that

the old is flown.  What else means this advent of the Regiment de Flandre;

entering Versailles, as we hear, on the 23rd of September, with two pieces

of cannon?  Did not the Versailles National Guard do duty at the Chateau? 

Had they not Swiss; Hundred Swiss; Gardes-du-Corps, Bodyguards so-called? 

Nay, it would seem, the number of Bodyguards on duty has, by a manoeuvre,

been doubled:  the new relieving Battalion of them arrived at its time; but

the old relieved one does not depart!



Actually, there runs a whisper through the best informed Upper-Circles, or

a nod still more potentous than whispering, of his Majesty's flying to

Metz; of a Bond (to stand by him therein) which has been signed by Noblesse

and Clergy, to the incredible amount of thirty, or even of sixty thousand. 

Lafayette coldly whispers it, and coldly asseverates it, to Count d'Estaing

at the Dinner-table; and d'Estaing, one of the bravest men, quakes to the

core lest some lackey overhear it; and tumbles thoughtful, without sleep,

all night.  (Brouillon de Lettre de M. d'Estaing a la Reine (in Histoire

Parlementaire, iii. 24.)  Regiment Flandre, as we said, is clearly arrived. 

His Majesty, they say, hesitates about sanctioning the Fourth of August;

makes observations, of chilling tenor, on the very Rights of Man! 

Likewise, may not all persons, the Bakers'-queues themselves discern on the

streets of Paris, the most astonishing number of Officers on furlough,

Crosses of St. Louis, and such like?  Some reckon 'from a thousand to

twelve hundred.'  Officers of all uniforms; nay one uniform never before

seen by eye:  green faced with red!  The tricolor cockade is not always

visible:  but what, in the name of Heaven, may these black cockades, which

some wear, foreshadow?



Hunger whets everything, especially Suspicion and Indignation.  Realities

themselves, in this Paris, have grown unreal:  preternatural.  Phantasms

once more stalk through the brain of hungry France.  O ye laggards and

dastards, cry shrill voices from the Queues, if ye had the hearts of men,

ye would take your pikes and secondhand firelocks, and look into it; not

leave your wives and daughters to be starved, murdered, and worse!--Peace,

women!  The heart of man is bitter and heavy; Patriotism, driven out by

Patrollotism, knows not what to resolve on.



The truth is, the Oeil-de-Boeuf has rallied; to a certain unknown extent. 

A changed Oeil-de-Boeuf; with Versailles National Guards, in their tricolor

cockades, doing duty there; a Court all flaring with tricolor!  Yet even to

a tricolor Court men will rally.  Ye loyal hearts, burnt-out Seigneurs,

rally round your Queen!  With wishes; which will produce hopes; which will

produce attempts!



For indeed self-preservation being such a law of Nature, what can a rallied

Court do, but attempt and endeavour, or call it plot,--with such wisdom and

unwisdom as it has?  They will fly, escorted, to Metz, where brave Bouille

commands; they will raise the Royal Standard:  the Bond-signatures shall

become armed men.  Were not the King so languid!  Their Bond, if at all

signed, must be signed without his privity.--Unhappy King, he has but one

resolution: not to have a civil war.  For the rest, he still hunts, having

ceased lockmaking; he still dozes, and digests; is clay in the hands of the

potter.  Ill will it fare with him, in a world where all is helping itself;

where, as has been written, 'whosoever is not hammer must be stithy;' and

'the very hyssop on the wall grows there, in that chink, because the whole

Universe could not prevent its growing!'



But as for the coming up of this Regiment de Flandre, may it not be urged

that there were Saint-Huruge Petitions, and continual meal-mobs? 

Undebauched Soldiers, be there plot, or only dim elements of a plot, are

always good.  Did not the Versailles Municipality (an old Monarchic one,

not yet refounded into a Democratic) instantly second the proposal?  Nay

the very Versailles National Guard, wearied with continual duty at the

Chateau, did not object; only Draper Lecointre, who is now Major Lecointre,

shook his head.--Yes, Friends, surely it was natural this Regiment de

Flandre should be sent for, since it could be got.  It was natural that, at

sight of military bandoleers, the heart of the rallied Oeil-de-Boeuf should

revive; and Maids of Honour, and gentlemen of honour, speak comfortable

words to epauletted defenders, and to one another.  Natural also, and mere

common civility, that the Bodyguards, a Regiment of Gentlemen, should

invite their Flandre brethren to a Dinner of welcome!--Such invitation, in

the last days of September, is given and accepted.



Dinners are defined as 'the ultimate act of communion;' men that can have

communion in nothing else, can sympathetically eat together, can still rise

into some glow of brotherhood over food and wine.  The dinner is fixed on,

for Thursday the First of October; and ought to have a fine effect. 

Further, as such Dinner may be rather extensive, and even the

Noncommissioned and the Common man be introduced, to see and to hear, could

not His Majesty's Opera Apartment, which has lain quite silent ever since

Kaiser Joseph was here, be obtained for the purpose?--The Hall of the Opera

is granted; the Salon d'Hercule shall be drawingroom.  Not only the

Officers of Flandre, but of the Swiss, of the Hundred Swiss, nay of the

Versailles National Guard, such of them as have any loyalty, shall feast: 

it will be a Repast like few.



And now suppose this Repast, the solid part of it, transacted; and the

first bottle over.  Suppose the customary loyal toasts drunk; the King's

health, the Queen's with deafening vivats;--that of the Nation 'omitted,'

or even 'rejected.'  Suppose champagne flowing; with pot-valorous speech,

with instrumental music; empty feathered heads growing ever the noisier, in

their own emptiness, in each other's noise!  Her Majesty, who looks

unusually sad to-night (his Majesty sitting dulled with the day's hunting),

is told that the sight of it would cheer her.  Behold!  She enters there,

issuing from her State-rooms, like the Moon from the clouds, this fairest

unhappy Queen of Hearts; royal Husband by her side, young Dauphin in her

arms!  She descends from the Boxes, amid splendour and acclaim; walks

queen-like, round the Tables; gracefully escorted, gracefully nodding; her

looks full of sorrow, yet of gratitude and daring, with the hope of France

on her mother-bosom!  And now, the band striking up, O Richard, O mon Roi,

l'univers t'abandonne (O Richard, O my King, and world is all forsaking

thee)--could man do other than rise to height of pity, of loyal valour? 

Could featherheaded young ensigns do other than, by white Bourbon Cockades,

handed them from fair fingers; by waving of swords, drawn to pledge the

Queen's health; by trampling of National Cockades; by scaling the Boxes,

whence intrusive murmurs may come; by vociferation, tripudiation, sound,

fury and distraction, within doors and without,--testify what tempest-tost

state of vacuity they are in?  Till champagne and tripudiation do their

work; and all lie silent, horizontal; passively slumbering, with meed-of-

battle dreams!--



A natural Repast, in ordinary times, a harmless one:  now fatal, as that of

Thyestes; as that of Job's Sons, when a strong wind smote the four corners

of their banquet-house!  Poor ill-advised Marie-Antoinette; with a woman's

vehemence, not with a sovereign's foresight!  It was so natural, yet so

unwise.  Next day, in public speech of ceremony, her Majesty declares

herself 'delighted with the Thursday.'



The heart of the Oeil-de-Boeuf glows into hope; into daring, which is

premature.  Rallied Maids of Honour, waited on by Abbes, sew 'white

cockades;' distribute them, with words, with glances, to epauletted youths;

who in return, may kiss, not without fervour, the fair sewing fingers. 

Captains of horse and foot go swashing with 'enormous white cockades;' nay

one Versailles National Captain had mounted the like, so witching were the

words and glances; and laid aside his tricolor!  Well may Major Lecointre

shake his head with a look of severity; and speak audible resentful words.

But now a swashbuckler, with enormous white cockade, overhearing the Major,

invites him insolently, once and then again elsewhere, to recant; and

failing that, to duel.  Which latter feat Major Lecointre declares that he

will not perform, not at least by any known laws of fence; that he

nevertheless will, according to mere law of Nature, by dirk and blade,

'exterminate' any 'vile gladiator,' who may insult him or the Nation;--

whereupon (for the Major is actually drawing his implement) 'they are

parted,' and no weasands slit.  (Moniteur (in Histoire Parlementaire, iii.

59); Deux Amis (iii. 128-141); Campan (ii. 70-85), &c. &c.)







Chapter 1.7.III.



Black Cockades.



But fancy what effect this Thyestes Repast and trampling on the National

Cockade, must have had in the Salle des Menus; in the famishing Bakers'-

queues at Paris!  Nay such Thyestes Repasts, it would seem, continue. 

Flandre has given its Counter-Dinner to the Swiss and Hundred Swiss; then

on Saturday there has been another.



Yes, here with us is famine; but yonder at Versailles is food; enough and

to spare!  Patriotism stands in queue, shivering hungerstruck, insulted by

Patrollotism; while bloodyminded Aristocrats, heated with excess of high

living, trample on the National Cockade.  Can the atrocity be true?  Nay,

look:  green uniforms faced with red; black cockades,--the colour of Night!

Are we to have military onfall; and death also by starvation?  For behold

the Corbeil Cornboat, which used to come twice a-day, with its Plaster-of-

Paris meal, now comes only once.  And the Townhall is deaf; and the men are

laggard and dastard!--At the Cafe de Foy, this Saturday evening, a new

thing is seen, not the last of its kind:  a woman engaged in public

speaking.  Her poor man, she says, was put to silence by his District;

their Presidents and Officials would not let him speak.  Wherefore she here

with her shrill tongue will speak; denouncing, while her breath endures,

the Corbeil-Boat, the Plaster-of-Paris bread, sacrilegious Opera-dinners,

green uniforms, Pirate Aristocrats, and those black cockades of theirs!--



Truly, it is time for the black cockades at least, to vanish.  Them

Patrollotism itself will not protect.  Nay, sharp-tempered 'M. Tassin,' at

the Tuileries parade on Sunday morning, forgets all National military rule;

starts from the ranks, wrenches down one black cockade which is swashing

ominous there; and tramples it fiercely into the soil of France. 

Patrollotism itself is not without suppressed fury.  Also the Districts

begin to stir; the voice of President Danton reverberates in the

Cordeliers:  People's-Friend Marat has flown to Versailles and back again;-

-swart bird, not of the halcyon kind!  (Camille's Newspaper, Revolutions de

Paris et de Brabant (in Histoire Parlementaire, iii. 108.)



And so Patriot meets promenading Patriot, this Sunday; and sees his own

grim care reflected on the face of another.  Groups, in spite of

Patrollotism, which is not so alert as usual, fluctuate deliberative: 

groups on the Bridges, on the Quais, at the patriotic Cafes.  And ever as

any black cockade may emerge, rises the many-voiced growl and bark:  A bas,

Down!  All black cockades are ruthlessly plucked off:  one individual picks

his up again; kisses it, attempts to refix it; but a 'hundred canes start

into the air,' and he desists.  Still worse went it with another

individual; doomed, by extempore Plebiscitum, to the Lanterne; saved, with

difficulty, by some active Corps-de-Garde.--Lafayette sees signs of an

effervescence; which he doubles his Patrols, doubles his diligence, to

prevent.  So passes Sunday, the 4th of October 1789.



Sullen is the male heart, repressed by Patrollotism; vehement is the

female, irrepressible.  The public-speaking woman at the Palais Royal was

not the only speaking one:--Men know not what the pantry is, when it grows

empty, only house-mothers know.  O women, wives of men that will only

calculate and not act!  Patrollotism is strong; but Death, by starvation

and military onfall, is stronger.  Patrollotism represses male Patriotism: 

but female Patriotism?  Will Guards named National thrust their bayonets

into the bosoms of women?  Such thought, or rather such dim unshaped raw-

material of a thought, ferments universally under the female night-cap;

and, by earliest daybreak, on slight hint, will explode.







Chapter 1.7.IV.



The Menads.



If Voltaire once, in splenetic humour, asked his countrymen:  "But you,

Gualches, what have you invented?" they can now answer:  The Art of

Insurrection.  It was an art needed in these last singular times:  an art,

for which the French nature, so full of vehemence, so free from depth, was

perhaps of all others the fittest.



Accordingly, to what a height, one may well say of perfection, has this

branch of human industry been carried by France, within the last half-

century!  Insurrection, which, Lafayette thought, might be 'the most sacred

of duties,' ranks now, for the French people, among the duties which they

can perform.  Other mobs are dull masses; which roll onwards with a dull

fierce tenacity, a dull fierce heat, but emit no light-flashes of genius as

they go.  The French mob, again, is among the liveliest phenomena of our

world.  So rapid, audacious; so clear-sighted, inventive, prompt to seize

the moment; instinct with life to its finger-ends!  That talent, were there

no other, of spontaneously standing in queue, distinguishes, as we said,

the French People from all Peoples, ancient and modern.



Let the Reader confess too that, taking one thing with another, perhaps few

terrestrial Appearances are better worth considering than mobs.  Your mob

is a genuine outburst of Nature; issuing from, or communicating with, the

deepest deep of Nature.  When so much goes grinning and grimacing as a

lifeless Formality, and under the stiff buckram no heart can be felt

beating, here once more, if nowhere else, is a Sincerity and Reality. 

Shudder at it; or even shriek over it, if thou must; nevertheless consider

it.  Such a Complex of human Forces and Individualities hurled forth, in

their transcendental mood, to act and react, on circumstances and on one

another; to work out what it is in them to work.  The thing they will do is

known to no man; least of all to themselves.  It is the inflammablest

immeasurable Fire-work, generating, consuming itself.  With what phases, to

what extent, with what results it will burn off, Philosophy and

Perspicacity conjecture in vain.



'Man,' as has been written, 'is for ever interesting to man; nay properly

there is nothing else interesting.'  In which light also, may we not

discern why most Battles have become so wearisome?  Battles, in these ages,

are transacted by mechanism; with the slightest possible developement of

human individuality or spontaneity:  men now even die, and kill one

another, in an artificial manner.  Battles ever since Homer's time, when

they were Fighting Mobs, have mostly ceased to be worth looking at, worth

reading of, or remembering.  How many wearisome bloody Battles does History

strive to represent; or even, in a husky way, to sing:--and she would omit

or carelessly slur-over this one Insurrection of Women?



A thought, or dim raw-material of a thought, was fermenting all night,

universally in the female head, and might explode.  In squalid garret, on

Monday morning, Maternity awakes, to hear children weeping for bread. 

Maternity must forth to the streets, to the herb-markets and Bakers'--

queues; meets there with hunger-stricken Maternity, sympathetic,

exasperative.  O we unhappy women!  But, instead of Bakers'-queues, why not

to Aristocrats' palaces, the root of the matter?  Allons!  Let us assemble. 

To the Hotel-de-Ville; to Versailles; to the Lanterne!



In one of the Guardhouses of the Quartier Saint-Eustache, 'a young woman'

seizes a drum,--for how shall National Guards give fire on women, on a

young woman?  The young woman seizes the drum; sets forth, beating it,

'uttering cries relative to the dearth of grains.'  Descend, O mothers;

descend, ye Judiths, to food and revenge!--All women gather and go; crowds

storm all stairs, force out all women:  the female Insurrectionary Force,

according to Camille, resembles the English Naval one; there is a universal

'Press of women.'  Robust Dames of the Halle, slim Mantua-makers,

assiduous, risen with the dawn; ancient Virginity tripping to matins; the

Housemaid, with early broom; all must go.  Rouse ye, O women; the laggard

men will not act; they say, we ourselves may act!



And so, like snowbreak from the mountains, for every staircase is a melted

brook, it storms; tumultuous, wild-shrilling, towards the Hotel-de-Ville. 

Tumultuous, with or without drum-music:  for the Faubourg Saint-Antoine

also has tucked up its gown; and, with besom-staves, fire-irons, and even

rusty pistols (void of ammunition), is flowing on.  Sound of it flies, with

a velocity of sound, to the outmost Barriers.  By seven o'clock, on this

raw October morning, fifth of the month, the Townhall will see wonders. 

Nay, as chance would have it, a male party are already there; clustering

tumultuously round some National Patrol, and a Baker who has been seized

with short weights.  They are there; and have even lowered the rope of the

Lanterne.  So that the official persons have to smuggle forth the short-

weighing Baker by back doors, and even send 'to all the Districts' for more

force.



Grand it was, says Camille, to see so many Judiths, from eight to ten

thousand of them in all, rushing out to search into the root of the matter!

Not unfrightful it must have been; ludicro-terrific, and most unmanageable. 

At such hour the overwatched Three Hundred are not yet stirring:  none but

some Clerks, a company of National Guards; and M. de Gouvion, the Major-

general.  Gouvion has fought in America for the cause of civil Liberty; a

man of no inconsiderable heart, but deficient in head.  He is, for the

moment, in his back apartment; assuaging Usher Maillard, the Bastille-

serjeant, who has come, as too many do, with 'representations.'  The

assuagement is still incomplete when our Judiths arrive.



The National Guards form on the outer stairs, with levelled bayonets; the

ten thousand Judiths press up, resistless; with obtestations, with

outspread hands,--merely to speak to the Mayor.  The rear forces them; nay,

from male hands in the rear, stones already fly:  the National Guards must

do one of two things; sweep the Place de Greve with cannon, or else open to

right and left.  They open; the living deluge rushes in.  Through all rooms

and cabinets, upwards to the topmost belfry:  ravenous; seeking arms,

seeking Mayors, seeking justice;--while, again, the better-cressed

(dressed?) speak kindly to the Clerks; point out the misery of these poor

women; also their ailments, some even of an interesting sort.  (Deux Amis,

iii. 141-166.)



Poor M. de Gouvion is shiftless in this extremity;--a man shiftless,

perturbed; who will one day commit suicide.  How happy for him that Usher

Maillard, the shifty, was there, at the moment, though making

representations!  Fly back, thou shifty Maillard; seek the Bastille

Company; and O return fast with it; above all, with thy own shifty head! 

For, behold, the Judiths can find no Mayor or Municipal; scarcely, in the

topmost belfry, can they find poor Abbe Lefevre the Powder-distributor. 

Him, for want of a better, they suspend there; in the pale morning light;

over the top of all Paris, which swims in one's failing eyes:--a horrible

end?  Nay, the rope broke, as French ropes often did; or else an Amazon cut

it.  Abbe Lefevre falls, some twenty feet, rattling among the leads; and

lives long years after, though always with 'a tremblement in the limbs.' 

(Dusaulx, Prise de la Bastille (note, p. 281.).)



And now doors fly under hatchets; the Judiths have broken the Armoury; have

seized guns and cannons, three money-bags, paper-heaps; torches flare:  in

few minutes, our brave Hotel-de-Ville which dates from the Fourth Henry,

will, with all that it holds, be in flames!







Chapter 1.7.V.



Usher Maillard.



In flames, truly,--were it not that Usher Maillard, swift of foot, shifty

of head, has returned!



Maillard, of his own motion, for Gouvion or the rest would not even

sanction him,--snatches a drum; descends the Porch-stairs, ran-tan, beating

sharp, with loud rolls, his Rogues'-march:  To Versailles!  Allons; a

Versailles!  As men beat on kettle or warmingpan, when angry she-bees, or

say, flying desperate wasps, are to be hived; and the desperate insects

hear it, and cluster round it,--simply as round a guidance, where there was

none:  so now these Menads round shifty Maillard, Riding-Usher of the

Chatelet.  The axe pauses uplifted; Abbe Lefevre is left half-hanged; from

the belfry downwards all vomits itself.  What rub-a-dub is that?  Stanislas

Maillard, Bastille-hero, will lead us to Versailles?  Joy to thee,

Maillard; blessed art thou above Riding-Ushers!  Away then, away!



The seized cannon are yoked with seized cart-horses:  brown-locked

Demoiselle Theroigne, with pike and helmet, sits there as gunneress, 'with

haughty eye and serene fair countenance;' comparable, some think, to the

Maid of Orleans, or even recalling 'the idea of Pallas Athene.'  (Deux

Amis, iii. 157.)  Maillard (for his drum still rolls) is, by heaven-rending

acclamation, admitted General.  Maillard hastens the languid march. 

Maillard, beating rhythmic, with sharp ran-tan, all along the Quais, leads

forward, with difficulty his Menadic host.  Such a host--marched not in

silence!  The bargeman pauses on the River; all wagoners and coachdrivers

fly; men peer from windows,--not women, lest they be pressed.  Sight of

sights:  Bacchantes, in these ultimate Formalized Ages!  Bronze Henri looks

on, from his Pont-Neuf; the Monarchic Louvre, Medicean Tuileries see a day

not theretofore seen.



And now Maillard has his Menads in the Champs Elysees (Fields Tartarean

rather); and the Hotel-de-Ville has suffered comparatively nothing.  Broken

doors; an Abbe Lefevre, who shall never more distribute powder; three sacks

of money, most part of which (for Sansculottism, though famishing, is not

without honour) shall be returned: (Hist. Parl. iii. 310.)  this is all the

damage.  Great Maillard!  A small nucleus of Order is round his drum; but

his outskirts fluctuate like the mad Ocean:  for Rascality male and female

is flowing in on him, from the four winds; guidance there is none but in

his single head and two drumsticks.



O Maillard, when, since War first was, had General of Force such a task

before him, as thou this day?  Walter the Penniless still touches the

feeling heart:  but then Walter had sanction; had space to turn in; and

also his Crusaders were of the male sex.  Thou, this day, disowned of

Heaven and Earth, art General of Menads.  Their inarticulate frenzy thou

must on the spur of the instant, render into articulate words, into actions

that are not frantic.  Fail in it, this way or that!  Pragmatical

Officiality, with its penalties and law-books, waits before thee; Menads

storm behind.  If such hewed off the melodious head of Orpheus, and hurled

it into the Peneus waters, what may they not make of thee,--thee rhythmic

merely, with no music but a sheepskin drum!--Maillard did not fail. 

Remarkable Maillard, if fame were not an accident, and History a

distillation of Rumour, how remarkable wert thou!



On the Elysian Fields, there is pause and fluctuation; but, for Maillard,

no return.  He persuades his Menads, clamorous for arms and the Arsenal,

that no arms are in the Arsenal; that an unarmed attitude, and petition to

a National Assembly, will be the best:  he hastily nominates or sanctions

generalesses, captains of tens and fifties;--and so, in loosest-flowing

order, to the rhythm of some 'eight drums' (having laid aside his own),

with the Bastille Volunteers bringing up his rear, once more takes the

road.



Chaillot, which will promptly yield baked loaves, is not plundered; nor are

the Sevres Potteries broken.  The old arches of Sevres Bridge echo under

Menadic feet; Seine River gushes on with his perpetual murmur; and Paris

flings after us the boom of tocsin and alarm-drum,--inaudible, for the

present, amid shrill-sounding hosts, and the splash of rainy weather.  To

Meudon, to Saint Cloud, on both hands, the report of them is gone abroad;

and hearths, this evening, will have a topic.  The press of women still

continues, for it is the cause of all Eve's Daughters, mothers that are, or

that hope to be.  No carriage-lady, were it with never such hysterics, but

must dismount, in the mud roads, in her silk shoes, and walk.  (Deux Amis,

iii. 159.)  In this manner, amid wild October weather, they a wild unwinged

stork-flight, through the astonished country, wend their way.  Travellers

of all sorts they stop; especially travellers or couriers from Paris. 

Deputy Lechapelier, in his elegant vesture, from his elegant vehicle, looks

forth amazed through his spectacles; apprehensive for life;--states eagerly

that he is Patriot-Deputy Lechapelier, and even Old-President Lechapelier,

who presided on the Night of Pentecost, and is original member of the

Breton Club.  Thereupon 'rises huge shout of Vive Lechapelier, and several

armed persons spring up behind and before to escort him.'  (Ibid. iii. 177;

Dictionnaire des Hommes Marquans, ii. 379.)



Nevertheless, news, despatches from Lafayette, or vague noise of rumour,

have pierced through, by side roads.  In the National Assembly, while all

is busy discussing the order of the day; regretting that there should be

Anti-national Repasts in Opera-Halls; that his Majesty should still

hesitate about accepting the Rights of Man, and hang conditions and

peradventures on them,--Mirabeau steps up to the President, experienced

Mounier as it chanced to be; and articulates, in bass under-tone: 

"Mounier, Paris marche sur nous (Paris is marching on us)."--"May be (Je

n'en sais rien)!"--"Believe it or disbelieve it, that is not my concern;

but Paris, I say, is marching on us.  Fall suddenly unwell; go over to the

Chateau; tell them this.  There is not a moment to lose.'--"Paris marching

on us?" responds Mounier, with an atrabiliar accent"  "Well, so much the

better!  We shall the sooner be a Republic."  Mirabeau quits him, as one

quits an experienced President getting blindfold into deep waters; and the

order of the day continues as before.



Yes, Paris is marching on us; and more than the women of Paris!  Scarcely

was Maillard gone, when M. de Gouvion's message to all the Districts, and

such tocsin and drumming of the generale, began to take effect.  Armed

National Guards from every District; especially the Grenadiers of the

Centre, who are our old Gardes Francaises, arrive, in quick sequence, on

the Place de Greve.  An 'immense people' is there; Saint-Antoine, with pike

and rusty firelock, is all crowding thither, be it welcome or unwelcome. 

The Centre Grenadiers are received with cheering:  "it is not cheers that

we want," answer they gloomily; "the nation has been insulted; to arms, and

come with us for orders!"  Ha, sits the wind so?  Patriotism and

Patrollotism are now one!



The Three Hundred have assembled; 'all the Committees are in activity;'

Lafayette is dictating despatches for Versailles, when a Deputation of the

Centre Grenadiers introduces itself to him.  The Deputation makes military

obeisance; and thus speaks, not without a kind of thought in it:  "Mon

General, we are deputed by the Six Companies of Grenadiers.  We do not

think you a traitor, but we think the Government betrays you; it is time

that this end.  We cannot turn our bayonets against women crying to us for

bread.  The people are miserable, the source of the mischief is at

Versailles:  we must go seek the King, and bring him to Paris.  We must

exterminate (exterminer) the Regiment de Flandre and the Gardes-du-Corps,

who have dared to trample on the National Cockade.  If the King be too weak

to wear his crown, let him lay it down.  You will crown his Son, you will

name a Council of Regency; and all will go better."  (Deux Amis, iii. 161.) 

Reproachful astonishment paints itself on the face of Lafayette; speaks

itself from his eloquent chivalrous lips:  in vain.  "My General, we would

shed the last drop of our blood for you; but the root of the mischief is at

Versailles; we must go and bring the King to Paris; all the people wish it,

tout le peuple le veut."



My General descends to the outer staircase; and harangues:  once more in

vain.  "To Versailles!  To Versailles!"  Mayor Bailly, sent for through

floods of Sansculottism, attempts academic oratory from his gilt state-

coach; realizes nothing but infinite hoarse cries of:  "Bread!  To

Versailles!"--and gladly shrinks within doors.  Lafayette mounts the white

charger; and again harangues and reharangues:  with eloquence, with

firmness, indignant demonstration; with all things but persuasion.  "To

Versailles!  To Versailles!"  So lasts it, hour after hour; for the space

of half a day.



The great Scipio Americanus can do nothing; not so much as escape. 

"Morbleu, mon General," cry the Grenadiers serrying their ranks as the

white charger makes a motion that way, "You will not leave us, you will

abide with us!"  A perilous juncture:  Mayor Bailly and the Municipals sit

quaking within doors; My General is prisoner without:  the Place de Greve,

with its thirty thousand Regulars, its whole irregular Saint-Antoine and

Saint-Marceau, is one minatory mass of clear or rusty steel; all hearts

set, with a moody fixedness, on one object.  Moody, fixed are all hearts: 

tranquil is no heart,--if it be not that of the white charger, who paws

there, with arched neck, composedly champing his bit; as if no world, with

its Dynasties and Eras, were now rushing down.  The drizzly day tends

westward; the cry is still:  "To Versailles!"



Nay now, borne from afar, come quite sinister cries; hoarse, reverberating

in longdrawn hollow murmurs, with syllables too like those of Lanterne!  Or

else, irregular Sansculottism may be marching off, of itself; with pikes,

nay with cannon.  The inflexible Scipio does at length, by aide-de-camp,

ask of the Municipals:  Whether or not he may go?  A Letter is handed out

to him, over armed heads; sixty thousand faces flash fixedly on his, there

is stillness and no bosom breathes, till he have read.  By Heaven, he grows

suddenly pale!  Do the Municipals permit?  'Permit and even order,'--since

he can no other.  Clangour of approval rends the welkin.  To your ranks,

then; let us march!



It is, as we compute, towards three in the afternoon.  Indignant National

Guards may dine for once from their haversack:  dined or undined, they

march with one heart.  Paris flings up her windows, claps hands, as the

Avengers, with their shrilling drums and shalms tramp by; she will then sit

pensive, apprehensive, and pass rather a sleepless night.  (Deux Amis, iii.

165.)  On the white charger, Lafayette, in the slowest possible manner,

going and coming, and eloquently haranguing among the ranks, rolls onward

with his thirty thousand.  Saint-Antoine, with pike and cannon, has

preceded him; a mixed multitude, of all and of no arms, hovers on his

flanks and skirts; the country once more pauses agape:  Paris marche sur

nous.







Chapter 1.7.VI.



To Versailles.



For, indeed, about this same moment, Maillard has halted his draggled

Menads on the last hill-top; and now Versailles, and the Chateau of

Versailles, and far and wide the inheritance of Royalty opens to the

wondering eye.  From far on the right, over Marly and Saint-Germains-en-

Laye; round towards Rambouillet, on the left:  beautiful all; softly

embosomed; as if in sadness, in the dim moist weather!  And near before us

is Versailles, New and Old; with that broad frondent Avenue de Versailles

between,--stately-frondent, broad, three hundred feet as men reckon, with

four Rows of Elms; and then the Chateau de Versailles, ending in royal

Parks and Pleasances, gleaming lakelets, arbours, Labyrinths, the

Menagerie, and Great and Little Trianon.  High-towered dwellings, leafy

pleasant places; where the gods of this lower world abide:  whence,

nevertheless, black Care cannot be excluded; whither Menadic Hunger is even

now advancing, armed with pike-thyrsi!



Yes, yonder, Mesdames, where our straight frondent Avenue, joined, as you

note, by Two frondent brother Avenues from this hand and from that, spreads

out into Place Royale and Palace Forecourt; yonder is the Salle des Menus. 

Yonder an august Assembly sits regenerating France.  Forecourt, Grand

Court, Court of Marble, Court narrowing into Court you may discern next, or

fancy:  on the extreme verge of which that glass-dome, visibly glittering

like a star of hope, is the--Oeil-de-Boeuf!  Yonder, or nowhere in the

world, is bread baked for us.  But, O Mesdames, were not one thing good: 

That our cannons, with Demoiselle Theroigne and all show of war, be put to

the rear?  Submission beseems petitioners of a National Assembly; we are

strangers in Versailles,--whence, too audibly, there comes even now sound

as of tocsin and generale!  Also to put on, if possible, a cheerful

countenance, hiding our sorrows; and even to sing?  Sorrow, pitied of the

Heavens, is hateful, suspicious to the Earth.--So counsels shifty Maillard;

haranguing his Menads, on the heights near Versailles.  (See Hist. Parl.

iii. 70-117; Deux Amis, iii. 166-177, &c.)



Cunning Maillard's dispositions are obeyed.  The draggled Insurrectionists

advance up the Avenue, 'in three columns, among the four Elm-rows; 'singing

Henri Quatre,' with what melody they can; and shouting Vive le Roi. 

Versailles, though the Elm-rows are dripping wet, crowds from both sides,

with:  "Vivent nos Parisiennes, Our Paris ones for ever!"



Prickers, scouts have been out towards Paris, as the rumour deepened: 

whereby his Majesty, gone to shoot in the Woods of Meudon, has been happily

discovered, and got home; and the generale and tocsin set a-sounding.  The

Bodyguards are already drawn up in front of the Palace Grates; and look

down the Avenue de Versailles; sulky, in wet buckskins.  Flandre too is

there, repentant of the Opera-Repast.  Also Dragoons dismounted are there.

Finally Major Lecointre, and what he can gather of the Versailles National

Guard; though, it is to be observed, our Colonel, that same sleepless Count

d'Estaing, giving neither order nor ammunition, has vanished most

improperly; one supposes, into the Oeil-de-Boeuf.  Red-coated Swiss stand

within the Grates, under arms.  There likewise, in their inner room, 'all

the Ministers,' Saint-Priest, Lamentation Pompignan and the rest, are

assembled with M. Necker:  they sit with him there; blank, expecting what

the hour will bring.



President Mounier, though he answered Mirabeau with a tant mieux, and

affected to slight the matter, had his own forebodings.  Surely, for these

four weary hours, he has reclined not on roses!  The order of the day is

getting forward:  a Deputation to his Majesty seems proper, that it might

please him to grant 'Acceptance pure and simple' to those Constitution-

Articles of ours; the 'mixed qualified Acceptance,' with its peradventures,

is satisfactory to neither gods nor men.



So much is clear.  And yet there is more, which no man speaks, which all

men now vaguely understand.  Disquietude, absence of mind is on every face;

Members whisper, uneasily come and go:  the order of the day is evidently

not the day's want.  Till at length, from the outer gates, is heard a

rustling and justling, shrill uproar and squabbling, muffled by walls;

which testifies that the hour is come!  Rushing and crushing one hears now;

then enter Usher Maillard, with a Deputation of Fifteen muddy dripping

Women,--having by incredible industry, and aid of all the macers, persuaded

the rest to wait out of doors.  National Assembly shall now, therefore,

look its august task directly in the face:  regenerative Constitutionalism

has an unregenerate Sansculottism bodily in front of it; crying, "Bread!

Bread!"



Shifty Maillard, translating frenzy into articulation; repressive with the

one hand, expostulative with the other, does his best; and really, though

not bred to public speaking, manages rather well:--In the present dreadful

rarity of grains, a Deputation of Female Citizens has, as the august

Assembly can discern, come out from Paris to petition.  Plots of

Aristocrats are too evident in the matter; for example, one miller has been

bribed 'by a banknote of 200 livres' not to grind,--name unknown to the

Usher, but fact provable, at least indubitable.  Further, it seems, the

National Cockade has been trampled on; also there are Black Cockades, or

were.  All which things will not an august National Assembly, the hope of

France, take into its wise immediate consideration?



And Menadic Hunger, impressible, crying "Black Cockades," crying Bread,

Bread," adds, after such fashion:  Will it not?--Yes, Messieurs, if a

Deputation to his Majesty, for the 'Acceptance pure and simple,' seemed

proper,--how much more now, for 'the afflicting situation of Paris;' for

the calming of this effervescence!  President Mounier, with a speedy

Deputation, among whom we notice the respectable figure of Doctor

Guillotin, gets himself forthwith on march.  Vice-President shall continue

the order of the day; Usher Maillard shall stay by him to repress the

women.  It is four o'clock, of the miserablest afternoon, when Mounier

steps out.



O experienced Mounier, what an afternoon; the last of thy political

existence!  Better had it been to 'fall suddenly unwell,' while it was yet

time.  For, behold, the Esplanade, over all its spacious expanse, is

covered with groups of squalid dripping Women; of lankhaired male

Rascality, armed with axes, rusty pikes, old muskets, ironshod clubs (baton

ferres, which end in knives or sword-blades, a kind of extempore

billhook);--looking nothing but hungry revolt.  The rain pours:  Gardes-du-

Corps go caracoling through the groups 'amid hisses;' irritating and

agitating what is but dispersed here to reunite there.



Innumerable squalid women beleaguer the President and Deputation; insist on

going with him:  has not his Majesty himself, looking from the window, sent

out to ask, What we wanted?  "Bread and speech with the King (Du pain, et

parler au Roi)," that was the answer.  Twelve women are clamorously added

to the Deputation; and march with it, across the Esplanade; through

dissipated groups, caracoling Bodyguards, and the pouring rain.



President Mounier, unexpectedly augmented by Twelve Women, copiously

escorted by Hunger and Rascality, is himself mistaken for a group:  himself

and his Women are dispersed by caracolers; rally again with difficulty,

among the mud.  (Mounier, Expose Justificatif (cited in Deux Amis, iii.

185).)  Finally the Grates are opened:  the Deputation gets access, with

the Twelve Women too in it; of which latter, Five shall even see the face

of his Majesty.  Let wet Menadism, in the best spirits it can expect their

return.







Chapter 1.7.VII.



At Versailles.



But already Pallas Athene (in the shape of Demoiselle Theroigne) is busy

with Flandre and the dismounted Dragoons.  She, and such women as are

fittest, go through the ranks; speak with an earnest jocosity; clasp rough

troopers to their patriot bosom, crush down spontoons and musketoons with

soft arms:  can a man, that were worthy of the name of man, attack

famishing patriot women?



One reads that Theroigne had bags of money, which she distributed over

Flandre:--furnished by whom?  Alas, with money-bags one seldom sits on

insurrectionary cannon.  Calumnious Royalism!  Theroigne had only the

limited earnings of her profession of unfortunate-female; money she had

not, but brown locks, the figure of a heathen Goddess, and an eloquent

tongue and heart.



Meanwhile, Saint-Antoine, in groups and troops, is continually arriving;

wetted, sulky; with pikes and impromptu billhooks:  driven thus far by

popular fixed-idea.  So many hirsute figures driven hither, in that manner: 

figures that have come to do they know not what; figures that have come to

see it done!  Distinguished among all figures, who is this, of gaunt

stature, with leaden breastplate, though a small one; (See Weber, ii. 185-

231.) bushy in red grizzled locks; nay, with long tile-beard?  It is

Jourdan, unjust dealer in mules; a dealer no longer, but a Painter's

Layfigure, playing truant this day.  From the necessities of Art comes his

long tile-beard; whence his leaden breastplate (unless indeed he were some

Hawker licensed by leaden badge) may have come,--will perhaps remain for

ever a Historical Problem.  Another Saul among the people we discern: 

'Pere Adam, Father Adam,' as the groups name him; to us better known as

bull-voiced Marquis Saint-Huruge; hero of the Veto; a man that has had

losses, and deserved them.  The tall Marquis, emitted some days ago from

limbo, looks peripatetically on this scene, from under his umbrella, not

without interest.  All which persons and things, hurled together as we see;

Pallas Athene, busy with Flandre; patriotic Versailles National Guards,

short of ammunition, and deserted by d'Estaing their Colonel, and commanded

by Lecointre their Major; then caracoling Bodyguards, sour, dispirited,

with their buckskins wet; and finally this flowing sea of indignant

Squalor,--may they not give rise to occurrences?



Behold, however, the Twelve She-deputies return from the Chateau.  Without

President Mounier, indeed; but radiant with joy, shouting "Life to the King

and his House."  Apparently the news are good, Mesdames?  News of the best!

Five of us were admitted to the internal splendours, to the Royal Presence. 

This slim damsel, 'Louison Chabray, worker in sculpture, aged only

seventeen,' as being of the best looks and address, her we appointed

speaker.  On whom, and indeed on all of us, his Majesty looked nothing but

graciousness.  Nay, when Louison, addressing him, was like to faint, he

took her in his royal arms; and said gallantly, "It was well worth while

(Elle en valut bien la peine)."  Consider, O women, what a King!  His words

were of comfort, and that only:  there shall be provision sent to Paris, if

provision is in the world; grains shall circulate free as air; millers

shall grind, or do worse, while their millstones endure; and nothing be

left wrong which a Restorer of French Liberty can right.



Good news these; but, to wet Menads, all too incredible!  There seems no

proof, then?  Words of comfort are words only; which will feed nothing.  O

miserable people, betrayed by Aristocrats, who corrupt thy very messengers!

In his royal arms, Mademoiselle Louison?  In his arms?  Thou shameless

minx, worthy of a name--that shall be nameless!  Yes, thy skin is soft:

ours is rough with hardship; and well wetted, waiting here in the rain.  No

children hast thou hungry at home; only alabaster dolls, that weep not! 

The traitress!  To the Lanterne!--And so poor Louison Chabray, no

asseveration or shrieks availing her, fair slim damsel, late in the arms of

Royalty, has a garter round her neck, and furibund Amazons at each end; is

about to perish so,--when two Bodyguards gallop up, indignantly

dissipating; and rescue her.  The miscredited Twelve hasten back to the

Chateau, for an 'answer in writing.'



Nay, behold, a new flight of Menads, with 'M. Brunout Bastille Volunteer,'

as impressed-commandant, at the head of it.  These also will advance to the

Grate of the Grand Court, and see what is toward.  Human patience, in wet

buckskins, has its limits.  Bodyguard Lieutenant, M. de Savonnieres, for

one moment, lets his temper, long provoked, long pent, give way.  He not

only dissipates these latter Menads; but caracoles and cuts, or indignantly

flourishes, at M. Brunout, the impressed-commandant; and, finding great

relief in it, even chases him; Brunout flying nimbly, though in a pirouette

manner, and now with sword also drawn.  At which sight of wrath and victory

two other Bodyguards (for wrath is contagious, and to pent Bodyguards is so

solacing) do likewise give way; give chase, with brandished sabre, and in

the air make horrid circles.  So that poor Brunout has nothing for it but

to retreat with accelerated nimbleness, through rank after rank; Parthian-

like, fencing as he flies; above all, shouting lustily, "On nous laisse

assassiner, They are getting us assassinated?"



Shameful!  Three against one!  Growls come from the Lecointrian ranks;

bellowings,--lastly shots.  Savonnieres' arm is raised to strike:  the

bullet of a Lecointrian musket shatters it; the brandished sabre jingles

down harmless.  Brunout has escaped, this duel well ended:  but the wild

howl of war is everywhere beginning to pipe!



The Amazons recoil; Saint-Antoine has its cannon pointed (full of

grapeshot); thrice applies the lit flambeau; which thrice refuses to

catch,--the touchholes are so wetted; and voices cry:  "Arretez, il n'est

pas temps encore, Stop, it is not yet time!"  (Deux Amis, iii. 192-201.) 

Messieurs of the Garde-du-Corps, ye had orders not to fire; nevertheless

two of you limp dismounted, and one war-horse lies slain.  Were it not well

to draw back out of shot-range; finally to file off,--into the interior? 

If in so filing off, there did a musketoon or two discharge itself, at

these armed shopkeepers, hooting and crowing, could man wonder?  Draggled

are your white cockades of an enormous size; would to Heaven they were got

exchanged for tricolor ones!  Your buckskins are wet, your hearts heavy. 

Go, and return not!



The Bodyguards file off, as we hint; giving and receiving shots; drawing no

life-blood; leaving boundless indignation.  Some three times in the

thickening dusk, a glimpse of them is seen, at this or the other Portal: 

saluted always with execrations, with the whew of lead.  Let but a

Bodyguard shew face, he is hunted by Rascality;--for instance, poor 'M. de

Moucheton of the Scotch Company,' owner of the slain war-horse; and has to

be smuggled off by Versailles Captains.  Or rusty firelocks belch after

him, shivering asunder his--hat.  In the end, by superior Order, the

Bodyguards, all but the few on immediate duty, disappear; or as it were

abscond; and march, under cloud of night, to Rambouillet.  (Weber, ubi

supra.)



We remark also that the Versaillese have now got ammunition:  all

afternoon, the official Person could find none; till, in these so critical

moments, a patriotic Sublieutenant set a pistol to his ear, and would thank

him to find some,--which he thereupon succeeded in doing.  Likewise that

Flandre, disarmed by Pallas Athene, says openly, it will not fight with

citizens; and for token of peace, has exchanged cartridges with the

Versaillese.



Sansculottism is now among mere friends; and can 'circulate freely;'

indignant at Bodyguards;--complaining also considerably of hunger.







Chapter 1.7.VIII.



The Equal Diet.



But why lingers Mounier; returns not with his Deputation?  It is six, it is

seven o'clock; and still no Mounier, no Acceptance pure and simple.



And, behold, the dripping Menads, not now in deputation but in mass, have

penetrated into the Assembly:  to the shamefullest interruption of public

speaking and order of the day.  Neither Maillard nor Vice-President can

restrain them, except within wide limits; not even, except for minutes, can

the lion-voice of Mirabeau, though they applaud it:  but ever and anon they

break in upon the regeneration of France with cries of:  "Bread; not so

much discoursing!  Du pain; pas tant de longs discours!"--So insensible

were these poor creatures to bursts of Parliamentary eloquence!



One learns also that the royal Carriages are getting yoked, as if for Metz.

Carriages, royal or not, have verily showed themselves at the back Gates. 

They even produced, or quoted, a written order from our Versailles

Municipality,--which is a Monarchic not a Democratic one.  However,

Versailles Patroles drove them in again; as the vigilant Lecointre had

strictly charged them to do.



A busy man, truly, is Major Lecointre, in these hours.  For Colonel

d'Estaing loiters invisible in the Oeil-de-Boeuf; invisible, or still more

questionably visible, for instants:  then also a too loyal Municipality

requires supervision: no order, civil or military, taken about any of these

thousand things!  Lecointre is at the Versailles Townhall:  he is at the

Grate of the Grand Court; communing with Swiss and Bodyguards.  He is in

the ranks of Flandre; he is here, he is there:  studious to prevent

bloodshed; to prevent the Royal Family from flying to Metz; the Menads from

plundering Versailles.



At the fall of night, we behold him advance to those armed groups of Saint-

Antoine, hovering all-too grim near the Salle des Menus.  They receive him

in a half-circle; twelve speakers behind cannons, with lighted torches in

hand, the cannon-mouths towards Lecointre:  a picture for Salvator!  He

asks, in temperate but courageous language:  What they, by this their

journey to Versailles, do specially want?  The twelve speakers reply, in

few words inclusive of much:  "Bread, and the end of these brabbles, Du

pain, et la fin des affaires."  When the affairs will end, no Major

Lecointre, nor no mortal, can say; but as to bread, he inquires, How many

are you?--learns that they are six hundred, that a loaf each will suffice;

and rides off to the Municipality to get six hundred loaves.



Which loaves, however, a Municipality of Monarchic temper will not give. 

It will give two tons of rice rather,--could you but know whether it should

be boiled or raw.  Nay when this too is accepted, the Municipals have

disappeared;--ducked under, as the Six-and-Twenty Long-gowned of Paris did;

and, leaving not the smallest vestage of rice, in the boiled or raw state,

they there vanish from History!



Rice comes not; one's hope of food is baulked; even one's hope of

vengeance:  is not M. de Moucheton of the Scotch Company, as we said,

deceitfully smuggled off?  Failing all which, behold only M. de Moucheton's

slain warhorse, lying on the Esplanade there!  Saint-Antoine, baulked,

esurient, pounces on the slain warhorse; flays it; roasts it, with such

fuel, of paling, gates, portable timber as can be come at,--not without

shouting:  and, after the manner of ancient Greek Heroes, they lifted their

hands to the daintily readied repast; such as it might be.  (Weber, Deux

Amis, &c.)  Other Rascality prowls discursive; seeking what it may devour. 

Flandre will retire to its barracks; Lecointre also with his Versaillese,--

all but the vigilant Patrols, charged to be doubly vigilant.



So sink the shadows of Night, blustering, rainy; and all paths grow dark. 

Strangest Night ever seen in these regions,--perhaps since the Bartholomew

Night, when Versailles, as Bassompierre writes of it, was a chetif chateau.

O for the Lyre of some Orpheus, to constrain, with touch of melodious

strings, these mad masses into Order!  For here all seems fallen asunder,

in wide-yawning dislocation.  The highest, as in down-rushing of a World,

is come in contact with the lowest:  the Rascality of France beleaguering

the Royalty of France; 'ironshod batons' lifted round the diadem, not to

guard it!  With denunciations of bloodthirsty Anti-national Bodyguards, are

heard dark growlings against a Queenly Name.



The Court sits tremulous, powerless; varies with the varying temper of the

Esplanade, with the varying colour of the rumours from Paris.  Thick-coming

rumours; now of peace, now of war.  Necker and all the Ministers consult;

with a blank issue.  The Oeil-de-Boeuf is one tempest of whispers:--We will

fly to Metz; we will not fly.  The royal Carriages again attempt egress;--

though for trial merely; they are again driven in by Lecointre's Patrols. 

In six hours, nothing has been resolved on; not even the Acceptance pure

and simple.



In six hours?  Alas, he who, in such circumstances, cannot resolve in six

minutes, may give up the enterprise:  him Fate has already resolved for. 

And Menadism, meanwhile, and Sansculottism takes counsel with the National

Assembly; grows more and more tumultuous there.  Mounier returns not;

Authority nowhere shews itself:  the Authority of France lies, for the

present, with Lecointre and Usher Maillard.--This then is the abomination

of desolation; come suddenly, though long foreshadowed as inevitable!  For,

to the blind, all things are sudden.  Misery which, through long ages, had

no spokesman, no helper, will now be its own helper and speak for itself. 

The dialect, one of the rudest, is, what it could be, this.



At eight o'clock there returns to our Assembly not the Deputation; but

Doctor Guillotin announcing that it will return; also that there is hope of

the Acceptance pure and simple.  He himself has brought a Royal Letter,

authorising and commanding the freest 'circulation of grains.'  Which Royal

Letter Menadism with its whole heart applauds.  Conformably to which the

Assembly forthwith passes a Decree; also received with rapturous Menadic

plaudits:--Only could not an august Assembly contrive further to "fix the

price of bread at eight sous the half-quartern; butchers'-meat at six sous

the pound;" which seem fair rates?  Such motion do 'a multitude of men and

women,' irrepressible by Usher Maillard, now make; does an august Assembly

hear made.  Usher Maillard himself is not always perfectly measured in

speech; but if rebuked, he can justly excuse himself by the peculiarity of

the circumstances.  (Moniteur (in Hist. Parl. ii. 105).)



But finally, this Decree well passed, and the disorder continuing; and

Members melting away, and no President Mounier returning,--what can the

Vice-President do but also melt away?  The Assembly melts, under such

pressure, into deliquium; or, as it is officially called, adjourns. 

Maillard is despatched to Paris, with the 'Decree concerning Grains' in his

pocket; he and some women, in carriages belonging to the King.  Thitherward

slim Louison Chabray has already set forth, with that 'written answer,'

which the Twelve She-deputies returned in to seek.  Slim sylph, she has set

forth, through the black muddy country:  she has much to tell, her poor

nerves so flurried; and travels, as indeed to-day on this road all persons

do, with extreme slowness.  President Mounier has not come, nor the

Acceptance pure and simple; though six hours with their events have come;

though courier on courier reports that Lafayette is coming.  Coming, with

war or with peace?  It is time that the Chateau also should determine on

one thing or another; that the Chateau also should show itself alive, if it

would continue living!



Victorious, joyful after such delay, Mounier does arrive at last, and the

hard-earned Acceptance with him; which now, alas, is of small value.  Fancy

Mounier's surprise to find his Senate, whom he hoped to charm by the

Acceptance pure and simple,--all gone; and in its stead a Senate of Menads!

For as Erasmus's Ape mimicked, say with wooden splint, Erasmus shaving, so

do these Amazons hold, in mock majesty, some confused parody of National

Assembly.  They make motions; deliver speeches; pass enactments; productive

at least of loud laughter.  All galleries and benches are filled; a strong

Dame of the Market is in Mounier's Chair.  Not without difficulty, Mounier,

by aid of macers, and persuasive speaking, makes his way to the Female-

President:  the Strong Dame before abdicating signifies that, for one

thing, she and indeed her whole senate male and female (for what was one

roasted warhorse among so many?) are suffering very considerably from

hunger.



Experienced Mounier, in these circumstances, takes a twofold resolution: 

To reconvoke his Assembly Members by sound of drum; also to procure a

supply of food.  Swift messengers fly, to all bakers, cooks, pastrycooks,

vintners, restorers; drums beat, accompanied with shrill vocal

proclamation, through all streets.  They come:  the Assembly Members come;

what is still better, the provisions come.  On tray and barrow come these

latter; loaves, wine, great store of sausages.  The nourishing baskets

circulate harmoniously along the benches; nor, according to the Father of

Epics, did any soul lack a fair share of victual ((Greek), an equal diet);

highly desirable, at the moment.  (Deux Amis, iii. 208.)



Gradually some hundred or so of Assembly members get edged in, Menadism

making way a little, round Mounier's Chair; listen to the Acceptance pure

and simple; and begin, what is the order of the night, 'discussion of the

Penal Code.'  All benches are crowded; in the dusky galleries, duskier with

unwashed heads, is a strange 'coruscation,'--of impromptu billhooks. 

(Courier de Provence (Mirabeau's Newspaper), No. 50, p. 19.)  It is exactly

five months this day since these same galleries were filled with high-

plumed jewelled Beauty, raining bright influences; and now?  To such length

have we got in regenerating France.  Methinks the travail-throes are of the

sharpest!--Menadism will not be restrained from occasional remarks; asks,

"What is use of the Penal Code?  The thing we want is Bread."  Mirabeau

turns round with lion-voiced rebuke; Menadism applauds him; but

recommences.



Thus they, chewing tough sausages, discussing the Penal Code, make night

hideous.  What the issue will be?  Lafayette with his thirty thousand must

arrive first:  him, who cannot now be distant, all men expect, as the

messenger of Destiny.







Chapter 1.7.IX.



Lafayette.



Towards midnight lights flare on the hill; Lafayette's lights!  The roll of

his drums comes up the Avenue de Versailles.  With peace, or with war? 

Patience, friends!  With neither.  Lafayette is come, but not yet the

catastrophe.



He has halted and harangued so often, on the march; spent nine hours on

four leagues of road.  At Montreuil, close on Versailles, the whole Host

had to pause; and, with uplifted right hand, in the murk of Night, to these

pouring skies, swear solemnly to respect the King's Dwelling; to be

faithful to King and National Assembly.  Rage is driven down out of sight,

by the laggard march; the thirst of vengeance slaked in weariness and

soaking clothes.  Flandre is again drawn out under arms:  but Flandre,

grown so patriotic, now needs no 'exterminating.'  The wayworn Batallions

halt in the Avenue:  they have, for the present, no wish so pressing as

that of shelter and rest.



Anxious sits President Mounier; anxious the Chateau.  There is a message

coming from the Chateau, that M. Mounier would please return thither with a

fresh Deputation, swiftly; and so at least unite our two anxieties. 

Anxious Mounier does of himself send, meanwhile, to apprise the General

that his Majesty has been so gracious as to grant us the Acceptance pure

and simple.  The General, with a small advance column, makes answer in

passing; speaks vaguely some smooth words to the National President,--

glances, only with the eye, at that so mixtiform National Assembly; then

fares forward towards the Chateau.  There are with him two Paris

Municipals; they were chosen from the Three Hundred for that errand.  He

gets admittance through the locked and padlocked Grates, through sentries

and ushers, to the Royal Halls.



The Court, male and female, crowds on his passage, to read their doom on

his face; which exhibits, say Historians, a mixture 'of sorrow, of fervour

and valour,' singular to behold.  (Memoire de M. le Comte de Lally-

Tollendal (Janvier 1790), p. 161-165.)  The King, with Monsieur, with

Ministers and Marshals, is waiting to receive him:  He "is come," in his

highflown chivalrous way, "to offer his head for the safety of his

Majesty's."  The two Municipals state the wish of Paris:  four things, of

quite pacific tenor.  First, that the honour of Guarding his sacred person

be conferred on patriot National Guards;--say, the Centre Grenadiers, who

as Gardes Francaises were wont to have that privilege.  Second, that

provisions be got, if possible.  Third, that the Prisons, all crowded with

political delinquents, may have judges sent them.  Fourth, that it would

please his Majesty to come and live in Paris.  To all which four wishes,

except the fourth, his Majesty answers readily, Yes; or indeed may almost

say that he has already answered it.  To the fourth he can answer only, Yes

or No; would so gladly answer, Yes and No!--But, in any case, are not their

dispositions, thank Heaven, so entirely pacific?  There is time for

deliberation.  The brunt of the danger seems past!



Lafayette and d'Estaing settle the watches; Centre Grenadiers are to take

the Guard-room they of old occupied as Gardes Francaises;--for indeed the

Gardes du Corps, its late ill-advised occupants, are gone mostly to

Rambouillet.  That is the order of this night; sufficient for the night is

the evil thereof.  Whereupon Lafayette and the two Municipals, with

highflown chivalry, take their leave.



So brief has the interview been, Mounier and his Deputation were not yet

got up.  So brief and satisfactory.  A stone is rolled from every heart. 

The fair Palace Dames publicly declare that this Lafayette, detestable

though he be, is their saviour for once.  Even the ancient vinaigrous

Tantes admit it; the King's Aunts, ancient Graille and Sisterhood, known to

us of old.  Queen Marie-Antoinette has been heard often say the like.  She

alone, among all women and all men, wore a face of courage, of lofty

calmness and resolve, this day.  She alone saw clearly what she meant to

do; and Theresa's Daughter dares do what she means, were all France

threatening her:  abide where her children are, where her husband is.



Towards three in the morning all things are settled:  the watches set, the

Centre Grenadiers put into their old Guard-room, and harangued; the Swiss,

and few remaining Bodyguards harangued.  The wayworn Paris Batallions,

consigned to 'the hospitality of Versailles,' lie dormant in spare-beds,

spare-barracks, coffeehouses, empty churches.  A troop of them, on their

way to the Church of Saint-Louis, awoke poor Weber, dreaming troublous, in

the Rue Sartory.  Weber has had his waistcoat-pocket full of balls all day;

'two hundred balls, and two pears of powder!'  For waistcoats were

waistcoats then, and had flaps down to mid-thigh.  So many balls he has had

all day; but no opportunity of using them:  he turns over now, execrating

disloyal bandits; swears a prayer or two, and straight to sleep again.



Finally, the National Assembly is harangued; which thereupon, on motion of

Mirabeau, discontinues the Penal Code, and dismisses for this night. 

Menadism, Sansculottism has cowered into guard-houses, barracks of Flandre,

to the light of cheerful fire; failing that, to churches, office-houses,

sentry-boxes, wheresoever wretchedness can find a lair.  The troublous Day

has brawled itself to rest:  no lives yet lost but that of one warhorse. 

Insurrectionary Chaos lies slumbering round the Palace, like Ocean round a

Diving-bell,--no crevice yet disclosing itself.



Deep sleep has fallen promiscuously on the high and on the low; suspending

most things, even wrath and famine.  Darkness covers the Earth.  But, far

on the North-east, Paris flings up her great yellow gleam; far into the wet

black Night.  For all is illuminated there, as in the old July Nights; the

streets deserted, for alarm of war; the Municipals all wakeful; Patrols

hailing, with their hoarse Who-goes.  There, as we discover, our poor slim

Louison Chabray, her poor nerves all fluttered, is arriving about this very

hour.  There Usher Maillard will arrive, about an hour hence, 'towards four

in the morning.'  They report, successively, to a wakeful Hotel-de-Ville

what comfort they can report; which again, with early dawn, large

comfortable Placards, shall impart to all men.



Lafayette, in the Hotel de Noailles, not far from the Chateau, having now

finished haranguing, sits with his Officers consulting:  at five o'clock

the unanimous best counsel is, that a man so tost and toiled for twenty-

four hours and more, fling himself on a bed, and seek some rest.



Thus, then, has ended the First Act of the Insurrection of Women.  How it

will turn on the morrow?  The morrow, as always, is with the Fates!  But

his Majesty, one may hope, will consent to come honourably to Paris; at all

events, he can visit Paris.  Anti-national Bodyguards, here and elsewhere,

must take the National Oath; make reparation to the Tricolor; Flandre will

swear.  There may be much swearing; much public speaking there will

infallibly be:  and so, with harangues and vows, may the matter in some

handsome way, wind itself up.



Or, alas, may it not be all otherwise, unhandsome:  the consent not

honourable, but extorted, ignominious?  Boundless Chaos of Insurrection

presses slumbering round the Palace, like Ocean round a Diving-bell; and

may penetrate at any crevice.  Let but that accumulated insurrectionary

mass find entrance!  Like the infinite inburst of water; or say rather, of

inflammable, self-igniting fluid; for example, 'turpentine-and-phosphorus

oil,'--fluid known to Spinola Santerre!







Chapter 1.7.X.



The Grand Entries.



The dull dawn of a new morning, drizzly and chill, had but broken over

Versailles, when it pleased Destiny that a Bodyguard should look out of

window, on the right wing of the Chateau, to see what prospect there was in

Heaven and in Earth.  Rascality male and female is prowling in view of him.

His fasting stomach is, with good cause, sour; he perhaps cannot forbear a

passing malison on them; least of all can he forbear answering such.



Ill words breed worse:  till the worst word came; and then the ill deed. 

Did the maledicent Bodyguard, getting (as was too inevitable) better

malediction than he gave, load his musketoon, and threaten to fire; and

actually fire?  Were wise who wist!  It stands asserted; to us not

credibly.  Be this as it may, menaced Rascality, in whinnying scorn, is

shaking at all Grates:  the fastening of one (some write, it was a chain

merely) gives way; Rascality is in the Grand Court, whinnying louder still.



The maledicent Bodyguard, more Bodyguards than he do now give fire; a man's

arm is shattered.  Lecointre will depose (Deposition de Lecointre (in Hist.

Parl. iii. 111-115.) that 'the Sieur Cardaine, a National Guard without

arms, was stabbed.'  But see, sure enough, poor Jerome l'Heritier, an

unarmed National Guard he too, 'cabinet-maker, a saddler's son, of Paris,'

with the down of youthhood still on his chin,--he reels death-stricken;

rushes to the pavement, scattering it with his blood and brains!--Allelew! 

Wilder than Irish wakes, rises the howl:  of pity; of infinite revenge.  In

few moments, the Grate of the inner and inmost Court, which they name Court

of Marble, this too is forced, or surprised, and burst open:  the Court of

Marble too is overflowed:  up the Grand Staircase, up all stairs and

entrances rushes the living Deluge!  Deshuttes and Varigny, the two sentry

Bodyguards, are trodden down, are massacred with a hundred pikes.  Women

snatch their cutlasses, or any weapon, and storm-in Menadic:--other women

lift the corpse of shot Jerome; lay it down on the Marble steps; there

shall the livid face and smashed head, dumb for ever, speak.



Wo now to all Bodyguards, mercy is none for them!  Miomandre de Sainte-

Marie pleads with soft words, on the Grand Staircase, 'descending four

steps:'--to the roaring tornado.  His comrades snatch him up, by the skirts

and belts; literally, from the jaws of Destruction; and slam-to their Door. 

This also will stand few instants; the panels shivering in, like potsherds.

Barricading serves not:  fly fast, ye Bodyguards; rabid Insurrection, like

the hellhound Chase, uproaring at your heels!



The terrorstruck Bodyguards fly, bolting and barricading; it follows. 

Whitherward?  Through hall on hall:  wo, now! towards the Queen's Suite of

Rooms, in the furtherest room of which the Queen is now asleep.  Five

sentinels rush through that long Suite; they are in the Anteroom knocking

loud:  "Save the Queen!"  Trembling women fall at their feet with tears;

are answered:  "Yes, we will die; save ye the Queen!"



Tremble not, women, but haste:  for, lo, another voice shouts far through

the outermost door, "Save the Queen!" and the door shut.  It is brave

Miomandre's voice that shouts this second warning.  He has stormed across

imminent death to do it; fronts imminent death, having done it.  Brave

Tardivet du Repaire, bent on the same desperate service, was borne down

with pikes; his comrades hardly snatched him in again alive.  Miomandre and

Tardivet:  let the names of these two Bodyguards, as the names of brave men

should, live long.



Trembling Maids of Honour, one of whom from afar caught glimpse of

Miomandre as well as heard him, hastily wrap the Queen; not in robes of

State.  She flies for her life, across the Oeil-de-Boeuf; against the main

door of which too Insurrection batters.  She is in the King's Apartment, in

the King's arms; she clasps her children amid a faithful few.  The

Imperial-hearted bursts into mother's tears:  "O my friends, save me and my

children, O mes amis, sauvez moi et mes enfans!"  The battering of

Insurrectionary axes clangs audible across the Oeil-de-Boeuf.  What an

hour!



Yes, Friends:  a hideous fearful hour; shameful alike to Governed and

Governor; wherein Governed and Governor ignominiously testify that their

relation is at an end.  Rage, which had brewed itself in twenty thousand

hearts, for the last four-and-twenty hours, has taken fire:  Jerome's

brained corpse lies there as live-coal.  It is, as we said, the infinite

Element bursting in:  wild-surging through all corridors and conduits.



Meanwhile, the poor Bodyguards have got hunted mostly into the Oeil-de-

Boeuf.  They may die there, at the King's threshhold; they can do little to

defend it.  They are heaping tabourets (stools of honour), benches and all

moveables, against the door; at which the axe of Insurrection thunders.--

But did brave Miomandre perish, then, at the Queen's door?  No, he was

fractured, slashed, lacerated, left for dead; he has nevertheless crawled

hither; and shall live, honoured of loyal France.  Remark also, in flat

contradiction to much which has been said and sung, that Insurrection did

not burst that door he had defended; but hurried elsewhither, seeking new

bodyguards.  (Campan, ii. 75-87.)



Poor Bodyguards, with their Thyestes' Opera-Repast!  Well for them, that

Insurrection has only pikes and axes; no right sieging tools!  It shakes

and thunders.  Must they all perish miserably, and Royalty with them? 

Deshuttes and Varigny, massacred at the first inbreak, have been beheaded

in the Marble Court:  a sacrifice to Jerome's manes:  Jourdan with the

tile-beard did that duty willingly; and asked, If there were no more? 

Another captive they are leading round the corpse, with howl-chauntings: 

may not Jourdan again tuck up his sleeves?



And louder and louder rages Insurrection within, plundering if it cannot

kill; louder and louder it thunders at the Oeil-de-Boeuf:  what can now

hinder its bursting in?--On a sudden it ceases; the battering has ceased! 

Wild rushing:  the cries grow fainter:  there is silence, or the tramp of

regular steps; then a friendly knocking:  "We are the Centre Grenadiers,

old Gardes Francaises:  Open to us, Messieurs of the Garde-du-Corps; we

have not forgotten how you saved us at Fontenoy!"  (Toulongeon, i. 144.) 

The door is opened; enter Captain Gondran and the Centre Grenadiers:  there

are military embracings; there is sudden deliverance from death into life.



Strange Sons of Adam!  It was to 'exterminate' these Gardes-du-Corps that

the Centre Grenadiers left home:  and now they have rushed to save them

from extermination.  The memory of common peril, of old help, melts the

rough heart; bosom is clasped to bosom, not in war.  The King shews

himself, one moment, through the door of his Apartment, with:  "Do not hurt

my Guards!"--"Soyons freres, Let us be brothers!" cries Captain Gondran;

and again dashes off, with levelled bayonets, to sweep the Palace clear.



Now too Lafayette, suddenly roused, not from sleep (for his eyes had not

yet closed), arrives; with passionate popular eloquence, with prompt

military word of command.  National Guards, suddenly roused, by sound of

trumpet and alarm-drum, are all arriving.  The death-melly ceases:  the

first sky-lambent blaze of Insurrection is got damped down; it burns now,

if unextinguished, yet flameless, as charred coals do, and not

inextinguishable.  The King's Apartments are safe.  Ministers, Officials,

and even some loyal National deputies are assembling round their Majesties. 

The consternation will, with sobs and confusion, settle down gradually,

into plan and counsel, better or worse.



But glance now, for a moment, from the royal windows!  A roaring sea of

human heads, inundating both Courts; billowing against all passages: 

Menadic women; infuriated men, mad with revenge, with love of mischief,

love of plunder!  Rascality has slipped its muzzle; and now bays, three-

throated, like the Dog of Erebus.  Fourteen Bodyguards are wounded; two

massacred, and as we saw, beheaded; Jourdan asking, "Was it worth while to

come so far for two?"  Hapless Deshuttes and Varigny!  Their fate surely

was sad.  Whirled down so suddenly to the abyss; as men are, suddenly, by

the wide thunder of the Mountain Avalanche, awakened not by them, awakened

far off by others!  When the Chateau Clock last struck, they two were

pacing languid, with poised musketoon; anxious mainly that the next hour

would strike.  It has struck; to them inaudible.  Their trunks lie mangled: 

their heads parade, 'on pikes twelve feet long,' through the streets of

Versailles; and shall, about noon reach the Barriers of Paris,--a too

ghastly contradiction to the large comfortable Placards that have been

posted there!



The other captive Bodyguard is still circling the corpse of Jerome, amid

Indian war-whooping; bloody Tilebeard, with tucked sleeves, brandishing his

bloody axe; when Gondran and the Grenadiers come in sight.  "Comrades, will

you see a man massacred in cold blood?"--"Off, butchers!" answer they; and

the poor Bodyguard is free.  Busy runs Gondran, busy run Guards and

Captains; scouring at all corridors; dispersing Rascality and Robbery;

sweeping the Palace clear.  The mangled carnage is removed; Jerome's body

to the Townhall, for inquest:  the fire of Insurrection gets damped, more

and more, into measurable, manageable heat.



Transcendent things of all sorts, as in the general outburst of

multitudinous Passion, are huddled together; the ludicrous, nay the

ridiculous, with the horrible.  Far over the billowy sea of heads, may be

seen Rascality, caprioling on horses from the Royal Stud.  The Spoilers

these; for Patriotism is always infected so, with a proportion of mere

thieves and scoundrels.  Gondran snatched their prey from them in the

Chateau; whereupon they hurried to the Stables, and took horse there.  But

the generous Diomedes' steeds, according to Weber, disdained such

scoundrel-burden; and, flinging up their royal heels, did soon project most

of it, in parabolic curves, to a distance, amid peals of laughter:  and

were caught.  Mounted National Guards secured the rest.



Now too is witnessed the touching last-flicker of Etiquette; which sinks

not here, in the Cimmerian World-wreckage, without a sign, as the house-

cricket might still chirp in the pealing of a Trump of Doom.  "Monsieur,"

said some Master of Ceremonies (one hopes it might be de Breze), as

Lafayette, in these fearful moments, was rushing towards the inner Royal

Apartments, "Monsieur, le Roi vous accorde les grandes entrees, Monsieur,

the King grants you the Grand Entries,"--not finding it convenient to

refuse them!"  (Toulongeon, 1 App. 120.)







Chapter 1.7.XI.



From Versailles.



However, the Paris National Guard, wholly under arms, has cleared the

Palace, and even occupies the nearer external spaces; extruding

miscellaneous Patriotism, for most part, into the Grand Court, or even into

the Forecourt.



The Bodyguards, you can observe, have now of a verity, 'hoisted the

National Cockade:'  for they step forward to the windows or balconies, hat

aloft in hand, on each hat a huge tricolor; and fling over their bandoleers

in sign of surrender; and shout Vive la Nation.  To which how can the

generous heart respond but with, Vive le Roi; vivent les Gardes-du-Corps? 

His Majesty himself has appeared with Lafayette on the balcony, and again

appears:  Vive le Roi greets him from all throats; but also from some one

throat is heard "Le Roi a Paris, The King to Paris!"



Her Majesty too, on demand, shows herself, though there is peril in it: 

she steps out on the balcony, with her little boy and girl.  "No children,

Point d'enfans!" cry the voices.  She gently pushes back her children; and

stands alone, her hands serenely crossed on her breast:  "should I die,"

she had said, "I will do it."  Such serenity of heroism has its effect. 

Lafayette, with ready wit, in his highflown chivalrous way, takes that fair

queenly hand; and reverently kneeling, kisses it:  thereupon the people do

shout Vive la Reine.  Nevertheless, poor Weber 'saw' (or even thought he

saw; for hardly the third part of poor Weber's experiences, in such

hysterical days, will stand scrutiny) 'one of these brigands level his

musket at her Majesty,'--with or without intention to shoot; for another of

the brigands 'angrily struck it down.'



So that all, and the Queen herself, nay the very Captain of the Bodyguards,

have grown National!  The very Captain of the Bodyguards steps out now with

Lafayette.  On the hat of the repentant man is an enormous tricolor; large

as a soup-platter, or sun-flower; visible to the utmost Forecourt.  He

takes the National Oath with a loud voice, elevating his hat; at which

sight all the army raise their bonnets on their bayonets, with shouts. 

Sweet is reconcilement to the heart of man.  Lafayette has sworn Flandre;

he swears the remaining Bodyguards, down in the Marble Court; the people

clasp them in their arms:--O, my brothers, why would ye force us to slay

you?  Behold there is joy over you, as over returning prodigal sons!--The

poor Bodyguards, now National and tricolor, exchange bonnets, exchange

arms; there shall be peace and fraternity.  And still "Vive le Roi;" and

also "Le Roi a Paris," not now from one throat, but from all throats as

one, for it is the heart's wish of all mortals.



Yes, The King to Paris:  what else?  Ministers may consult, and National

Deputies wag their heads:  but there is now no other possibility.  You have

forced him to go willingly.  "At one o'clock!" Lafayette gives audible

assurance to that purpose; and universal Insurrection, with immeasurable

shout, and a discharge of all the firearms, clear and rusty, great and

small, that it has, returns him acceptance.  What a sound; heard for

leagues:  a doom peal!--That sound too rolls away, into the Silence of

Ages.  And the Chateau of Versailles stands ever since vacant, hushed

still; its spacious Courts grassgrown, responsive to the hoe of the weeder. 

Times and generations roll on, in their confused Gulf-current; and

buildings like builders have their destiny.



Till one o'clock, then, there will be three parties, National Assembly,

National Rascality, National Royalty, all busy enough.  Rascality rejoices;

women trim themselves with tricolor.  Nay motherly Paris has sent her

Avengers sufficient 'cartloads of loaves;' which are shouted over, which

are gratefully consumed.  The Avengers, in return, are searching for grain-

stores; loading them in fifty waggons; that so a National King, probable

harbinger of all blessings, may be the evident bringer of plenty, for one.



And thus has Sansculottism made prisoner its King; revoking his parole. 

The Monarchy has fallen; and not so much as honourably:  no, ignominiously;

with struggle, indeed, oft repeated; but then with unwise struggle; wasting

its strength in fits and paroxysms; at every new paroxysm, foiled more

pitifully than before.  Thus Broglie's whiff of grapeshot, which might have

been something, has dwindled to the pot-valour of an Opera Repast, and O

Richard, O mon Roi.  Which again we shall see dwindle to a Favras'

Conspiracy, a thing to be settled by the hanging of one Chevalier.



Poor Monarchy!  But what save foulest defeat can await that man, who wills,

and yet wills not?  Apparently the King either has a right, assertible as

such to the death, before God and man; or else he has no right. 

Apparently, the one or the other; could he but know which!  May Heaven pity

him!  Were Louis wise he would this day abdicate.--Is it not strange so few

Kings abdicate; and none yet heard of has been known to commit suicide? 

Fritz the First, of Prussia, alone tried it; and they cut the rope.



As for the National Assembly, which decrees this morning that it 'is

inseparable from his Majesty,' and will follow him to Paris, there may one

thing be noted:  its extreme want of bodily health.  After the Fourteenth

of July there was a certain sickliness observable among honourable Members;

so many demanding passports, on account of infirm health.  But now, for

these following days, there is a perfect murrian:  President Mounier, Lally

Tollendal, Clermont Tonnere, and all Constitutional Two-Chamber Royalists

needing change of air; as most No-Chamber Royalists had formerly done.



For, in truth, it is the second Emigration this that has now come; most

extensive among Commons Deputies, Noblesse, Clergy:  so that 'to

Switzerland alone there go sixty thousand.'  They will return in the day of

accounts!  Yes, and have hot welcome.--But Emigration on Emigration is the

peculiarity of France.  One Emigration follows another; grounded on

reasonable fear, unreasonable hope, largely also on childish pet.  The

highflyers have gone first, now the lower flyers; and ever the lower will

go down to the crawlers.  Whereby, however, cannot our National Assembly so

much the more commodiously make the Constitution; your Two-Chamber

Anglomaniacs being all safe, distant on foreign shores?  Abbe Maury is

seized, and sent back again:  he, tough as tanned leather, with eloquent

Captain Cazales and some others, will stand it out for another year.



But here, meanwhile, the question arises:  Was Philippe d'Orleans seen,

this day, 'in the Bois de Boulogne, in grey surtout;' waiting under the wet

sere foliage, what the day might bring forth?  Alas, yes, the Eidolon of

him was,--in Weber's and other such brains.  The Chatelet shall make large

inquisition into the matter, examining a hundred and seventy witnesses, and

Deputy Chabroud publish his Report; but disclose nothing further.  (Rapport

de Chabroud (Moniteur, du 31 December, 1789).)  What then has caused these

two unparalleled October Days?  For surely such dramatic exhibition never

yet enacted itself without Dramatist and Machinist.  Wooden Punch emerges

not, with his domestic sorrows, into the light of day, unless the wire be

pulled:  how can human mobs?  Was it not d'Orleans then, and Laclos,

Marquis Sillery, Mirabeau and the sons of confusion, hoping to drive the

King to Metz, and gather the spoil?  Nay was it not, quite contrariwise,

the Oeil-de-Boeuf, Bodyguard Colonel de Guiche, Minister Saint-Priest and

highflying Loyalists; hoping also to drive him to Metz; and try it by the

sword of civil war?  Good Marquis Toulongeon, the Historian and Deputy,

feels constrained to admit that it was both.  (Toulongeon, i. 150.)



Alas, my Friends, credulous incredulity is a strange matter.  But when a

whole Nation is smitten with Suspicion, and sees a dramatic miracle in the

very operation of the gastric juices, what help is there?  Such Nation is

already a mere hypochondriac bundle of diseases; as good as changed into

glass; atrabiliar, decadent; and will suffer crises.  Is not Suspicion

itself the one thing to be suspected, as Montaigne feared only fear?



Now, however, the short hour has struck.  His Majesty is in his carriage,

with his Queen, sister Elizabeth, and two royal children.  Not for another

hour can the infinite Procession get marshalled, and under way.  The

weather is dim drizzling; the mind confused; and noise great.



Processional marches not a few our world has seen; Roman triumphs and

ovations, Cabiric cymbal-beatings, Royal progresses, Irish funerals:  but

this of the French Monarchy marching to its bed remained to be seen.  Miles

long, and of breadth losing itself in vagueness, for all the neighbouring

country crowds to see.  Slow; stagnating along, like shoreless Lake, yet

with a noise like Niagara, like Babel and Bedlam.  A splashing and a

tramping; a hurrahing, uproaring, musket-volleying;--the truest segment of

Chaos seen in these latter Ages!  Till slowly it disembogue itself, in the

thickening dusk, into expectant Paris, through a double row of faces all

the way from Passy to the Hotel-de-Ville.



Consider this:  Vanguard of National troops; with trains of artillery; of

pikemen and pikewomen, mounted on cannons, on carts, hackney-coaches, or on

foot;--tripudiating, in tricolor ribbons from head to heel; loaves stuck on

the points of bayonets, green boughs stuck in gun barrels.  (Mercier,

Nouveau Paris, iii. 21.)  Next, as main-march, 'fifty cartloads of corn,'

which have been lent, for peace, from the stores of Versailles.  Behind

which follow stragglers of the Garde-du-Corps; all humiliated, in Grenadier

bonnets.  Close on these comes the Royal Carriage; come Royal Carriages: 

for there are an Hundred National Deputies too, among whom sits Mirabeau,--

his remarks not given.  Then finally, pellmell, as rearguard, Flandre,

Swiss, Hundred Swiss, other Bodyguards, Brigands, whosoever cannot get

before.  Between and among all which masses, flows without limit Saint-

Antoine, and the Menadic Cohort.  Menadic especially about the Royal

Carriage; tripudiating there, covered with tricolor; singing 'allusive

songs;' pointing with one hand to the Royal Carriage, which the illusions

hit, and pointing to the Provision-wagons, with the other hand, and these

words: "Courage, Friends!  We shall not want bread now; we are bringing you

the Baker, the Bakeress, and Baker's Boy (le Boulanger, la Boulangere, et

le petit Mitron)."  (Toulongeon, i. 134-161; Deux Amis (iii. c. 9); &c.

&c.)



The wet day draggles the tricolor, but the joy is unextinguishable.  Is not

all well now?  "Ah, Madame, notre bonne Reine," said some of these Strong-

women some days hence, "Ah Madame, our good Queen, don't be a traitor any

more (ne soyez plus traitre), and we will all love you!"  Poor Weber went

splashing along, close by the Royal carriage, with the tear in his eye: 

'their Majesties did me the honour,' or I thought they did it, 'to testify,

from time to time, by shrugging of the shoulders, by looks directed to

Heaven, the emotions they felt.'  Thus, like frail cockle, floats the Royal

Life-boat, helmless, on black deluges of Rascality.



Mercier, in his loose way, estimates the Procession and assistants at two

hundred thousand.  He says it was one boundless inarticulate Haha;--

transcendent World-Laughter; comparable to the Saturnalia of the Ancients.

Why not?  Here too, as we said, is Human Nature once more human; shudder at

it whoso is of shuddering humour:  yet behold it is human.  It has

'swallowed all formulas;' it tripudiates even so.  For which reason they

that collect Vases and Antiques, with figures of Dancing Bacchantes 'in

wild and all but impossible positions,' may look with some interest on it.



Thus, however, has the slow-moving Chaos or modern Saturnalia of the

Ancients, reached the Barrier; and must halt, to be harangued by Mayor

Bailly.  Thereafter it has to lumber along, between the double row of

faces, in the transcendent heaven-lashing Haha; two hours longer, towards

the Hotel-de-Ville.  Then again to be harangued there, by several persons;

by Moreau de Saint-Mery, among others; Moreau of the Three-thousand orders,

now National Deputy for St. Domingo.  To all which poor Louis, who seemed

to 'experience a slight emotion' on entering this Townhall, can answer only

that he "comes with pleasure, with confidence among his people."  Mayor

Bailly, in reporting it, forgets 'confidence;' and the poor Queen says

eagerly:  "Add, with confidence."--"Messieurs," rejoins Bailly, "You are

happier than if I had not forgot."



Finally, the King is shewn on an upper balcony, by torchlight, with a huge

tricolor in his hat:  'And all the "people," says Weber, grasped one

another's hands;--thinking now surely the New Era was born.'  Hardly till

eleven at night can Royalty get to its vacant, long-deserted Palace of the

Tuileries:  to lodge there, somewhat in strolling-player fashion.  It is

Tuesday, the sixth of October, 1789.



Poor Louis has Two other Paris Processions to make:  one ludicrous-

ignominious like this; the other not ludicrous nor ignominious, but

serious, nay sublime.





END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
