








VOLUME II.



THE CONSTITUTION





BOOK 2.I.



THE FEAST OF PIKES





Chapter 2.1.I.



In the Tuileries.



The victim having once got his stroke-of-grace, the catastrophe can be

considered as almost come.  There is small interest now in watching his

long low moans:  notable only are his sharper agonies, what convulsive

struggles he may take to cast the torture off from him; and then finally

the last departure of life itself, and how he lies extinct and ended,

either wrapt like Caesar in decorous mantle-folds, or unseemly sunk

together, like one that had not the force even to die.



Was French Royalty, when wrenched forth from its tapestries in that

fashion, on that Sixth of October 1789, such a victim?  Universal France,

and Royal Proclamation to all the Provinces, answers anxiously, No;

nevertheless one may fear the worst.  Royalty was beforehand so decrepit,

moribund, there is little life in it to heal an injury.  How much of its

strength, which was of the imagination merely, has fled; Rascality having

looked plainly in the King's face, and not died!  When the assembled crows

can pluck up their scarecrow, and say to it, Here shalt thou stand and not

there; and can treat with it, and make it, from an infinite, a quite finite

Constitutional scarecrow,--what is to be looked for?  Not in the finite

Constitutional scarecrow, but in what still unmeasured, infinite-seeming

force may rally round it, is there thenceforth any hope.  For it is most

true that all available Authority is mystic in its conditions, and comes

'by the grace of God.'



Cheerfuller than watching the death-struggles of Royalism will it be to

watch the growth and gambollings of Sansculottism; for, in human things,

especially in human society, all death is but a death-birth:  thus if the

sceptre is departing from Louis, it is only that, in other forms, other

sceptres, were it even pike-sceptres, may bear sway.  In a prurient

element, rich with nutritive influences, we shall find that Sansculottism

grows lustily, and even frisks in not ungraceful sport:  as indeed most

young creatures are sportful; nay, may it not be noted further, that as the

grown cat, and cat-species generally, is the cruellest thing known, so the

merriest is precisely the kitten, or growing cat?



But fancy the Royal Family risen from its truckle-beds on the morrow of

that mad day:  fancy the Municipal inquiry, "How would your Majesty please

to lodge?"--and then that the King's rough answer, "Each may lodge as he

can, I am well enough," is congeed and bowed away, in expressive grins, by

the Townhall Functionaries, with obsequious upholsterers at their back; and

how the Chateau of the Tuileries is repainted, regarnished into a golden

Royal Residence; and Lafayette with his blue National Guards lies

encompassing it, as blue Neptune (in the language of poets) does an island,

wooingly.  Thither may the wrecks of rehabilitated Loyalty gather; if it

will become Constitutional; for Constitutionalism thinks no evil;

Sansculottism itself rejoices in the King's countenance.  The rubbish of a

Menadic Insurrection, as in this ever-kindly world all rubbish can and must

be, is swept aside; and so again, on clear arena, under new conditions,

with something even of a new stateliness, we begin a new course of action.



Arthur Young has witnessed the strangest scene:  Majesty walking unattended

in the Tuileries Gardens; and miscellaneous tricolor crowds, who cheer it,

and reverently make way for it:  the very Queen commands at lowest

respectful silence, regretful avoidance.  (Arthur Young's Travels, i. 264-

280.)  Simple ducks, in those royal waters, quackle for crumbs from young

royal fingers:  the little Dauphin has a little railed garden, where he is

seen delving, with ruddy cheeks and flaxen curled hair; also a little hutch

to put his tools in, and screen himself against showers.  What peaceable

simplicity!  Is it peace of a Father restored to his children?  Or of a

Taskmaster who has lost his whip?  Lafayette and the Municipality and

universal Constitutionalism assert the former, and do what is in them to

realise it.  Such Patriotism as snarls dangerously, and shows teeth,

Patrollotism shall suppress; or far better, Royalty shall soothe down the

angry hair of it, by gentle pattings; and, most effectual of all, by fuller

diet.  Yes, not only shall Paris be fed, but the King's hand be seen in

that work.  The household goods of the Poor shall, up to a certain amount,

by royal bounty, be disengaged from pawn, and that insatiable Mont de Piete

disgorge:  rides in the city with their vive-le-roi need not fail; and so

by substance and show, shall Royalty, if man's art can popularise it, be

popularised.  (Deux Amis, iii. c. 10.)



Or, alas, is it neither restored Father nor diswhipped Taskmaster that

walks there; but an anomalous complex of both these, and of innumerable

other heterogeneities; reducible to no rubric, if not to this newly devised

one:  King Louis Restorer of French Liberty?  Man indeed, and King Louis

like other men, lives in this world to make rule out of the ruleless; by

his living energy, he shall force the absurd itself to become less absurd. 

But then if there be no living energy; living passivity only?  King

Serpent, hurled into his unexpected watery dominion, did at least bite, and

assert credibly that he was there:  but as for the poor King Log, tumbled

hither and thither as thousandfold chance and other will than his might

direct, how happy for him that he was indeed wooden; and, doing nothing,

could also see and suffer nothing!  It is a distracted business.



For his French Majesty, meanwhile, one of the worst things is that he can

get no hunting.  Alas, no hunting henceforth; only a fatal being-hunted! 

Scarcely, in the next June weeks, shall he taste again the joys of the

game-destroyer; in next June, and never more.  He sends for his smith-

tools; gives, in the course of the day, official or ceremonial business

being ended, 'a few strokes of the file, quelques coups de lime.  (Le

Chateau des Tuileries, ou recit, &c., par Roussel (in Hist. Parl. iv. 195-

219).)  Innocent brother mortal, why wert thou not an obscure substantial

maker of locks; but doomed in that other far-seen craft, to be a maker only

of world-follies, unrealities; things self destructive, which no mortal

hammering could rivet into coherence!



Poor Louis is not without insight, nor even without the elements of will;

some sharpness of temper, spurting at times from a stagnating character. 

If harmless inertness could save him, it were well; but he will slumber and

painfully dream, and to do aught is not given him.  Royalist Antiquarians

still shew the rooms where Majesty and suite, in these extraordinary

circumstances, had their lodging.  Here sat the Queen; reading,--for she

had her library brought hither, though the King refused his; taking

vehement counsel of the vehement uncounselled; sorrowing over altered

times; yet with sure hope of better:  in her young rosy Boy, has she not

the living emblem of hope!  It is a murky, working sky; yet with golden

gleams--of dawn, or of deeper meteoric night?  Here again this chamber, on

the other side of the main entrance, was the King's:  here his Majesty

breakfasted, and did official work; here daily after breakfast he received

the Queen; sometimes in pathetic friendliness; sometimes in human

sulkiness, for flesh is weak; and, when questioned about business would

answer:  "Madame, your business is with the children."  Nay, Sire, were it

not better you, your Majesty's self, took the children?  So asks impartial

History; scornful that the thicker vessel was not also the stronger; pity-

struck for the porcelain-clay of humanity rather than for the tile-clay,--

though indeed both were broken!



So, however, in this Medicean Tuileries, shall the French King and Queen

now sit, for one-and-forty months; and see a wild-fermenting France work

out its own destiny, and theirs.  Months bleak, ungenial, of rapid

vicissitude; yet with a mild pale splendour, here and there:  as of an

April that were leading to leafiest Summer; as of an October that led only

to everlasting Frost.  Medicean Tuileries, how changed since it was a

peaceful Tile field!  Or is the ground itself fate-stricken, accursed:  an

Atreus' Palace; for that Louvre window is still nigh, out of which a Capet,

whipt of the Furies, fired his signal of the Saint Bartholomew!  Dark is

the way of the Eternal as mirrored in this world of Time:  God's way is in

the sea, and His path in the great deep.







Chapter 2.1.II.



In the Salle de Manege.



To believing Patriots, however, it is now clear, that the Constitution will

march, marcher,--had it once legs to stand on.  Quick, then, ye Patriots,

bestir yourselves, and make it; shape legs for it!  In the Archeveche, or

Archbishop's Palace, his Grace himself having fled; and afterwards in the

Riding-hall, named Manege, close on the Tuileries:  there does a National

Assembly apply itself to the miraculous work.  Successfully, had there been

any heaven-scaling Prometheus among them; not successfully since there was

none!  There, in noisy debate, for the sessions are occasionally

'scandalous,' and as many as three speakers have been seen in the Tribune

at once,--let us continue to fancy it wearing the slow months.



Tough, dogmatic, long of wind is Abbe Maury; Ciceronian pathetic is

Cazales.  Keen-trenchant, on the other side, glitters a young Barnave;

abhorrent of sophistry; sheering, like keen Damascus sabre, all sophistry

asunder,--reckless what else he sheer with it.  Simple seemest thou, O

solid Dutch-built Petion; if solid, surely dull.  Nor lifegiving in that

tone of thine, livelier polemical Rabaut.  With ineffable serenity sniffs

great Sieyes, aloft, alone; his Constitution ye may babble over, ye may

mar, but can by no possibility mend:  is not Polity a science he has

exhausted?  Cool, slow, two military Lameths are visible, with their

quality sneer, or demi-sneer; they shall gallantly refund their Mother's

Pension, when the Red Book is produced; gallantly be wounded in duels.  A

Marquis Toulongeon, whose Pen we yet thank, sits there; in stoical

meditative humour, oftenest silent, accepts what destiny will send. 

Thouret and Parlementary Duport produce mountains of Reformed Law; liberal,

Anglomaniac, available and unavailable.  Mortals rise and fall.  Shall

goose Gobel, for example,--or Go(with an umlaut)bel, for he is of Strasburg

German breed, be a Constitutional Archbishop?



Alone of all men there, Mirabeau may begin to discern clearly whither all

this is tending.  Patriotism, accordingly, regrets that his zeal seems to

be getting cool.  In that famed Pentecost-Night of the Fourth of August,

when new Faith rose suddenly into miraculous fire, and old Feudality was

burnt up, men remarked that Mirabeau took no hand in it; that, in fact, he

luckily happened to be absent.  But did he not defend the Veto, nay Veto

Absolu; and tell vehement Barnave that six hundred irresponsible senators

would make of all tyrannies the insupportablest?  Again, how anxious was he

that the King's Ministers should have seat and voice in the National

Assembly;--doubtless with an eye to being Minister himself!  Whereupon the

National Assembly decides, what is very momentous, that no Deputy shall be

Minister; he, in his haughty stormful manner, advising us to make it, 'no

Deputy called Mirabeau.'  (Moniteur, Nos. 65, 86 (29th September, 7th

November, 1789).)  A man of perhaps inveterate Feudalisms; of stratagems;

too often visible leanings towards the Royalist side:  a man suspect; whom

Patriotism will unmask!  Thus, in these June days, when the question Who

shall have right to declare war? comes on, you hear hoarse Hawkers sound

dolefully through the streets, "Grand Treason of Count Mirabeau, price only

one sou;"--because he pleads that it shall be not the Assembly but the

King!  Pleads; nay prevails:  for in spite of the hoarse Hawkers, and an

endless Populace raised by them to the pitch even of 'Lanterne,' he mounts

the Tribune next day; grim-resolute; murmuring aside to his friends that

speak of danger:  "I know it:  I must come hence either in triumph, or else

torn in fragments;" and it was in triumph that he came.



A man of stout heart; whose popularity is not of the populace, 'pas

populaciere;' whom no clamour of unwashed mobs without doors, or of washed

mobs within, can scarce from his way!  Dumont remembers hearing him deliver

a Report on Marseilles; 'every word was interrupted on the part of the Cote

Droit by abusive epithets; calumniator, liar, assassin, scoundrel

(scelerat):  Mirabeau pauses a moment, and, in a honeyed tone, addressing

the most furious, says:  "I wait, Messieurs, till these amenities be

exhausted."'  (Dumont, Souvenirs, p. 278.)  A man enigmatic, difficult to

unmask!  For example, whence comes his money?  Can the profit of a

Newspaper, sorely eaten into by Dame Le Jay; can this, and the eighteen

francs a-day your National Deputy has, be supposed equal to this

expenditure?  House in the Chaussee d'Antin; Country-house at Argenteuil;

splendours, sumptuosities, orgies;--living as if he had a mint!  All

saloons barred against Adventurer Mirabeau, are flung wide open to King

Mirabeau, the cynosure of Europe, whom female France flutters to behold,--

though the Man Mirabeau is one and the same.  As for money, one may

conjecture that Royalism furnishes it; which if Royalism do, will not the

same be welcome, as money always is to him?



'Sold,' whatever Patriotism thinks, he cannot readily be:  the spiritual

fire which is in that man; which shining through such confusions is

nevertheless Conviction, and makes him strong, and without which he had no

strength,--is not buyable nor saleable; in such transference of barter, it

would vanish and not be.  Perhaps 'paid and not sold, paye pas vendu:'  as

poor Rivarol, in the unhappier converse way, calls himself 'sold and not

paid!'  A man travelling, comet-like, in splendour and nebulosity, his wild

way; whom telescopic Patriotism may long watch, but, without higher

mathematics, will not make out.  A questionable most blameable man; yet to

us the far notablest of all.  With rich munificence, as we often say, in a

most blinkard, bespectacled, logic-chopping generation, Nature has gifted

this man with an eye.  Welcome is his word, there where he speaks and

works; and growing ever welcomer; for it alone goes to the heart of the

business:  logical cobwebbery shrinks itself together; and thou seest a

thing, how it is, how is may be worked with.



Unhappily our National Assembly has much to do:  a France to regenerate;

and France is short of so many requisites; short even of cash!  These same

Finances give trouble enough; no choking of the Deficit; which gapes ever,

Give, give!  To appease the Deficit we venture on a hazardous step, sale of

the Clergy's Lands and superfluous Edifices; most hazardous.  Nay, given

the sale, who is to buy them, ready-money having fled?  Wherefore, on the

19th day of December, a paper-money of 'Assignats,' of Bonds secured, or

assigned, on that Clerico-National Property, and unquestionable at least in

payment of that,--is decreed:  the first of a long series of like financial

performances, which shall astonish mankind.  So that now, while old rags

last, there shall be no lack of circulating medium; whether of commodities

to circulate thereon is another question.  But, after all, does not this

Assignat business speak volumes for modern science?  Bankruptcy, we may

say, was come, as the end of all Delusions needs must come:  yet how

gently, in softening diffusion, in mild succession, was it hereby made to

fall;--like no all-destroying avalanche; like gentle showers of a powdery

impalpable snow, shower after shower, till all was indeed buried, and yet

little was destroyed that could not be replaced , be dispensed with!  To

such length has modern machinery reached.  Bankruptcy, we said, was great;

but indeed Money itself is a standing miracle.



On the whole, it is a matter of endless difficulty, that of the Clergy. 

Clerical property may be made the Nation's, and the Clergy hired servants

of the State; but if so, is it not an altered Church?  Adjustment enough,

of the most confused sort, has become unavoidable.  Old landmarks, in any

sense, avail not in a new France.  Nay literally, the very Ground is new

divided; your old party-coloured Provinces become new uniform Departments,

Eighty-three in number;--whereby, as in some sudden shifting of the Earth's

axis, no mortal knows his new latitude at once.  The Twelve old Parlements

too, what is to be done with them?  The old Parlements are declared to be

all 'in permanent vacation,'--till once the new equal-justice, of

Departmental Courts, National Appeal-Court, of elective Justices, Justices

of Peace, and other Thouret-and-Duport apparatus be got ready.  They have

to sit there, these old Parlements, uneasily waiting; as it were, with the

rope round their neck; crying as they can, Is there none to deliver us? 

But happily the answer being, None, none, they are a manageable class,

these Parlements.  They can be bullied, even into silence; the Paris

Parliament, wiser than most, has never whimpered.  They will and must sit

there; in such vacation as is fit; their Chamber of Vacation distributes in

the interim what little justice is going.  With the rope round their neck,

their destiny may be succinct!  On the 13th of November 1790, Mayor Bailly

shall walk to the Palais de Justice, few even heeding him; and with

municipal seal-stamp and a little hot wax, seal up the Parlementary Paper-

rooms,--and the dread Parlement of Paris pass away, into Chaos, gently as

does a Dream!  So shall the Parlements perish, succinctly; and innumerable

eyes be dry.



Not so the Clergy.  For granting even that Religion were dead; that it had

died, half-centuries ago, with unutterable Dubois; or emigrated lately, to

Alsace, with Necklace-Cardinal Rohan; or that it now walked as goblin

revenant with Bishop Talleyrand of Autun; yet does not the Shadow of

Religion, the Cant of Religion, still linger?  The Clergy have means and

material:  means, of number, organization, social weight; a material, at

lowest, of public ignorance, known to be the mother of devotion.  Nay,

withal, is it incredible that there might, in simple hearts, latent here

and there like gold grains in the mud-beach, still dwell some real Faith in

God, of so singular and tenacious a sort that even a Maury or a Talleyrand,

could still be the symbol for it?--Enough, and Clergy has strength, the

Clergy has craft and indignation.  It is a most fatal business this of the

Clergy.  A weltering hydra-coil, which the National Assembly has stirred up

about its ears; hissing, stinging; which cannot be appeased, alive; which

cannot be trampled dead!  Fatal, from first to last!  Scarcely after

fifteen months' debating, can a Civil Constitution of the Clergy be so much

as got to paper; and then for getting it into reality?  Alas, such Civil

Constitution is but an agreement to disagree.  It divides France from end

to end, with a new split, infinitely complicating all the other splits;--

Catholicism, what of it there is left, with the Cant of Catholicism, raging

on the one side, and sceptic Heathenism on the other; both, by

contradiction , waxing fanatic.  What endless jarring, of Refractory hated

Priests, and Constitutional despised ones; of tender consciences, like the

King's, and consciences hot-seared, like certain of his People's:  the

whole to end in Feasts of Reason and a War of La Vendee!  So deep-seated is

Religion in the heart of man, and holds of all infinite passions.  If the

dead echo of it still did so much, what could not the living voice of it

once do?



Finance and Constitution, Law and Gospel:  this surely were work enough;

yet this is not all.  In fact, the Ministry, and Necker himself whom a

brass inscription 'fastened by the people over his door-lintel' testifies

to be the 'Ministre adore,' are dwindling into clearer and clearer nullity. 

Execution or legislation, arrangement or detail, from their nerveless

fingers all drops undone; all lights at last on the toiled shoulders of an

august Representative Body.  Heavy-laden National Assembly!  It has to hear

of innumerable fresh revolts, Brigand expeditions; of Chateaus in the West,

especially of Charter-chests, Chartiers, set on fire; for there too the

overloaded Ass frightfully recalcitrates.  Of Cities in the South full of

heats and jealousies; which will end in crossed sabres, Marseilles against

Toulon, and Carpentras beleaguered by Avignon;--such Royalist collision in

a career of Freedom; nay Patriot collision, which a mere difference of

velocity will bring about!  Of a Jourdan Coup-tete, who has skulked

thitherward, from the claws of the Chatelet; and will raise whole

scoundrel-regiments.



Also it has to hear of Royalist Camp of Jales:  Jales mountain-girdled

Plain, amid the rocks of the Cevennes; whence Royalism, as is feared and

hoped, may dash down like a mountain deluge, and submerge France!  A

singular thing this camp of Jales; existing mostly on paper.  For the

Soldiers at Jales, being peasants or National Guards, were in heart sworn

Sansculottes; and all that the Royalist Captains could do was, with false

words, to keep them, or rather keep the report of them, drawn up there,

visible to all imaginations, for a terror and a sign,--if peradventure

France might be reconquered by theatrical machinery, by the picture of a

Royalist Army done to the life!  (Dampmartin, Evenemens, i. 208.)  Not till

the third summer was this portent, burning out by fits and then fading, got

finally extinguished; was the old Castle of Jales, no Camp being visible to

the bodily eye, got blown asunder by some National Guards.



Also it has to hear not only of Brissot and his Friends of the Blacks, but

by and by of a whole St. Domingo blazing skyward; blazing in literal fire,

and in far worse metaphorical; beaconing the nightly main.  Also of the

shipping interest, and the landed-interest, and all manner of interests,

reduced to distress.  Of Industry every where manacled, bewildered; and

only Rebellion thriving.  Of sub-officers, soldiers and sailors in mutiny

by land and water.  Of soldiers, at Nanci, as we shall see, needing to be

cannonaded by a brave Bouille.  Of sailors, nay the very galley-slaves, at

Brest, needing also to be cannonaded; but with no Bouille to do it.  For

indeed, to say it in a word, in those days there was no King in Israel, and

every man did that which was right in his own eyes.  (See Deux Amis, iii.

c. 14; iv. c. 2, 3, 4, 7, 9, 14.  Expedition des Volontaires de Brest sur

Lannion; Les Lyonnais Sauveurs des Dauphinois; Massacre au Mans; Troubles

du Maine (Pamphlets and Excerpts, in Hist. Parl. iii. 251; iv. 162-168),

&c.)



Such things has an august National Assembly to hear of, as it goes on

regenerating France.  Sad and stern:  but what remedy?  Get the

Constitution ready; and all men will swear to it:  for do not 'Addresses of

adhesion' arrive by the cartload?  In this manner, by Heaven's blessing,

and a Constitution got ready, shall the bottomless fire-gulf be vaulted in,

with rag-paper; and Order will wed Freedom, and live with her there,--till

it grow too hot for them.  O Cote Gauche, worthy are ye, as the adhesive

Addresses generally say, to 'fix the regards of the Universe;' the regards

of this one poor Planet, at lowest!--



Nay, it must be owned, the Cote Droit makes a still madder figure.  An

irrational generation; irrational, imbecile, and with the vehement

obstinacy characteristic of that; a generation which will not learn. 

Falling Bastilles, Insurrections of Women, thousands of smoking

Manorhouses, a country bristling with no crop but that of Sansculottic

steel:  these were tolerably didactic lessons; but them they have not

taught.  There are still men, of whom it was of old written, Bray them in a

mortar!  Or, in milder language, They have wedded their delusions:  fire

nor steel, nor any sharpness of Experience, shall sever the bond; till

death do us part!  Of such may the Heavens have mercy; for the Earth, with

her rigorous Necessity, will have none.



Admit, at the same time, that it was most natural.  Man lives by Hope: 

Pandora when her box of gods'-gifts flew all out, and became gods'-curses,

still retained Hope.  How shall an irrational mortal, when his high-place

is never so evidently pulled down, and he, being irrational, is left

resourceless,--part with the belief that it will be rebuilt?  It would make

all so straight again; it seems so unspeakably desirable; so reasonable,--

would you but look at it aright!  For, must not the thing which was

continue to be; or else the solid World dissolve?  Yes, persist, O

infatuated Sansculottes of France!  Revolt against constituted Authorities;

hunt out your rightful Seigneurs, who at bottom so loved you, and readily

shed their blood for you,--in country's battles as at Rossbach and

elsewhere; and, even in preserving game, were preserving you, could ye but

have understood it:  hunt them out, as if they were wild wolves; set fire

to their Chateaus and Chartiers as to wolf-dens; and what then?  Why, then

turn every man his hand against his fellow!  In confusion, famine,

desolation, regret the days that are gone; rueful recall them, recall us

with them.  To repentant prayers we will not be deaf.



So, with dimmer or clearer consciousness, must the Right Side reason and

act.  An inevitable position perhaps; but a most false one for them.  Evil,

be thou our good:  this henceforth must virtually be their prayer.  The

fiercer the effervescence grows, the sooner will it pass; for after all it

is but some mad effervescence; the World is solid, and cannot dissolve.



For the rest, if they have any positive industry, it is that of plots, and

backstairs conclaves.  Plots which cannot be executed; which are mostly

theoretic on their part;--for which nevertheless this and the other

practical Sieur Augeard, Sieur Maillebois, Sieur Bonne Savardin, gets into

trouble, gets imprisoned, and escapes with difficulty.  Nay there is a poor

practical Chevalier Favras who, not without some passing reflex on Monsieur

himself, gets hanged for them, amid loud uproar of the world.  Poor Favras,

he keeps dictating his last will at the 'Hotel-de-Ville, through the whole

remainder of the day,' a weary February day; offers to reveal secrets, if

they will save him; handsomely declines since they will not; then dies, in

the flare of torchlight, with politest composure; remarking, rather than

exclaiming, with outspread hands:  "People, I die innocent; pray for me." 

(See Deux Amis, iv. c. 14, 7; Hist. Parl. vi. 384.)  Poor Favras;--type of

so much that has prowled indefatigable over France, in days now ending;

and, in freer field, might have earned instead of prowling,--to thee it is

no theory!



In the Senate-house again, the attitude of the Right Side is that of calm

unbelief.  Let an august National Assembly make a Fourth-of-August

Abolition of Feudality; declare the Clergy State-servants who shall have

wages; vote Suspensive Vetos, new Law-Courts; vote or decree what contested

thing it will; have it responded to from the four corners of France, nay

get King's Sanction, and what other Acceptance were conceivable,--the Right

Side, as we find, persists, with imperturbablest tenacity, in considering,

and ever and anon shews that it still considers, all these so-called

Decrees as mere temporary whims, which indeed stand on paper, but in

practice and fact are not, and cannot be.  Figure the brass head of an Abbe

Maury flooding forth Jesuitic eloquence in this strain; dusky d'Espremenil,

Barrel Mirabeau (probably in liquor), and enough of others, cheering him

from the Right; and, for example, with what visage a seagreen Robespierre

eyes him from the Left.  And how Sieyes ineffably sniffs on him, or does

not deign to sniff; and how the Galleries groan in spirit, or bark rabid on

him:  so that to escape the Lanterne, on stepping forth, he needs presence

of mind, and a pair of pistols in his girdle!  For he is one of the

toughest of men.



Here indeed becomes notable one great difference between our two kinds of

civil war; between the modern lingual or Parliamentary-logical kind, and

the ancient, or manual kind, in the steel battle-field;--much to the

disadvantage of the former.  In the manual kind, where you front your foe

with drawn weapon, one right stroke is final; for, physically speaking,

when the brains are out the man does honestly die, and trouble you no more.

But how different when it is with arguments you fight!  Here no victory yet

definable can be considered as final.  Beat him down, with Parliamentary

invective, till sense be fled; cut him in two, hanging one half in this

dilemma-horn, the other on that; blow the brains or thinking-faculty quite

out of him for the time:  it skills not; he rallies and revives on the

morrow; to-morrow he repairs his golden fires!  The think that will

logically extinguish him is perhaps still a desideratum in Constitutional

civilisation.  For how, till a man know, in some measure, at what point he

becomes logically defunct, can Parliamentary Business be carried on, and

Talk cease or slake?



Doubtless it was some feeling of this difficulty; and the clear insight how

little such knowledge yet existed in the French Nation, new in the

Constitutional career, and how defunct Aristocrats would continue to walk

for unlimited periods, as Partridge the Alamanack-maker did,--that had sunk

into the deep mind of People's-friend Marat, an eminently practical mind;

and had grown there, in that richest putrescent soil, into the most

original plan of action ever submitted to a People.  Not yet has it grown;

but it has germinated, it is growing; rooting itself into Tartarus,

branching towards Heaven:  the second season hence, we shall see it risen

out of the bottomless Darkness, full-grown, into disastrous Twilight,--a

Hemlock-tree, great as the world; on or under whose boughs all the

People's-friends of the world may lodge.  'Two hundred and sixty thousand

Aristocrat heads:'  that is the precisest calculation, though one would not

stand on a few hundreds; yet we never rise as high as the round three

hundred thousand.  Shudder at it, O People; but it is as true as that ye

yourselves, and your People's-friend, are alive.  These prating Senators of

yours hover ineffectual on the barren letter, and will never save the

Revolution.  A Cassandra-Marat cannot do it, with his single shrunk arm;

but with a few determined men it were possible.  "Give me," said the

People's-friend, in his cold way, when young Barbaroux, once his pupil in a

course of what was called Optics, went to see him, "Give me two hundred

Naples Bravoes, armed each with a good dirk, and a muff on his left arm by

way of shield:  with them I will traverse France, and accomplish the

Revolution."  (Memoires de Barbaroux (Paris, 1822), p. 57.)  Nay, be brave,

young Barbaroux; for thou seest, there is no jesting in those rheumy eyes;

in that soot-bleared figure, most earnest of created things; neither indeed

is there madness, of the strait-waistcoat sort.



Such produce shall the Time ripen in cavernous Marat, the man forbid;

living in Paris cellars, lone as fanatic Anchorite in his Thebaid; say, as

far-seen Simon on his Pillar,--taking peculiar views therefrom.  Patriots

may smile; and, using him as bandog now to be muzzled, now to be let bark,

name him, as Desmoulins does, 'Maximum of Patriotism' and 'Cassandra-

Marat:'  but were it not singular if this dirk-and-muff plan of his (with

superficial modifications) proved to be precisely the plan adopted?



After this manner, in these circumstances, do august Senators regenerate

France.  Nay, they are, in very deed, believed to be regenerating it; on

account of which great fact, main fact of their history, the wearied eye

can never be permitted wholly to ignore them.



But looking away now from these precincts of the Tuileries, where

Constitutional Royalty, let Lafayette water it as he will, languishes too

like a cut branch; and august Senators are perhaps at bottom only

perfecting their 'theory of defective verbs,'--how does the young Reality,

young Sansculottism thrive?  The attentive observer can answer:  It thrives

bravely; putting forth new buds; expanding the old buds into leaves, into

boughs.  Is not French Existence, as before, most prurient, all loosened,

most nutrient for it?  Sansculottism has the property of growing by what

other things die of:  by agitation, contention, disarrangement; nay in a

word, by what is the symbol and fruit of all these:  Hunger.



In such a France as this, Hunger, as we have remarked, can hardly fail. 

The Provinces, the Southern Cities feel it in their turn; and what it

brings:  Exasperation, preternatural Suspicion.  In Paris some halcyon days

of abundance followed the Menadic Insurrection, with its Versailles grain-

carts, and recovered Restorer of Liberty; but they could not continue.  The

month is still October when famishing Saint-Antoine, in a moment of

passion, seizes a poor Baker, innocent 'Francois the Baker;' (21st October,

1789 (Moniteur, No. 76).) and hangs him, in Constantinople wise;--but even

this, singular as it my seem, does not cheapen bread!  Too clear it is, no

Royal bounty, no Municipal dexterity can adequately feed a Bastille-

destroying Paris.  Wherefore, on view of the hanged Baker,

Constitutionalism in sorrow and anger demands 'Loi Martiale,' a kind of

Riot Act;--and indeed gets it, most readily, almost before the sun goes

down.



This is that famed Martial law, with its Red Flag, its 'Drapeau Rouge:'  in

virtue of which Mayor Bailly, or any Mayor, has but henceforth to hang out

that new Oriflamme of his; then to read or mumble something about the

King's peace; and, after certain pauses, serve any undispersing Assemblage

with musket-shot, or whatever shot will disperse it.  A decisive Law; and

most just on one proviso:  that all Patrollotism be of God, and all mob-

assembling be of the Devil;--otherwise not so just.  Mayor Bailly be

unwilling to use it!  Hang not out that new Oriflamme, flame not of gold

but of the want of gold!  The thrice-blessed Revolution is done, thou

thinkest?  If so it will be well with thee.



But now let no mortal say henceforth that an august National Assembly wants

riot:  all it ever wanted was riot enough to balance Court-plotting; all it

now wants, of Heaven or of Earth, is to get its theory of defective verbs

perfected.







Chapter 2.1.III.



The Muster.



With famine and a Constitutional theory of defective verbs going on, all

other excitement is conceivable.  A universal shaking and sifting of French

Existence this is:  in the course of which, for one thing, what a multitude

of low-lying figures are sifted to the top, and set busily to work there!



Dogleech Marat, now for-seen as Simon Stylites, we already know; him and

others, raised aloft.  The mere sample, these, of what is coming, of what

continues coming, upwards from the realm of Night!--Chaumette, by and by

Anaxagoras Chaumette, one already descries:  mellifluous in street-groups;

not now a sea-boy on the high and giddy mast:  a mellifluous tribune of the

common people, with long curling locks, on bourne-stone of the

thoroughfares; able sub-editor too; who shall rise--to the very gallows. 

Clerk Tallien, he also is become sub-editor; shall become able editor; and

more.  Bibliopolic Momoro, Typographic Pruhomme see new trades opening. 

Collot d'Herbois, tearing a passion to rags, pauses on the Thespian boards;

listens, with that black bushy head, to the sound of the world's drama: 

shall the Mimetic become Real?  Did ye hiss him, O men of Lyons?  (Buzot,

Memoires (Paris, 1823), p. 90.)  Better had ye clapped!



Happy now, indeed, for all manner of mimetic, half-original men!  Tumid

blustering, with more or less of sincerity, which need not be entirely

sincere, yet the sincerer the better, is like to go far.  Shall we say, the

Revolution-element works itself rarer and rarer; so that only lighter and

lighter bodies will float in it; till at last the mere blown-bladder is

your only swimmer?  Limitation of mind, then vehemence, promptitude,

audacity, shall all be available; to which add only these two:  cunning and

good lungs.  Good fortune must be presupposed.  Accordingly, of all classes

the rising one, we observe, is now the Attorney class:  witness Bazires,

Carriers, Fouquier-Tinvilles, Bazoche-Captain Bourdons:  more than enough.

Such figures shall Night, from her wonder-bearing bosom, emit; swarm after

swarm.  Of another deeper and deepest swarm, not yet dawned on the

astonished eye; of pilfering Candle-snuffers, Thief-valets, disfrocked

Capuchins, and so many Heberts, Henriots, Ronsins, Rossignols, let us, as

long as possible, forbear speaking.



Thus, over France, all stirs that has what the Physiologists call

irritability in it:  how much more all wherein irritability has perfected

itself into vitality; into actual vision, and force that can will!  All

stirs; and if not in Paris, flocks thither.  Great and greater waxes

President Danton in his Cordeliers Section; his rhetorical tropes are all

'gigantic:'  energy flashes from his black brows, menaces in his athletic

figure, rolls in the sound of his voice 'reverberating from the domes;'

this man also, like Mirabeau, has a natural eye, and begins to see whither

Constitutionalism is tending, though with a wish in it different from

Mirabeau's.



Remark, on the other hand, how General Dumouriez has quitted Normandy and

the Cherbourg Breakwater, to come--whither we may guess.  It is his second

or even third trial at Paris, since this New Era began; but now it is in

right earnest, for he has quitted all else.  Wiry, elastic unwearied man;

whose life was but a battle and a march!  No, not a creature of Choiseul's;

"the creature of God and of my sword,"--he fiercely answered in old days. 

Overfalling Corsican batteries, in the deadly fire-hail; wriggling

invincible from under his horse, at Closterkamp of the Netherlands, though

tethered with 'crushed stirrup-iron and nineteen wounds;' tough, minatory,

standing at bay, as forlorn hope, on the skirts of Poland; intriguing,

battling in cabinet and field; roaming far out, obscure, as King's spial,

or sitting sealed up, enchanted in Bastille; fencing, pamphleteering,

scheming and struggling from the very birth of him, (Dumouriez, Memoires,

i. 28, &c.)--the man has come thus far.  How repressed, how irrepressible! 

Like some incarnate spirit in prison, which indeed he was; hewing on

granite walls for deliverance; striking fire flashes from them.  And now

has the general earthquake rent his cavern too?  Twenty years younger, what

might he not have done!  But his hair has a shade of gray:  his way of

thought is all fixed, military.  He can grow no further, and the new world

is in such growth.  We will name him, on the whole, one of Heaven's Swiss;

without faith; wanting above all things work, work on any side.  Work also

is appointed him; and he will do it.



Not from over France only are the unrestful flocking towards Paris; but

from all sides of Europe.  Where the carcase is, thither will the eagles

gather.  Think how many a Spanish Guzman, Martinico Fournier named

'Fournier l'Americain,' Engineer Miranda from the very Andes, were flocking

or had flocked!  Walloon Pereyra might boast of the strangest parentage: 

him, they say, Prince Kaunitz the Diplomatist heedlessly dropped;' like

ostrich-egg, to be hatched of Chance--into an ostrich-eater!  Jewish or

German Freys do business in the great Cesspool of Agio; which Cesspool this

Assignat-fiat has quickened, into a Mother of dead dogs.  Swiss Claviere

could found no Socinian Genevese Colony in Ireland; but he paused, years

ago, prophetic before the Minister's Hotel at Paris; and said, it was borne

on his mind that he one day was to be Minister, and laughed.  (Dumont,

Souvenirs sur Mirabeau, p. 399.)  Swiss Pachc, on the other hand, sits

sleekheaded, frugal; the wonder of his own alley, and even of neighbouring

ones, for humility of mind, and a thought deeper than most men's:  sit

there, Tartuffe, till wanted!  Ye Italian Dufournys, Flemish Prolys, flit

hither all ye bipeds of prey!  Come whosesoever head is hot; thou of mind

ungoverned, be it chaos as of undevelopment or chaos as of ruin; the man

who cannot get known, the man who is too well known; if thou have any

vendible faculty, nay if thou have but edacity and loquacity, come!  They

come; with hot unutterabilities in their heart; as Pilgrims towards a

miraculous shrine.  Nay how many come as vacant Strollers, aimless, of whom

Europe is full merely towards something!  For benighted fowls, when you

beat their bushes, rush towards any light.  Thus Frederick Baron Trenck too

is here; mazed, purblind, from the cells of Magdeburg; Minotauric cells,

and his Ariadne lost!  Singular to say, Trenck, in these years, sells wine;

not indeed in bottle, but in wood.



Nor is our England without her missionaries.  She has her live-saving

Needham; to whom was solemnly presented a 'civic sword,'--long since rusted

into nothingness.  Her Paine:  rebellious Staymaker; unkempt; who feels

that he, a single Needleman, did by his 'Common Sense' Pamphlet, free

America;--that he can and will free all this World; perhaps even the other. 

Price-Stanhope Constitutional Association sends over to congratulate;

(Moniteur, 10 Novembre, 7 Decembre, 1789.) welcomed by National Assembly,

though they are but a London Club; whom Burke and Toryism eye askance.



On thee too, for country's sake, O Chevalier John Paul, be a word spent, or

misspent!  In faded naval uniform, Paul Jones lingers visible here; like a

wine-skin from which the wine is all drawn.  Like the ghost of himself! 

Low is his once loud bruit; scarcely audible, save, with extreme tedium in

ministerial ante-chambers; in this or the other charitable dining-room,

mindful of the past.  What changes; culminatings and declinings!  Not now,

poor Paul, thou lookest wistful over the Solway brine, by the foot of

native Criffel, into blue mountainous Cumberland, into blue Infinitude;

environed with thrift, with humble friendliness; thyself, young fool,

longing to be aloft from it, or even to be away from it.  Yes, beyond that

sapphire Promontory, which men name St. Bees, which is not sapphire either,

but dull sandstone, when one gets close to it, there is a world.  Which

world thou too shalt taste of!--From yonder White Haven rise his smoke-

clouds; ominous though ineffectual.  Proud Forth quakes at his bellying

sails; had not the wind suddenly shifted.  Flamborough reapers, homegoing,

pause on the hill-side:  for what sulphur-cloud is that that defaces the

sleek sea; sulphur-cloud spitting streaks of fire?  A sea cockfight it is,

and of the hottest; where British Serapis and French-American Bon Homme

Richard do lash and throttle each other, in their fashion; and lo the

desperate valour has suffocated the deliberate, and Paul Jones too is of

the Kings of the Sea!



The Euxine, the Meotian waters felt thee next, and long-skirted Turks, O

Paul; and thy fiery soul has wasted itself in thousand contradictions;--to

no purpose.  For, in far lands, with scarlet Nassau-Siegens, with sinful

Imperial Catherines, is not the heart-broken, even as at home with the

mean?  Poor Paul! hunger and dispiritment track thy sinking footsteps: 

once or at most twice, in this Revolution-tumult the figure of thee

emerges; mute, ghost-like, as 'with stars dim-twinkling through.'  And

then, when the light is gone quite out, a National Legislature grants

'ceremonial funeral!'  As good had been the natural Presbyterian Kirk-bell,

and six feet of Scottish earth, among the dust of thy loved ones.--Such

world lay beyond the Promontory of St. Bees.  Such is the life of sinful

mankind here below.



But of all strangers, far the notablest for us is Baron Jean Baptiste de

Clootz;--or, dropping baptisms and feudalisms, World-Citizen Anacharsis

Clootz, from Cleves.  Him mark, judicious Reader.  Thou hast known his

Uncle, sharp-sighted thorough-going Cornelius de Pauw, who mercilessly cuts

down cherished illusions; and of the finest antique Spartans, will make

mere modern cutthroat Mainots.  (De Pauw, Recherches sur les Grecs, &c.) 

The like stuff is in Anacharsis:  hot metal; full of scoriae, which should

and could have been smelted out, but which will not.  He has wandered over

this terraqueous Planet; seeking, one may say, the Paradise we lost long

ago.  He has seen English Burke; has been seen of the Portugal Inquisition;

has roamed, and fought, and written; is writing, among other things,

'Evidences of the Mahometan Religion.'  But now, like his Scythian adoptive

godfather, he finds himself in the Paris Athens; surely, at last, the haven

of his soul.  A dashing man, beloved at Patriotic dinner-tables; with

gaiety, nay with humour; headlong, trenchant, of free purse; in suitable

costume; though what mortal ever more despised costumes?  Under all

costumes Anacharsis seeks the man; not Stylites Marat will more freely

trample costumes, if they hold no man.  This is the faith of Anacharsis: 

That there is a Paradise discoverable; that all costumes ought to hold men.

O Anacharsis, it is a headlong, swift-going faith.  Mounted thereon,

meseems, thou art bound hastily for the City of Nowhere; and wilt arrive! 

At best, we may say, arrive in good riding attitude; which indeed is

something.



So many new persons, and new things, have come to occupy this France.  Her

old Speech and Thought, and Activity which springs from those, are all

changing; fermenting towards unknown issues.  To the dullest peasant, as he

sits sluggish, overtoiled, by his evening hearth, one idea has come:  that

of Chateaus burnt; of Chateaus combustible.  How altered all Coffeehouses,

in Province or Capital!  The Antre de Procope has now other questions than

the Three Stagyrite Unities to settle; not theatre-controversies, but a

world-controversy:  there, in the ancient pigtail mode, or with modern

Brutus' heads, do well-frizzed logicians hold hubbub, and Chaos umpire

sits.  The ever-enduring Melody of Paris Saloons has got a new ground-tone: 

ever-enduring; which has been heard, and by the listening Heaven too, since

Julian the Apostate's time and earlier; mad now as formerly.



Ex-Censor Suard, Ex-Censor, for we have freedom of the Press; he may be

seen there; impartial, even neutral.  Tyrant Grimm rolls large eyes, over a

questionable coming Time.  Atheist Naigeon, beloved disciple of Diderot,

crows, in his small difficult way, heralding glad dawn.  (Naigeon: 

Addresse a l'Assemblee Nationale (Paris, 1790) sur la liberte des

opinions.)  But, on the other hand, how many Morellets, Marmontels, who had

sat all their life hatching Philosophe eggs, cackle now, in a state

bordering on distraction, at the brood they have brought out!  (See

Marmontel, Memoires, passim; Morellet, Memoires, &c.)  It was so delightful

to have one's Philosophe Theorem demonstrated, crowned in the saloons:  and

now an infatuated people will not continue speculative, but have Practice?



There also observe Preceptress Genlis, or Sillery, or Sillery-Genlis,--for

our husband is both Count and Marquis, and we have more than one title. 

Pretentious, frothy; a puritan yet creedless; darkening counsel by words

without wisdom!  For, it is in that thin element of the Sentimentalist and

Distinguished-Female that Sillery-Genlis works; she would gladly be

sincere, yet can grow no sincerer than sincere-cant:  sincere-cant of many

forms, ending in the devotional form.  For the present, on a neck still of

moderate whiteness, she wears as jewel a miniature Bastille, cut on mere

sandstone, but then actual Bastille sandstone.  M. le Marquis is one of

d'Orleans's errandmen; in National Assembly, and elsewhere.  Madame, for

her part, trains up a youthful d'Orleans generation in what superfinest

morality one can; gives meanwhile rather enigmatic account of fair

Mademoiselle Pamela, the Daughter whom she has adopted.  Thus she, in

Palais Royal saloon;--whither, we remark, d'Orleans himself, spite of

Lafayette, has returned from that English 'mission' of his:  surely no

pleasant mission:  for the English would not speak to him; and Saint Hannah

More of England, so unlike Saint Sillery-Genlis of France, saw him shunned,

in Vauxhall Gardens, like one pest-struck, (Hannah More's Life and

Correspondence, ii. c. 5.) and his red-blue impassive visage waxing hardly

a shade bluer.







Chapter 2.1.IV.



Journalism.



As for Constitutionalism, with its National Guards, it is doing what it

can; and has enough to do:  it must, as ever, with one hand wave

persuasively, repressing Patriotism; and keep the other clenched to menace

Royalty plotters.  A most delicate task; requiring tact.



Thus, if People's-friend Marat has to-day his writ of 'prise de corps, or

seizure of body,' served on him, and dives out of sight, tomorrow he is

left at large; or is even encouraged, as a sort of bandog whose baying may

be useful.  President Danton, in open Hall, with reverberating voice,

declares that, in a case like Marat's, "force may be resisted by force."  

Whereupon the Chatelet serves Danton also with a writ;--which, however, as

the whole Cordeliers District responds to it, what Constable will be prompt

to execute?  Twice more, on new occasions, does the Chatelet launch its

writ; and twice more in vain:  the body of Danton cannot be seized by

Chatelet; he unseized, should he even fly for a season, shall behold the

Chatelet itself flung into limbo.



Municipality and Brissot, meanwhile, are far on with their Municipal

Constitution.  The Sixty Districts shall become Forty-eight Sections; much

shall be adjusted, and Paris have its Constitution.  A Constitution wholly

Elective; as indeed all French Government shall and must be.  And yet, one

fatal element has been introduced: that of citoyen actif.  No man who does

not pay the marc d'argent, or yearly tax equal to three days' labour, shall

be other than a passive citizen:  not the slightest vote for him; were he

acting, all the year round, with sledge hammer, with forest-levelling axe! 

Unheard of! cry Patriot Journals.  Yes truly, my Patriot Friends, if

Liberty, the passion and prayer of all men's souls, means Liberty to send

your fifty-thousandth part of a new Tongue-fencer into National Debating-

club, then, be the gods witness, ye are hardly entreated.  Oh, if in

National Palaver (as the Africans name it), such blessedness is verily

found, what tyrant would deny it to Son of Adam!  Nay, might there not be a

Female Parliament too, with 'screams from the Opposition benches,' and 'the

honourable Member borne out in hysterics?'  To a Children's Parliament

would I gladly consent; or even lower if ye wished it.  Beloved Brothers! 

Liberty, one might fear, is actually, as the ancient wise men said, of

Heaven.  On this Earth, where, thinks the enlightened public, did a brave

little Dame de Staal (not Necker's Daughter, but a far shrewder than she)

find the nearest approach to Liberty?  After mature computation, cool as

Dilworth's, her answer is, In the Bastille.  (See De Staal:  Memoires

(Paris, 1821), i. 169-280.)  "Of Heaven?" answer many, asking.  Wo that

they should ask; for that is the very misery!  "Of Heaven" means much;

share in the National Palaver it may, or may as probably not mean.



One Sansculottic bough that cannot fail to flourish is Journalism.  The

voice of the People being the voice of God, shall not such divine voice

make itself heard?  To the ends of France; and in as many dialects as when

the first great Babel was to be built!  Some loud as the lion; some small

as the sucking dove.  Mirabeau himself has his instructive Journal or

Journals, with Geneva hodmen working in them; and withal has quarrels

enough with Dame le Jay, his Female Bookseller, so ultra-compliant

otherwise.  (See Dumont:  Souvenirs, 6.)



King's-friend Royou still prints himself.  Barrere sheds tears of loyal

sensibility in Break of Day Journal, though with declining sale.  But why

is Freron so hot, democratic; Freron, the King's-friend's Nephew?  He has

it by kind, that heat of his:  wasp Freron begot him; Voltaire's Frelon;

who fought stinging, while sting and poison-bag were left, were it only as

Reviewer, and over Printed Waste-paper.  Constant, illuminative, as the

nightly lamplighter, issues the useful Moniteur, for it is now become

diurnal:  with facts and few commentaries; official, safe in the middle:--

its able Editors sunk long since, recoverably or irrecoverably, in deep

darkness.  Acid Loustalot, with his 'vigour,' as of young sloes, shall

never ripen, but die untimely:  his Prudhomme, however, will not let that

Revolutions de Paris die; but edit it himself, with much else,--dull-

blustering Printer though he be.



Of Cassandra-Marat we have spoken often; yet the most surprising truth

remains to be spoken:  that he actually does not want sense; but, with

croaking gelid throat, croaks out masses of the truth, on several things. 

Nay sometimes, one might almost fancy he had a perception of humour, and

were laughing a little, far down in his inner man.  Camille is wittier than

ever, and more outspoken, cynical; yet sunny as ever.  A light melodious

creature; 'born,' as he shall yet say with bitter tears, 'to write verses;'

light Apollo, so clear, soft-lucent, in this war of the Titans, wherein he

shall not conquer!



Folded and hawked Newspapers exist in all countries; but, in such a

Journalistic element as this of France, other and stranger sorts are to be

anticipated.  What says the English reader to a Journal-Affiche, Placard

Journal; legible to him that has no halfpenny; in bright prismatic colours,

calling the eye from afar?  Such, in the coming months, as Patriot

Associations, public and private, advance, and can subscribe funds, shall

plenteously hang themselves out:  leaves, limed leaves, to catch what they

can!  The very Government shall have its Pasted Journal; Louvet, busy yet

with a new 'charming romance,' shall write Sentinelles, and post them with

effect; nay Bertrand de Moleville, in his extremity, shall still more

cunningly try it. (See Bertrand-Moleville:  Memoires, ii. 100, &c.)  Great

is Journalism.  Is not every Able Editor a Ruler of the World, being a

persuader of it; though self-elected, yet sanctioned, by the sale of his

Numbers?  Whom indeed the world has the readiest method of deposing, should

need be:  that of merely doing nothing to him; which ends in starvation!



Nor esteem it small what those Bill-stickers had to do in Paris:  above

Three Score of them:  all with their crosspoles, haversacks, pastepots; nay

with leaden badges, for the Municipality licenses them.  A Sacred College,

properly of World-rulers' Heralds, though not respected as such, in an Era

still incipient and raw.  They made the walls of Paris didactic, suasive,

with an ever fresh Periodical Literature, wherein he that ran might read: 

Placard Journals, Placard Lampoons, Municipal Ordinances, Royal

Proclamations; the whole other or vulgar Placard-department super-added,--

or omitted from contempt!  What unutterable things the stone-walls spoke,

during these five years!  But it is all gone; To-day swallowing Yesterday,

and then being in its turn swallowed of To-morrow, even as Speech ever is. 

Nay what, O thou immortal Man of Letters, is Writing itself but Speech

conserved for a time?  The Placard Journal conserved it for one day; some

Books conserve it for the matter of ten years; nay some for three thousand: 

but what then?  Why, then, the years being all run, it also dies, and the

world is rid of it.  Oh, were there not a spirit in the word of man, as in

man himself, that survived the audible bodied word, and tended either

Godward, or else Devilward for evermore, why should he trouble himself much

with the truth of it, or the falsehood of it, except for commercial

purposes?  His immortality indeed, and whether it shall last half a

lifetime, or a lifetime and half; is not that a very considerable thing? 

As mortality, was to the runaway, whom Great Fritz bullied back into the

battle with a:  "R--, wollt ihr ewig leben, Unprintable Off-scouring of

Scoundrels, would ye live for ever!"



This is the Communication of Thought:  how happy when there is any Thought

to communicate!  Neither let the simpler old methods be neglected, in their

sphere. The Palais-Royal Tent, a tyrannous Patrollotism has removed; but

can it remove the lungs of man?  Anaxagoras Chaumette we saw mounted on

bourne-stones, while Tallien worked sedentary at the subeditorial desk.  In

any corner of the civilised world, a tub can be inverted, and an

articulate-speaking biped mount thereon.  Nay, with contrivance, a portable

trestle, or folding-stool, can be procured, for love or money; this the

peripatetic Orator can take in his hand, and, driven out here, set it up

again there; saying mildly, with a Sage Bias, Omnia mea mecum porto.



Such is Journalism, hawked, pasted, spoken.  How changed since One old

Metra walked this same Tuileries Garden, in gilt cocked hat, with Journal

at his nose, or held loose-folded behind his back; and was a notability of

Paris, 'Metra the Newsman;' (Dulaure, Histoire de Paris, viii. 483;

Mercier, Nouveau Paris, &c.) and Louis himself was wont to say:  Qu'en dit

Metra?  Since the first Venetian News-sheet was sold for a gazza, or

farthing, and named Gazette!  We live in a fertile world.







Chapter 2.1.V.



Clubbism.



Where the heart is full, it seeks, for a thousand reasons, in a thousand

ways, to impart itself.  How sweet, indispensable, in such cases, is

fellowship; soul mystically strengthening soul!  The meditative Germans,

some think, have been of opinion that Enthusiasm in the general means

simply excessive Congregating--Schwarmerey, or Swarming.  At any rate, do

we not see glimmering half-red embers, if laid together, get into the

brightest white glow?



In such a France, gregarious Reunions will needs multiply, intensify;

French Life will step out of doors, and, from domestic, become a public

Club Life.  Old Clubs, which already germinated, grow and flourish; new

every where bud forth.  It is the sure symptom of Social Unrest:  in such

way, most infallibly of all, does Social Unrest exhibit itself; find

solacement, and also nutriment.  In every French head there hangs now,

whether for terror or for hope, some prophetic picture of a New France: 

prophecy which brings, nay which almost is, its own fulfilment; and in all

ways, consciously and unconsciously, works towards that.



Observe, moreover, how the Aggregative Principle, let it be but deep

enough, goes on aggregating, and this even in a geometrical progression: 

how when the whole world, in such a plastic time, is forming itself into

Clubs, some One Club, the strongest or luckiest, shall, by friendly

attracting, by victorious compelling, grow ever stronger, till it become

immeasurably strong; and all the others, with their strength, be either

lovingly absorbed into it, or hostilely abolished by it!  This if the Club-

spirit is universal; if the time is plastic.  Plastic enough is the time,

universal the Club-spirit:  such an all absorbing, paramount One Club

cannot be wanting.



What a progress, since the first salient-point of the Breton Committee!  It

worked long in secret, not languidly; it has come with the National

Assembly to Paris; calls itself Club; calls itself in imitation, as is

thought, of those generous Price-Stanhope English, French Revolution Club;

but soon, with more originality, Club of Friends of the Constitution. 

Moreover it has leased, for itself, at a fair rent, the Hall of the

Jacobin's Convent, one of our 'superfluous edifices;' and does therefrom

now, in these spring months, begin shining out on an admiring Paris.  And

so, by degrees, under the shorter popular title of Jacobins' Club, it shall

become memorable to all times and lands.  Glance into the interior: 

strongly yet modestly benched and seated; as many as Thirteen Hundred

chosen Patriots; Assembly Members not a few.  Barnave, the two Lameths are

seen there; occasionally Mirabeau, perpetually Robespierre; also the

ferret-visage of Fouquier-Tinville with other attorneys; Anacharsis of

Prussian Scythia, and miscellaneous Patriots,--though all is yet in the

most perfectly clean-washed state; decent, nay dignified.  President on

platform, President's bell are not wanting; oratorical Tribune high-raised;

nor strangers' galleries, wherein also sit women.  Has any French

Antiquarian Society preserved that written Lease of the Jacobins Convent

Hall?  Or was it, unluckier even than Magna Charta, clipt by sacrilegious

Tailors?  Universal History is not indifferent to it.



These Friends of the Constitution have met mainly, as their name may

foreshadow, to look after Elections when an Election comes, and procure fit

men; but likewise to consult generally that the Commonweal take no damage;

one as yet sees not how.  For indeed let two or three gather together any

where, if it be not in Church, where all are bound to the passive state; no

mortal can say accurately, themselves as little as any, for what they are

gathered.  How often has the broached barrel proved not to be for joy and

heart effusion, but for duel and head-breakage; and the promised feast

become a Feast of the Lapithae!  This Jacobins Club, which at first shone

resplendent, and was thought to be a new celestial Sun for enlightening the

Nations, had, as things all have, to work through its appointed phases:  it

burned unfortunately more and more lurid, more sulphurous, distracted;--and

swam at last, through the astonished Heaven, like a Tartarean Portent, and

lurid-burning Prison of Spirits in Pain.



Its style of eloquence?  Rejoice, Reader, that thou knowest it not, that

thou canst never perfectly know.  The Jacobins published a Journal of

Debates, where they that have the heart may examine:  Impassioned, full-

droning Patriotic-eloquence; implacable, unfertile--save for Destruction,

which was indeed its work: most wearisome, though most deadly.  Be thankful

that Oblivion covers so much; that all carrion is by and by buried in the

green Earth's bosom, and even makes her grow the greener.  The Jacobins are

buried; but their work is not; it continues 'making the tour of the world,'

as it can.  It might be seen lately, for instance, with bared bosom and

death-defiant eye, as far on as Greek Missolonghi; and, strange enough, old

slumbering Hellas was resuscitated, into somnambulism which will become

clear wakefulness, by a voice from the Rue St. Honore!  All dies, as we

often say; except the spirit of man, of what man does.  Thus has not the

very House of the Jacobins vanished; scarcely lingering in a few old men's

memories?  The St. Honore Market has brushed it away, and now where dull-

droning eloquence, like a Trump of Doom, once shook the world, there is

pacific chaffering for poultry and greens.  The sacred National Assembly

Hall itself has become common ground; President's platform permeable to

wain and dustcart; for the Rue de Rivoli runs there.  Verily, at Cockcrow

(of this Cock or the other), all Apparitions do melt and dissolve in space.



The Paris Jacobins became 'the Mother-Society, Societe-Mere;' and had as

many as 'three hundred' shrill-tongued daughters in 'direct correspondence'

with her.  Of indirectly corresponding, what we may call grand-daughters

and minute progeny, she counted 'forty-four thousand!'--But for the present

we note only two things:  the first of them a mere anecdote.  One night, a

couple of brother Jacobins are doorkeepers; for the members take this post

of duty and honour in rotation, and admit none that have not tickets:  one

doorkeeper was the worthy Sieur Lais, a patriotic Opera-singer, stricken in

years, whose windpipe is long since closed without result; the other,

young, and named Louis Philippe, d'Orleans's firstborn, has in this latter

time, after unheard-of destinies, become Citizen-King, and struggles to

rule for a season.  All-flesh is grass; higher reedgrass or creeping herb.



The second thing we have to note is historical:  that the Mother-Society,

even in this its effulgent period, cannot content all Patriots.  Already it

must throw off, so to speak, two dissatisfied swarms; a swarm to the right,

a swarm to the left.  One party, which thinks the Jacobins lukewarm,

constitutes itself into Club of the Cordeliers; a hotter Club: it is

Danton's element:  with whom goes Desmoulins.  The other party, again,

which thinks the Jacobins scalding-hot, flies off to the right, and becomes

'Club of 1789, Friends of the Monarchic Constitution.'  They are afterwards

named 'Feuillans Club;' their place of meeting being the Feuillans Convent. 

Lafayette is, or becomes, their chief-man; supported by the respectable

Patriot everywhere, by the mass of Property and Intelligence,--with the

most flourishing prospects.  They, in these June days of 1790, do, in the

Palais Royal, dine solemnly with open windows; to the cheers of the people;

with toasts, with inspiriting songs,--with one song at least, among the

feeblest ever sung.  (Hist. Parl. vi. 334.)  They shall, in due time be

hooted forth, over the borders, into Cimmerian Night.



Another expressly Monarchic or Royalist Club, 'Club des Monarchiens,'

though a Club of ample funds, and all sitting in damask sofas, cannot

realise the smallest momentary cheer; realises only scoffs and groans;--

till, ere long, certain Patriots in disorderly sufficient number, proceed

thither, for a night or for nights, and groan it out of pain.  Vivacious

alone shall the Mother-Society and her family be.  The very Cordeliers may,

as it were, return into her bosom, which will have grown warm enough.



Fatal-looking!  Are not such Societies an incipient New Order of Society

itself?  The Aggregative Principle anew at work in a Society grown

obsolete, cracked asunder, dissolving into rubbish and primary atoms?







Chapter 2.1.VI.



Je le jure.



With these signs of the times, is it not surprising that the dominant

feeling all over France was still continually Hope?  O blessed Hope, sole

boon of man; whereby, on his strait prison walls, are painted beautiful

far-stretching landscapes; and into the night of very Death is shed holiest

dawn!  Thou art to all an indefeasible possession in this God's-world:  to

the wise a sacred Constantine's-banner, written on the eternal skies; under

which they shall conquer, for the battle itself is victory:  to the foolish

some secular mirage, or shadow of still waters, painted on the parched

Earth; whereby at least their dusty pilgrimage, if devious, becomes

cheerfuller, becomes possible.



In the death-tumults of a sinking Society, French Hope sees only the birth-

struggles of a new unspeakably better Society; and sings, with full

assurance of faith, her brisk Melody, which some inspired fiddler has in

these very days composed for her,--the world-famous ca-ira.  Yes; 'that

will go:' and then there will come--?  All men hope:  even Marat hopes--

that Patriotism will take muff and dirk.  King Louis is not without hope: 

in the chapter of chances; in a flight to some Bouille; in getting

popularized at Paris.  But what a hoping People he had, judge by the fact,

and series of facts, now to be noted.



Poor Louis, meaning the best, with little insight and even less

determination of his own, has to follow, in that dim wayfaring of his, such

signal as may be given him; by backstairs Royalism, by official or

backstairs Constitutionalism, whichever for the month may have convinced

the royal mind.  If flight to Bouille, and (horrible to think!) a drawing

of the civil sword do hang as theory, portentous in the background, much

nearer is this fact of these Twelve Hundred Kings, who sit in the Salle de

Manege.  Kings uncontrollable by him, not yet irreverent to him.  Could

kind management of these but prosper, how much better were it than armed

Emigrants, Turin-intrigues, and the help of Austria!  Nay, are the two

hopes inconsistent?  Rides in the suburbs, we have found, cost little; yet

they always brought vivats.  (See Bertrand-Moleville, i. 241, &c.)  Still

cheaper is a soft word; such as has many times turned away wrath.  In these

rapid days, while France is all getting divided into Departments, Clergy

about to be remodelled, Popular Societies rising, and Feudalism and so much

ever is ready to be hurled into the melting-pot,--might one not try?



On the 4th of February, accordingly, M. le President reads to his National

Assembly a short autograph, announcing that his Majesty will step over,

quite in an unceremonious way, probably about noon.  Think, therefore,

Messieurs, what it may mean; especially, how ye will get the Hall decorated

a little.  The Secretaries' Bureau can be shifted down from the platform;

on the President's chair be slipped this cover of velvet, 'of a violet

colour sprigged with gold fleur-de-lys;'--for indeed M. le President has

had previous notice underhand, and taken counsel with Doctor Guillotin. 

Then some fraction of 'velvet carpet,' of like texture and colour, cannot

that be spread in front of the chair, where the Secretaries usually sit? 

So has judicious Guillotin advised:  and the effect is found satisfactory. 

Moreover, as it is probable that his Majesty, in spite of the fleur-de-lys-

velvet, will stand and not sit at all, the President himself, in the

interim, presides standing.  And so, while some honourable Member is

discussing, say, the division of a Department, Ushers announce:  "His

Majesty!"  In person, with small suite, enter Majesty:  the honourable

Member stops short; the Assembly starts to its feet; the Twelve Hundred

Kings 'almost all,' and the Galleries no less, do welcome the Restorer of

French Liberty with loyal shouts.  His Majesty's Speech, in diluted

conventional phraseology, expresses this mainly:  That he, most of all

Frenchmen, rejoices to see France getting regenerated; is sure, at the same

time, that they will deal gently with her in the process, and not

regenerate her roughly.  Such was his Majesty's Speech:  the feat he

performed was coming to speak it, and going back again.



Surely, except to a very hoping People, there was not much here to build

upon.  Yet what did they not build!  The fact that the King has spoken,

that he has voluntarily come to speak, how inexpressibly encouraging!  Did

not the glance of his royal countenance, like concentrated sunbeams, kindle

all hearts in an august Assembly; nay thereby in an inflammable

enthusiastic France?  To move 'Deputation of thanks' can be the happy lot

of but one man; to go in such Deputation the lot of not many.  The Deputed

have gone, and returned with what highest-flown compliment they could; whom

also the Queen met, Dauphin in hand.  And still do not our hearts burn with

insatiable gratitude; and to one other man a still higher blessedness

suggests itself:  To move that we all renew the National Oath.



Happiest honourable Member, with his word so in season as word seldom was;

magic Fugleman of a whole National Assembly, which sat there bursting to do

somewhat; Fugleman of a whole onlooking France!  The President swears;

declares that every one shall swear, in distinct je le jure.  Nay the very

Gallery sends him down a written slip signed, with their Oath on it; and as

the Assembly now casts an eye that way, the Gallery all stands up and

swears again.  And then out of doors, consider at the Hotel-de-Ville how

Bailly, the great Tennis-Court swearer, again swears, towards nightful,

with all the Municipals, and Heads of Districts assembled there.  And 'M. 

Danton suggests that the public would like to partake:'  whereupon Bailly,

with escort of Twelve, steps forth to the great outer staircase; sways the

ebullient multitude with stretched hand:  takes their oath, with a thunder

of 'rolling drums,' with shouts that rend the welkin.  And on all streets

the glad people, with moisture and fire in their eyes, 'spontaneously

formed groups, and swore one another,' (Newspapers (in Hist. Parl. iv.

445.)--and the whole City was illuminated.  This was the Fourth of February

1790:  a day to be marked white in Constitutional annals.



Nor is the illumination for a night only, but partially or totally it lasts

a series of nights.  For each District, the Electors of each District, will

swear specially; and always as the District swears; it illuminates itself. 

Behold them, District after District, in some open square, where the Non-

Electing People can all see and join:  with their uplifted right hands, and

je le jure:  with rolling drums, with embracings, and that infinite hurrah

of the enfranchised,--which any tyrant that there may be can consider! 

Faithful to the King, to the Law, to the Constitution which the National

Assembly shall make.



Fancy, for example, the Professors of Universities parading the streets

with their young France, and swearing, in an enthusiastic manner, not

without tumult.  By a larger exercise of fancy, expand duly this little

word:  The like was repeated in every Town and District of France!  Nay one

Patriot Mother, in Lagnon of Brittany, assembles her ten children; and,

with her own aged hand, swears them all herself, the highsouled venerable

woman.  Of all which, moreover, a National Assembly must be eloquently

apprised.  Such three weeks of swearing!  Saw the sun ever such a swearing

people?  Have they been bit by a swearing tarantula?  No:  but they are men

and Frenchmen; they have Hope; and, singular to say, they have Faith, were

it only in the Gospel according to Jean Jacques.  O my Brothers! would to

Heaven it were even as ye think and have sworn!  But there are Lovers'

Oaths, which, had they been true as love itself, cannot be kept; not to

speak of Dicers' Oaths, also a known sort.







Chapter 2.1.VII.



Prodigies.



To such length had the Contrat Social brought it, in believing hearts. 

Man, as is well said, lives by faith; each generation has its own faith,

more or less; and laughs at the faith of its predecessor,--most unwisely. 

Grant indeed that this faith in the Social Contract belongs to the stranger

sorts; that an unborn generation may very wisely, if not laugh, yet stare

at it, and piously consider.  For, alas, what is Contrat?  If all men were

such that a mere spoken or sworn Contract would bind them, all men were

then true men, and Government a superfluity.  Not what thou and I have

promised to each other, but what the balance of our forces can make us

perform to each other:  that, in so sinful a world as ours, is the thing to

be counted on.  But above all, a People and a Sovereign promising to one

another; as if a whole People, changing from generation to generation, nay

from hour to hour, could ever by any method be made to speak or promise;

and to speak mere solecisms:  "We, be the Heavens witness, which Heavens

however do no miracles now; we, ever-changing Millions, will allow thee,

changeful Unit, to force us or govern us!"  The world has perhaps seen few

faiths comparable to that.



So nevertheless had the world then construed the matter.  Had they not so

construed it, how different had their hopes been, their attempts, their

results!  But so and not otherwise did the Upper Powers will it to be. 

Freedom by Social Contract:  such was verily the Gospel of that Era.  And

all men had believed in it, as in a Heaven's Glad-tidings men should; and

with overflowing heart and uplifted voice clave to it, and stood fronting

Time and Eternity on it.  Nay smile not; or only with a smile sadder than

tears!  This too was a better faith than the one it had replaced :  than

faith merely in the Everlasting Nothing and man's Digestive Power; lower

than which no faith can go.



Not that such universally prevalent, universally jurant, feeling of Hope,

could be a unanimous one.  Far from that!  The time was ominous:  social

dissolution near and certain; social renovation still a problem, difficult

and distant even though sure.  But if ominous to some clearest onlooker,

whose faith stood not with one side or with the other, nor in the ever-

vexed jarring of Greek with Greek at all,--how unspeakably ominous to dim

Royalist participators; for whom Royalism was Mankind's palladium; for

whom, with the abolition of Most-Christian Kingship and Most-Talleyrand

Bishopship, all loyal obedience, all religious faith was to expire, and

final Night envelope the Destinies of Man!  On serious hearts, of that

persuasion, the matter sinks down deep; prompting, as we have seen, to

backstairs Plots, to Emigration with pledge of war, to Monarchic Clubs; nay

to still madder things.



The Spirit of Prophecy, for instance, had been considered extinct for some

centuries:  nevertheless these last-times, as indeed is the tendency of

last-times, do revive it; that so, of French mad things, we might have

sample also of the maddest.  In remote rural districts, whither

Philosophism has not yet radiated, where a heterodox Constitution of the

Clergy is bringing strife round the altar itself, and the very Church-bells

are getting melted into small money-coin, it appears probable that the End

of the World cannot be far off.  Deep-musing atrabiliar old men, especially

old women, hint in an obscure way that they know what they know.  The Holy

Virgin, silent so long, has not gone dumb;--and truly now, if ever more in

this world, were the time for her to speak.  One Prophetess, though

careless Historians have omitted her name, condition, and whereabout,

becomes audible to the general ear; credible to not a few:  credible to

Friar Gerle, poor Patriot Chartreux, in the National Assembly itself!  She,

in Pythoness' recitative, with wildstaring eye, sings that there shall be a

Sign; that the heavenly Sun himself will hang out a Sign, or Mock-Sun,--

which, many say, shall be stamped with the Head of hanged Favras.  List,

Dom Gerle, with that poor addled poll of thine; list, O list;--and hear

nothing.  (Deux Amis, v. c. 7.)



Notable however was that 'magnetic vellum, velin magnetique,' of the Sieurs

d'Hozier and Petit-Jean, Parlementeers of Rouen.  Sweet young d'Hozier,

'bred in the faith of his Missal, and of parchment genealogies,' and of

parchment generally:  adust, melancholic, middle-aged Petit-Jean:  why came

these two to Saint-Cloud, where his Majesty was hunting, on the festival of

St. Peter and St. Paul; and waited there, in antechambers, a wonder to

whispering Swiss, the livelong day; and even waited without the Grates,

when turned out; and had dismissed their valets to Paris, as with purpose

of endless waiting?  They have a magnetic vellum, these two; whereon the

Virgin, wonderfully clothing herself in Mesmerean Cagliostric Occult-

Philosophy, has inspired them to jot down instructions and predictions for

a much-straitened King.  To whom, by Higher Order, they will this day

present it; and save the Monarchy and World.  Unaccountable pair of visual-

objects!  Ye should be men, and of the Eighteenth Century; but your

magnetic vellum forbids us so to interpret.  Say, are ye aught?  Thus ask

the Guardhouse Captains, the Mayor of St. Cloud; nay, at great length, thus

asks the Committee of Researches, and not the Municipal, but the National

Assembly one.  No distinct answer, for weeks.  At last it becomes plain

that the right answer is negative.  Go, ye Chimeras, with your magnetic

vellum; sweet young Chimera, adust middle-aged one!  The Prison-doors are

open.  Hardly again shall ye preside the Rouen Chamber of Accounts; but

vanish obscurely into Limbo.  (See Deux Amis, v. 199.)







Chapter 2.1.VIII.



Solemn League and Covenant.



Such dim masses, and specks of even deepest black, work in that white-hot

glow of the French mind, now wholly in fusion, and confusion.  Old women

here swearing their ten children on the new Evangel of Jean Jacques; old

women there looking up for Favras' Heads in the celestial Luminary:  these

are preternatural signs, prefiguring somewhat.



In fact, to the Patriot children of Hope themselves, it is undeniable that

difficulties exist:  emigrating Seigneurs; Parlements in sneaking but most

malicious mutiny (though the rope is round their neck); above all, the most

decided 'deficiency of grains.'  Sorrowful:  but, to a Nation that hopes,

not irremediable.  To a Nation which is in fusion and ardent communion of

thought; which, for example, on signal of one Fugleman, will lift its right

hand like a drilled regiment, and swear and illuminate, till every village

from Ardennes to the Pyrenees has rolled its village-drum, and sent up its

little oath, and glimmer of tallow-illumination some fathoms into the reign

of Night!



If grains are defective, the fault is not of Nature or National Assembly,

but of Art and Antinational Intriguers.  Such malign individuals, of the

scoundrel species, have power to vex us, while the Constitution is a-

making.  Endure it, ye heroic Patriots:  nay rather, why not cure it? 

Grains do grow, they lie extant there in sheaf or sack; only that regraters

and Royalist plotters, to provoke the people into illegality, obstruct the

transport of grains.  Quick, ye organised Patriot Authorities, armed

National Guards, meet together; unite your goodwill; in union is tenfold

strength:  let the concentred flash of your Patriotism strike stealthy

Scoundrelism blind, paralytic, as with a coup de soleil.



Under which hat or nightcap of the Twenty-five millions, this pregnant Idea

first rose, for in some one head it did rise, no man can now say.  A most

small idea, near at hand for the whole world:  but a living one, fit; and

which waxed, whether into greatness or not, into immeasurable size.  When a

Nation is in this state that the Fugleman can operate on it, what will the

word in season, the act in season, not do!  It will grow verily, like the

Boy's Bean in the Fairy-Tale, heaven-high, with habitations and adventures

on it, in one night.  It is nevertheless unfortunately still a Bean (for

your long-lived Oak grows not so); and, the next night, it may lie felled,

horizontal, trodden into common mud.--But remark, at least, how natural to

any agitated Nation, which has Faith, this business of Covenanting is.  The

Scotch, believing in a righteous Heaven above them, and also in a Gospel,

far other than the Jean-Jacques one, swore, in their extreme need, a Solemn

League and Covenant,--as Brothers on the forlorn-hope, and imminence of

battle, who embrace looking Godward; and got the whole Isle to swear it;

and even, in their tough Old-Saxon Hebrew-Presbyterian way, to keep it more

or less;--for the thing, as such things are, was heard in Heaven, and

partially ratified there; neither is it yet dead, if thou wilt look, nor

like to die.  The French too, with their Gallic-Ethnic excitability and

effervescence, have, as we have seen, real Faith, of a sort; they are hard

bestead, though in the middle of Hope:  a National Solemn League and

Covenant there may be in France too; under how different conditions; with

how different developement and issue!



Note, accordingly, the small commencement; first spark of a mighty

firework:  for if the particular hat cannot be fixed upon, the particular

District can.  On the 29th day of last November, were National Guards by

the thousand seen filing, from far and near, with military music, with

Municipal officers in tricolor sashes, towards and along the Rhone-stream,

to the little town of Etoile.  There with ceremonial evolution and

manoeuvre, with fanfaronading, musketry-salvoes, and what else the Patriot

genius could devise, they made oath and obtestation to stand faithfully by

one another, under Law and King; in particular, to have all manner of

grains, while grains there were, freely circulated, in spite both of robber

and regrater.  This was the meeting of Etoile, in the mild end of November

1789.



But now, if a mere empty Review, followed by Review-dinner, ball, and such

gesticulation and flirtation as there may be, interests the happy County-

town, and makes it the envy of surrounding County-towns, how much more

might this!  In a fortnight, larger Montelimart, half ashamed of itself,

will do as good, and better.  On the Plain of Montelimart, or what is

equally sonorous, 'under the Walls of Montelimart,' the thirteenth of

December sees new gathering and obtestation; six thousand strong; and now

indeed, with these three remarkable improvements, as unanimously resolved

on there.  First that the men of Montelimart do federate with the already

federated men of Etoile.  Second, that, implying not expressing the

circulation of grain, they 'swear in the face of God and their Country'

with much more emphasis and comprehensiveness, 'to obey all decrees of the

National Assembly, and see them obeyed, till death, jusqu'a la mort.' 

Third, and most important, that official record of all this be solemnly

delivered in to the National Assembly, to M. de Lafayette, and 'to the

Restorer of French Liberty;' who shall all take what comfort from it they

can.  Thus does larger Montelimart vindicate its Patriot importance, and

maintain its rank in the municipal scale.  (Hist. Parl. vii. 4.)



And so, with the New-year, the signal is hoisted; for is not a National

Assembly, and solemn deliverance there, at lowest a National Telegraph? 

Not only grain shall circulate, while there is grain, on highways or the

Rhone-waters, over all that South-Eastern region,--where also if

Monseigneur d'Artois saw good to break in from Turin, hot welcome might

wait him; but whatsoever Province of France is straitened for grain, or

vexed with a mutinous Parlement, unconstitutional plotters, Monarchic

Clubs, or any other Patriot ailment,--can go and do likewise, or even do

better.  And now, especially, when the February swearing has set them all

agog!  From Brittany to Burgundy, on most plains of France, under most

City-walls, it is a blaring of trumpets, waving of banners, a

constitutional manoeuvring:  under the vernal skies, while Nature too is

putting forth her green Hopes, under bright sunshine defaced by the

stormful East; like Patriotism victorious, though with difficulty, over

Aristocracy and defect of grain!  There march and constitutionally wheel,

to the ca-ira-ing mood of fife and drum, under their tricolor Municipals,

our clear-gleaming Phalanxes; or halt, with uplifted right-hand, and

artillery-salvoes that imitate Jove's thunder; and all the Country, and

metaphorically all 'the Universe,' is looking on.  Wholly, in their best

apparel, brave men, and beautifully dizened women, most of whom have lovers

there; swearing, by the eternal Heavens and this green-growing all-

nutritive Earth, that France is free!



Sweetest days, when (astonishing to say) mortals have actually met together

in communion and fellowship; and man, were it only once through long

despicable centuries, is for moments verily the brother of man!--And then

the Deputations to the National Assembly, with highflown descriptive

harangue; to M. de Lafayette, and the Restorer; very frequently moreover to

the Mother of Patriotism sitting on her stout benches in that Hall of the

Jacobins!  The general ear is filled with Federation.  New names of

Patriots emerge, which shall one day become familiar:  Boyer-Fonfrede

eloquent denunciator of a rebellious Bourdeaux Parlement; Max Isnard

eloquent reporter of the Federation of Draguignan; eloquent pair, separated

by the whole breadth of France, who are nevertheless to meet.  Ever wider

burns the flame of Federation; ever wider and also brighter.  Thus the

Brittany and Anjou brethren mention a Fraternity of all true Frenchmen; and

go the length of invoking 'perdition and death' on any renegade:  moreover,

if in their National-Assembly harangue, they glance plaintively at the marc

d'argent which makes so many citizens passive, they, over in the Mother-

Society, ask, being henceforth themselves 'neither Bretons nor Angevins but

French,' Why all France has not one Federation, and universal Oath of

Brotherhood, once for all?  (Reports, &c. (in Hist. Parl. ix. 122-147).)  A

most pertinent suggestion; dating from the end of March.  Which pertinent

suggestion the whole Patriot world cannot but catch, and reverberate and

agitate till it become loud;--which, in that case, the Townhall Municipals

had better take up, and meditate.



Some universal Federation seems inevitable:  the Where is given; clearly

Paris:  only the When, the How?  These also productive Time will give; is

already giving.  For always as the Federative work goes on, it perfects

itself, and Patriot genius adds contribution after contribution.  Thus, at

Lyons, in the end of the May month, we behold as many as fifty, or some say

sixty thousand, met to federate; and a multitude looking on, which it would

be difficult to number.  From dawn to dusk!  For our Lyons Guardsmen took

rank, at five in the bright dewy morning; came pouring in, bright-gleaming,

to the Quai de Rhone, to march thence to the Federation-field; amid wavings

of hats and lady-handkerchiefs; glad shoutings of some two hundred thousand

Patriot voices and hearts; the beautiful and brave!  Among whom, courting

no notice, and yet the notablest of all, what queenlike Figure is this;

with her escort of house-friends and Champagneux the Patriot Editor; come

abroad with the earliest?  Radiant with enthusiasm are those dark eyes, is

that strong Minerva-face, looking dignity and earnest joy; joyfullest she

where all are joyful.  It is Roland de la Platriere's Wife!  (Madame

Roland, Memoires, i. (Discours Preliminaire, p. 23).)  Strict elderly

Roland, King's Inspector of Manufactures here; and now likewise, by popular

choice, the strictest of our new Lyons Municipals:  a man who has gained

much, if worth and faculty be gain; but above all things, has gained to

wife Phlipon the Paris Engraver's daughter.  Reader, mark that queenlike

burgher-woman:  beautiful, Amazonian-graceful to the eye; more so to the

mind.  Unconscious of her worth (as all worth is), of her greatness, of her

crystal clearness; genuine, the creature of Sincerity and Nature, in an age

of Artificiality, Pollution and Cant; there, in her still completeness, in

her still invincibility, she, if thou knew it, is the noblest of all living

Frenchwomen,--and will be seen, one day.  O blessed rather while unseen,

even of herself!  For the present she gazes, nothing doubting, into this

grand theatricality; and thinks her young dreams are to be fulfilled.



From dawn to dusk, as we said, it lasts; and truly a sight like few. 

Flourishes of drums and trumpets are something:  but think of an

'artificial Rock fifty feet high,' all cut into crag-steps, not without the

similitude of 'shrubs!'  The interior cavity, for in sooth it is made of

deal,--stands solemn, a 'Temple of Concord:'  on the outer summit rises 'a

Statue of Liberty,' colossal, seen for miles, with her Pike and Phrygian

Cap, and civic column; at her feet a Country's Altar, 'Autel de la

Patrie:'--on all which neither deal-timber nor lath and plaster, with paint

of various colours, have been spared.  But fancy then the banners all

placed on the steps of the Rock; high-mass chaunted; and the civic oath of

fifty thousand:  with what volcanic outburst of sound from iron and other

throats, enough to frighten back the very Saone and Rhone; and how the

brightest fireworks, and balls, and even repasts closed in that night of

the gods!  (Hist. Parl. xii. 274.)  And so the Lyons Federation vanishes

too, swallowed of darkness;--and yet not wholly, for our brave fair Roland

was there; also she, though in the deepest privacy, writes her Narrative of

it in Champagneux's Courier de Lyons; a piece which 'circulates to the

extent of sixty thousand;' which one would like now to read.



But on the whole, Paris, we may see, will have little to devise; will only

have to borrow and apply.  And then as to the day, what day of all the

calendar is fit, if the Bastille Anniversary be not?  The particular spot

too, it is easy to see, must be the Champ-de-Mars; where many a Julian the

Apostate has been lifted on bucklers, to France's or the world's

sovereignty; and iron Franks, loud-clanging, have responded to the voice of

a Charlemagne; and from of old mere sublimities have been familiar.







Chapter 2.1.IX.



Symbolic.



How natural, in all decisive circumstances, is Symbolic Representation to

all kinds of men!  Nay, what is man's whole terrestrial Life but a Symbolic

Representation, and making visible, of the Celestial invisible Force that

is in him?  By act and world he strives to do it; with sincerity, if

possible; failing that, with theatricality, which latter also may have its

meaning.  An Almack's Masquerade is not nothing; in more genial ages, your

Christmas Guisings, Feasts of the Ass, Abbots of Unreason, were a

considerable something:  since sport they were; as Almacks may still be

sincere wish for sport.  But what, on the other hand, must not sincere

earnest have been:  say, a Hebrew Feast of Tabernacles have been!  A whole

Nation gathered, in the name of the Highest, under the eye of the Highest;

imagination herself flagging under the reality; and all noblest Ceremony as

yet not grown ceremonial, but solemn, significant to the outmost fringe! 

Neither, in modern private life, are theatrical scenes, of tearful women

wetting whole ells of cambric in concert, of impassioned bushy-whiskered

youth threatening suicide, and such like, to be so entirely detested:  drop

thou a tear over them thyself rather.



At any rate, one can remark that no Nation will throw-by its work, and

deliberately go out to make a scene, without meaning something thereby. 

For indeed no scenic individual, with knavish hypocritical views, will take

the trouble to soliloquise a scene:  and now consider, is not a scenic

Nation placed precisely in that predicament of soliloquising; for its own

behoof alone; to solace its own sensibilities, maudlin or other?--Yet in

this respect, of readiness for scenes, the difference of Nations, as of

men, is very great.  If our Saxon-Puritanic friends, for example, swore and

signed their National Covenant, without discharge of gunpowder, or the

beating of any drum, in a dingy Covenant-Close of the Edinburgh High-

street, in a mean room, where men now drink mean liquor, it was consistent

with their ways so to swear it.  Our Gallic-Encyclopedic friends, again,

must have a Champ-de-Mars, seen of all the world, or universe; and such a

Scenic Exhibition, to which the Coliseum Amphitheatre was but a stroller's

barn, as this old Globe of ours had never or hardly ever beheld.  Which

method also we reckon natural, then and there.  Nor perhaps was the

respective keeping of these two Oaths far out of due proportion to such

respective display in taking them:  inverse proportion, namely.  For the

theatricality of a People goes in a compound-ratio:  ratio indeed of their

trustfulness, sociability, fervency; but then also of their excitability,

of their porosity, not continent; or say, of their explosiveness, hot-

flashing, but which does not last.



How true also, once more, is it that no man or Nation of men, conscious of

doing a great thing, was ever, in that thing, doing other than a small one!

O Champ-de-Mars Federation, with three hundred drummers, twelve hundred

wind-musicians, and artillery planted on height after height to boom the

tidings of it all over France, in few minutes!  Could no Atheist-Naigeon

contrive to discern, eighteen centuries off, those Thirteen most poor mean-

dressed men, at frugal Supper, in a mean Jewish dwelling, with no symbol

but hearts god-initiated into the 'Divine depth of Sorrow,' and a Do this

in remembrance of me;--and so cease that small difficult crowing of his, if

he were not doomed to it?







Chapter 2.1.X.



Mankind.



Pardonable are human theatricalities; nay perhaps touching, like the

passionate utterance of a tongue which with sincerity stammers; of a head

which with insincerity babbles,--having gone distracted.  Yet, in

comparison with unpremeditated outbursts of Nature, such as an Insurrection

of Women, how foisonless, unedifying, undelightful; like small ale palled,

like an effervescence that has effervesced!  Such scenes, coming of

forethought, were they world-great, and never so cunningly devised, are at

bottom mainly pasteboard and paint.  But the others are original; emitted

from the great everliving heart of Nature herself:  what figure they will

assume is unspeakably significant.  To us, therefore, let the French

National Solemn League, and Federation, be the highest recorded triumph of

the Thespian Art; triumphant surely, since the whole Pit, which was of

Twenty-five Millions, not only claps hands, but does itself spring on the

boards and passionately set to playing there.  And being such, be it

treated as such:  with sincere cursory admiration; with wonder from afar. 

A whole Nation gone mumming deserves so much; but deserves not that loving

minuteness a Menadic Insurrection did.  Much more let prior, and as it

were, rehearsal scenes of Federation come and go, henceforward, as they

list; and, on Plains and under City-walls, innumerable regimental bands

blare off into the Inane, without note from us.



One scene, however, the hastiest reader will momentarily pause on:  that of

Anacharsis Clootz and the Collective sinful Posterity of Adam.--For a

Patriot Municipality has now, on the 4th of June, got its plan concocted,

and got it sanctioned by National Assembly; a Patriot King assenting; to

whom, were he even free to dissent, Federative harangues, overflowing with


loyalty, have doubtless a transient sweetness.  There shall come Deputed

National Guards, so many in the hundred, from each of the Eighty-three

Departments of France.  Likewise from all Naval and Military King's Forces,

shall Deputed quotas come; such Federation of National with Royal Soldier

has, taking place spontaneously, been already seen and sanctioned.  For the

rest, it is hoped, as many as forty thousand may arrive:  expenses to be

borne by the Deputing District; of all which let District and Department

take thought, and elect fit men,--whom the Paris brethren will fly to meet

and welcome.



Now, therefore, judge if our Patriot Artists are busy; taking deep counsel

how to make the Scene worthy of a look from the Universe!  As many as

fifteen thousand men, spade-men, barrow-men, stone-builders, rammers, with

their engineers, are at work on the Champ-de-Mars; hollowing it out into a

natural Amphitheatre, fit for such solemnity.  For one may hope it will be

annual and perennial; a 'Feast of Pikes, Fete des Piques,' notablest among

the high-tides of the year:  in any case ought not a Scenic free Nation to

have some permanent National Amphitheatre?  The Champ-de-Mars is getting

hollowed out; and the daily talk and the nightly dream in most Parisian

heads is of Federation, and that only.  Federate Deputies are already under

way.  National Assembly, what with its natural work, what with hearing and

answering harangues of Federates, of this Federation, will have enough to

do!  Harangue of 'American Committee,' among whom is that faint figure of

Paul Jones 'as with the stars dim-twinkling through it,'--come to

congratulate us on the prospect of such auspicious day.  Harangue of

Bastille Conquerors, come to 'renounce' any special recompense, any

peculiar place at the solemnity;--since the Centre Grenadiers rather

grumble.  Harangue of 'Tennis-Court Club,' who enter with far-gleaming

Brass-plate, aloft on a pole, and the Tennis-Court Oath engraved thereon;

which far gleaming Brass-plate they purpose to affix solemnly in the

Versailles original locality, on the 20th of this month, which is the

anniversary, as a deathless memorial, for some years:  they will then dine,

as they come back, in the Bois de Boulogne; (See Deux Amis, v. 122; Hist.

Parl. &c.)--cannot, however, do it without apprising the world.  To such

things does the august National Assembly ever and anon cheerfully listen,

suspending its regenerative labours; and with some touch of impromptu

eloquence, make friendly reply;--as indeed the wont has long been; for it

is a gesticulating, sympathetic People, and has a heart, and wears it on

its sleeve.



In which circumstances, it occurred to the mind of Anacharsis Clootz that

while so much was embodying itself into Club or Committee, and perorating

applauded, there yet remained a greater and greatest; of which, if it also

took body and perorated, what might not the effect be:  Humankind namely,

le Genre Humain itself!  In what rapt creative moment the Thought rose in

Anacharsis's soul; all his throes, while he went about giving shape and

birth to it; how he was sneered at by cold worldlings; but did sneer again,

being a man of polished sarcasm; and moved to and fro persuasive in

coffeehouse and soiree, and dived down assiduous-obscure in the great deep

of Paris, making his Thought a Fact:  of all this the spiritual biographies

of that period say nothing.  Enough that on the 19th evening of June 1790,

the Sun's slant rays lighted a spectacle such as our foolish little Planet

has not often had to show:  Anacharsis Clootz entering the august Salle de

Manege, with the Human Species at his heels.  Swedes, Spaniards, Polacks;

Turks, Chaldeans, Greeks, dwellers in Mesopotamia:  behold them all; they

have come to claim place in the grand Federation, having an undoubted

interest in it.



"Our ambassador titles," said the fervid Clootz, "are not written on

parchment, but on the living hearts of all men."  These whiskered Polacks,

long-flowing turbaned Ishmaelites, astrological Chaldeans, who stand so

mute here, let them plead with you, august Senators, more eloquently than

eloquence could.  They are the mute representatives of their tongue-tied,

befettered, heavy-laden Nations; who from out of that dark bewilderment

gaze wistful, amazed, with half-incredulous hope, towards you, and this

your bright light of a French Federation:  bright particular day-star, the

herald of universal day.  We claim to stand there, as mute monuments,

pathetically adumbrative of much.--From bench and gallery comes 'repeated

applause;' for what august Senator but is flattered even by the very shadow

of Human Species depending on him?  From President Sieyes, who presides

this remarkable fortnight, in spite of his small voice, there comes

eloquent though shrill reply.  Anacharsis and the 'Foreigners Committee'

shall have place at the Federation; on condition of telling their

respective Peoples what they see there.  In the mean time, we invite them

to the 'honours of the sitting, honneur de la seance.'  A long-flowing

Turk, for rejoinder, bows with Eastern solemnity, and utters articulate

sounds:  but owing to his imperfect knowledge of the French dialect,

(Moniteur, &c. (in Hist. Parl. xii. 283).) his words are like spilt water;

the thought he had in him remains conjectural to this day.



Anacharsis and Mankind accept the honours of the sitting; and have

forthwith, as the old Newspapers still testify, the satisfaction to see

several things.  First and chief, on the motion of Lameth, Lafayette,

Saint-Fargeau and other Patriot Nobles, let the others repugn as they will: 

all Titles of Nobility, from Duke to Esquire, or lower, are henceforth

abolished.  Then, in like manner, Livery Servants, or rather the Livery of

Servants.  Neither, for the future, shall any man or woman, self-styled

noble, be 'incensed,'--foolishly fumigated with incense, in Church; as the

wont has been.  In a word, Feudalism being dead these ten months, why

should her empty trappings and scutcheons survive?  The very Coats-of-arms

will require to be obliterated;--and yet Cassandra Marat on this and the

other coach-panel notices that they 'are but painted-over,' and threaten to

peer through again.



So that henceforth de Lafayette is but the Sieur Motier, and Saint-Fargeau

is plain Michel Lepelletier; and Mirabeau soon after has to say huffingly,

"With your Riquetti you have set Europe at cross-purposes for three days." 

For his Counthood is not indifferent to this man; which indeed the admiring

People treat him with to the last.  But let extreme Patriotism rejoice, and

chiefly Anacharsis and Mankind; for now it seems to be taken for granted

that one Adam is Father of us all!--



Such was, in historical accuracy, the famed feat of Anacharsis.  Thus did

the most extensive of Public Bodies find a sort of spokesman.  Whereby at

least we may judge of one thing:  what a humour the once sniffing mocking

City of Paris and Baron Clootz had got into; when such exhibition could

appear a propriety, next door to a sublimity.  It is true, Envy did in

after times, pervert this success of Anacharsis; making him, from

incidental 'Speaker of the Foreign-Nations Committee,' claim to be official

permanent 'Speaker, Orateur, of the Human Species,' which he only deserved

to be; and alleging, calumniously, that his astrological Chaldeans, and the

rest, were a mere French tag-rag-and-bobtail disguised for the nonce; and,

in short, sneering and fleering at him in her cold barren way; all which,

however, he, the man he was, could receive on thick enough panoply, or even

rebound therefrom, and also go his way.



Most extensive of Public Bodies, we may call it; and also the most

unexpected:  for who could have thought to see All Nations in the Tuileries

Riding-Hall?  But so it is; and truly as strange things may happen when a

whole People goes mumming and miming.  Hast not thou thyself perchance seen

diademed Cleopatra, daughter of the Ptolemies, pleading, almost with bended

knee, in unheroic tea-parlour, or dimlit retail-shop, to inflexible gross

Burghal Dignitary, for leave to reign and die; being dressed for it, and

moneyless, with small children;--while suddenly Constables have shut the

Thespian barn, and her Antony pleaded in vain?  Such visual spectra flit

across this Earth, if the Thespian Stage be rudely interfered with:  but

much more, when, as was said, Pit jumps on Stage, then is it verily, as in

Herr Tieck's Drama, a Verkehrte Welt, of World Topsyturvied!



Having seen the Human Species itself, to have seen the 'Dean of the Human

Species,' ceased now to be a miracle.  Such 'Doyen du Genre Humain, Eldest

of Men,' had shewn himself there, in these weeks:  Jean Claude Jacob, a

born Serf, deputed from his native Jura Mountains to thank the National

Assembly for enfranchising them.  On his bleached worn face are ploughed

the furrowings of one hundred and twenty years.  He has heard dim patois-

talk, of immortal Grand-Monarch victories; of a burnt Palatinate, as he

toiled and moiled to make a little speck of this Earth greener; of Cevennes

Dragoonings; of Marlborough going to the war.  Four generations have

bloomed out, and loved and hated, and rustled off:  he was forty-six when

Louis Fourteenth died.  The Assembly, as one man, spontaneously rose, and

did reverence to the Eldest of the World; old Jean is to take seance among

them, honourably, with covered head.  He gazes feebly there, with his old

eyes, on that new wonder-scene; dreamlike to him, and uncertain, wavering

amid fragments of old memories and dreams.  For Time is all growing

unsubstantial, dreamlike; Jean's eyes and mind are weary, and about to

close,--and open on a far other wonder-scene, which shall be real.  Patriot

Subscription, Royal Pension was got for him, and he returned home glad; but

in two months more he left it all, and went on his unknown way.  (Deux

Amis, iv. iii.)







Chapter 2.1.XI.



As in the Age of Gold.



Meanwhile to Paris, ever going and returning, day after day, and all day

long, towards that Field of Mars, it becomes painfully apparent that the

spadework there cannot be got done in time.  There is such an area of it;

three hundred thousand square feet:  for from the Ecole militaire (which

will need to be done up in wood with balconies and galleries) westward to

the Gate by the river (where also shall be wood, in triumphal arches), we

count same thousand yards of length; and for breadth, from this umbrageous

Avenue of eight rows, on the South side, to that corresponding one on the

North, some thousand feet, more or less.  All this to be scooped out, and

wheeled up in slope along the sides; high enough; for it must be rammed

down there, and shaped stair-wise into as many as 'thirty ranges of

convenient seats,' firm-trimmed with turf, covered with enduring timber;--

and then our huge pyramidal Fatherland's-Altar, Autel de la Patrie, in the

centre, also to be raised and stair-stepped!  Force-work with a vengeance;

it is a World's Amphitheatre!  There are but fifteen days good; and at this

languid rate, it might take half as many weeks.  What is singular too, the

spademen seem to work lazily; they will not work double-tides, even for

offer of more wages, though their tide is but seven hours; they declare

angrily that the human tabernacle requires occasional rest!



Is it Aristocrats secretly bribing?  Aristocrats were capable of that. 

Only six months since, did not evidence get afloat that subterranean Paris,

for we stand over quarries and catacombs, dangerously, as it were midway

between Heaven and the Abyss, and are hollow underground,--was charged with

gunpowder, which should make us 'leap?'  Till a Cordelier's Deputation

actually went to examine, and found it--carried off again!  (23rd December,

1789 (Newspapers in Hist. Parl. iv. 44).)  An accursed, incurable brood;

all asking for 'passports,' in these sacred days.  Trouble, of rioting,

chateau-burning, is in the Limousin and elsewhere; for they are busy! 

Between the best of Peoples and the best of Restorer-Kings, they would sow

grudges; with what a fiend's-grin would they see this Federation, looked

for by the Universe, fail!



Fail for want of spadework, however, it shall not.  He that has four limbs,

and a French heart, can do spadework; and will!  On the first July Monday,

scarcely has the signal-cannon boomed; scarcely have the languescent

mercenary Fifteen Thousand laid down their tools, and the eyes of onlookers

turned sorrowfully of the still high Sun; when this and the other Patriot,

fire in his eye, snatches barrow and mattock, and himself begins

indignantly wheeling.  Whom scores and then hundreds follow; and soon a

volunteer Fifteen Thousand are shovelling and trundling; with the heart of

giants; and all in right order, with that extemporaneous adroitness of

theirs:  whereby such a lift has been given, worth three mercenary ones;--

which may end when the late twilight thickens, in triumph shouts, heard or

heard of beyond Montmartre!



A sympathetic population will wait, next day, with eagerness, till the

tools are free.  Or why wait?  Spades elsewhere exist!  And so now bursts

forth that effulgence of Parisian enthusiasm, good-heartedness and

brotherly love; such, if Chroniclers are trustworthy, as was not witnessed

since the Age of Gold.  Paris, male and female, precipitates itself towards

its South-west extremity, spade on shoulder.  Streams of men, without

order; or in order, as ranked fellow-craftsmen, as natural or accidental

reunions, march towards the Field of Mars.  Three-deep these march; to the

sound of stringed music; preceded by young girls with green boughs, and

tricolor streamers:  they have shouldered, soldier-wise, their shovels and

picks; and with one throat are singing ca-ira.  Yes, pardieu ca-ira, cry

the passengers on the streets.  All corporate Guilds, and public and

private Bodies of Citizens, from the highest to the lowest, march; the very

Hawkers, one finds, have ceased bawling for one day.  The neighbouring

Villages turn out:  their able men come marching, to village fiddle or

tambourine and triangle, under their Mayor, or Mayor and Curate, who also

walk bespaded, and in tricolor sash.  As many as one hundred and fifty

thousand workers:  nay at certain seasons, as some count, two hundred and

fifty thousand; for, in the afternoon especially, what mortal but,

finishing his hasty day's work, would run!  A stirring city:  from the time

you reach the Place Louis Quinze, southward over the River, by all Avenues,

it is one living throng. So many workers; and no mercenary mock-workers,

but real ones that lie freely to it:  each Patriot stretches himself

against the stubborn glebe; hews and wheels with the whole weight that is

in him.



Amiable infants, aimables enfans!  They do the 'police des l'atelier' too,

the guidance and governance, themselves; with that ready will of theirs,

with that extemporaneous adroitness.  It is a true brethren's work; all

distinctions confounded, abolished; as it was in the beginning, when Adam

himself delved.  Longfrocked tonsured Monks, with short-skirted Water-

carriers, with swallow-tailed well-frizzled Incroyables of a Patriot turn;

dark Charcoalmen, meal-white Peruke-makers; or Peruke-wearers, for Advocate

and Judge are there, and all Heads of Districts:  sober Nuns sisterlike

with flaunting Nymphs of the Opera, and females in common circumstances

named unfortunate:  the patriot Rag-picker, and perfumed dweller in

palaces; for Patriotism like New-birth, and also like Death, levels all. 

The Printers have come marching, Prudhomme's all in Paper-caps with

Revolutions de Paris printed on them; as Camille notes; wishing that in

these great days there should be a Pacte des Ecrivains too, or Federation

of Able Editors.  (See Newspapers, &c. (in Hist. Parl. vi. 381-406).) 

Beautiful to see!  The snowy linen and delicate pantaloon alternates with

the soiled check-shirt and bushel-breeches; for both have cast their coats,

and under both are four limbs and a set of Patriot muscles.  There do they

pick and shovel; or bend forward, yoked in long strings to box-barrow or

overloaded tumbril; joyous, with one mind.  Abbe Sieyes is seen pulling,

wiry, vehement, if too light for draught; by the side of Beauharnais, who

shall get Kings though he be none.  Abbe Maury did not pull; but the

Charcoalmen brought a mummer guised like him, so he had to pull in effigy.

Let no august Senator disdain the work:  Mayor Bailly, Generalissimo

Lafayette are there;--and, alas, shall be there again another day!  The

King himself comes to see:  sky-rending Vive-le-Roi; 'and suddenly with

shouldered spades they form a guard of honour round him.'  Whosoever can

come comes, to work, or to look, and bless the work.



Whole families have come.  One whole family we see clearly, of three

generations:  the father picking, the mother shovelling, the young ones

wheeling assiduous; old grandfather, hoary with ninety-three years, holds

in his arms the youngest of all: (Mercier. ii. 76, &c.) frisky, not helpful

this one; who nevertheless may tell it to his grandchildren; and how the

Future and the Past alike looked on, and with failing or with half-formed

voice, faltered their ca-ira.  A vintner has wheeled in, on Patriot truck,

beverage of wine:  "Drink not, my brothers, if ye are not dry; that your

cask may last the longer;" neither did any drink, but men 'evidently

exhausted.'  A dapper Abbe looks on, sneering.  "To the barrow!" cry

several; whom he, lest a worse thing befal him, obeys:  nevertheless one

wiser Patriot barrowman, arriving now, interposes his "arretez;" setting

down his own barrow, he snatches the Abbe's; trundles it fast, like an

infected thing; forth of the Champ-de-Mars circuit, and discharges it

there.  Thus too a certain person (of some quality, or private capital, to

appearance), entering hastily, flings down his coat, waistcoat and two

watches, and is rushing to the thick of the work:  "But your watches?"

cries the general voice.--"Does one distrust his brothers?" answers he; nor

were the watches stolen.  How beautiful is noble-sentiment:  like gossamer

gauze, beautiful and cheap; which will stand no tear and wear!  Beautiful

cheap gossamer gauze, thou film-shadow of a raw-material of Virtue, which

art not woven, nor likely to be, into Duty; thou art better than nothing,

and also worse!



Young Boarding-school Boys, College Students, shout Vive la Nation, and

regret that they have yet 'only their sweat to give.'  What say we of Boys?

Beautifullest Hebes; the loveliest of Paris, in their light air-robes, with

riband-girdle of tricolor, are there; shovelling and wheeling with the

rest; their Hebe eyes brighter with enthusiasm, and long hair in beautiful

dishevelment:  hard-pressed are their small fingers; but they make the

patriot barrow go, and even force it to the summit of the slope (with a

little tracing, which what man's arm were not too happy to lend?)--then

bound down with it again, and go for more; with their long locks and

tricolors blown back:  graceful as the rosy Hours.  O, as that evening Sun

fell over the Champ-de-Mars, and tinted with fire the thick umbrageous

boscage that shelters it on this hand and on that, and struck direct on

those Domes and two-and-forty Windows of the Ecole Militaire, and made them

all of burnished gold,--saw he on his wide zodiac road other such sight?  A

living garden spotted and dotted with such flowerage; all colours of the

prism; the beautifullest blent friendly with the usefullest; all growing

and working brotherlike there, under one warm feeling, were it but for

days; once and no second time!  But Night is sinking; these Nights too,

into Eternity.  The hastiest Traveller Versailles-ward has drawn bridle on

the heights of Chaillot:  and looked for moments over the River; reporting

at Versailles what he saw, not without tears.  (Mercier, ii. 81.)



Meanwhile, from all points of the compass, Federates are arriving:  fervid

children of the South, 'who glory in their Mirabeau;' considerate North-

blooded Mountaineers of Jura; sharp Bretons, with their Gaelic suddenness;

Normans not to be overreached in bargain:  all now animated with one

noblest fire of Patriotism.  Whom the Paris brethren march forth to

receive; with military solemnities, with fraternal embracing, and a

hospitality worthy of the heroic ages.  They assist at the Assembly's

Debates, these Federates:  the Galleries are reserved for them.  They

assist in the toils of the Champ-de-Mars; each new troop will put its hand

to the spade; lift a hod of earth on the Altar of the Fatherland.  But the

flourishes of rhetoric, for it is a gesticulating People; the moral-sublime

of those Addresses to an august Assembly, to a Patriot Restorer!  Our

Breton Captain of Federates kneels even, in a fit of enthusiasm, and gives

up his sword; he wet-eyed to a King wet-eyed.  Poor Louis!  These, as he

said afterwards, were among the bright days of his life.



Reviews also there must be; royal Federate-reviews, with King, Queen and

tricolor Court looking on:  at lowest, if, as is too common, it rains, our

Federate Volunteers will file through the inner gateways, Royalty standing

dry.  Nay there, should some stop occur, the beautifullest fingers in

France may take you softly by the lapelle, and, in mild flute-voice, ask: 

"Monsieur, of what Province are you?"  Happy he who can reply, chivalrously

lowering his sword's point, "Madame, from the Province your ancestors

reigned over."  He that happy 'Provincial Advocate,' now Provincial

Federate, shall be rewarded by a sun-smile, and such melodious glad words

addressed to a King:  "Sire, these are your faithful Lorrainers."  Cheerier

verily, in these holidays, is this 'skyblue faced with red' of a National

Guardsman, than the dull black and gray of a Provincial Advocate, which in

workdays one was used to.  For the same thrice-blessed Lorrainer shall,

this evening, stand sentry at a Queen's door; and feel that he could die a

thousand deaths for her:  then again, at the outer gate, and even a third

time, she shall see him; nay he will make her do it; presenting arms with

emphasis, 'making his musket jingle again':  and in her salute there shall

again be a sun-smile, and that little blonde-locked too hasty Dauphin shall

be admonished, "Salute then, Monsieur, don't be unpolite;" and therewith

she, like a bright Sky-wanderer or Planet with her little Moon, issues

forth peculiar.  (Narrative by a Lorraine Federate (given in Hist. Parl.

vi. 389-91).)



But at night, when Patriot spadework is over, figure the sacred rights of

hospitality!  Lepelletier Saint-Fargeau, a mere private senator, but with

great possessions, has daily his 'hundred dinner-guests;' the table of

Generalissimo Lafayette may double that number.  In lowly parlour, as in

lofty saloon, the wine-cup passes round; crowned by the smiles of Beauty;

be it of lightly-tripping Grisette, or of high-sailing Dame, for both

equally have beauty, and smiles precious to the brave.







Chapter 2.1.XII.



Sound and Smoke.



And so now, in spite of plotting Aristocrats, lazy hired spademen, and

almost of Destiny itself (for there has been much rain), the Champ-de-Mars,

on the 13th of the month is fairly ready; trimmed, rammed, buttressed with

firm masonry; and Patriotism can stroll over it admiring; and as it were

rehearsing, for in every head is some unutterable image of the morrow. 

Pray Heaven there be not clouds.  Nay what far worse cloud is this, of a

misguided Municipality that talks of admitting Patriotism, to the

solemnity, by tickets!  Was it by tickets we were admitted to the work; and

to what brought the work?  Did we take the Bastille by tickets?  A

misguided Municipality sees the error; at late midnight, rolling drums

announce to Patriotism starting half out of its bed-clothes, that it is to

be ticketless.  Pull down thy night-cap therefore; and, with demi-

articulate grumble, significant of several things, go pacified to sleep

again.  Tomorrow is Wednesday morning; unforgetable among the fasti of the

world.



The morning comes, cold for a July one; but such a festivity would make

Greenland smile.  Through every inlet of that National Amphitheatre (for it

is a league in circuit, cut with openings at due intervals), floods-in the

living throng; covers without tumult space after space.  The Ecole

Militaire has galleries and overvaulting canopies, where Carpentry and

Painting have vied, for the upper Authorities; triumphal arches, at the

Gate by the River, bear inscriptions, if weak, yet well-meant, and

orthodox.  Far aloft, over the Altar of the Fatherland, on their tall crane

standards of iron, swing pensile our antique Cassolettes or pans of

incense; dispensing sweet incense-fumes,--unless for the Heathen Mythology,

one sees not for whom.  Two hundred thousand Patriotic Men; and, twice as

good, one hundred thousand Patriotic Women, all decked and glorified as one

can fancy, sit waiting in this Champ-de-Mars.



What a picture:  that circle of bright-eyed Life, spread up there, on its

thirty-seated Slope; leaning, one would say, on the thick umbrage of those

Avenue-Trees, for the stems of them are hidden by the height; and all

beyond it mere greenness of Summer Earth, with the gleams of waters, or

white sparklings of stone-edifices:  little circular enamel-picture in the

centre of such a vase--of emerald!  A vase not empty:  the Invalides

Cupolas want not their population, nor the distant Windmills of Montmartre;

on remotest steeple and invisible village belfry, stand men with spy-

glasses.  On the heights of Chaillot are many-coloured undulating groups;

round and far on, over all the circling heights that embosom Paris, it is

as one more or less peopled Amphitheatre; which the eye grows dim with

measuring.  Nay heights, as was before hinted, have cannon; and a floating-

battery of cannon is on the Seine.  When eye fails, ear shall serve; and

all France properly is but one Amphitheatre:  for in paved town and unpaved

hamlet, men walk listening; till the muffled thunder sound audible on their

horizon, that they too may begin swearing and firing!  (Deux Amis, v. 168.) 

But now, to streams of music, come Federates enough,--for they have

assembled on the Boulevard Saint-Antoine or thereby, and come marching

through the City, with their Eighty-three Department Banners, and blessings

not loud but deep; comes National Assembly, and takes seat under its

Canopy; comes Royalty, and takes seat on a throne beside it.  And

Lafayette, on white charger, is here, and all the civic Functionaries; and

the Federates form dances, till their strictly military evolutions and

manoeuvres can begin.



Evolutions and manoeuvres?  Task not the pen of mortal to describe them: 

truant imagination droops;--declares that it is not worth while.  There is

wheeling and sweeping, to slow, to quick, and double quick-time:  Sieur

Motier, or Generalissimo Lafayette, for they are one and the same, and he

is General of France, in the King's stead, for four-and-twenty hours; Sieur

Motier must step forth, with that sublime chivalrous gait of his; solemnly

ascend the steps of the Fatherland's Altar, in sight of Heaven and of the

scarcely breathing Earth; and, under the creak of those swinging

Cassolettes, 'pressing his sword's point firmly there,' pronounce the Oath,

To King, to Law, and Nation (not to mention 'grains' with their

circulating), in his own name and that of armed France.  Whereat there is

waving of banners and acclaim sufficient.  The National Assembly must

swear, standing in its place; the King himself audibly.  The King swears;

and now be the welkin split with vivats; let citizens enfranchised embrace,

each smiting heartily his palm into his fellow's; and armed Federates clang

their arms; above all, that floating battery speak!  It has spoken,--to the

four corners of France.  From eminence to eminence, bursts the thunder;

faint-heard, loud-repeated.  What a stone, cast into what a lake; in

circles that do not grow fainter.  From Arras to Avignon; from Metz to

Bayonne!  Over Orleans and Blois it rolls, in cannon-recitative; Puy

bellows of it amid his granite mountains; Pau where is the shell-cradle of

Great Henri.  At far Marseilles, one can think, the ruddy evening witnesses

it; over the deep-blue Mediterranean waters, the Castle of If ruddy-tinted

darts forth, from every cannon's mouth, its tongue of fire; and all the

people shout:  Yes, France is free.  O glorious France that has burst out

so; into universal sound and smoke; and attained--the Phrygian Cap of

Liberty!  In all Towns, Trees of Liberty also may be planted; with or

without advantage.  Said we not, it is the highest stretch attained by the

Thespian Art on this Planet, or perhaps attainable?



The Thespian Art, unfortunately, one must still call it; for behold there,

on this Field of Mars, the National Banners, before there could be any

swearing, were to be all blessed.  A most proper operation; since surely

without Heaven's blessing bestowed, say even, audibly or inaudibly sought,

no Earthly banner or contrivance can prove victorious:  but now the means

of doing it?  By what thrice-divine Franklin thunder-rod shall miraculous

fire be drawn out of Heaven; and descend gently, life-giving, with health

to the souls of men?  Alas, by the simplest:  by Two Hundred shaven-crowned

Individuals, 'in snow-white albs, with tricolor girdles,' arranged on the

steps of Fatherland's Altar; and, at their head for spokesman, Soul's

Overseer Talleyrand-Perigord!  These shall act as miraculous thunder-rod,--

to such length as they can.  O ye deep azure Heavens, and thou green all-

nursing Earth; ye Streams ever-flowing; deciduous Forests that die and are

born again, continually, like the sons of men; stone Mountains that die

daily with every rain-shower, yet are not dead and levelled for ages of

ages, nor born again (it seems) but with new world-explosions, and such

tumultuous seething and tumbling, steam half way to the Moon; O thou

unfathomable mystic All, garment and dwellingplace of the UNNAMED; O

spirit, lastly, of Man, who mouldest and modellest that Unfathomable

Unnameable even as we see,--is not there a miracle:  That some French

mortal should, we say not have believed, but pretended to imagine that he

believed that Talleyrand and Two Hundred pieces of white Calico could do

it!



Here, however, we are to remark with the sorrowing Historians of that day,

that suddenly, while Episcopus Talleyrand, long-stoled, with mitre and

tricolor belt, was yet but hitching up the Altar-steps, to do his miracle,

the material Heaven grew black; a north-wind, moaning cold moisture, began

to sing; and there descended a very deluge of rain.  Sad to see!  The

thirty-staired Seats, all round our Amphitheatre, get instantaneously

slated with mere umbrellas, fallacious when so thick set:  our antique

Cassolettes become Water-pots; their incense-smoke gone hissing, in a whiff

of muddy vapour.  Alas, instead of vivats, there is nothing now but the

furious peppering and rattling.  From three to four hundred thousand human

individuals feel that they have a skin; happily impervious.  The General's

sash runs water:  how all military banners droop; and will not wave, but

lazily flap, as if metamorphosed into painted tin-banners!  Worse, far

worse, these hundred thousand, such is the Historian's testimony, of the

fairest of France!  Their snowy muslins all splashed and draggled; the

ostrich feather shrunk shamefully to the backbone of a feather:  all caps

are ruined; innermost pasteboard molten into its original pap:  Beauty no

longer swims decorated in her garniture, like Love-goddess hidden-revealed

in her Paphian clouds, but struggles in disastrous imprisonment in it, for

'the shape was noticeable;' and now only sympathetic interjections,

titterings, teeheeings, and resolute good-humour will avail.  A deluge; an

incessant sheet or fluid-column of rain;--such that our Overseer's very

mitre must be filled; not a mitre, but a filled and leaky fire-bucket on

his reverend head!--Regardless of which, Overseer Talleyrand performs his

miracle: the Blessing of Talleyrand, another than that of Jacob, is on all

the Eighty-three departmental flags of France; which wave or flap, with

such thankfulness as needs.  Towards three o'clock, the sun beams out

again:  the remaining evolutions can be transacted under bright heavens,

though with decorations much damaged.  (Deux Amis, v. 143-179.)



On Wednesday our Federation is consummated:  but the festivities last out

the week, and over into the next.  Festivities such as no Bagdad Caliph, or

Aladdin with the Lamp, could have equalled.  There is a Jousting on the

River; with its water-somersets, splashing and haha-ing:  Abbe Fauchet, Te-

Deum Fauchet, preaches, for his part, in 'the rotunda of the Corn-market,'

a Harangue on Franklin; for whom the National Assembly has lately gone

three days in black.  The Motier and Lepelletier tables still groan with

viands; roofs ringing with patriotic toasts.  On the fifth evening, which

is the Christian Sabbath, there is a universal Ball.  Paris, out of doors

and in, man, woman and child, is jigging it, to the sound of harp and four-

stringed fiddle.  The hoariest-headed man will tread one other measure,

under this nether Moon; speechless nurselings, infants as we call them,

(Greek), crow in arms; and sprawl out numb-plump little limbs,--impatient

for muscularity, they know not why.  The stiffest balk bends more or less;

all joists creak.



Or out, on the Earth's breast itself, behold the Ruins of the Bastille. 

All lamplit, allegorically decorated:  a Tree of Liberty sixty feet high;

and Phrygian Cap on it, of size enormous, under which King Arthur and his

round-table might have dined!  In the depths of the background, is a single

lugubrious lamp, rendering dim-visible one of your iron cages, half-buried,

and some Prison stones,--Tyranny vanishing downwards, all gone but the

skirt:  the rest wholly lamp-festoons, trees real or of pasteboard; in the

similitude of a fairy grove; with this inscription, readable to runner: 

'Ici l'on danse, Dancing Here.'  As indeed had been obscurely foreshadowed

by Cagliostro (See his Lettre au Peuple Francais (London, 1786.) prophetic

Quack of Quacks, when he, four years ago, quitted the grim durance;--to

fall into a grimmer, of the Roman Inquisition, and not quit it.



But, after all, what is this Bastille business to that of the Champs

Elysees!  Thither, to these Fields well named Elysian, all feet tend.  It

is radiant as day with festooned lamps; little oil-cups, like variegated

fire-flies, daintily illumine the highest leaves:  trees there are all

sheeted with variegated fire, shedding far a glimmer into the dubious wood.

There, under the free sky, do tight-limbed Federates, with fairest newfound

sweethearts, elastic as Diana, and not of that coyness and tart humour of

Diana, thread their jocund mazes, all through the ambrosial night; and

hearts were touched and fired; and seldom surely had our old Planet, in

that huge conic Shadow of hers 'which goes beyond the Moon, and is named

Night,' curtained such a Ball-room.  O if, according to Seneca, the very

gods look down on a good man struggling with adversity, and smile; what

must they think of Five-and-twenty million indifferent ones victorious over

it,--for eight days and more?



In this way, and in such ways, however, has the Feast of Pikes danced

itself off; gallant Federates wending homewards, towards every point of the

compass, with feverish nerves, heart and head much heated; some of them,

indeed, as Dampmartin's elderly respectable friend, from Strasbourg, quite

'burnt out with liquors,' and flickering towards extinction.  (Dampmartin,

Evenemens, i. 144-184.)  The Feast of Pikes has danced itself off, and

become defunct, and the ghost of a Feast;--nothing of it now remaining but

this vision in men's memory; and the place that knew it (for the slope of

that Champ-de-Mars is crumbled to half the original height (Dulaure,

Histoire de Paris, viii. 25).) now knowing it no more.  Undoubtedly one of

the memorablest National Hightides.  Never or hardly ever, as we said, was

Oath sworn with such heart-effusion, emphasis and expenditure of joyance;

and then it was broken irremediably within year and day.  Ah, why?  When

the swearing of it was so heavenly-joyful, bosom clasped to bosom, and

Five-and-twenty million hearts all burning together:  O ye inexorable

Destinies, why?--Partly because it was sworn with such over-joyance; but

chiefly, indeed, for an older reason:  that Sin had come into the world and

Misery by Sin!  These Five-and-twenty millions, if we will consider it,

have now henceforth, with that Phrygian Cap of theirs, no force over them,

to bind and guide; neither in them, more than heretofore, is guiding force,

or rule of just living:  how then, while they all go rushing at such a

pace, on unknown ways, with no bridle, towards no aim, can hurlyburly

unutterable fail?  For verily not Federation-rosepink is the colour of this

Earth and her work:  not by outbursts of noble-sentiment, but with far

other ammunition, shall a man front the world.



But how wise, in all cases, to 'husband your fire;' to keep it deep down,

rather, as genial radical-heat!  Explosions, the forciblest, and never so

well directed, are questionable; far oftenest futile, always frightfully

wasteful:  but think of a man, of a Nation of men, spending its whole stock

of fire in one artificial Firework!  So have we seen fond weddings (for

individuals, like Nations, have their Hightides) celebrated with an

outburst of triumph and deray, at which the elderly shook their heads. 

Better had a serious cheerfulness been; for the enterprise was great.  Fond

pair! the more triumphant ye feel, and victorious over terrestrial evil,

which seems all abolished, the wider-eyed will your disappointment be to

find terrestrial evil still extant.  "And why extant?" will each of you

cry:  "Because my false mate has played the traitor:  evil was abolished; I

meant faithfully, and did, or would have done."  Whereby the oversweet moon

of honey changes itself into long years of vinegar; perhaps divulsive

vinegar, like Hannibal's.



Shall we say then, the French Nation has led Royalty, or wooed and teased

poor Royalty to lead her, to the hymeneal Fatherland's Altar, in such

oversweet manner; and has, most thoughtlessly, to celebrate the nuptials

with due shine and demonstration,--burnt her bed?
