








BOOK 2.III.



THE TUILERIES





Chapter 2.3.I.



Epimenides.



How true that there is nothing dead in this Universe; that what we call

dead is only changed, its forces working in inverse order!  'The leaf that

lies rotting in moist winds,' says one, 'has still force; else how could it

rot?'  Our whole Universe is but an infinite Complex of Forces;

thousandfold, from Gravitation up to Thought and Will; man's Freedom

environed with Necessity of Nature:  in all which nothing at any moment

slumbers, but all is for ever awake and busy.  The thing that lies isolated

inactive thou shalt nowhere discover; seek every where from the granite

mountain, slow-mouldering since Creation, to the passing cloud-vapour, to

the living man; to the action, to the spoken word of man.  The word that is

spoken, as we know, flies-irrevocable:  not less, but more, the action that

is done.  'The gods themselves,' sings Pindar, 'cannot annihilate the

action that is done.'  No:  this, once done, is done always; cast forth

into endless Time; and, long conspicuous or soon hidden, must verily work

and grow for ever there, an indestructible new element in the Infinite of

Things.  Or, indeed, what is this Infinite of Things itself, which men name

Universe, but an action, a sum-total of Actions and Activities?  The living

ready-made sum-total of these three,--which Calculation cannot add, cannot

bring on its tablets; yet the sum, we say, is written visible:  All that

has been done, All that is doing, All that will be done!  Understand it

well, the Thing thou beholdest, that Thing is an Action, the product and

expression of exerted Force:  the All of Things is an infinite conjugation

of the verb To do.  Shoreless Fountain-Ocean of Force, of power to do;

wherein Force rolls and circles, billowing, many-streamed, harmonious; wide

as Immensity, deep as Eternity; beautiful and terrible, not to be

comprehended:  this is what man names Existence and Universe; this

thousand-tinted Flame-image, at once veil and revelation, reflex such as

he, in his poor brain and heart, can paint, of One Unnameable dwelling in

inaccessible light!  From beyond the Star-galaxies, from before the

Beginning of Days, it billows and rolls,--round thee, nay thyself art of

it, in this point of Space where thou now standest, in this moment which

thy clock measures.



Or apart from all Transcendentalism, is it not a plain truth of sense,

which the duller mind can even consider as a truism, that human things

wholly are in continual movement, and action and reaction; working

continually forward, phasis after phasis, by unalterable laws, towards

prescribed issues?  How often must we say, and yet not rightly lay to

heart:  The seed that is sown, it will spring!  Given the summer's

blossoming, then there is also given the autumnal withering:  so is it

ordered not with seedfields only, but with transactions, arrangements,

philosophies, societies, French Revolutions, whatsoever man works with in

this lower world.  The Beginning holds in it the End, and all that leads

thereto; as the acorn does the oak and its fortunes.  Solemn enough, did we

think of it,--which unhappily and also happily we do not very much!  Thou

there canst begin; the Beginning is for thee, and there:  but where, and of

what sort, and for whom will the End be?  All grows, and seeks and endures

its destinies:  consider likewise how much grows, as the trees do, whether

we think of it or not.  So that when your Epimenides, your somnolent Peter

Klaus, since named Rip van Winkle, awakens again, he finds it a changed

world.  In that seven-years' sleep of his, so much has changed!  All that

is without us will change while we think not of it; much even that is

within us.  The truth that was yesterday a restless Problem, has to-day

grown a Belief burning to be uttered:  on the morrow, contradiction has

exasperated it into mad Fanaticism; obstruction has dulled it into sick

Inertness; it is sinking towards silence, of satisfaction or of

resignation.  To-day is not Yesterday, for man or for thing.  Yesterday

there was the oath of Love; today has come the curse of Hate.  Not

willingly:  ah, no; but it could not help coming.  The golden radiance of

youth, would it willingly have tarnished itself into the dimness of old

age?--Fearful:  how we stand enveloped, deep-sunk, in that Mystery of TIME;

and are Sons of Time; fashioned and woven out of Time; and on us, and on

all that we have, or see, or do, is written:  Rest not, Continue not,

Forward to thy doom!



But in seasons of Revolution, which indeed distinguish themselves from

common seasons by their velocity mainly, your miraculous Seven-sleeper

might, with miracle enough, wake sooner:  not by the century, or seven

years, need he sleep; often not by the seven months.  Fancy, for example,

some new Peter Klaus, sated with the jubilee of that Federation day, had

lain down, say directly after the Blessing of Talleyrand; and, reckoning it

all safe now, had fallen composedly asleep under the timber-work of the

Fatherland's Altar; to sleep there, not twenty-one years, but as it were

year and day.  The cannonading of Nanci, so far off, does not disturb him;

nor does the black mortcloth, close at hand, nor the requiems chanted, and

minute guns, incense-pans and concourse right over his head:  none of

these; but Peter sleeps through them all.  Through one circling year, as we

say; from July 14th of 1790, till July the 17th of 1791:  but on that

latter day, no Klaus, nor most leaden Epimenides, only the Dead could

continue sleeping; and so our miraculous Peter Klaus awakens.  With what

eyes, O Peter!  Earth and sky have still their joyous July look, and the

Champ-de-Mars is multitudinous with men:  but the jubilee-huzzahing has

become Bedlam-shrieking, of terror and revenge; not blessing of Talleyrand,

or any blessing, but cursing, imprecation and shrill wail; our cannon-

salvoes are turned to sharp shot; for swinging of incense-pans and Eighty-

three Departmental Banners, we have waving of the one sanguinous Drapeau-

Rouge.--Thou foolish Klaus!  The one lay in the other, the one was the

other minus Time; even as Hannibal's rock-rending vinegar lay in the sweet

new wine.  That sweet Federation was of last year; this sour Divulsion is

the self-same substance, only older by the appointed days.



No miraculous Klaus or Epimenides sleeps in these times:  and yet, may not

many a man, if of due opacity and levity, act the same miracle in a natural

way; we mean, with his eyes open?  Eyes has he, but he sees not, except

what is under his nose.  With a sparkling briskness of glance, as if he not

only saw but saw through, such a one goes whisking, assiduous, in his

circle of officialities; not dreaming but that it is the whole world: as,

indeed, where your vision terminates, does not inanity begin there, and the

world's end clearly declares itself--to you?  Whereby our brisk sparkling

assiduous official person (call him, for instance, Lafayette), suddenly

startled, after year and day, by huge grape-shot tumult, stares not less

astonished at it than Peter Klaus would have done.  Such natural-miracle

Lafayette can perform; and indeed not he only but most other officials,

non-officials, and generally the whole French People can perform it; and do

bounce up, ever and anon, like amazed Seven-sleepers awakening; awakening

amazed at the noise they themselves make.  So strangely is Freedom, as we

say, environed in Necessity; such a singular Somnambulism, of Conscious and

Unconscious, of Voluntary and Involuntary, is this life of man.  If any

where in the world there was astonishment that the Federation Oath went

into grape-shot, surely of all persons the French, first swearers and then

shooters, felt astonished the most.



Alas, offences must come.  The sublime Feast of Pikes, with its effulgence

of brotherly love, unknown since the Age of Gold, has changed nothing. 

That prurient heat in Twenty-five millions of hearts is not cooled thereby;

but is still hot, nay hotter.  Lift off the pressure of command from so

many millions; all pressure or binding rule, except such melodramatic

Federation Oath as they have bound themselves with!  For 'Thou shalt' was

from of old the condition of man's being, and his weal and blessedness was

in obeying that.  Wo for him when, were it on hest of the clearest

necessity, rebellion, disloyal isolation, and mere 'I will', becomes his

rule!  But the Gospel of Jean-Jacques has come, and the first Sacrament of

it has been celebrated:  all things, as we say, are got into hot and hotter

prurience; and must go on pruriently fermenting, in continual change noted

or unnoted.



'Worn out with disgusts,' Captain after Captain, in Royalist moustachioes,

mounts his warhorse, or his Rozinante war-garron, and rides minatory across

the Rhine; till all have ridden.  Neither does civic Emigration cease: 

Seigneur after Seigneur must, in like manner, ride or roll; impelled to it,

and even compelled.  For the very Peasants despise him in that he dare not

join his order and fight.  (Dampmartin, passim.)  Can he bear to have a

Distaff, a Quenouille sent to him; say in copper-plate shadow, by post; or

fixed up in wooden reality over his gate-lintel:  as if he were no Hercules

but an Omphale?  Such scutcheon they forward to him diligently from behind

the Rhine; till he too bestir himself and march, and in sour humour,

another Lord of Land is gone, not taking the Land with him.  Nay, what of

Captains and emigrating Seigneurs?  There is not an angry word on any of

those Twenty-five million French tongues, and indeed not an angry thought

in their hearts, but is some fraction of the great Battle.  Add many

successions of angry words together, you have the manual brawl; add brawls

together, with the festering sorrows they leave, and they rise to riots and

revolts.  One reverend thing after another ceases to meet reverence:  in

visible material combustion, chateau after chateau mounts up; in spiritual

invisible combustion, one authority after another.  With noise and glare,

or noisily and unnoted, a whole Old System of things is vanishing

piecemeal:  on the morrow thou shalt look and it is not.







Chapter 2.3.II.



The Wakeful.



Sleep who will, cradled in hope and short vision, like Lafayette, 'who

always in the danger done sees the last danger that will threaten him,'--

Time is not sleeping, nor Time's seedfield.



That sacred Herald's-College of a new Dynasty; we mean the Sixty and odd

Billstickers with their leaden badges, are not sleeping.  Daily they, with

pastepot and cross-staff, new clothe the walls of Paris in colours of the

rainbow:  authoritative heraldic, as we say, or indeed almost magical

thaumaturgic; for no Placard-Journal that they paste but will convince some

soul or souls of man.  The Hawkers bawl; and the Balladsingers:  great

Journalism blows and blusters, through all its throats, forth from Paris

towards all corners of France, like an Aeolus' Cave; keeping alive all

manner of fires.



Throats or Journals there are, as men count, (Mercier, iii. 163.) to the

number of some hundred and thirty-three.  Of various calibre; from your

Cheniers, Gorsases, Camilles, down to your Marat, down now to your

incipient Hebert of the Pere Duchesne; these blow, with fierce weight of

argument or quick light banter, for the Rights of man:  Durosoys, Royous,

Peltiers, Sulleaus, equally with mixed tactics, inclusive, singular to say,

of much profane Parody, (See Hist. Parl. vii. 51.) are blowing for Altar

and Throne.  As for Marat the People's-Friend, his voice is as that of the

bullfrog, or bittern by the solitary pools; he, unseen of men, croaks harsh

thunder, and that alone continually,--of indignation, suspicion, incurable

sorrow.  The People are sinking towards ruin, near starvation itself:  'My

dear friends,' cries he, 'your indigence is not the fruit of vices nor of

idleness, you have a right to life, as good as Louis XVI., or the happiest

of the century.  What man can say he has a right to dine, when you have no

bread?'  (Ami du Peuple, No. 306.  See other Excerpts in Hist. Parl. viii.

139-149, 428-433; ix. 85-93, &c.)  The People sinking on the one hand:  on

the other hand, nothing but wretched Sieur Motiers, treasonous Riquetti

Mirabeaus; traitors, or else shadows, and simulacra of Quacks, to be seen

in high places, look where you will!  Men that go mincing, grimacing, with

plausible speech and brushed raiment; hollow within:  Quacks Political;

Quacks scientific, Academical; all with a fellow-feeling for each other,

and kind of Quack public-spirit!  Not great Lavoisier himself, or any of

the Forty can escape this rough tongue; which wants not fanatic sincerity,

nor, strangest of all, a certain rough caustic sense.  And then the 'three

thousand gaming-houses' that are in Paris; cesspools for the scoundrelism

of the world; sinks of iniquity and debauchery,--whereas without good

morals Liberty is impossible!  There, in these Dens of Satan, which one

knows, and perseveringly denounces, do Sieur Motier's mouchards consort and

colleague; battening vampyre-like on a People next-door to starvation.  'O

Peuple!' cries he oftimes, with heart-rending accent.  Treason, delusion,

vampyrism, scoundrelism, from Dan to Beersheba!  The soul of Marat is sick

with the sight:  but what remedy?  To erect 'Eight Hundred gibbets,' in

convenient rows, and proceed to hoisting; 'Riquetti on the first of them!' 

Such is the brief recipe of Marat, Friend of the People.



So blow and bluster the Hundred and thirty-three:  nor, as would seem, are

these sufficient; for there are benighted nooks in France, to which

Newspapers do not reach; and every where is 'such an appetite for news as

was never seen in any country.'  Let an expeditious Dampmartin, on

furlough, set out to return home from Paris, (Dampmartin, i. 184.) he

cannot get along for 'peasants stopping him on the highway; overwhelming

him with questions:'  the Maitre de Poste will not send out the horses till

you have well nigh quarrelled with him, but asks always, What news?  At

Autun, 'in spite of the rigorous frost' for it is now January, 1791,

nothing will serve but you must gather your wayworn limbs, and thoughts,

and 'speak to the multitudes from a window opening into the market-place.' 

It is the shortest method:  This, good Christian people, is verily what an

August Assembly seemed to me to be doing; this and no other is the news;



  'Now my weary lips I close;

  Leave me, leave me to repose.'



The good Dampmartin!--But, on the whole, are not Nations astonishingly true

to their National character; which indeed runs in the blood?  Nineteen

hundred years ago, Julius Caesar, with his quick sure eye, took note how

the Gauls waylaid men. 'It is a habit of theirs,' says he, 'to stop

travellers, were it even by constraint, and inquire whatsoever each of them

may have heard or known about any sort of matter:  in their towns, the

common people beset the passing trader; demanding to hear from what regions

he came, what things he got acquainted with there.  Excited by which

rumours and hearsays they will decide about the weightiest matters; and

necessarily repent next moment that they did it, on such guidance of

uncertain reports, and many a traveller answering with mere fictions to

please them, and get off.'  (De Bello Gallico, iv. 5.)  Nineteen hundred

years; and good Dampmartin, wayworn, in winter frost, probably with scant

light of stars and fish-oil, still perorates from the Inn-window!  This

People is no longer called Gaulish; and it has wholly become braccatus, has

got breeches, and suffered change enough:  certain fierce German Franken

came storming over; and, so to speak, vaulted on the back of it; and always

after, in their grim tenacious way, have ridden it bridled; for German is,

by his very name, Guerre-man, or man that wars and gars.  And so the

People, as we say, is now called French or Frankish:  nevertheless, does

not the old Gaulish and Gaelic Celthood, with its vehemence, effervescent

promptitude, and what good and ill it had, still vindicate itself little

adulterated?--



For the rest, that in such prurient confusion, Clubbism thrives and

spreads, need not be said.  Already the Mother of Patriotism, sitting in

the Jacobins, shines supreme over all; and has paled the poor lunar light

of that Monarchic Club near to final extinction.  She, we say, shines

supreme, girt with sun-light, not yet with infernal lightning; reverenced,

not without fear, by Municipal Authorities; counting her Barnaves, Lameths,

Petions, of a National Assembly; most gladly of all, her Robespierre. 

Cordeliers, again, your Hebert, Vincent, Bibliopolist Momoro, groan audibly

that a tyrannous Mayor and Sieur Motier harrow them with the sharp tribula

of Law, intent apparently to suppress them by tribulation.  How the Jacobin

Mother-Society, as hinted formerly, sheds forth Cordeliers on this hand,

and then Feuillans on that; the Cordeliers on this hand, and then Feuillans

on that; the Cordeliers 'an elixir or double-distillation of Jacobin

Patriotism;' the other a wide-spread weak dilution thereof; how she will

re-absorb the former into her Mother-bosom, and stormfully dissipate the

latter into Nonentity:  how she breeds and brings forth Three Hundred

Daughter-Societies; her rearing of them, her correspondence, her

endeavourings and continual travail:  how, under an old figure, Jacobinism

shoots forth organic filaments to the utmost corners of confused dissolved

France; organising it anew:--this properly is the grand fact of the Time.



To passionate Constitutionalism, still more to Royalism, which see all

their own Clubs fail and die, Clubbism will naturally grow to seem the root

of all evil.  Nevertheless Clubbism is not death, but rather new

organisation, and life out of death:  destructive, indeed, of the remnants

of the Old; but to the New important, indispensable.  That man can co-

operate and hold communion with man, herein lies his miraculous strength. 

In hut or hamlet, Patriotism mourns not now like voice in the desert:  it

can walk to the nearest Town; and there, in the Daughter-Society, make its

ejaculation into an articulate oration, into an action, guided forward by

the Mother of Patriotism herself.  All Clubs of Constitutionalists, and

such like, fail, one after another, as shallow fountains:  Jacobinism alone

has gone down to the deep subterranean lake of waters; and may, unless

filled in, flow there, copious, continual, like an Artesian well.  Till the

Great Deep have drained itself up:  and all be flooded and submerged, and

Noah's Deluge out-deluged!



On the other hand, Claude Fauchet, preparing mankind for a Golden Age now

apparently just at hand, has opened his Cercle Social, with clerks,

corresponding boards, and so forth; in the precincts of the Palais Royal. 

It is Te-Deum Fauchet; the same who preached on Franklin's Death, in that

huge Medicean rotunda of the Halle aux bleds.  He here, this winter, by

Printing-press and melodious Colloquy, spreads bruit of himself to the

utmost City-barriers.  'Ten thousand persons' of respectability attend

there; and listen to this 'Procureur-General de la Verite, Attorney-General

of Truth,' so has he dubbed himself; to his sage Condorcet, or other

eloquent coadjutor.  Eloquent Attorney-General!  He blows out from him,

better or worse, what crude or ripe thing he holds:  not without result to

himself; for it leads to a Bishoprick, though only a Constitutional one. 

Fauchet approves himself a glib-tongued, strong-lunged, whole-hearted human

individual:  much flowing matter there is, and really of the better sort,

about Right, Nature, Benevolence, Progress; which flowing matter, whether

'it is pantheistic,' or is pot-theistic, only the greener mind, in these

days, need read.  Busy Brissot was long ago of purpose to establish

precisely some such regenerative Social Circle:  nay he had tried it, in

'Newman-street Oxford-street,' of the Fog Babylon; and failed,--as some

say, surreptitiously pocketing the cash.  Fauchet, not Brissot, was fated

to be the happy man; whereat, however, generous Brissot will with sincere

heart sing a timber-toned Nunc Domine.  (See Brissot, Patriote-Francais

Newspaper; Fauchet, Bouche-de-Fer, &c. (excerpted in Hist. Parl. viii.,

ix., et seqq.).)  But 'ten thousand persons of respectability:'  what a

bulk have many things in proportion to their magnitude!  This Cercle

Social, for which Brissot chants in sincere timber-tones such Nunc Domine,

what is it?  Unfortunately wind and shadow.  The main reality one finds in

it now, is perhaps this:  that an 'Attorney-General of Truth' did once take

shape of a body, as Son of Adam, on our Earth, though but for months or

moments; and ten thousand persons of respectability attended, ere yet Chaos

and Nox had reabsorbed him.



Hundred and thirty-three Paris Journals; regenerative Social Circle;

oratory, in Mother and Daughter Societies, from the balconies of Inns, by

chimney-nook, at dinner-table,--polemical, ending many times in duel!  Add

ever, like a constant growling accompaniment of bass Discord:  scarcity of

work, scarcity of food.  The winter is hard and cold; ragged Bakers'-

queues, like a black tattered flag-of-distress, wave out ever and anon.  It

is the third of our Hunger-years this new year of a glorious Revolution. 

The rich man when invited to dinner, in such distress-seasons, feels bound

in politeness to carry his own bread in his pocket:  how the poor dine? 

And your glorious Revolution has done it, cries one.  And our glorious

Revolution is subtilety, by black traitors worthy of the Lamp-iron,

perverted to do it, cries another!  Who will paint the huge whirlpool

wherein France, all shivered into wild incoherence, whirls?  The jarring

that went on under every French roof, in every French heart; the diseased

things that were spoken, done, the sum-total whereof is the French

Revolution, tongue of man cannot tell.  Nor the laws of action that work

unseen in the depths of that huge blind Incoherence!  With amazement, not

with measurement, men look on the Immeasurable; not knowing its laws;

seeing, with all different degrees of knowledge, what new phases, and

results of event, its laws bring forth.  France is as a monstrous Galvanic

Mass, wherein all sorts of far stranger than chemical galvanic or electric

forces and substances are at work; electrifying one another, positive and

negative; filling with electricity your Leyden-jars,--Twenty-five millions

in number!  As the jars get full, there will, from time to time, be, on

slight hint, an explosion.







Chapter 2.3.III.



Sword in Hand.



On such wonderful basis, however, has Law, Royalty, Authority, and whatever

yet exists of visible Order, to maintain itself, while it can.  Here, as in

that Commixture of the Four Elements did the Anarch Old, has an august

Assembly spread its pavilion; curtained by the dark infinite of discords;

founded on the wavering bottomless of the Abyss; and keeps continual

hubbub.  Time is around it, and Eternity, and the Inane; and it does what

it can, what is given it to do.



Glancing reluctantly in, once more, we discern little that is edifying:  a

Constitutional Theory of Defective Verbs struggling forward, with

perseverance, amid endless interruptions:  Mirabeau, from his tribune, with

the weight of his name and genius, awing down much Jacobin violence; which

in return vents itself the louder over in its Jacobins Hall, and even reads

him sharp lectures there.  (Camille's Journal (in Hist. Parl. ix. 366-85).) 

This man's path is mysterious, questionable; difficult, and he walks

without companion in it.  Pure Patriotism does not now count him among her

chosen; pure Royalism abhors him:  yet his weight with the world is

overwhelming.  Let him travel on, companionless, unwavering, whither he is

bound,--while it is yet day with him, and the night has not come.



But the chosen band of pure Patriot brothers is small; counting only some

Thirty, seated now on the extreme tip of the Left, separate from the world.

A virtuous Petion; an incorruptible Robespierre, most consistent,

incorruptible of thin acrid men; Triumvirs Barnave, Duport, Lameth, great

in speech, thought, action, each according to his kind; a lean old Goupil

de Prefeln:  on these and what will follow them has pure Patriotism to

depend.



There too, conspicuous among the Thirty, if seldom audible, Philippe

d'Orleans may be seen sitting:  in dim fuliginous bewilderment; having, one

might say, arrived at Chaos!  Gleams there are, at once of a Lieutenancy

and Regency; debates in the Assembly itself, of succession to the Throne

'in case the present Branch should fail;' and Philippe, they say, walked

anxiously, in silence, through the corridors, till such high argument were

done:  but it came all to nothing; Mirabeau, glaring into the man, and

through him, had to ejaculate in strong untranslatable language: Ce j--f--

ne vaut pas la peine qu'on se donne pour lui.  It came all to nothing; and

in the meanwhile Philippe's money, they say, is gone!  Could he refuse a

little cash to the gifted Patriot, in want only of that; he himself in want

of all but that?  Not a pamphlet can be printed without cash; or indeed

written, without food purchasable by cash.  Without cash your hopefullest

Projector cannot stir from the spot:  individual patriotic or other

Projects require cash:  how much more do wide-spread Intrigues, which live

and exist by cash; lying widespread, with dragon-appetite for cash; fit to

swallow Princedoms!  And so Prince Philippe, amid his Sillerys, Lacloses,

and confused Sons of Night, has rolled along:  the centre of the strangest

cloudy coil; out of which has visibly come, as we often say, an Epic

Preternatural Machinery of SUSPICION; and within which there has dwelt and

worked,--what specialties of treason, stratagem, aimed or aimless endeavour

towards mischief, no party living (if it be not the Presiding Genius of it,

Prince of the Power of the Air) has now any chance to know.  Camille's

conjecture is the likeliest:  that poor Philippe did mount up, a little

way, in treasonable speculation, as he mounted formerly in one of the

earliest Balloons; but, frightened at the new position he was getting into,

had soon turned the cock again, and come down.  More fool than he rose!  To

create Preternatural Suspicion, this was his function in the Revolutionary

Epos.  But now if he have lost his cornucopia of ready-money, what else had

he to lose?  In thick darkness, inward and outward, he must welter and

flounder on, in that piteous death-element, the hapless man.  Once, or even

twice, we shall still behold him emerged; struggling out of the thick

death-element:  in vain.  For one moment, it is the last moment, he starts

aloft, or is flung aloft, even into clearness and a kind of memorability,--

to sink then for evermore!



The Cote Droit persists no less; nay with more animation than ever, though

hope has now well nigh fled.  Tough Abbe Maury, when the obscure country

Royalist grasps his hand with transport of thanks, answers, rolling his

indomitable brazen head:  "Helas, Monsieur, all that I do here is as good

as simply nothing."  Gallant Faussigny, visible this one time in History,

advances frantic, into the middle of the Hall, exclaiming:  "There is but

one way of dealing with it, and that is to fall sword in hand on those

gentry there, sabre a la main sur ces gaillards la," (Moniteur, Seance du

21 Aout, 1790.) franticly indicating our chosen Thirty on the extreme tip

of the Left!  Whereupon is clangour and clamour, debate, repentance,--

evaporation.  Things ripen towards downright incompatibility, and what is

called 'scission:'  that fierce theoretic onslaught of Faussigny's was in

August, 1790; next August will not have come, till a famed Two Hundred and

Ninety-two, the chosen of Royalism, make solemn final 'scission' from an

Assembly given up to faction; and depart, shaking the dust off their feet.



Connected with this matter of sword in hand, there is yet another thing to

be noted.  Of duels we have sometimes spoken:  how, in all parts of France,

innumerable duels were fought; and argumentative men and messmates,

flinging down the wine-cup and weapons of reason and repartee, met in the

measured field; to part bleeding; or perhaps not to part, but to fall

mutually skewered through with iron, their wrath and life alike ending,--

and die as fools die.  Long has this lasted, and still lasts.  But now it

would seem as if in an august Assembly itself, traitorous Royalism, in its

despair, had taken to a new course:  that of cutting off Patriotism by

systematic duel!  Bully-swordsmen, 'Spadassins' of that party, go

swaggering; or indeed they can be had for a trifle of money.  'Twelve

Spadassins' were seen, by the yellow eye of Journalism, 'arriving recently

out of Switzerland;' also 'a considerable number of Assassins, nombre

considerable d'assassins, exercising in fencing-schools and at pistol-

targets.'  Any Patriot Deputy of mark can be called out; let him escape one

time, or ten times, a time there necessarily is when he must fall, and

France mourn.  How many cartels has Mirabeau had; especially while he was

the People's champion!  Cartels by the hundred:  which he, since the

Constitution must be made first, and his time is precious, answers now

always with a kind of stereotype formula:  "Monsieur, you are put upon my

List; but I warn you that it is long, and I grant no preferences."



Then, in Autumn, had we not the Duel of Cazales and Barnave; the two chief

masters of tongue-shot meeting now to exchange pistol-shot?  For Cazales,

chief of the Royalists, whom we call 'Blacks or Noirs,' said, in a moment

of passion, "the Patriots were sheer Brigands," nay in so speaking, he

darted or seemed to dart, a fire-glance specially at Barnave; who thereupon

could not but reply by fire-glances,--by adjournment to the Bois-de-

Boulogne.  Barnave's second shot took effect:  on Cazales's hat.  The

'front nook' of a triangular Felt, such as mortals then wore, deadened the

ball; and saved that fine brow from more than temporary injury.  But how

easily might the lot have fallen the other way, and Barnave's hat not been

so good!  Patriotism raises its loud denunciation of Duelling in general;

petitions an august Assembly to stop such Feudal barbarism by law. 

Barbarism and solecism:  for will it convince or convict any man to blow

half an ounce of lead through the head of him?  Surely not.--Barnave was

received at the Jacobins with embraces, yet with rebukes.



Mindful of which, and also that his repetition in America was that of

headlong foolhardiness rather, and want of brain not of heart, Charles

Lameth does, on the eleventh day of November, with little emotion, decline

attending some hot young Gentleman from Artois, come expressly to challenge

him:  nay indeed he first coldly engages to attend; then coldly permits two

Friends to attend instead of him, and shame the young Gentleman out of it,

which they successfully do.  A cold procedure; satisfactory to the two

Friends, to Lameth and the hot young Gentleman; whereby, one might have

fancied, the whole matter was cooled down.



Not so, however:  Lameth, proceeding to his senatorial duties, in the

decline of the day, is met in those Assembly corridors by nothing but

Royalist brocards; sniffs, huffs, and open insults.  Human patience has its

limits:  "Monsieur," said Lameth, breaking silence to one Lautrec, a man

with hunchback, or natural deformity, but sharp of tongue, and a Black of

the deepest tint, "Monsieur, if you were a man to be fought with!"--"I am

one," cries the young Duke de Castries.  Fast as fire-flash Lameth replies,

"Tout a l'heure, On the instant, then!"  And so, as the shades of dusk

thicken in that Bois-de-Boulogne, we behold two men with lion-look, with

alert attitude, side foremost, right foot advanced; flourishing and

thrusting, stoccado and passado, in tierce and quart; intent to skewer one

another.  See, with most skewering purpose, headlong Lameth, with his whole

weight, makes a furious lunge; but deft Castries whisks aside:  Lameth

skewers only the air,--and slits deep and far, on Castries' sword's-point,

his own extended left arm!  Whereupon with bleeding, pallor, surgeon's-

lint, and formalities, the Duel is considered satisfactorily done.



But will there be no end, then?  Beloved Lameth lies deep-slit, not out of

danger.  Black traitorous Aristocrats kill the People's defenders, cut up

not with arguments, but with rapier-slits.  And the Twelve Spadassins out

of Switzerland, and the considerable number of Assassins exercising at the

pistol-target?  So meditates and ejaculates hurt Patriotism, with ever-

deepening ever-widening fervour, for the space of six and thirty hours.



The thirty-six hours past, on Saturday the 13th, one beholds a new

spectacle:  The Rue de Varennes, and neighbouring Boulevard des Invalides,

covered with a mixed flowing multitude:  the Castries Hotel gone

distracted, devil-ridden, belching from every window, 'beds with clothes

and curtains,' plate of silver and gold with filigree, mirrors, pictures,

images, commodes, chiffoniers, and endless crockery and jingle:  amid

steady popular cheers, absolutely without theft; for there goes a cry, "He

shall be hanged that steals a nail!"  It is a Plebiscitum, or informal

iconoclastic Decree of the Common People, in the course of being executed!-

-The Municipality sit tremulous; deliberating whether they will hang out

the Drapeau Rouge and Martial Law:  National Assembly, part in loud wail,

part in hardly suppressed applause:  Abbe Maury unable to decide whether

the iconoclastic Plebs amount to forty thousand or to two hundred thousand.



Deputations, swift messengers, for it is at a distance over the River, come

and go.  Lafayette and National Guardes, though without Drapeau Rouge, get

under way; apparently in no hot haste.  Nay, arrived on the scene,

Lafayette salutes with doffed hat, before ordering to fix bayonets.  What

avails it?  The Plebeian "Court of Cassation,' as Camille might punningly

name it, has done its work; steps forth, with unbuttoned vest, with pockets

turned inside out:  sack, and just ravage, not plunder!  With inexhaustible

patience, the Hero of two Worlds remonstrates; persuasively, with a kind of

sweet constraint, though also with fixed bayonets, dissipates, hushes down: 

on the morrow it is once more all as usual.



Considering which things, however, Duke Castries may justly 'write to the

President,' justly transport himself across the Marches; to raise a corps,

or do what else is in him.  Royalism totally abandons that Bobadilian

method of contest, and the Twelve Spadassins return to Switzerland,--or

even to Dreamland through the Horn-gate, whichsoever their home is.  Nay

Editor Prudhomme is authorised to publish a curious thing:  'We are

authorised to publish,' says he, dull-blustering Publisher, that M. Boyer,

champion of good Patriots, is at the head of Fifty Spadassinicides or

Bully-killers.  His address is:  Passage du Bois-de-Boulonge, Faubourg St.

Denis.'  (Revolutions de Paris (in Hist. Parl. viii. 440).)  One of the

strangest Institutes, this of Champion Boyer and the Bully-killers!  Whose

services, however, are not wanted; Royalism having abandoned the rapier-

method as plainly impracticable.







Chapter 2.3.IV.



To fly or not to fly.



The truth is Royalism sees itself verging towards sad extremities; nearer

and nearer daily.  From over the Rhine it comes asserted that the King in

his Tuileries is not free:  this the poor King may contradict, with the

official mouth, but in his heart feels often to be undeniable.  Civil

Constitution of the Clergy; Decree of ejectment against Dissidents from it: 

not even to this latter, though almost his conscience rebels, can he say

'Nay; but, after two months' hesitating, signs this also.  It was on

January 21st,' of this 1790, that he signed it; to the sorrow of his poor

heart yet, on another Twenty-first of January!  Whereby come Dissident

ejected Priests; unconquerable Martyrs according to some, incurable

chicaning Traitors according to others.  And so there has arrived what we

once foreshadowed:  with Religion, or with the Cant and Echo of Religion,

all France is rent asunder in a new rupture of continuity; complicating,

embittering all the older;--to be cured only, by stern surgery, in La

Vendee!



Unhappy Royalty, unhappy Majesty, Hereditary (Representative), Representant

Hereditaire, or however they can name him; of whom much is expected, to

whom little is given!  Blue National Guards encircle that Tuileries; a

Lafayette, thin constitutional Pedant; clear, thin, inflexible, as water,

turned to thin ice; whom no Queen's heart can love.  National Assembly, its

pavilion spread where we know, sits near by, keeping continual hubbub. 

From without nothing but Nanci Revolts, sack of Castries Hotels, riots and

seditions; riots, North and South, at Aix, at Douai, at Befort, Usez,

Perpignan, at Nismes, and that incurable Avignon of the Pope's:  a

continual crackling and sputtering of riots from the whole face of France;-

-testifying how electric it grows.  Add only the hard winter, the famished

strikes of operatives; that continual running-bass of Scarcity, ground-tone

and basis of all other Discords!



The plan of Royalty, so far as it can be said to have any fixed plan, is

still, as ever, that of flying towards the frontiers.  In very truth, the

only plan of the smallest promise for it!  Fly to Bouille; bristle yourself

round with cannon, served by your 'forty-thousand undebauched Germans:' 

summon the National Assembly to follow you, summon what of it is Royalist,

Constitutional, gainable by money; dissolve the rest, by grapeshot if need

be.  Let Jacobinism and Revolt, with one wild wail, fly into Infinite

Space; driven by grapeshot.  Thunder over France with the cannon's mouth;

commanding, not entreating, that this riot cease.  And then to rule

afterwards with utmost possible Constitutionality; doing justice, loving

mercy; being Shepherd of this indigent People, not Shearer merely, and

Shepherd's-similitude!  All this, if ye dare.  If ye dare not, then in

Heaven's name go to sleep:  other handsome alternative seems none.



Nay, it were perhaps possible; with a man to do it.  For if such

inexpressible whirlpool of Babylonish confusions (which our Era is) cannot

be stilled by man, but only by Time and men, a man may moderate its

paroxysms, may balance and sway, and keep himself unswallowed on the top of

it,--as several men and Kings in these days do.  Much is possible for a

man; men will obey a man that kens and cans, and name him reverently their

Ken-ning or King.  Did not Charlemagne rule?  Consider too whether he had

smooth times of it; hanging 'thirty-thousand Saxons over the Weser-Bridge,'

at one dread swoop!  So likewise, who knows but, in this same distracted

fanatic France, the right man may verily exist?  An olive-complexioned

taciturn man; for the present, Lieutenant in the Artillery-service, who

once sat studying Mathematics at Brienne?  The same who walked in the

morning to correct proof-sheets at Dole, and enjoyed a frugal breakfast

with M. Joly?  Such a one is gone, whither also famed General Paoli his

friend is gone, in these very days, to see old scenes in native Corsica,

and what Democratic good can be done there.



Royalty never executes the evasion-plan, yet never abandons it; living in

variable hope; undecisive, till fortune shall decide.  In utmost secresy, a

brisk Correspondence goes on with Bouille; there is also a plot, which

emerges more than once, for carrying the King to Rouen: (See Hist. Parl.

vii. 316; Bertrand-Moleville, &c.)  plot after plot, emerging and

submerging, like 'ignes fatui in foul weather, which lead no whither. 

About 'ten o'clock at night,' the Hereditary Representative, in partie

quarree, with the Queen, with Brother Monsieur, and Madame, sits playing

'wisk,' or whist.  Usher Campan enters mysteriously, with a message he only

half comprehends:  How a certain Compte d'Inisdal waits anxious in the

outer antechamber; National Colonel, Captain of the watch for this night,

is gained over; post-horses ready all the way; party of Noblesse sitting

armed, determined; will His Majesty, before midnight, consent to go? 

Profound silence; Campan waiting with upturned ear.  "Did your Majesty hear

what Campan said?" asks the Queen.  "Yes, I heard," answers Majesty, and

plays on.  "'Twas a pretty couplet, that of Campan's," hints Monsieur, who

at times showed a pleasant wit: Majesty, still unresponsive, plays wisk. 

"After all, one must say something to Campan," remarks the Queen.  "Tell M.

d'Inisdal," said the King, and the Queen puts an emphasis on it, "that the

King cannot consent to be forced away."--"I see!" said d'Inisdal, whisking

round, peaking himself into flame of irritancy:  "we have the risk; we are

to have all the blame if it fail," (Campan, ii. 105.)--and vanishes, he and

his plot, as will-o'-wisps do.  The Queen sat till far in the night,

packing jewels:  but it came to nothing; in that peaked frame of irritancy

the Will-o'-wisp had gone out.



Little hope there is in all this.  Alas, with whom to fly?  Our loyal

Gardes-du-Corps, ever since the Insurrection of Women, are disbanded; gone

to their homes; gone, many of them, across the Rhine towards Coblentz and

Exiled Princes:  brave Miomandre and brave Tardivet, these faithful Two,

have received, in nocturnal interview with both Majesties, their viaticum

of gold louis, of heartfelt thanks from a Queen's lips, though unluckily

'his Majesty stood, back to fire, not speaking;' (Campan, ii. 109-11.) and

do now dine through the Provinces; recounting hairsbreadth escapes,

insurrectionary horrors.  Great horrors; to be swallowed yet of greater. 

But on the whole what a falling off from the old splendour of Versailles! 

Here in this poor Tuileries, a National Brewer-Colonel, sonorous Santerre,

parades officially behind her Majesty's chair.  Our high dignitaries, all

fled over the Rhine:  nothing now to be gained at Court; but hopes, for

which life itself must be risked!  Obscure busy men frequent the back

stairs; with hearsays, wind projects, un fruitful fanfaronades.  Young

Royalists, at the Theatre de Vaudeville, 'sing couplets;' if that could do

any thing.  Royalists enough, Captains on furlough, burnt-out Seigneurs,

may likewise be met with, 'in the Cafe de Valois, and at Meot the

Restaurateur's.'  There they fan one another into high loyal glow; drink,

in such wine as can be procured, confusion to Sansculottism; shew purchased

dirks, of an improved structure, made to order; and, greatly daring, dine.

(Dampmartin, ii. 129.)  It is in these places, in these months, that the

epithet Sansculotte first gets applied to indigent Patriotism; in the last

age we had Gilbert Sansculotte, the indigent Poet.  (Mercier, Nouveau

Paris, iii. 204.)  Destitute-of-Breeches:  a mournful Destitution; which

however, if Twenty millions share it, may become more effective than most

Possessions!



Meanwhile, amid this vague dim whirl of fanfaronades, wind-projects,

poniards made to order, there does disclose itself one punctum-saliens of

life and feasibility:  the finger of Mirabeau!  Mirabeau and the Queen of

France have met; have parted with mutual trust!  It is strange; secret as

the Mysteries; but it is indubitable.  Mirabeau took horse, one evening;

and rode westward, unattended,--to see Friend Claviere in that country

house of his?  Before getting to Claviere's, the much-musing horseman

struck aside to a back gate of the Garden of Saint-Cloud:  some Duke

d'Aremberg, or the like, was there to introduce him; the Queen was not far: 

on a 'round knoll, rond point, the highest of the Garden of Saint-Cloud,'

he beheld the Queen's face; spake with her, alone, under the void canopy of

Night.  What an interview; fateful secret for us, after all searching; like

the colloquies of the gods!  (Campan, ii. c. 17.)  She called him 'a

Mirabeau:'  elsewhere we read that she 'was charmed with him,' the wild

submitted Titan; as indeed it is among the honourable tokens of this high

ill-fated heart that no mind of any endowment, no Mirabeau, nay no Barnave,

no Dumouriez, ever came face to face with her but, in spite of all

prepossessions, she was forced to recognise it, to draw nigh to it, with

trust.  High imperial heart; with the instinctive attraction towards all

that had any height!  "You know not the Queen," said Mirabeau once in

confidence; "her force of mind is prodigious; she is a man for courage." 

(Dumont, p. 211.)--And so, under the void Night, on the crown of that

knoll, she has spoken with a Mirabeau:  he has kissed loyally the queenly

hand, and said with enthusiasm:  "Madame, the Monarchy is saved!"--

Possible?  The Foreign Powers, mysteriously sounded, gave favourable

guarded response; (Correspondence Secrete (in Hist. Parl. viii. 169-73).) 

Bouille is at Metz, and could find forty-thousand sure Germans.  With a

Mirabeau for head, and a Bouille for hand, something verily is possible,--

if Fate intervene not.



But figure under what thousandfold wrappages, and cloaks of darkness,

Royalty, meditating these things, must involve itself.  There are men with

'Tickets of Entrance;' there are chivalrous consultings, mysterious

plottings.  Consider also whether, involve as it like, plotting Royalty can

escape the glance of Patriotism; lynx-eyes, by the ten thousand fixed on

it, which see in the dark!  Patriotism knows much:  know the dirks made to

order, and can specify the shops; knows Sieur Motier's legions of

mouchards; the Tickets of Entree, and men in black; and how plan of evasion

succeeds plan,--or may be supposed to succeed it.  Then conceive the

couplets chanted at the Theatre de Vaudeville; or worse, the whispers,

significant nods of traitors in moustaches.  Conceive, on the other hand,

the loud cry of alarm that came through the Hundred-and-Thirty Journals;

the Dionysius'-Ear of each of the Forty-eight Sections, wakeful night and

day.



Patriotism is patient of much; not patient of all.  The Cafe de Procope has

sent, visibly along the streets, a Deputation of Patriots, 'to expostulate

with bad Editors,' by trustful word of mouth:  singular to see and hear. 

The bad Editors promise to amend, but do not.  Deputations for change of

Ministry were many; Mayor Bailly joining even with Cordelier Danton in

such:  and they have prevailed.  With what profit?  Of Quacks, willing or

constrained to be Quacks, the race is everlasting:  Ministers Duportail and

Dutertre will have to manage much as Ministers Latour-du-Pin and Cice did. 

So welters the confused world.



But now, beaten on for ever by such inextricable contradictory influences

and evidences, what is the indigent French Patriot, in these unhappy days,

to believe, and walk by?  Uncertainty all; except that he is wretched,

indigent; that a glorious Revolution, the wonder of the Universe, has

hitherto brought neither Bread nor Peace; being marred by traitors,

difficult to discover.  Traitors that dwell in the dark, invisible there;--

or seen for moments, in pallid dubious twilight, stealthily vanishing

thither!  Preternatural Suspicion once more rules the minds of men.



'Nobody here,' writes Carra of the Annales Patriotiques, so early as the

first of February, 'can entertain a doubt of the constant obstinate project

these people have on foot to get the King away; or of the perpetual

succession of manoeuvres they employ for that.'  Nobody:  the watchful

Mother of Patriotism deputed two Members to her Daughter at Versailles, to

examine how the matter looked there.  Well, and there?  Patriotic Carra

continues:  'The Report of these two deputies we all heard with our own

ears last Saturday.  They went with others of Versailles, to inspect the

King's Stables, also the stables of the whilom Gardes du Corps; they found

there from seven to eight hundred horses standing always saddled and

bridled, ready for the road at a moment's notice.  The same deputies,

moreover, saw with their own two eyes several Royal Carriages, which men

were even then busy loading with large well-stuffed luggage-bags,' leather

cows, as we call them, 'vaches de cuir; the Royal Arms on the panels almost

entirely effaced.'  Momentous enough!  Also, 'on the same day the whole

Marechaussee, or Cavalry Police, did assemble with arms, horses and

baggage,'--and disperse again.  They want the King over the marches, that

so Emperor Leopold and the German Princes, whose troops are ready, may have

a pretext for beginning:  'this,' adds Carra, 'is the word of the riddle: 

this is the reason why our fugitive Aristocrats are now making levies of

men on the frontiers; expecting that, one of these mornings, the Executive

Chief Magistrate will be brought over to them, and the civil war commence.' 

(Carra's Newspaper, 1st Feb. 1791 (in Hist. Parl. ix. 39).)



If indeed the Executive Chief Magistrate, bagged, say in one of these

leather cows, were once brought safe over to them!  But the strangest thing

of all is that Patriotism, whether barking at a venture, or guided by some

instinct of preternatural sagacity, is actually barking aright this time;

at something, not at nothing.  Bouille's Secret Correspondence, since made

public, testifies as much.



Nay, it is undeniable, visible to all, that Mesdames the King's Aunts are

taking steps for departure:  asking passports of the Ministry, safe-

conducts of the Municipality; which Marat warns all men to beware of.  They

will carry gold with them, 'these old Beguines;' nay they will carry the

little Dauphin, 'having nursed a changeling, for some time, to leave in his

stead!'  Besides, they are as some light substance flung up, to shew how

the wind sits; a kind of proof-kite you fly off to ascertain whether the

grand paper-kite, Evasion of the King, may mount!



In these alarming circumstances, Patriotism is not wanting to itself. 

Municipality deputes to the King; Sections depute to the Municipality; a

National Assembly will soon stir.  Meanwhile, behold, on the 19th of

February 1791, Mesdames, quitting Bellevue and Versailles with all privacy,

are off!  Towards Rome, seemingly; or one knows not whither.  They are not

without King's passports, countersigned; and what is more to the purpose, a

serviceable Escort.  The Patriotic Mayor or Mayorlet of the Village of

Moret tried to detain them; but brisk Louis de Narbonne, of the Escort,

dashed off at hand-gallop; returned soon with thirty dragoons, and

victoriously cut them out.  And so the poor ancient women go their way; to

the terror of France and Paris, whose nervous excitability is become

extreme.  Who else would hinder poor Loque and Graille, now grown so old,

and fallen into such unexpected circumstances, when gossip itself turning

only on terrors and horrors is no longer pleasant to the mind, and you

cannot get so much as an orthodox confessor in peace,--from going what way

soever the hope of any solacement might lead them?



They go, poor ancient dames,--whom the heart were hard that does not pity: 

they go; with palpitations, with unmelodious suppressed screechings; all

France, screeching and cackling, in loud unsuppressed terror, behind and on

both hands of them:  such mutual suspicion is among men.  At Arnay le Duc,

above halfway to the frontiers, a Patriotic Municipality and Populace again

takes courage to stop them:  Louis Narbonne must now back to Paris, must

consult the National Assembly.  National Assembly answers, not without an

effort, that Mesdames may go.  Whereupon Paris rises worse than ever,

screeching half-distracted.  Tuileries and precincts are filled with women

and men, while the National Assembly debates this question of questions;

Lafayette is needed at night for dispersing them, and the streets are to be

illuminated.  Commandant Berthier, a Berthier before whom are great things

unknown, lies for the present under blockade at Bellevue in Versailles.  By

no tactics could he get Mesdames' Luggage stirred from the Courts there;

frantic Versaillese women came screaming about him; his very troops cut the

waggon-traces; he retired to the interior, waiting better times.  (Campan,

ii. 132.)



Nay, in these same hours, while Mesdames hardly cut out from Moret by the

sabre's edge, are driving rapidly, to foreign parts, and not yet stopped at

Arnay, their august nephew poor Monsieur, at Paris has dived deep into his

cellars of the Luxembourg for shelter; and according to Montgaillard can

hardly be persuaded up again.  Screeching multitudes environ that

Luxembourg of his:  drawn thither by report of his departure:  but, at

sight and sound of Monsieur, they become crowing multitudes; and escort

Madame and him to the Tuileries with vivats.  (Montgaillard, ii. 282; Deux

Amis, vi. c. 1.)  It is a state of nervous excitability such as few Nations

know.







Chapter 2.3.V.



The Day of Poniards.



Or, again, what means this visible reparation of the Castle of Vincennes? 

Other Jails being all crowded with prisoners, new space is wanted here: 

that is the Municipal account.  For in such changing of Judicatures,

Parlements being abolished, and New Courts but just set up, prisoners have

accumulated.  Not to say that in these times of discord and club-law,

offences and committals are, at any rate, more numerous.  Which Municipal

account, does it not sufficiently explain the phenomenon?  Surely, to

repair the Castle of Vincennes was of all enterprises that an enlightened

Municipality could undertake, the most innocent.



Not so however does neighbouring Saint-Antoine look on it:  Saint-Antoine

to whom these peaked turrets and grim donjons, all-too near her own dark

dwelling, are of themselves an offence.  Was not Vincennes a kind of minor

Bastille?  Great Diderot and Philosophes have lain in durance here; great

Mirabeau, in disastrous eclipse, for forty-two months.  And now when the

old Bastille has become a dancing-ground (had any one the mirth to dance),

and its stones are getting built into the Pont Louis-Seize, does this

minor, comparative insignificance of a Bastille flank itself with fresh-

hewn mullions, spread out tyrannous wings; menacing Patriotism?  New space

for prisoners: and what prisoners?  A d'Orleans, with the chief Patriots on

the tip of the Left?  It is said, there runs 'a subterranean passage' all

the way from the Tuileries hither.  Who knows?  Paris, mined with quarries

and catacombs, does hang wondrous over the abyss; Paris was once to be

blown up,--though the powder, when we went to look, had got withdrawn.  A

Tuileries, sold to Austria and Coblentz, should have no subterranean

passage.  Out of which might not Coblentz or Austria issue, some morning;

and, with cannon of long range, 'foudroyer,' bethunder a patriotic Saint-

Antoine into smoulder and ruin!



So meditates the benighted soul of Saint-Antoine, as it sees the aproned

workmen, in early spring, busy on these towers.  An official-speaking

Municipality, a Sieur Motier with his legions of mouchards, deserve no

trust at all.  Were Patriot Santerre, indeed, Commander!  But the sonorous

Brewer commands only our own Battalion:  of such secrets he can explain

nothing, knows nothing, perhaps suspects much.  And so the work goes on;

and afflicted benighted Saint-Antoine hears rattle of hammers, sees stones

suspended in air.  (Montgaillard, ii. 285.)



Saint-Antoine prostrated the first great Bastille:  will it falter over

this comparative insignificance of a Bastille?  Friends, what if we took

pikes, firelocks, sledgehammers; and helped ourselves!--Speedier is no

remedy; nor so certain.  On the 28th day of February, Saint-Antoine turns

out, as it has now often done; and, apparently with little superfluous

tumult, moves eastward to that eye-sorrow of Vincennes.  With grave voice

of authority, no need of bullying and shouting, Saint-Antoine signifies to

parties concerned there that its purpose is, To have this suspicious

Stronghold razed level with the general soil of the country.  Remonstrance

may be proffered, with zeal:  but it avails not.  The outer gate goes up,

drawbridges tumble; iron window-stanchions, smitten out with sledgehammers,

become iron-crowbars:  it rains furniture, stone-masses, slates:  with

chaotic clatter and rattle, Demolition clatters down.  And now hasty

expresses rush through the agitated streets, to warn Lafayette, and the

Municipal and Departmental Authorities; Rumour warns a National Assembly, a

Royal Tuileries, and all men who care to hear it:  That Saint-Antoine is

up; that Vincennes, and probably the last remaining Institution of the

Country, is coming down.  (Deux Amis, vi. 11-15; Newspapers (in Hist. Parl.

ix. 111-17).)



Quick, then!  Let Lafayette roll his drums and fly eastward; for to all

Constitutional Patriots this is again bad news.  And you, ye Friends of

Royalty, snatch your poniards of improved structure, made to order; your

sword-canes, secret arms, and tickets of entry; quick, by backstairs

passages, rally round the Son of Sixty Kings.  An effervescence probably

got up by d'Orleans and Company, for the overthrow of Throne and Altar:  it

is said her Majesty shall be put in prison, put out of the way; what then

will his Majesty be?  Clay for the Sansculottic Potter!  Or were it

impossible to fly this day; a brave Noblesse suddenly all rallying?  Peril

threatens, hope invites:  Dukes de Villequier, de Duras, Gentlemen of the

Chamber give tickets and admittance; a brave Noblesse is suddenly all

rallying.  Now were the time to 'fall sword in hand on those gentry there,'

could it be done with effect.



The Hero of two Worlds is on his white charger; blue Nationals, horse and

foot, hurrying eastward:  Santerre, with the Saint-Antoine Battalion, is

already there,--apparently indisposed to act.  Heavy-laden Hero of two

Worlds, what tasks are these!  The jeerings, provocative gambollings of

that Patriot Suburb, which is all out on the streets now, are hard to

endure; unwashed Patriots jeering in sulky sport; one unwashed Patriot

'seizing the General by the boot' to unhorse him.  Santerre, ordered to

fire, makes answer obliquely, "These are the men that took the Bastille;"

and not a trigger stirs!  Neither dare the Vincennes Magistracy give

warrant of arrestment, or the smallest countenance:  wherefore the General

'will take it on himself' to arrest.  By promptitude, by cheerful

adroitness, patience and brisk valour without limits, the riot may be again

bloodlessly appeased.



Meanwhile, the rest of Paris, with more or less unconcern, may mind the

rest of its business:  for what is this but an effervescence, of which

there are now so many?  The National Assembly, in one of its stormiest

moods, is debating a Law against Emigration; Mirabeau declaring aloud, "I

swear beforehand that I will not obey it."  Mirabeau is often at the

Tribune this day; with endless impediments from without; with the old

unabated energy from within.  What can murmurs and clamours, from Left or

from Right, do to this man; like Teneriffe or Atlas unremoved?  With clear

thought; with strong bass-voice, though at first low, uncertain, he claims

audience, sways the storm of men:  anon the sound of him waxes, softens; he

rises into far-sounding melody of strength, triumphant, which subdues all

hearts; his rude-seamed face, desolate fire-scathed, becomes fire-lit, and

radiates:  once again men feel, in these beggarly ages, what is the potency

and omnipotency of man's word on the souls of men.  "I will triumph or be

torn in fragments," he was once heard to say.  "Silence," he cries now, in

strong word of command, in imperial consciousness of strength, "Silence,

the thirty voices, Silence aux trente voix!"--and Robespierre and the

Thirty Voices die into mutterings; and the Law is once more as Mirabeau

would have it.



How different, at the same instant, is General Lafayette's street

eloquence; wrangling with sonorous Brewers, with an ungrammatical Saint-

Antoine!  Most different, again, from both is the Cafe-de-Valois eloquence,

and suppressed fanfaronade, of this multitude of men with Tickets of Entry;

who are now inundating the Corridors of the Tuileries.  Such things can go

on simultaneously in one City.  How much more in one Country; in one Planet

with its discrepancies, every Day a mere crackling infinitude of

discrepancies--which nevertheless do yield some coherent net-product,

though an infinitesimally small one!



Be this as it may.  Lafayette has saved Vincennes; and is marching

homewards with some dozen of arrested demolitionists.  Royalty is not yet

saved;--nor indeed specially endangered.  But to the King's Constitutional

Guard, to these old Gardes Francaises, or Centre Grenadiers, as it chanced

to be, this affluence of men with Tickets of Entry is becoming more and

more unintelligible.  Is his Majesty verily for Metz, then; to be carried

off by these men, on the spur of the instant?  That revolt of Saint-Antoine

got up by traitor Royalists for a stalking-horse?  Keep a sharp outlook, ye

Centre Grenadiers on duty here:  good never came from the 'men in black.' 

Nay they have cloaks, redingotes; some of them leather-breeches, boots,--as

if for instant riding!  Or what is this that sticks visible from the

lapelle of Chevalier de Court? (Weber, ii. 286.)  Too like the handle of

some cutting or stabbing instrument!  He glides and goes; and still the

dudgeon sticks from his left lapelle.  "Hold, Monsieur!"--a Centre

Grenadier clutches him; clutches the protrusive dudgeon, whisks it out in

the face of the world:  by Heaven, a very dagger; hunting-knife, or

whatsoever you call it; fit to drink the life of Patriotism!



So fared it with Chevalier de Court, early in the day; not without noise;

not without commentaries.  And now this continually increasing multitude at

nightfall?  Have they daggers too?  Alas, with them too, after angry

parleyings, there has begun a groping and a rummaging; all men in black,

spite of their Tickets of Entry, are clutched by the collar, and groped. 

Scandalous to think of; for always, as the dirk, sword-cane, pistol, or

were it but tailor's bodkin, is found on him, and with loud scorn drawn

forth from him, he, the hapless man in black, is flung all too rapidly down

stairs.  Flung; and ignominiously descends, head foremost; accelerated by

ignominious shovings from sentry after sentry; nay, as is written, by

smitings, twitchings,--spurnings, a posteriori, not to be named. In this

accelerated way, emerges, uncertain which end uppermost, man after man in

black, through all issues, into the Tuileries Garden.  Emerges, alas, into

the arms of an indignant multitude, now gathered and gathering there, in

the hour of dusk, to see what is toward, and whether the Hereditary

Representative is carried off or not.  Hapless men in black; at last

convicted of poniards made to order; convicted 'Chevaliers of the Poniard!' 

Within is as the burning ship; without is as the deep sea.  Within is no

help; his Majesty, looking forth, one moment, from his interior

sanctuaries, coldly bids all visitors 'give up their weapons;' and shuts

the door again.  The weapons given up form a heap:  the convicted

Chevaliers of the poniard keep descending pellmell, with impetuous

velocity; and at the bottom of all staircases, the mixed multitude receives

them, hustles, buffets, chases and disperses them.  (Hist. Parl. ix. 139-

48.)



Such sight meets Lafayette, in the dusk of the evening, as he returns,

successful with difficulty at Vincennes:  Sansculotte Scylla hardly

weathered, here is Aristocrat Charybdis gurgling under his lee!  The

patient Hero of two Worlds almost loses temper.  He accelerates, does not

retard, the flying Chevaliers; delivers, indeed, this or the other hunted

Loyalist of quality, but rates him in bitter words, such as the hour

suggested; such as no saloon could pardon.  Hero ill-bested; hanging, so to

speak, in mid-air; hateful to Rich divinities above; hateful to Indigent

mortals below!  Duke de Villequier, Gentleman of the Chamber, gets such

contumelious rating, in presence of all people there, that he may see good

first to exculpate himself in the Newspapers; then, that not prospering, to

retire over the Frontiers, and begin plotting at Brussels.  (Montgaillard,

ii. 286.)  His Apartment will stand vacant; usefuller, as we may find, than

when it stood occupied.



So fly the Chevaliers of the Poniard; hunted of Patriotic men, shamefully

in the thickening dusk.  A dim miserable business; born of darkness; dying

away there in the thickening dusk and dimness!  In the midst of which,

however, let the reader discern clearly one figure running for its life: 

Crispin-Cataline d'Espremenil,--for the last time, or the last but one.  It

is not yet three years since these same Centre Grenadiers, Gardes

Francaises then, marched him towards the Calypso Isles, in the gray of the

May morning; and he and they have got thus far.  Buffeted, beaten down,

delivered by popular Petion, he might well answer bitterly:  "And I too,

Monsieur, have been carried on the People's shoulders."  (See Mercier, ii.

40, 202.)  A fact which popular Petion, if he like, can meditate.



But happily, one way and another, the speedy night covers up this

ignominious Day of Poniards; and the Chevaliers escape, though maltreated,

with torn coat-skirts and heavy hearts, to their respective dwelling-

houses.  Riot twofold is quelled; and little blood shed, if it be not

insignificant blood from the nose:  Vincennes stands undemolished,

reparable; and the Hereditary Representative has not been stolen, nor the

Queen smuggled into Prison.  A Day long remembered:  commented on with loud

hahas and deep grumblings; with bitter scornfulness of triumph, bitter

rancour of defeat.  Royalism, as usual, imputes it to d'Orleans and the

Anarchists intent on insulting Majesty:  Patriotism, as usual, to

Royalists, and even Constitutionalists, intent on stealing Majesty to Metz: 

we, also as usual, to Preternatural Suspicion, and Phoebus Apollo having

made himself like the Night.



Thus however has the reader seen, in an unexpected arena, on this last day

of February 1791, the Three long-contending elements of French Society,

dashed forth into singular comico-tragical collision; acting and reacting

openly to the eye.  Constitutionalism, at once quelling Sansculottic riot

at Vincennes, and Royalist treachery from the Tuileries, is great, this

day, and prevails.  As for poor Royalism, tossed to and fro in that manner,

its daggers all left in a heap, what can one think of it?  Every dog, the

Adage says, has its day:  has it; has had it; or will have it.  For the

present, the day is Lafayette's and the Constitution's.  Nevertheless

Hunger and Jacobinism, fast growing fanatical, still work; their-day, were

they once fanatical, will come.  Hitherto, in all tempests, Lafayette, like

some divine Sea-ruler, raises his serene head:  the upper Aeolus's blasts

fly back to their caves, like foolish unbidden winds:  the under sea-

billows they had vexed into froth allay themselves.  But if, as we often

write, the submarine Titanic Fire-powers came into play, the Ocean bed from

beneath being burst?  If they hurled Poseidon Lafayette and his

Constitution out of Space; and, in the Titanic melee, sea were mixed with

sky?







Chapter 2.3.VI.



Mirabeau.



The spirit of France waxes ever more acrid, fever-sick:  towards the final

outburst of dissolution and delirium.  Suspicion rules all minds: 

contending parties cannot now commingle; stand separated sheer asunder,

eying one another, in most aguish mood, of cold terror or hot rage. 

Counter-Revolution, Days of Poniards, Castries Duels; Flight of Mesdames,

of Monsieur and Royalty!  Journalism shrills ever louder its cry of alarm.

The sleepless Dionysius's Ear of the Forty-eight Sections, how feverishly

quick has it grown; convulsing with strange pangs the whole sick Body, as

in such sleeplessness and sickness, the ear will do!



Since Royalists get Poniards made to order, and a Sieur Motier is no better

than he should be, shall not Patriotism too, even of the indigent sort,

have Pikes, secondhand Firelocks, in readiness for the worst?  The anvils

ring, during this March month, with hammering of Pikes.  A Constitutional

Municipality promulgated its Placard, that no citizen except the 'active or

cash-citizen' was entitled to have arms; but there rose, instantly

responsive, such a tempest of astonishment from Club and Section, that the

Constitutional Placard, almost next morning, had to cover itself up, and

die away into inanity, in a second improved edition.  (Ordonnance du 17

Mars 1791 (Hist. Parl. ix. 257).)  So the hammering continues; as all that

it betokens does.



Mark, again, how the extreme tip of the Left is mounting in favour, if not

in its own National Hall, yet with the Nation, especially with Paris.  For

in such universal panic of doubt, the opinion that is sure of itself, as

the meagrest opinion may the soonest be, is the one to which all men will

rally.  Great is Belief, were it never so meagre; and leads captive the

doubting heart!  Incorruptible Robespierre has been elected Public Accuser

in our new Courts of Judicature; virtuous Petion, it is thought, may rise

to be Mayor.  Cordelier Danton, called also by triumphant majorities, sits

at the Departmental Council-table; colleague there of Mirabeau.  Of

incorruptible Robespierre it was long ago predicted that he might go far,

mean meagre mortal though he was; for Doubt dwelt not in him.



Under which circumstances ought not Royalty likewise to cease doubting, and

begin deciding and acting?  Royalty has always that sure trump-card in its

hand:  Flight out of Paris.  Which sure trump-card, Royalty, as we see,

keeps ever and anon clutching at, grasping; and swashes it forth

tentatively; yet never tables it, still puts it back again.  Play it, O

Royalty!  If there be a chance left, this seems it, and verily the last

chance; and now every hour is rendering this a doubtfuller.  Alas, one

would so fain both fly and not fly; play one's card and have it to play. 

Royalty, in all human likelihood, will not play its trump-card till the

honours, one after one, be mainly lost; and such trumping of it prove to be

the sudden finish of the game!



Here accordingly a question always arises; of the prophetic sort; which

cannot now be answered.  Suppose Mirabeau, with whom Royalty takes deep

counsel, as with a Prime Minister that cannot yet legally avow himself as

such, had got his arrangements completed?  Arrangements he has; far-

stretching plans that dawn fitfully on us, by fragments, in the confused

darkness.  Thirty Departments ready to sign loyal Addresses, of prescribed

tenor:  King carried out of Paris, but only to Compiegne and Rouen, hardly

to Metz, since, once for all, no Emigrant rabble shall take the lead in it: 

National Assembly consenting, by dint of loyal Addresses, by management, by

force of Bouille, to hear reason, and follow thither!  (See Fils Adoptif,

vii. 1. 6; Dumont, c. 11, 12, 14.)  Was it so, on these terms, that

Jacobinism and Mirabeau were then to grapple, in their Hercules-and-Typhon

duel; death inevitable for the one or the other?  The duel itself is

determined on, and sure:  but on what terms; much more, with what issue, we

in vain guess.  It is vague darkness all:  unknown what is to be; unknown

even what has already been.  The giant Mirabeau walks in darkness, as we

said; companionless, on wild ways:  what his thoughts during these months

were, no record of Biographer, not vague Fils Adoptif, will now ever

disclose.



To us, endeavouring to cast his horoscope, it of course remains doubly

vague.  There is one Herculean man, in internecine duel with him, there is

Monster after Monster.  Emigrant Noblesse return, sword on thigh, vaunting

of their Loyalty never sullied; descending from the air, like Harpy-swarms

with ferocity, with obscene greed.  Earthward there is the Typhon of

Anarchy, Political, Religious; sprawling hundred-headed, say with Twenty-

five million heads; wide as the area of France; fierce as Frenzy; strong in

very Hunger.  With these shall the Serpent-queller do battle continually,

and expect no rest.



As for the King, he as usual will go wavering chameleonlike; changing

colour and purpose with the colour of his environment;--good for no Kingly

use.  On one royal person, on the Queen only, can Mirabeau perhaps place

dependance.  It is possible, the greatness of this man, not unskilled too

in blandishments, courtiership, and graceful adroitness, might, with most

legitimate sorcery, fascinate the volatile Queen, and fix her to him.  She

has courage for all noble daring; an eye and a heart:  the soul of

Theresa's Daughter.  'Faut il-donc, Is it fated then,' she passionately

writes to her Brother, 'that I with the blood I am come of, with the

sentiments I have, must live and die among such mortals?'  (Fils Adoptif,

ubi supra.)  Alas, poor Princess, Yes.  'She is the only man,' as Mirabeau

observes, 'whom his Majesty has about him.'  Of one other man Mirabeau is

still surer:  of himself.  There lies his resources; sufficient or

insufficient.



Dim and great to the eye of Prophecy looks the future!  A perpetual life-

and-death battle; confusion from above and from below;--mere confused

darkness for us; with here and there some streak of faint lurid light.  We

see King perhaps laid aside; not tonsured, tonsuring is out of fashion now;

but say, sent away any whither, with handsome annual allowance, and stock

of smith-tools.  We see a Queen and Dauphin, Regent and Minor; a Queen

'mounted on horseback,' in the din of battles, with Moriamur pro rege

nostro!  'Such a day,' Mirabeau writes, 'may come.'



Din of battles, wars more than civil, confusion from above and from below: 

in such environment the eye of Prophecy sees Comte de Mirabeau, like some

Cardinal de Retz, stormfully maintain himself; with head all-devising,

heart all-daring, if not victorious, yet unvanquished, while life is left

him.  The specialties and issues of it, no eye of Prophecy can guess at: 

it is clouds, we repeat, and tempestuous night; and in the middle of it,

now visible, far darting, now labouring in eclipse, is Mirabeau indomitably

struggling to be Cloud-Compeller!--One can say that, had Mirabeau lived,

the History of France and of the World had been different.  Further, that

the man would have needed, as few men ever did, the whole compass of that

same 'Art of Daring, Art d'Oser,' which he so prized; and likewise that he,

above all men then living, would have practised and manifested it. 

Finally, that some substantiality, and no empty simulacrum of a formula,

would have been the result realised by him:  a result you could have loved,

a result you could have hated; by no likelihood, a result you could only

have rejected with closed lips, and swept into quick forgetfulness for

ever.  Had Mirabeau lived one other year!







Chapter 2.3.VII.



Death of Mirabeau.



But Mirabeau could not live another year, any more than he could live

another thousand years.  Men's years are numbered, and the tale of

Mirabeau's was now complete.  Important, or unimportant; to be mentioned in

World-History for some centuries, or not to be mentioned there beyond a day

or two,--it matters not to peremptory Fate.  From amid the press of ruddy

busy Life, the Pale Messenger beckons silently:  wide-spreading interests,

projects, salvation of French Monarchies, what thing soever man has on

hand, he must suddenly quit it all, and go.  Wert thou saving French

Monarchies; wert thou blacking shoes on the Pont Neuf!  The most important

of men cannot stay; did the World's History depend on an hour, that hour is

not to be given.  Whereby, indeed, it comes that these same would-have-

beens are mostly a vanity; and the World's History could never in the least

be what it would, or might, or should, by any manner of potentiality, but

simply and altogether what it is.



The fierce wear and tear of such an existence has wasted out the giant

oaken strength of Mirabeau.  A fret and fever that keeps heart and brain on

fire:  excess of effort, of excitement; excess of all kinds:  labour

incessant, almost beyond credibility!  'If I had not lived with him,' says

Dumont, 'I should never have known what a man can make of one day; what

things may be placed within the interval of twelve hours.  A day for this

man was more than a week or a month is for others:  the mass of things he

guided on together was prodigious; from the scheming to the executing not a

moment lost.'  "Monsieur le Comte," said his Secretary to him once, "what

you require is impossible."--"Impossible!" answered he starting from his

chair, Ne me dites jamais ce bete de mot, Never name to me that blockhead

of a word."  (Dumont, p. 311.)  And then the social repasts; the dinner

which he gives as Commandant of National Guards, which 'costs five hundred

pounds;' alas, and 'the Sirens of the Opera;' and all the ginger that is

hot in the mouth:--down what a course is this man hurled!  Cannot Mirabeau

stop; cannot he fly, and save himself alive?  No!  There is a Nessus' Shirt

on this Hercules; he must storm and burn there, without rest, till he be

consumed.  Human strength, never so Herculean, has its measure.  Herald

shadows flit pale across the fire-brain of Mirabeau; heralds of the pale

repose.  While he tosses and storms, straining every nerve, in that sea of

ambition and confusion, there comes, sombre and still, a monition that for

him the issue of it will be swift death.



In January last, you might see him as President of the Assembly; 'his neck

wrapt in linen cloths, at the evening session:' there was sick heat of the

blood, alternate darkening and flashing in the eye-sight; he had to apply

leeches, after the morning labour, and preside bandaged.  'At parting he

embraced me,' says Dumont, 'with an emotion I had never seen in him:  "I am

dying, my friend; dying as by slow fire; we shall perhaps not meet again. 

When I am gone, they will know what the value of me was.  The miseries I

have held back will burst from all sides on France."'  (Dumont, p. 267.) 

Sickness gives louder warning; but cannot be listened to.  On the 27th day

of March, proceeding towards the Assembly, he had to seek rest and help in

Friend de Lamarck's, by the road; and lay there, for an hour, half-fainted,

stretched on a sofa.  To the Assembly nevertheless he went, as if in spite

of Destiny itself; spoke, loud and eager, five several times; then quitted

the Tribune--for ever.  He steps out, utterly exhausted, into the Tuileries

Gardens; many people press round him, as usual, with applications,

memorials; he says to the Friend who was with him:  Take me out of this!



And so, on the last day of March 1791, endless anxious multitudes beset the

Rue de la Chaussee d'Antin; incessantly inquiring:  within doors there, in

that House numbered in our time '42,' the over wearied giant has fallen

down, to die.  (Fils Adoptif, viii. 420-79.)  Crowds, of all parties and

kinds; of all ranks from the King to the meanest man!  The King sends

publicly twice a-day to inquire; privately besides:  from the world at

large there is no end of inquiring.  'A written bulletin is handed out

every three hours,' is copied and circulated; in the end, it is printed. 

The People spontaneously keep silence; no carriage shall enter with its

noise:  there is crowding pressure; but the Sister of Mirabeau is

reverently recognised, and has free way made for her.  The People stand

mute, heart-stricken; to all it seems as if a great calamity were nigh:  as

if the last man of France, who could have swayed these coming troubles, lay

there at hand-grips with the unearthly Power.



The silence of a whole People, the wakeful toil of Cabanis, Friend and

Physician, skills not:  on Saturday, the second day of April, Mirabeau

feels that the last of the Days has risen for him; that, on this day, he

has to depart and be no more.  His death is Titanic, as his life has been.

Lit up, for the last time, in the glare of coming dissolution, the mind of

the man is all glowing and burning; utters itself in sayings, such as men

long remember.  He longs to live, yet acquiesces in death, argues not with

the inexorable.  His speech is wild and wondrous:  unearthly Phantasms

dancing now their torch-dance round his soul; the soul itself looking out,

fire-radiant, motionless, girt together for that great hour!  At times

comes a beam of light from him on the world he is quitting.  "I carry in my

heart the death-dirge of the French Monarchy; the dead remains of it will

now be the spoil of the factious."  Or again, when he heard the cannon

fire, what is characteristic too:  "Have we the Achilles' Funeral already?" 

So likewise, while some friend is supporting him:  "Yes, support that head;

would I could bequeath it thee!"  For the man dies as he has lived; self-

conscious, conscious of a world looking on.  He gazes forth on the young

Spring, which for him will never be Summer.  The Sun has risen; he says: 

"Si ce n'est pas la Dieu, c'est du moins son cousin germain."  (Fils

Adoptif, viii. 450; Journal de la maladie et de la mort de Mirabeau, par

P.J.G. Cabanis (Paris, 1803).)--Death has mastered the outworks; power of

speech is gone; the citadel of the heart still holding out:  the moribund

giant, passionately, by sign, demands paper and pen; writes his passionate

demand for opium, to end these agonies.  The sorrowful Doctor shakes his

head:  Dormir 'To sleep,' writes the other, passionately pointing at it! 

So dies a gigantic Heathen and Titan; stumbling blindly, undismayed, down

to his rest.  At half-past eight in the morning, Dr. Petit, standing at the

foot of the bed, says "Il ne souffre plus."  His suffering and his working

are now ended.



Even so, ye silent Patriot multitudes, all ye men of France; this man is

rapt away from you.  He has fallen suddenly, without bending till he broke;

as a tower falls, smitten by sudden lightning.  His word ye shall hear no

more, his guidance follow no more.--The multitudes depart, heartstruck;

spread the sad tidings.  How touching is the loyalty of men to their

Sovereign Man!  All theatres, public amusements close; no joyful meeting

can be held in these nights, joy is not for them:  the People break in upon

private dancing-parties, and sullenly command that they cease.  Of such

dancing-parties apparently but two came to light; and these also have gone

out.  The gloom is universal:  never in this City was such sorrow for one

death; never since that old night when Louis XII. departed, 'and the

Crieurs des Corps went sounding their bells, and crying along the streets: 

Le bon roi Louis, pere du peuple, est mort, The good King Louis, Father of

the People, is dead!'  (Henault, Abrege Chronologique, p. 429.)  King

Mirabeau is now the lost King; and one may say with little exaggeration,

all the People mourns for him.



For three days there is low wide moan:  weeping in the National Assembly

itself.  The streets are all mournful; orators mounted on the bournes, with

large silent audience, preaching the funeral sermon of the dead.  Let no

coachman whip fast, distractively with his rolling wheels, or almost at

all, through these groups!  His traces may be cut; himself and his fare, as

incurable Aristocrats, hurled sulkily into the kennels.  The bourne-stone

orators speak as it is given them; the Sansculottic People, with its rude

soul, listens eager,--as men will to any Sermon, or Sermo, when it is a

spoken Word meaning a Thing, and not a Babblement meaning No-thing.  In the

Restaurateur's of the Palais Royal, the waiter remarks, "Fine weather,

Monsieur:"--"Yes, my friend," answers the ancient Man of Letters, "very

fine; but Mirabeau is dead."  Hoarse rhythmic threnodies comes also from

the throats of balladsingers; are sold on gray-white paper at a sou each. 

(Fils Adoptif, viii. l. 19; Newspapers and Excerpts (in Hist. Parl. ix.

366-402).)  But of Portraits, engraved, painted, hewn, and written; of

Eulogies, Reminiscences, Biographies, nay Vaudevilles, Dramas and

Melodramas, in all Provinces of France, there will, through these coming

months, be the due immeasurable crop; thick as the leaves of Spring.  Nor,

that a tincture of burlesque might be in it, is Gobel's Episcopal Mandement

wanting; goose Gobel, who has just been made Constitutional Bishop of

Paris.  A Mandement wherein ca ira alternates very strangely with Nomine

Domini, and you are, with a grave countenance, invited to 'rejoice at

possessing in the midst of you a body of Prelates created by Mirabeau,

zealous followers of his doctrine, faithful imitators of his virtues.' 

(Hist. Parl. ix. 405.)  So speaks, and cackles manifold, the Sorrow of

France; wailing articulately, inarticulately, as it can, that a Sovereign

Man is snatched away.  In the National Assembly, when difficult questions

are astir, all eyes will 'turn mechanically to the place where Mirabeau

sat,'--and Mirabeau is absent now.



On the third evening of the lamentation, the fourth of April, there is

solemn Public Funeral; such as deceased mortal seldom had.  Procession of a

league in length; of mourners reckoned loosely at a hundred thousand!  All

roofs are thronged with onlookers, all windows, lamp-irons, branches of

trees.  'Sadness is painted on every countenance; many persons weep.' 

There is double hedge of National Guards; there is National Assembly in a

body; Jacobin Society, and Societies; King's Ministers, Municipals, and all

Notabilities, Patriot or Aristocrat.  Bouille is noticeable there, 'with

his hat on;' say, hat drawn over his brow, hiding many thoughts!  Slow-

wending, in religious silence, the Procession of a league in length, under

the level sun-rays, for it is five o'clock, moves and marches:  with its

sable plumes; itself in a religious silence; but, by fits, with the muffled

roll of drums, by fits with some long-drawn wail of music, and strange new

clangour of trombones, and metallic dirge-voice; amid the infinite hum of

men.  In the Church of Saint-Eustache, there is funeral oration by Cerutti;

and discharge of fire-arms, which 'brings down pieces of the plaster.' 

Thence, forward again to the Church of Sainte-Genevieve; which has been

consecrated, by supreme decree, on the spur of this time, into a Pantheon

for the Great Men of the Fatherland, Aux Grands Hommes la Patrie

reconnaissante.  Hardly at midnight is the business done; and Mirabeau left

in his dark dwelling:  first tenant of that Fatherland's Pantheon.



Tenant, alas, with inhabits but at will, and shall be cast out!  For, in

these days of convulsion and disjection, not even the dust of the dead is

permitted to rest.  Voltaire's bones are, by and by, to be carried from

their stolen grave in the Abbey of Scellieres, to an eager stealing grave,

in Paris his birth-city:  all mortals processioning and perorating there;

cars drawn by eight white horses, goadsters in classical costume, with

fillets and wheat-ears enough;--though the weather is of the wettest. 

(Moniteur, du 13 Juillet 1791.)  Evangelist Jean Jacques, too, as is most

proper, must be dug up from Ermenonville, and processioned, with pomp, with

sensibility, to the Pantheon of the Fatherland.  (Ibid. du 18 Septembre,

1794.  See also du 30 Aout, &c. 1791.)  He and others:  while again

Mirabeau, we say, is cast forth from it, happily incapable of being

replaced; and rests now, irrecognisable, reburied hastily at dead of night,

in the central 'part of the Churchyard Sainte-Catherine, in the Suburb

Saint-Marceau,' to be disturbed no further.



So blazes out, farseen, a Man's Life, and becomes ashes and a caput

mortuum, in this World-Pyre, which we name French Revolution:  not the

first that consumed itself there; nor, by thousands and many millions, the

last!  A man who 'had swallowed all formulas;' who, in these strange times

and circumstances, felt called to live Titanically, and also to die so.  As

he, for his part had swallowed all formulas, what Formula is there, never

so comprehensive, that will express truly the plus and the minus, give us

the accurate net-result of him?  There is hitherto none such.  Moralities

not a few must shriek condemnatory over this Mirabeau; the Morality by

which he could be judged has not yet got uttered in the speech of men.  We

shall say this of him, again:  That he is a Reality, and no Simulacrum:  a

living son of Nature our general Mother; not a hollow Artfice, and

mechanism of Conventionalities, son of nothing, brother to nothing.  In

which little word, let the earnest man, walking sorrowful in a world mostly

of 'Stuffed Clothes-suits,' that chatter and grin meaningless on him, quite

ghastly to the earnest soul,--think what significance there is!



Of men who, in such sense, are alive, and see with eyes, the number is now

not great:  it may be well, if in this huge French Revolution itself, with

its all-developing fury, we find some Three.  Mortals driven rabid we find;

sputtering the acridest logic; baring their breast to the battle-hail,

their neck to the guillotine; of whom it is so painful to say that they too

are still, in good part, manufactured Formalities, not Facts but Hearsays!



Honour to the strong man, in these ages, who has shaken himself loose of

shams, and is something.  For in the way of being worthy, the first

condition surely is that one be.  Let Cant cease, at all risks and at all

costs:  till Cant cease, nothing else can begin.  Of human Criminals, in

these centuries, writes the Moralist, I find but one unforgivable:  the

Quack.  'Hateful to God,' as divine Dante sings, 'and to the Enemies of

God,



  'A Dio spiacente ed a' nemici sui!'



But whoever will, with sympathy, which is the first essential towards

insight, look at this questionable Mirabeau, may find that there lay verily

in him, as the basis of all, a Sincerity, a great free Earnestness; nay

call it Honesty, for the man did before all things see, with that clear

flashing vision, into what was, into what existed as fact; and did, with

his wild heart, follow that and no other.  Whereby on what ways soever he

travels and struggles, often enough falling, he is still a brother man. 

Hate him not; thou canst not hate him!  Shining through such soil and

tarnish, and now victorious effulgent, and oftenest struggling eclipsed,

the light of genius itself is in this man; which was never yet base and

hateful:  but at worst was lamentable, loveable with pity.  They say that

he was ambitious, that he wanted to be Minister.  It is most true; and was

he not simply the one man in France who could have done any good as

Minister?  Not vanity alone, not pride alone; far from that!  Wild

burstings of affection were in this great heart; of fierce lightning, and

soft dew of pity.  So sunk, bemired in wretchedest defacements, it may be

said of him, like the Magdalen of old, that he loved much:  his Father the

harshest of old crabbed men he loved with warmth, with veneration.



Be it that his falls and follies are manifold,--as himself often lamented

even with tears.  (Dumont, p. 287.)  Alas, is not the Life of every such

man already a poetic Tragedy; made up 'of Fate and of one's own

Deservings,' of Schicksal und eigene Schuld; full of the elements of Pity

and Fear?  This brother man, if not Epic for us, is Tragic; if not great,

is large; large in his qualities, world-large in his destinies.  Whom other

men, recognising him as such, may, through long times, remember, and draw

nigh to examine and consider:  these, in their several dialects, will say

of him and sing of him,--till the right thing be said; and so the Formula

that can judge him be no longer an undiscovered one.



Here then the wild Gabriel Honore drops from the tissue of our History; not

without a tragic farewell.  He is gone:  the flower of the wild Riquetti or

Arrighetti kindred; which seems as if in him, with one last effort, it had

done its best, and then expired, or sunk down to the undistinguished level. 

Crabbed old Marquis Mirabeau, the Friend of Men, sleeps sound.  The Bailli

Mirabeau, worthy uncle, will soon die forlorn, alone.  Barrel-Mirabeau,

already gone across the Rhine, his Regiment of Emigrants will drive nigh

desperate.  'Barrel-Mirabeau,' says a biographer of his, 'went indignantly

across the Rhine, and drilled Emigrant Regiments.  But as he sat one

morning in his tent, sour of stomach doubtless and of heart, meditating in

Tartarean humour on the turn things took, a certain Captain or Subaltern

demanded admittance on business.  Such Captain is refused; he again

demands, with refusal; and then again, till Colonel Viscount Barrel-

Mirabeau, blazing up into a mere burning brandy barrel, clutches his sword,

and tumbles out on this canaille of an intruder,--alas, on the canaille of

an intruder's sword's point, who had drawn with swift dexterity; and dies,

and the Newspapers name it apoplexy and alarming accident.'  So die the

Mirabeaus.



New Mirabeaus one hears not of:  the wild kindred, as we said, is gone out

with this its greatest.  As families and kindreds sometimes do; producing,

after long ages of unnoted notability, some living quintescence of all the

qualities they had, to flame forth as a man world-noted; after whom they

rest as if exhausted; the sceptre passing to others.  The chosen Last of

the Mirabeaus is gone; the chosen man of France is gone.  It was he who

shook old France from its basis; and, as if with his single hand, has held

it toppling there, still unfallen.  What things depended on that one man! 

He is as a ship suddenly shivered on sunk rocks:  much swims on the waste

waters, far from help.
