





BOOK 1.V.



THE THIRD ESTATE





Chapter 1.5.I.



Inertia.




That exasperated France, in this same National Assembly of hers, has got

something, nay something great, momentous, indispensable, cannot be

doubted; yet still the question were:  Specially what?  A question hard to

solve, even for calm onlookers at this distance; wholly insoluble to actors

in the middle of it.  The States-General, created and conflated by the

passionate effort of the whole nation, is there as a thing high and lifted

up.  Hope, jubilating, cries aloud that it will prove a miraculous Brazen

Serpent in the Wilderness; whereon whosoever looks, with faith and

obedience, shall be healed of all woes and serpent-bites.



We may answer, it will at least prove a symbolic Banner; round which the

exasperating complaining Twenty-Five Millions, otherwise isolated and

without power, may rally, and work--what it is in them to work.  If battle

must be the work, as one cannot help expecting, then shall it be a battle-

banner (say, an Italian Gonfalon, in its old Republican Carroccio); and

shall tower up, car-borne, shining in the wind:  and with iron tongue peal

forth many a signal.  A thing of prime necessity; which whether in the van

or in the centre, whether leading or led and driven, must do the fighting

multitude incalculable services.  For a season, while it floats in the very

front, nay as it were stands solitary there, waiting whether force will

gather round it, this same National Carroccio, and the signal-peals it

rings, are a main object with us.



The omen of the 'slouch-hats clapt on' shows the Commons Deputies to have

made up their minds on one thing:  that neither Noblesse nor Clergy shall

have precedence of them; hardly even Majesty itself.  To such length has

the Contrat Social, and force of public opinion, carried us.  For what is

Majesty but the Delegate of the Nation; delegated, and bargained with (even

rather tightly),--in some very singular posture of affairs, which Jean

Jacques has not fixed the date of?



Coming therefore into their Hall, on the morrow, an inorganic mass of Six

Hundred individuals, these Commons Deputies perceive, without terror, that

they have it all to themselves.  Their Hall is also the Grand or general

Hall for all the Three Orders.  But the Noblesse and Clergy, it would seem,

have retired to their two separate Apartments, or Halls; and are there

'verifying their powers,' not in a conjoint but in a separate capacity. 

They are to constitute two separate, perhaps separately-voting Orders,

then?  It is as if both Noblesse and Clergy had silently taken for granted

that they already were such!  Two Orders against one; and so the Third

Order to be left in a perpetual minority?



Much may remain unfixed; but the negative of that is a thing fixed:  in the

Slouch-hatted heads, in the French Nation's head.  Double representation,

and all else hitherto gained, were otherwise futile, null.  Doubtless, the

'powers must be verified;'--doubtless, the Commission, the electoral

Documents of your Deputy must be inspected by his brother Deputies, and

found valid:  it is the preliminary of all.  Neither is this question, of

doing it separately or doing it conjointly, a vital one:  but if it lead to

such?  It must be resisted; wise was that maxim, Resist the beginnings! 

Nay were resistance unadvisable, even dangerous, yet surely pause is very

natural:  pause, with Twenty-five Millions behind you, may become

resistance enough.--The inorganic mass of Commons Deputies will restrict

itself to a 'system of inertia,' and for the present remain inorganic.



Such method, recommendable alike to sagacity and to timidity, do the

Commons Deputies adopt; and, not without adroitness, and with ever more

tenacity, they persist in it, day after day, week after week.  For six

weeks their history is of the kind named barren; which indeed, as

Philosophy knows, is often the fruitfulest of all.  These were their still

creation-days; wherein they sat incubating!  In fact, what they did was to

do nothing, in a judicious manner.  Daily the inorganic body reassembles;

regrets that they cannot get organisation, 'verification of powers in

common, and begin regenerating France.  Headlong motions may be made, but

let such be repressed; inertia alone is at once unpunishable and

unconquerable.



Cunning must be met by cunning; proud pretension by inertia, by a low tone

of patriotic sorrow; low, but incurable, unalterable.  Wise as serpents;

harmless as doves: what a spectacle for France!  Six Hundred inorganic

individuals, essential for its regeneration and salvation, sit there, on

their elliptic benches, longing passionately towards life; in painful

durance; like souls waiting to be born.  Speeches are spoken; eloquent;

audible within doors and without.  Mind agitates itself against mind; the

Nation looks on with ever deeper interest.  Thus do the Commons Deputies

sit incubating.



There are private conclaves, supper-parties, consultations; Breton Club,

Club of Viroflay; germs of many Clubs.  Wholly an element of confused

noise, dimness, angry heat;--wherein, however, the Eros-egg, kept at the

fit temperature, may hover safe, unbroken till it be hatched.  In your

Mouniers, Malouets, Lechapeliers in science sufficient for that; fervour in

your Barnaves, Rabauts.  At times shall come an inspiration from royal

Mirabeau:  he is nowise yet recognised as royal; nay he was 'groaned at,'

when his name was first mentioned:  but he is struggling towards

recognition.



In the course of the week, the Commons having called their Eldest to the

chair, and furnished him with young stronger-lunged assistants,--can speak

articulately; and, in audible lamentable words, declare, as we said, that

they are an inorganic body, longing to become organic.  Letters arrive; but

an inorganic body cannot open letters; they lie on the table unopened.  The

Eldest may at most procure for himself some kind of List or Muster-roll, to

take the votes by, and wait what will betide.  Noblesse and Clergy are all

elsewhere:  however, an eager public crowds all galleries and vacancies;

which is some comfort.  With effort, it is determined, not that a

Deputation shall be sent,--for how can an inorganic body send deputations?-

-but that certain individual Commons Members shall, in an accidental way,

stroll into the Clergy Chamber, and then into the Noblesse one; and mention

there, as a thing they have happened to observe, that the Commons seem to

be sitting waiting for them, in order to verify their powers.  That is the

wiser method!



The Clergy, among whom are such a multitude of Undignified, of mere Commons

in Curates' frocks, depute instant respectful answer that they are, and

will now more than ever be, in deepest study as to that very matter. 

Contrariwise the Noblesse, in cavalier attitude, reply, after four days,

that they, for their part, are all verified and constituted; which, they

had trusted, the Commons also were; such separate verification being

clearly the proper constitutional wisdom-of-ancestors method;--as they the

Noblesse will have much pleasure in demonstrating by a Commission of their

number, if the Commons will meet them, Commission against Commission! 

Directly in the rear of which comes a deputation of Clergy, reiterating, in

their insidious conciliatory way, the same proposal.  Here, then, is a

complexity:  what will wise Commons say to this?



Warily, inertly, the wise Commons, considering that they are, if not a

French Third Estate, at least an Aggregate of individuals pretending to

some title of that kind, determine, after talking on it five days, to name

such a Commission,--though, as it were, with proviso not to be convinced: 

a sixth day is taken up in naming it; a seventh and an eighth day in

getting the forms of meeting, place, hour and the like, settled:  so that

it is not till the evening of the 23rd of May that Noblesse Commission

first meets Commons Commission, Clergy acting as Conciliators; and begins

the impossible task of convincing it.  One other meeting, on the 25th, will

suffice:  the Commons are inconvincible, the Noblesse and Clergy

irrefragably convincing; the Commissions retire; each Order persisting in

its first pretensions.  (Reported Debates, 6th May to 1st June, 1789 (in

Histoire Parlementaire, i. 379-422.)



Thus have three weeks passed.  For three weeks, the Third-Estate Carroccio,

with far-seen Gonfalon, has stood stockstill, flouting the wind; waiting

what force would gather round it.



Fancy can conceive the feeling of the Court; and how counsel met counsel,

the loud-sounding inanity whirled in that distracted vortex, where wisdom

could not dwell.  Your cunningly devised Taxing-Machine has been got

together; set up with incredible labour; and stands there, its three pieces

in contact; its two fly-wheels of Noblesse and Clergy, its huge working-

wheel of Tiers-Etat.  The two fly-wheels whirl in the softest manner; but,

prodigious to look upon, the huge working-wheel hangs motionless, refuses

to stir!  The cunningest engineers are at fault.  How will it work, when it

does begin?  Fearfully, my Friends; and to many purposes; but to gather

taxes, or grind court-meal, one may apprehend, never.  Could we but have

continued gathering taxes by hand!  Messeigneurs d'Artois, Conti, Conde

(named Court Triumvirate), they of the anti-democratic Memoire au Roi, has

not their foreboding proved true?  They may wave reproachfully their high

heads; they may beat their poor brains; but the cunningest engineers can do

nothing.  Necker himself, were he even listened to, begins to look blue. 

The only thing one sees advisable is to bring up soldiers.  New regiments,

two, and a battalion of a third, have already reached Paris; others shall

get in march.  Good were it, in all circumstances, to have troops within

reach; good that the command were in sure hands.  Let Broglie be appointed;

old Marshal Duke de Broglie; veteran disciplinarian, of a firm drill-

sergeant morality, such as may be depended on.



For, alas, neither are the Clergy, or the very Noblesse what they should

be; and might be, when so menaced from without:  entire, undivided within. 

The Noblesse, indeed, have their Catiline or Crispin D'Espremenil, dusky-

glowing, all in renegade heat; their boisterous Barrel-Mirabeau; but also

they have their Lafayettes, Liancourts, Lameths; above all, their

D'Orleans, now cut forever from his Court-moorings, and musing drowsily of

high and highest sea-prizes (for is not he too a son of Henri Quatre, and

partial potential Heir-Apparent?)--on his voyage towards Chaos.  From the

Clergy again, so numerous are the Cures, actual deserters have run over: 

two small parties; in the second party Cure Gregoire.  Nay there is talk of

a whole Hundred and Forty-nine of them about to desert in mass, and only

restrained by an Archbishop of Paris.  It seems a losing game.



But judge if France, if Paris sat idle, all this while!  Addresses from far

and near flow in:  for our Commons have now grown organic enough to open

letters.  Or indeed to cavil at them!  Thus poor Marquis de Breze, Supreme

Usher, Master of Ceremonies, or whatever his title was, writing about this

time on some ceremonial matter, sees no harm in winding up with a

'Monsieur, yours with sincere attachment.'--"To whom does it address

itself, this sincere attachment?" inquires Mirabeau.  "To the Dean of the

Tiers-Etat."--"There is no man in France entitled to write that," rejoins

he; whereat the Galleries and the World will not be kept from applauding. 

(Moniteur (in Histoire Parlementaire, i. 405).)  Poor De Breze!  These

Commons have a still older grudge at him; nor has he yet done with them.



In another way, Mirabeau has had to protest against the quick suppression

of his Newspaper, Journal of the States-General;--and to continue it under

a new name.  In which act of valour, the Paris Electors, still busy

redacting their Cahier, could not but support him, by Address to his

Majesty:  they claim utmost 'provisory freedom of the press;' they have

spoken even about demolishing the Bastille, and erecting a Bronze Patriot

King on the site!--These are the rich Burghers:  but now consider how it

went, for example, with such loose miscellany, now all grown

eleutheromaniac, of Loungers, Prowlers, social Nondescripts (and the

distilled Rascality of our Planet), as whirls forever in the Palais Royal;-

-or what low infinite groan, first changing into a growl, comes from Saint-

Antoine, and the Twenty-five Millions in danger of starvation!



There is the indisputablest scarcity of corn;--be it Aristocrat-plot,

D'Orleans-plot, of this year; or drought and hail of last year:  in city

and province, the poor man looks desolately towards a nameless lot.  And

this States-General, that could make us an age of gold, is forced to stand

motionless; cannot get its powers verified!  All industry necessarily

languishes, if it be not that of making motions.



In the Palais Royal there has been erected, apparently by subscription, a

kind of Wooden Tent (en planches de bois); (Histoire Parlementaire, i.

429.)-- most convenient; where select Patriotism can now redact

resolutions, deliver harangues, with comfort, let the weather but as it

will.  Lively is that Satan-at-Home!  On his table, on his chair, in every

cafe, stands a patriotic orator; a crowd round him within; a crowd

listening from without, open-mouthed, through open door and window; with

'thunders of applause for every sentiment of more than common hardiness.' 

In Monsieur Dessein's Pamphlet-shop, close by, you cannot without strong

elbowing get to the counter:  every hour produces its pamphlet, or litter

of pamphlets; 'there were thirteen to-day, sixteen yesterday, nine-two last

week.'  (Arthur Young, Travels, i. 104.)  Think of Tyranny and Scarcity;

Fervid-eloquence, Rumour, Pamphleteering; Societe Publicole, Breton Club,

Enraged Club;--and whether every tap-room, coffee-room, social reunion,

accidental street-group, over wide France, was not an Enraged Club!



To all which the Commons Deputies can only listen with a sublime inertia of

sorrow; reduced to busy themselves 'with their internal police.'  Surer

position no Deputies ever occupied; if they keep it with skill.  Let not

the temperature rise too high; break not the Eros-egg till it be hatched,

till it break itself!  An eager public crowds all Galleries and vacancies!

'cannot be restrained from applauding.'  The two Privileged Orders, the

Noblesse all verified and constituted, may look on with what face they

will; not without a secret tremor of heart.  The Clergy, always acting the

part of conciliators, make a clutch at the Galleries, and the popularity

there; and miss it.  Deputation of them arrives, with dolorous message

about the 'dearth of grains,' and the necessity there is of casting aside

vain formalities, and deliberating on this.  An insidious proposal; which,

however, the Commons (moved thereto by seagreen Robespierre) dexterously

accept as a sort of hint, or even pledge, that the Clergy will forthwith

come over to them, constitute the States-General, and so cheapen grains! 

(Bailly, Memoires, i. 114.)--Finally, on the 27th day of May, Mirabeau,

judging the time now nearly come, proposes that 'the inertia cease;' that,

leaving the Noblesse to their own stiff ways, the Clergy be summoned, 'in

the name of the God of Peace,' to join the Commons, and begin.  (Histoire

Parlementaire, i. 413.)  To which summons if they turn a deaf ear,--we

shall see!  Are not one Hundred and Forty-nine of them ready to desert?



O Triumvirate of Princes, new Garde-des-Sceaux Barentin, thou Home-

Secretary Breteuil, Duchess Polignac, and Queen eager to listen,--what is

now to be done?  This Third Estate will get in motion, with the force of

all France in it; Clergy-machinery with Noblesse-machinery, which were to

serve as beautiful counter-balances and drags, will be shamefully dragged

after it,--and take fire along with it.  What is to be done?  The Oeil-de-

Boeuf waxes more confused than ever.  Whisper and counter-whisper; a very

tempest of whispers!  Leading men from all the Three Orders are nightly

spirited thither; conjurors many of them; but can they conjure this? 

Necker himself were now welcome, could he interfere to purpose.



Let Necker interfere, then; and in the King's name!  Happily that

incendiary 'God-of-Peace' message is not yet answered.  The Three Orders

shall again have conferences; under this Patriot Minister of theirs,

somewhat may be healed, clouted up;--we meanwhile getting forward Swiss

Regiments, and a 'hundred pieces of field-artillery.'  This is what the

Oeil-de-Boeuf, for its part, resolves on.



But as for Necker--Alas, poor Necker, thy obstinate Third Estate has one

first-last word, verification in common, as the pledge of voting and

deliberating in common!  Half-way proposals, from such a tried friend, they

answer with a stare.  The tardy conferences speedily break up; the Third

Estate, now ready and resolute, the whole world backing it, returns to its

Hall of the Three Orders; and Necker to the Oeil-de-Boeuf, with the

character of a disconjured conjuror there--fit only for dismissal. 

(Debates, 1st to 17th June 1789 (in Histoire Parlementaire, i. 422-478).)



And so the Commons Deputies are at last on their own strength getting under

way?  Instead of Chairman, or Dean, they have now got a President: 

Astronomer Bailly.  Under way, with a vengeance!  With endless vociferous

and temperate eloquence, borne on Newspaper wings to all lands, they have

now, on this 17th day of June, determined that their name is not Third

Estate, but--National Assembly!  They, then, are the Nation?  Triumvirate

of Princes, Queen, refractory Noblesse and Clergy, what, then, are you?  A

most deep question;--scarcely answerable in living political dialects.



All regardless of which, our new National Assembly proceeds to appoint a

'committee of subsistences;' dear to France, though it can find little or

no grain.  Next, as if our National Assembly stood quite firm on its legs,-

-to appoint 'four other standing committees;' then to settle the security

of the National Debt; then that of the Annual Taxation:  all within eight-

and-forty hours.  At such rate of velocity it is going:  the conjurors of

the Oeil-de-Boeuf may well ask themselves, Whither?







Chapter 1.5.II.



Mercury de Breze.



Now surely were the time for a 'god from the machine;' there is a nodus

worthy of one.  The only question is, Which god?  Shall it be Mars de

Broglie, with his hundred pieces of cannon?--Not yet, answers prudence; so

soft, irresolute is King Louis.  Let it be Messenger Mercury, our Supreme

Usher de Breze.



On the morrow, which is the 20th of June, these Hundred and Forty-nine

false Curates, no longer restrainable by his Grace of Paris, will desert in

a body:  let De Breze intervene, and produce--closed doors!  Not only shall

there be Royal Session, in that Salle des Menus; but no meeting, nor

working (except by carpenters), till then.  Your Third Estate, self-styled

'National Assembly,' shall suddenly see itself extruded from its Hall, by

carpenters, in this dexterous way; and reduced to do nothing, not even to

meet, or articulately lament,--till Majesty, with Seance Royale and new

miracles, be ready!  In this manner shall De Breze, as Mercury ex machina,

intervene; and, if the Oeil-de-Boeuf mistake not, work deliverance from the

nodus.



Of poor De Breze we can remark that he has yet prospered in none of his

dealings with these Commons.  Five weeks ago, when they kissed the hand of

Majesty, the mode he took got nothing but censure; and then his 'sincere

attachment,' how was it scornfully whiffed aside!  Before supper, this

night, he writes to President Bailly, a new Letter, to be delivered shortly

after dawn tomorrow, in the King's name.  Which Letter, however, Bailly in

the pride of office, will merely crush together into his pocket, like a

bill he does not mean to pay.



Accordingly on Saturday morning the 20th of June, shrill-sounding heralds

proclaim through the streets of Versailles, that there is to be a Seance

Royale next Monday; and no meeting of the States-General till then.  And

yet, we observe, President Bailly in sound of this, and with De Breze's

Letter in his pocket, is proceeding, with National Assembly at his heels,

to the accustomed Salles des Menus; as if De Breze and heralds were mere

wind.  It is shut, this Salle; occupied by Gardes Francaises.  "Where is

your Captain?"  The Captain shows his royal order:  workmen, he is grieved

to say, are all busy setting up the platform for his Majesty's Seance; most

unfortunately, no admission; admission, at furthest, for President and

Secretaries to bring away papers, which the joiners might destroy!--

President Bailly enters with Secretaries; and returns bearing papers: 

alas, within doors, instead of patriotic eloquence, there is now no noise

but hammering, sawing, and operative screeching and rumbling!  A

profanation without parallel.



The Deputies stand grouped on the Paris Road, on this umbrageous Avenue de

Versailles; complaining aloud of the indignity done them.  Courtiers, it is

supposed, look from their windows, and giggle.  The morning is none of the

comfortablest:  raw; it is even drizzling a little.  (Bailly, Memoires, i.

185-206.)  But all travellers pause; patriot gallery-men, miscellaneous

spectators increase the groups.  Wild counsels alternate.  Some desperate

Deputies propose to go and hold session on the great outer Staircase at

Marly, under the King's windows; for his Majesty, it seems, has driven over

thither.  Others talk of making the Chateau Forecourt, what they call Place

d'Armes, a Runnymede and new Champ de Mai of free Frenchmen:  nay of

awakening, to sounds of indignant Patriotism, the echoes of the Oeil-de-

boeuf itself.--Notice is given that President Bailly, aided by judicious

Guillotin and others, has found place in the Tennis-Court of the Rue St.

Francois.  Thither, in long-drawn files, hoarse-jingling, like cranes on

wing, the Commons Deputies angrily wend.



Strange sight was this in the Rue St. Francois, Vieux Versailles!  A naked

Tennis-Court, as the pictures of that time still give it:  four walls;

naked, except aloft some poor wooden penthouse, or roofed spectators'-

gallery, hanging round them:--on the floor not now an idle teeheeing, a

snapping of balls and rackets; but the bellowing din of an indignant

National Representation, scandalously exiled hither!  However, a cloud of

witnesses looks down on them, from wooden penthouse, from wall-top, from

adjoining roof and chimney; rolls towards them from all quarters, with

passionate spoken blessings.  Some table can be procured to write on; some

chair, if not to sit on, then to stand on.  The Secretaries undo their

tapes; Bailly has constituted the Assembly.



Experienced Mounier, not wholly new to such things, in Parlementary

revolts, which he has seen or heard of, thinks that it were well, in these

lamentable threatening circumstances, to unite themselves by an Oath.--

Universal acclamation, as from smouldering bosoms getting vent!  The Oath

is redacted; pronounced aloud by President Bailly,--and indeed in such a

sonorous tone, that the cloud of witnesses, even outdoors, hear it, and

bellow response to it.  Six hundred right-hands rise with President

Bailly's, to take God above to witness that they will not separate for man

below, but will meet in all places, under all circumstances, wheresoever

two or three can get together, till they have made the Constitution.  Made

the Constitution, Friends!  That is a long task.  Six hundred hands,

meanwhile, will sign as they have sworn:  six hundred save one; one

Loyalist Abdiel, still visible by this sole light-point, and nameable, poor

'M. Martin d'Auch, from Castelnaudary, in Languedoc.'  Him they permit to

sign or signify refusal; they even save him from the cloud of witnesses, by

declaring 'his head deranged.'  At four o'clock, the signatures are all

appended; new meeting is fixed for Monday morning, earlier than the hour of

the Royal Session; that our Hundred and Forty-nine Clerical deserters be

not balked:  we shall meet 'at the Recollets Church or elsewhere,' in hope

that our Hundred and Forty-nine will join us;--and now it is time to go to

dinner.



This, then, is the Session of the Tennis-Court, famed Seance du Jeu de

Paume; the fame of which has gone forth to all lands.  This is Mercurius de

Breze's appearance as Deus ex machina; this is the fruit it brings!  The

giggle of Courtiers in the Versailles Avenue has already died into gaunt

silence.  Did the distracted Court, with Gardes-des-Sceaux Barentin,

Triumvirate and Company, imagine that they could scatter six hundred

National Deputies, big with a National Constitution, like as much barndoor

poultry, big with next to nothing,--by the white or black rod of a Supreme

Usher?  Barndoor poultry fly cackling:  but National Deputies turn round,

lion-faced; and, with uplifted right-hand, swear an Oath that makes the

four corners of France tremble.



President Bailly has covered himself with honour; which shall become

rewards.  The National Assembly is now doubly and trebly the Nation's

Assembly; not militant, martyred only, but triumphant; insulted, and which

could not be insulted.  Paris disembogues itself once more, to witness,

'with grim looks,' the Seance Royale:  (See Arthur Young (Travels, i. 115-

118); A. Lameth, &c.) which, by a new felicity, is postponed till Tuesday.

The Hundred and Forty-nine, and even with Bishops among them, all in

processional mass, have had free leisure to march off, and solemnly join

the Commons sitting waiting in their Church.  The Commons welcomed them

with shouts, with embracings, nay with tears; (Dumont, Souvenirs sur

Mirabeau, c. 4.) for it is growing a life-and-death matter now.



As for the Seance itself, the Carpenters seem to have accomplished their

platform; but all else remains unaccomplished.  Futile, we may say fatal,

was the whole matter.  King Louis enters, through seas of people, all grim-

silent, angry with many things,--for it is a bitter rain too.  Enters, to a

Third Estate, likewise grim-silent; which has been wetted waiting under

mean porches, at back-doors, while Court and Privileged were entering by

the front.  King and Garde-des-Sceaux (there is no Necker visible) make

known, not without longwindedness, the determinations of the royal breast.

The Three Orders shall vote separately.  On the other hand, France may look

for considerable constitutional blessings; as specified in these Five-and-

thirty Articles, (Histoire Parlementaire, i. 13.) which Garde-des-Sceaux is

waxing hoarse with reading.  Which Five-and-Thirty Articles, adds his

Majesty again rising, if the Three Orders most unfortunately cannot agree

together to effect them, I myself will effect:  "seul je ferai le bien de

mes peuples,"--which being interpreted may signify, You, contentious

Deputies of the States-General, have probably not long to be here!  But, in

fine, all shall now withdraw for this day; and meet again, each Order in

its separate place, to-morrow morning, for despatch of business.  This is

the determination of the royal breast:  pithy and clear.  And herewith

King, retinue, Noblesse, majority of Clergy file out, as if the whole

matter were satisfactorily completed.



These file out; through grim-silent seas of people.  Only the Commons

Deputies file not out; but stand there in gloomy silence, uncertain what

they shall do.  One man of them is certain; one man of them discerns and

dares!  It is now that King Mirabeau starts to the Tribune, and lifts up

his lion-voice.  Verily a word in season; for, in such scenes, the moment

is the mother of ages!  Had not Gabriel Honore been there,--one can well

fancy, how the Commons Deputies, affrighted at the perils which now yawned

dim all round them, and waxing ever paler in each other's paleness, might

very naturally, one after one, have glided off; and the whole course of

European History have been different!



But he is there.  List to the brool of that royal forest-voice; sorrowful,

low; fast swelling to a roar!  Eyes kindle at the glance of his eye:--

National Deputies were missioned by a Nation; they have sworn an Oath;

they--but lo! while the lion's voice roars loudest, what Apparition is

this?  Apparition of Mercurius de Breze, muttering somewhat!--"Speak out,"

cry several.--"Messieurs," shrills De Breze, repeating himself, "You have

heard the King's orders!"--Mirabeau glares on him with fire-flashing face;

shakes the black lion's mane:  "Yes, Monsieur, we have heard what the King

was advised to say:  and you who cannot be the interpreter of his orders to

the States-General; you, who have neither place nor right of speech here;

you are not the man to remind us of it.  Go, Monsieur, tell these who sent

you that we are here by the will of the People, and that nothing shall send

us hence but the force of bayonets!"  (Moniteur (Hist. Parl. ii. 22.).) 

And poor De Breze shivers forth from the National Assembly;--and also (if

it be not in one faintest glimmer, months later) finally from the page of

History!--



Hapless De Breze; doomed to survive long ages, in men's memory, in this

faint way, with tremulent white rod!  He was true to Etiquette, which was

his Faith here below; a martyr to respect of persons.  Short woollen cloaks

could not kiss Majesty's hand as long velvet ones did.  Nay lately, when

the poor little Dauphin lay dead, and some ceremonial Visitation came, was

he not punctual to announce it even to the Dauphin's dead body: 

"Monseigneur, a Deputation of the States-General!"  (Montgaillard, ii. 38.)

Sunt lachrymae rerum.



But what does the Oeil-de-Boeuf, now when De Breze shivers back thither? 

Despatch that same force of bayonets?  Not so:  the seas of people still

hang multitudinous, intent on what is passing; nay rush and roll, loud-

billowing, into the Courts of the Chateau itself; for a report has risen

that Necker is to be dismissed.  Worst of all, the Gardes Francaises seem

indisposed to act:  'two Companies of them do not fire when ordered!' 

(Histoire Parlementaire, ii. 26.)  Necker, for not being at the Seance,

shall be shouted for, carried home in triumph; and must not be dismissed. 

His Grace of Paris, on the other hand, has to fly with broken coach-panels,

and owe his life to furious driving.  The Gardes-du-Corps (Body-Guards),

which you were drawing out, had better be drawn in again.  (Bailly, i.

217.)  There is no sending of bayonets to be thought of.



Instead of soldiers, the Oeil-de-Boeuf sends--carpenters, to take down the

platform.  Ineffectual shift!  In few instants, the very carpenters cease

wrenching and knocking at their platform; stand on it, hammer in hand, and

listen open-mouthed.  (Histoire Parlementaire, ii. 23.)  The Third Estate

is decreeing that it is, was, and will be, nothing but a National Assembly;

and now, moreover, an inviolable one, all members of it inviolable: 

'infamous, traitorous, towards the Nation, and guilty of capital crime, is

any person, body-corporate, tribunal, court or commission that now or

henceforth, during the present session or after it, shall dare to pursue,

interrogate, arrest, or cause to be arrested, detain or cause to be

detained, any,' &c. &c. 'on whose part soever the same be commanded.' 

(Montgaillard, ii. 47.)  Which done, one can wind up with this comfortable

reflection from Abbe Sieyes:  "Messieurs, you are today what you were

yesterday."



Courtiers may shriek; but it is, and remains, even so.  Their well-charged

explosion has exploded through the touch-hole; covering themselves with

scorches, confusion, and unseemly soot!  Poor Triumvirate, poor Queen; and

above all, poor Queen's Husband, who means well, had he any fixed meaning!

Folly is that wisdom which is wise only behindhand.  Few months ago these

Thirty-five Concessions had filled France with a rejoicing, which might

have lasted for several years.  Now it is unavailing, the very mention of

it slighted; Majesty's express orders set at nought.



All France is in a roar; a sea of persons, estimated at 'ten thousand,'

whirls 'all this day in the Palais Royal.'  (Arthur Young, i. 119.)  The

remaining Clergy, and likewise some Forty-eight Noblesse, D'Orleans among

them, have now forthwith gone over to the victorious Commons; by whom, as

is natural, they are received 'with acclamation.'



The Third Estate triumphs; Versailles Town shouting round it; ten thousand

whirling all day in the Palais Royal; and all France standing a-tiptoe, not

unlike whirling!  Let the Oeil-de-Boeuf look to it.  As for King Louis, he

will swallow his injuries; will temporise, keep silence; will at all costs

have present peace.  It was Tuesday the 23d of June, when he spoke that

peremptory royal mandate; and the week is not done till he has written to

the remaining obstinate Noblesse, that they also must oblige him, and give

in.  D'Espremenil rages his last; Barrel Mirabeau 'breaks his sword,'

making a vow,--which he might as well have kept.  The 'Triple Family' is

now therefore complete; the third erring brother, the Noblesse, having

joined it;--erring but pardonable; soothed, so far as possible, by sweet

eloquence from President Bailly.



So triumphs the Third Estate; and States-General are become National

Assembly; and all France may sing Te Deum.  By wise inertia, and wise

cessation of inertia, great victory has been gained.  It is the last night

of June:  all night you meet nothing on the streets of Versailles but 'men

running with torches' with shouts of jubilation.  From the 2nd of May when

they kissed the hand of Majesty, to this 30th of June when men run with

torches, we count seven weeks complete.  For seven weeks the National

Carroccio has stood far-seen, ringing many a signal; and, so much having

now gathered round it, may hope to stand.







Chapter 1.5.III.



Broglie the War-God.



The Court feels indignant that it is conquered; but what then?  Another

time it will do better.  Mercury descended in vain; now has the time come

for Mars.--The gods of the Oeil-de-Boeuf have withdrawn into the darkness

of their cloudy Ida; and sit there, shaping and forging what may be

needful, be it 'billets of a new National Bank,' munitions of war, or

things forever inscrutable to men.



Accordingly, what means this 'apparatus of troops'?  The National Assembly

can get no furtherance for its Committee of Subsistences; can hear only

that, at Paris, the Bakers' shops are besieged; that, in the Provinces,

people are living on 'meal-husks and boiled grass.'  But on all highways

there hover dust-clouds, with the march of regiments, with the trailing of

cannon:  foreign Pandours, of fierce aspect; Salis-Samade, Esterhazy,

Royal-Allemand; so many of them foreign, to the number of thirty thousand,-

-which fear can magnify to fifty:  all wending towards Paris and

Versailles!  Already, on the heights of Montmartre, is a digging and

delving; too like a scarping and trenching.  The effluence of Paris is

arrested Versailles-ward by a barrier of cannon at Sevres Bridge.  From the

Queen's Mews, cannon stand pointed on the National Assembly Hall itself. 

The National Assembly has its very slumbers broken by the tramp of

soldiery, swarming and defiling, endless, or seemingly endless, all round

those spaces, at dead of night, 'without drum-music, without audible word

of command.'  (A. Lameth, Assemblee Constituante, i. 41.)  What means it?



Shall eight, or even shall twelve Deputies, our Mirabeaus, Barnaves at the

head of them, be whirled suddenly to the Castle of Ham; the rest

ignominiously dispersed to the winds?  No National Assembly can make the

Constitution with cannon levelled on it from the Queen's Mews!  What means

this reticence of the Oeil-de-Boeuf, broken only by nods and shrugs?  In

the mystery of that cloudy Ida, what is it that they forge and shape?--Such

questions must distracted Patriotism keep asking, and receive no answer but

an echo.



Enough of themselves!  But now, above all, while the hungry food-year,

which runs from August to August, is getting older; becoming more and more

a famine-year?  With 'meal-husks and boiled grass,' Brigands may actually

collect; and, in crowds, at farm and mansion, howl angrily, Food! Food!  It

is in vain to send soldiers against them:  at sight of soldiers they

disperse, they vanish as under ground; then directly reassemble elsewhere

for new tumult and plunder.  Frightful enough to look upon; but what to

hear of, reverberated through Twenty-five Millions of suspicious minds! 

Brigands and Broglie, open Conflagration, preternatural Rumour are driving

mad most hearts in France.  What will the issue of these things be?



At Marseilles, many weeks ago, the Townsmen have taken arms; for

'suppressing of Brigands,' and other purposes:  the military commandant may

make of it what he will.  Elsewhere, everywhere, could not the like be

done?  Dubious, on the distracted Patriot imagination, wavers, as a last

deliverance, some foreshadow of a National Guard.  But conceive, above all,

the Wooden Tent in the Palais Royal!  A universal hubbub there, as of

dissolving worlds:  their loudest bellows the mad, mad-making voice of

Rumour; their sharpest gazes Suspicion into the pale dim World-Whirlpool;

discerning shapes and phantasms; imminent bloodthirsty Regiments camped on

the Champ-de-Mars; dispersed National Assembly; redhot cannon-balls (to

burn Paris);--the mad War-god and Bellona's sounding thongs.  To the

calmest man it is becoming too plain that battle is inevitable.



Inevitable, silently nod Messeigneurs and Broglie:  Inevitable and brief! 

Your National Assembly, stopped short in its Constitutional labours, may

fatigue the royal ear with addresses and remonstrances:  those cannon of

ours stand duly levelled; those troops are here.  The King's Declaration,

with its Thirty-five too generous Articles, was spoken, was not listened

to; but remains yet unrevoked:  he himself shall effect it, seul il fera!



As for Broglie, he has his headquarters at Versailles, all as in a seat of

war:  clerks writing; significant staff-officers, inclined to taciturnity;

plumed aides-de-camp, scouts, orderlies flying or hovering.  He himself

looks forth, important, impenetrable; listens to Besenval Commandant of

Paris, and his warning and earnest counsels (for he has come out repeatedly

on purpose), with a silent smile.  (Besenval, iii. 398.)  The Parisians

resist? scornfully cry Messeigneurs.  As a meal-mob may!  They have sat

quiet, these five generations, submitting to all.  Their Mercier declared,

in these very years, that a Parisian revolt was henceforth 'impossible.' 

(Mercier, Tableau de Paris, vi. 22.)  Stand by the royal Declaration, of

the Twenty-third of June.  The Nobles of France, valorous, chivalrous as of

old, will rally round us with one heart;--and as for this which you call

Third Estate, and which we call canaille of unwashed Sansculottes, of

Patelins, Scribblers, factious Spouters,--brave Broglie, 'with a whiff of

grapeshot (salve de canons), if need be, will give quick account of it. 

Thus reason they:  on their cloudy Ida; hidden from men,--men also hidden

from them.



Good is grapeshot, Messeigneurs, on one condition:  that the shooter also

were made of metal!  But unfortunately he is made of flesh; under his buffs

and bandoleers your hired shooter has instincts, feelings, even a kind of

thought.  It is his kindred, bone of his bone, this same canaille that

shall be whiffed; he has brothers in it, a father and mother,--living on

meal-husks and boiled grass.  His very doxy, not yet 'dead i' the spital,'

drives him into military heterodoxy; declares that if he shed Patriot

blood, he shall be accursed among men.  The soldier, who has seen his pay

stolen by rapacious Foulons, his blood wasted by Soubises, Pompadours, and

the gates of promotion shut inexorably on him if he were not born noble,--

is himself not without griefs against you.  Your cause is not the soldier's

cause; but, as would seem, your own only, and no other god's nor man's.



For example, the world may have heard how, at Bethune lately, when there

rose some 'riot about grains,' of which sort there are so many, and the

soldiers stood drawn out, and the word 'Fire!; was given,--not a trigger

stirred; only the butts of all muskets rattled angrily against the ground;

and the soldiers stood glooming, with a mixed expression of countenance;--

till clutched 'each under the arm of a patriot householder,' they were all

hurried off, in this manner, to be treated and caressed, and have their pay

increased by subscription!  (Histoire Parlementaire.)



Neither have the Gardes Francaises, the best regiment of the line, shown

any promptitude for street-firing lately.  They returned grumbling from

Reveillon's; and have not burnt a single cartridge since; nay, as we saw,

not even when bid.  A dangerous humour dwells in these Gardes.  Notable men

too, in their way!  Valadi the Pythagorean was, at one time, an officer of

theirs.  Nay, in the ranks, under the three-cornered felt and cockade, what

hard heads may there not be, and reflections going on,--unknown to the

public!  One head of the hardest we do now discern there:  on the shoulders

of a certain Sergeant Hoche.  Lazare Hoche, that is the name of him; he

used to be about the Versailles Royal Stables, nephew of a poor herbwoman;

a handy lad; exceedingly addicted to reading.  He is now Sergeant Hoche,

and can rise no farther:  he lays out his pay in rushlights, and cheap

editions of books.  (Dictionnaire des Hommes Marquans, Londres (Paris),

1800, ii. 198.)



On the whole, the best seems to be:  Consign these Gardes Francaises to

their Barracks.  So Besenval thinks, and orders.  Consigned to their

barracks, the Gardes Francaises do but form a 'Secret Association,' an

Engagement not to act against the National Assembly.  Debauched by Valadi

the Pythagorean; debauched by money and women! cry Besenval and innumerable

others.  Debauched by what you will, or in need of no debauching, behold

them, long files of them, their consignment broken, arrive, headed by their

Sergeants, on the 26th day of June, at the Palais Royal!  Welcomed with

vivats, with presents, and a pledge of patriot liquor; embracing and

embraced; declaring in words that the cause of France is their cause!  Next

day and the following days the like.  What is singular too, except this

patriot humour, and breaking of their consignment, they behave otherwise

with 'the most rigorous accuracy.'  (Besenval, iii. 394-6.)



They are growing questionable, these Gardes!  Eleven ring-leaders of them

are put in the Abbaye Prison.  It boots not in the least.  The imprisoned

Eleven have only, 'by the hand of an individual,' to drop, towards

nightfall, a line in the Cafe de Foy; where Patriotism harangues loudest on

its table.  'Two hundred young persons, soon waxing to four thousand,' with

fit crowbars, roll towards the Abbaye; smite asunder the needful doors; and

bear out their Eleven, with other military victims:--to supper in the

Palais Royal Garden; to board, and lodging 'in campbeds, in the Theatre des

Varietes;' other national Prytaneum as yet not being in readiness.  Most

deliberate!  Nay so punctual were these young persons, that finding one

military victim to have been imprisoned for real civil crime, they returned

him to his cell, with protest.



Why new military force was not called out?  New military force was called

out.  New military force did arrive, full gallop, with drawn sabre:  but

the people gently 'laid hold of their bridles;' the dragoons sheathed their

swords; lifted their caps by way of salute, and sat like mere statues of

dragoons,--except indeed that a drop of liquor being brought them, they

'drank to the King and Nation with the greatest cordiality.'  (Histoire

Parlementaire, ii. 32.)



And now, ask in return, why Messeigneurs and Broglie the great god of war,

on seeing these things, did not pause, and take some other course, any

other course?  Unhappily, as we said, they could see nothing.  Pride, which

goes before a fall; wrath, if not reasonable, yet pardonable, most natural,

had hardened their hearts and heated their heads; so, with imbecility and

violence (ill-matched pair), they rush to seek their hour.  All Regiments

are not Gardes Francaises, or debauched by Valadi the Pythagorean:  let

fresh undebauched Regiments come up; let Royal-Allemand, Salais-Samade,

Swiss Chateau-Vieux come up,--which can fight, but can hardly speak except

in German gutturals; let soldiers march, and highways thunder with

artillery-waggons:  Majesty has a new Royal Session to hold,--and miracles

to work there!  The whiff of grapeshot can, if needful, become a blast and

tempest.



In which circumstances, before the redhot balls begin raining, may not the

Hundred-and-twenty Paris Electors, though their Cahier is long since

finished, see good to meet again daily, as an 'Electoral Club'?  They meet

first 'in a Tavern;'--where 'the largest wedding-party' cheerfully give

place to them.  (Dusaulx, Prise de la Bastille (Collection des Memoires,

par Berville et Barriere, Paris, 1821), p. 269.)  But latterly they meet in

the Hotel-de-Ville, in the Townhall itself.  Flesselles, Provost of

Merchants, with his Four Echevins (Scabins, Assessors), could not prevent

it; such was the force of public opinion.  He, with his Echevins, and the

Six-and-Twenty Town-Councillors, all appointed from Above, may well sit

silent there, in their long gowns; and consider, with awed eye, what

prelude this is of convulsion coming from Below, and how themselves shall

fare in that!







Chapter 1.5.IV.



To Arms!



So hangs it, dubious, fateful, in the sultry days of July.  It is the

passionate printed advice of M. Marat, to abstain, of all things, from

violence.  (Avis au Peuple, ou les Ministres devoiles, 1st July, 1789 (in

Histoire Parlementaire, ii. 37.)  Nevertheless the hungry poor are already

burning Town Barriers, where Tribute on eatables is levied; getting

clamorous for food.



The twelfth July morning is Sunday; the streets are all placarded with an

enormous-sized De par le Roi, 'inviting peaceable citizens to remain within

doors,' to feel no alarm, to gather in no crowd.  Why so?  What mean these

'placards of enormous size'?  Above all, what means this clatter of

military; dragoons, hussars, rattling in from all points of the compass

towards the Place Louis Quinze; with a staid gravity of face, though

saluted with mere nicknames, hootings and even missiles?  (Besenval, iii.

411.)  Besenval is with them.  Swiss Guards of his are already in the

Champs Elysees, with four pieces of artillery.



Have the destroyers descended on us, then?  From the Bridge of Sevres to

utmost Vincennes, from Saint-Denis to the Champ-de-Mars, we are begirt! 

Alarm, of the vague unknown, is in every heart.  The Palais Royal has

become a place of awestruck interjections, silent shakings of the head: 

one can fancy with what dolorous sound the noon-tide cannon (which the Sun

fires at the crossing of his meridian) went off there; bodeful, like an

inarticulate voice of doom.  (Histoire Parlementaire, ii. 81.)  Are these

troops verily come out 'against Brigands'?  Where are the Brigands?  What

mystery is in the wind?--Hark! a human voice reporting articulately the

Job's-news:  Necker, People's Minister, Saviour of France, is dismissed. 

Impossible; incredible!  Treasonous to the public peace!  Such a voice

ought to be choked in the water-works; (Ibid.)--had not the news-bringer

quickly fled.  Nevertheless, friends, make of it what you will, the news is

true.  Necker is gone.  Necker hies northward incessantly, in obedient

secrecy, since yesternight.  We have a new Ministry:  Broglie the War-god;

Aristocrat Breteuil; Foulon who said the people might eat grass!



Rumour, therefore, shall arise; in the Palais Royal, and in broad France. 

Paleness sits on every face; confused tremor and fremescence; waxing into

thunder-peals, of Fury stirred on by Fear.



But see Camille Desmoulins, from the Cafe de Foy, rushing out, sibylline in

face; his hair streaming, in each hand a pistol!  He springs to a table: 

the Police satellites are eyeing him; alive they shall not take him, not

they alive him alive.  This time he speaks without stammering:--Friends,

shall we die like hunted hares?  Like sheep hounded into their pinfold;

bleating for mercy, where is no mercy, but only a whetted knife?  The hour

is come; the supreme hour of Frenchman and Man; when Oppressors are to try

conclusions with Oppressed; and the word is, swift Death, or Deliverance

forever.  Let such hour be well-come!  Us, meseems, one cry only befits: 

To Arms!  Let universal Paris, universal France, as with the throat of the

whirlwind, sound only:  To arms!--"To arms!" yell responsive the

innumerable voices:  like one great voice, as of a Demon yelling from the

air:  for all faces wax fire-eyed, all hearts burn up into madness.  In

such, or fitter words, (Ibid.) does Camille evoke the Elemental Powers, in

this great moment.--Friends, continues Camille, some rallying sign! 

Cockades; green ones;--the colour of hope!--As with the flight of locusts,

these green tree leaves; green ribands from the neighbouring shops; all

green things are snatched, and made cockades of.  Camille descends from his

table, 'stifled with embraces, wetted with tears;' has a bit of green

riband handed him; sticks it in his hat.  And now to Curtius' Image-shop

there; to the Boulevards; to the four winds; and rest not till France be on

fire!  (Vieux Cordelier, par Camille Desmoulins, No. 5 (reprinted in

Collection des Memoires, par Baudouin Freres, Paris, 1825), p. 81.)



France, so long shaken and wind-parched, is probably at the right

inflammable point.--As for poor Curtius, who, one grieves to think, might

be but imperfectly paid,--he cannot make two words about his Images.  The

Wax-bust of Necker, the Wax-bust of D'Orleans, helpers of France:  these,

covered with crape, as in funeral procession, or after the manner of

suppliants appealing to Heaven, to Earth, and Tartarus itself, a mixed

multitude bears off.  For a sign!  As indeed man, with his singular

imaginative faculties, can do little or nothing without signs:  thus Turks

look to their Prophet's banner; also Osier Mannikins have been burnt, and

Necker's Portrait has erewhile figured, aloft on its perch.



In this manner march they, a mixed, continually increasing multitude; armed

with axes, staves and miscellanea; grim, many-sounding, through the

streets.  Be all Theatres shut; let all dancing, on planked floor, or on

the natural greensward, cease!  Instead of a Christian Sabbath, and feast

of guinguette tabernacles, it shall be a Sorcerer's Sabbath; and Paris,

gone rabid, dance,--with the Fiend for piper!



However, Besenval, with horse and foot, is in the Place Louis Quinze. 

Mortals promenading homewards, in the fall of the day, saunter by, from

Chaillot or Passy, from flirtation and a little thin wine; with sadder step

than usual.  Will the Bust-Procession pass that way!  Behold it; behold

also Prince Lambesc dash forth on it, with his Royal-Allemands!  Shots

fall, and sabre-strokes; Busts are hewn asunder; and, alas, also heads of

men.  A sabred Procession has nothing for it but to explode, along what

streets, alleys, Tuileries Avenues it finds; and disappear.  One unarmed

man lies hewed down; a Garde Francaise by his uniform:  bear him (or bear

even the report of him) dead and gory to his Barracks;--where he has

comrades still alive!



But why not now, victorious Lambesc, charge through that Tuileries Garden

itself, where the fugitives are vanishing?  Not show the Sunday promenaders

too, how steel glitters, besprent with blood; that it be told of, and men's

ears tingle?--Tingle, alas, they did; but the wrong way.  Victorious

Lambesc, in this his second or Tuileries charge, succeeds but in

overturning (call it not slashing, for he struck with the flat of his

sword) one man, a poor old schoolmaster, most pacifically tottering there;

and is driven out, by barricade of chairs, by flights of 'bottles and

glasses,' by execrations in bass voice and treble.  Most delicate is the

mob-queller's vocation; wherein Too-much may be as bad as Not-enough.  For

each of these bass voices, and more each treble voice, borne to all points

of the City, rings now nothing but distracted indignation; will ring all

another.  The cry, To arms! roars tenfold; steeples with their metal storm-

voice boom out, as the sun sinks; armorer's shops are broken open,

plundered; the streets are a living foam-sea, chafed by all the winds.



Such issue came of Lambesc's charge on the Tuileries Garden:  no striking

of salutary terror into Chaillot promenaders; a striking into broad

wakefulness of Frenzy and the three Furies,--which otherwise were not

asleep!  For they lie always, those subterranean Eumenides (fabulous and

yet so true), in the dullest existence of man;--and can dance, brandishing

their dusky torches, shaking their serpent-hair.  Lambesc with Royal-

Allemand may ride to his barracks, with curses for his marching-music; then

ride back again, like one troubled in mind:  vengeful Gardes Francaises,

sacreing, with knit brows, start out on him, from their barracks in the

Chaussee d'Antin; pour a volley into him (killing and wounding); which he

must not answer, but ride on.  (Weber, ii. 75-91.)



Counsel dwells not under the plumed hat.  If the Eumenides awaken, and

Broglie has given no orders, what can a Besenval do?  When the Gardes

Francaises, with Palais-Royal volunteers, roll down, greedy of more

vengeance, to the Place Louis Quinze itself, they find neither Besenval,

Lambesc, Royal-Allemand, nor any soldier now there.  Gone is military

order.  On the far Eastern Boulevard, of Saint-Antoine, the Chasseurs

Normandie arrive, dusty, thirsty, after a hard day's ride; but can find no

billet-master, see no course in this City of confusions; cannot get to

Besenval, cannot so much as discover where he is:  Normandie must even

bivouac there, in its dust and thirst,--unless some patriot will treat it

to a cup of liquor, with advices.



Raging multitudes surround the Hotel-de-Ville, crying:  Arms!  Orders!  The

Six-and-twenty Town-Councillors, with their long gowns, have ducked under

(into the raging chaos);--shall never emerge more.  Besenval is painfully

wriggling himself out, to the Champ-de-Mars; he must sit there 'in the

cruelest uncertainty:'  courier after courier may dash off for Versailles;

but will bring back no answer, can hardly bring himself back.  For the

roads are all blocked with batteries and pickets, with floods of carriages

arrested for examination:  such was Broglie's one sole order; the Oeil-de-

Boeuf, hearing in the distance such mad din, which sounded almost like

invasion, will before all things keep its own head whole.  A new Ministry,

with, as it were, but one foot in the stirrup, cannot take leaps.  Mad

Paris is abandoned altogether to itself.



What a Paris, when the darkness fell!  A European metropolitan City hurled

suddenly forth from its old combinations and arrangements; to crash

tumultuously together, seeking new.  Use and wont will now no longer direct

any man; each man, with what of originality he has, must begin thinking; or

following those that think.  Seven hundred thousand individuals, on the

sudden, find all their old paths, old ways of acting and deciding, vanish

from under their feet.  And so there go they, with clangour and terror,

they know not as yet whether running, swimming or flying,--headlong into

the New Era.  With clangour and terror:  from above, Broglie the war-god

impends, preternatural, with his redhot cannon-balls; and from below, a

preternatural Brigand-world menaces with dirk and firebrand:  madness rules

the hour.



Happily, in place of the submerged Twenty-six, the Electoral Club is

gathering; has declared itself a 'Provisional Municipality.'  On the morrow

it will get Provost Flesselles, with an Echevin or two, to give help in

many things.  For the present it decrees one most essential thing:  that

forthwith a 'Parisian Militia' shall be enrolled.  Depart, ye heads of

Districts, to labour in this great work; while we here, in Permanent

Committee, sit alert.  Let fencible men, each party in its own range of

streets, keep watch and ward, all night.  Let Paris court a little fever-

sleep; confused by such fever-dreams, of 'violent motions at the Palais

Royal;'--or from time to time start awake, and look out, palpitating, in

its nightcap, at the clash of discordant mutually-unintelligible Patrols;

on the gleam of distant Barriers, going up all-too ruddy towards the vault

of Night.  (Deux Amis, i. 267-306.)







Chapter 1.5.V.



Give us Arms.



On Monday the huge City has awoke, not to its week-day industry:  to what a

different one!  The working man has become a fighting man; has one want

only:  that of arms.  The industry of all crafts has paused;--except it be

the smith's, fiercely hammering pikes; and, in a faint degree, the

kitchener's, cooking off-hand victuals; for bouche va toujours.  Women too

are sewing cockades;--not now of green, which being D'Artois colour, the

Hotel-de-Ville has had to interfere in it; but of red and blue, our old

Paris colours:  these, once based on a ground of constitutional white, are

the famed TRICOLOR,--which (if Prophecy err not) 'will go round the world.'



All shops, unless it be the Bakers' and Vintners', are shut:  Paris is in

the streets;--rushing, foaming like some Venice wine-glass into which you

had dropped poison.  The tocsin, by order, is pealing madly from all

steeples.  Arms, ye Elector Municipals; thou Flesselles with thy Echevins,

give us arms!  Flesselles gives what he can:  fallacious, perhaps insidious

promises of arms from Charleville; order to seek arms here, order to seek

them there.  The new Municipals give what they can; some three hundred and

sixty indifferent firelocks, the equipment of the City-Watch:  'a man in

wooden shoes, and without coat, directly clutches one of them, and mounts

guard.'  Also as hinted, an order to all Smiths to make pikes with their

whole soul.



Heads of Districts are in fervent consultation; subordinate Patriotism

roams distracted, ravenous for arms.  Hitherto at the Hotel-de-Ville was

only such modicum of indifferent firelocks as we have seen.  At the so-

called Arsenal, there lies nothing but rust, rubbish and saltpetre,--

overlooked too by the guns of the Bastille.  His Majesty's Repository, what

they call Garde-Meuble, is forced and ransacked:  tapestries enough, and

gauderies; but of serviceable fighting-gear small stock!  Two silver-

mounted cannons there are; an ancient gift from his Majesty of Siam to

Louis Fourteenth:  gilt sword of the Good Henri; antique Chivalry arms and

armour.  These, and such as these, a necessitous Patriotism snatches

greedily, for want of better.  The Siamese cannons go trundling, on an

errand they were not meant for.  Among the indifferent firelocks are seen

tourney-lances; the princely helm and hauberk glittering amid ill-hatted

heads,--as in a time when all times and their possessions are suddenly sent

jumbling!



At the Maison de Saint-Lazare, Lazar-House once, now a Correction-House

with Priests, there was no trace of arms; but, on the other hand, corn,

plainly to a culpable extent.  Out with it, to market; in this scarcity of

grains!--Heavens, will 'fifty-two carts,' in long row, hardly carry it to

the Halle aux Bleds?  Well, truly, ye reverend Fathers, was your pantry

filled; fat are your larders; over-generous your wine-bins, ye plotting

exasperators of the Poor; traitorous forestallers of bread!



Vain is protesting, entreaty on bare knees:  the House of Saint-Lazarus has

that in it which comes not out by protesting.  Behold, how, from every

window, it vomits:  mere torrents of furniture, of bellowing and

hurlyburly;--the cellars also leaking wine.  Till, as was natural, smoke

rose,--kindled, some say, by the desperate Saint-Lazaristes themselves,

desperate of other riddance; and the Establishment vanished from this world

in flame.  Remark nevertheless that 'a thief' (set on or not by

Aristocrats), being detected there, is 'instantly hanged.'



Look also at the Chatelet Prison.  The Debtors' Prison of La Force is

broken from without; and they that sat in bondage to Aristocrats go free: 

hearing of which the Felons at the Chatelet do likewise 'dig up their

pavements,' and stand on the offensive; with the best prospects,--had not

Patriotism, passing that way, 'fired a volley' into the Felon world; and

crushed it down again under hatches.  Patriotism consorts not with thieving

and felony:  surely also Punishment, this day, hitches (if she still hitch)

after Crime, with frightful shoes-of-swiftness!  'Some score or two' of

wretched persons, found prostrate with drink in the cellars of that Saint-

Lazare, are indignantly haled to prison; the Jailor has no room; whereupon,

other place of security not suggesting itself, it is written, 'on les

pendit, they hanged them.'  (Histoire Parlementaire, ii. 96.)  Brief is the

word; not without significance, be it true or untrue!



In such circumstances, the Aristocrat, the unpatriotic rich man is packing-

up for departure.  But he shall not get departed.  A wooden-shod force has

seized all Barriers, burnt or not:  all that enters, all that seeks to

issue, is stopped there, and dragged to the Hotel-de-Ville:  coaches,

tumbrils, plate, furniture, 'many meal-sacks,' in time even 'flocks and

herds' encumber the Place de Greve.  (Dusaulx, Prise de la Bastille, p.

20.)



And so it roars, and rages, and brays; drums beating, steeples pealing;

criers rushing with hand-bells:  "Oyez, oyez.  All men to their Districts

to be enrolled!"  The Districts have met in gardens, open squares; are

getting marshalled into volunteer troops.  No redhot ball has yet fallen

from Besenval's Camp; on the contrary, Deserters with their arms are

continually dropping in:  nay now, joy of joys, at two in the afternoon,

the Gardes Francaises, being ordered to Saint-Denis, and flatly declining,

have come over in a body!  It is a fact worth many.  Three thousand six

hundred of the best fighting men, with complete accoutrement; with

cannoneers even, and cannon!  Their officers are left standing alone; could

not so much as succeed in 'spiking the guns.'  The very Swiss, it may now

be hoped, Chateau-Vieux and the others, will have doubts about fighting.



Our Parisian Militia,--which some think it were better to name National

Guard,--is prospering as heart could wish.  It promised to be forty-eight

thousand; but will in few hours double and quadruple that number: 

invincible, if we had only arms!



But see, the promised Charleville Boxes, marked Artillerie!  Here, then,

are arms enough?--Conceive the blank face of Patriotism, when it found them

filled with rags, foul linen, candle-ends, and bits of wood!  Provost of

the Merchants, how is this?  Neither at the Chartreux Convent, whither we

were sent with signed order, is there or ever was there any weapon of war.

Nay here, in this Seine Boat, safe under tarpaulings (had not the nose of

Patriotism been of the finest), are 'five thousand-weight of gunpowder;'

not coming in, but surreptitiously going out!  What meanest thou,

Flesselles?  'Tis a ticklish game, that of 'amusing' us.  Cat plays with

captive mouse:  but mouse with enraged cat, with enraged National Tiger?



Meanwhile, the faster, O ye black-aproned Smiths, smite; with strong arm

and willing heart.  This man and that, all stroke from head to heel, shall

thunder alternating, and ply the great forge-hammer, till stithy reel and

ring again; while ever and anon, overhead, booms the alarm-cannon,--for the

City has now got gunpowder.  Pikes are fabricated; fifty thousand of them,

in six-and-thirty hours:  judge whether the Black-aproned have been idle. 

Dig trenches, unpave the streets, ye others, assiduous, man and maid; cram

the earth in barrel-barricades, at each of them a volunteer sentry; pile

the whinstones in window-sills and upper rooms.  Have scalding pitch, at

least boiling water ready, ye weak old women, to pour it and dash it on

Royal-Allemand, with your old skinny arms:  your shrill curses along with

it will not be wanting!--Patrols of the newborn National Guard, bearing

torches, scour the streets, all that night; which otherwise are vacant, yet

illuminated in every window by order.  Strange-looking; like some naphtha-

lighted City of the Dead, with here and there a flight of perturbed Ghosts.



O poor mortals, how ye make this Earth bitter for each other; this fearful

and wonderful Life fearful and horrible; and Satan has his place in all

hearts!  Such agonies and ragings and wailings ye have, and have had, in

all times:--to be buried all, in so deep silence; and the salt sea is not

swoln with your tears.



Great meanwhile is the moment, when tidings of Freedom reach us; when the

long-enthralled soul, from amid its chains and squalid stagnancy, arises,

were it still only in blindness and bewilderment, and swears by Him that

made it, that it will be free!  Free?  Understand that well, it is the deep

commandment, dimmer or clearer, of our whole being, to be free.  Freedom is

the one purport, wisely aimed at, or unwisely, of all man's struggles,

toilings and sufferings, in this Earth.  Yes, supreme is such a moment (if

thou have known it):  first vision as of a flame-girt Sinai, in this our

waste Pilgrimage,--which thenceforth wants not its pillar of cloud by day,

and pillar of fire by night!  Something it is even,--nay, something

considerable, when the chains have grown corrosive, poisonous, to be free

'from oppression by our fellow-man.'  Forward, ye maddened sons of France;

be it towards this destiny or towards that!  Around you is but starvation,

falsehood, corruption and the clam of death.  Where ye are is no abiding.



Imagination may, imperfectly, figure how Commandant Besenval, in the Champ-

de-Mars, has worn out these sorrowful hours Insurrection all round; his men

melting away!  From Versailles, to the most pressing messages, comes no

answer; or once only some vague word of answer which is worse than none.  A

Council of Officers can decide merely that there is no decision:  Colonels

inform him, 'weeping,' that they do not think their men will fight.  Cruel

uncertainty is here:  war-god Broglie sits yonder, inaccessible in his

Olympus; does not descend terror-clad, does not produce his whiff of

grapeshot; sends no orders.



Truly, in the Chateau of Versailles all seems mystery:  in the Town of

Versailles, were we there, all is rumour, alarm and indignation.  An august

National Assembly sits, to appearance, menaced with death; endeavouring to

defy death.  It has resolved 'that Necker carries with him the regrets of

the Nation.'  It has sent solemn Deputation over to the Chateau, with

entreaty to have these troops withdrawn.  In vain:  his Majesty, with a

singular composure, invites us to be busy rather with our own duty, making

the Constitution!  Foreign Pandours, and suchlike, go pricking and

prancing, with a swashbuckler air; with an eye too probably to the Salle

des Menus,--were it not for the 'grim-looking countenances' that crowd all

avenues there.  (See Lameth; Ferrieres, &c.)  Be firm, ye National

Senators; the cynosure of a firm, grim-looking people!



The august National Senators determine that there shall, at least, be

Permanent Session till this thing end.  Wherein, however, consider that

worthy Lafranc de Pompignan, our new President, whom we have named Bailly's

successor, is an old man, wearied with many things.  He is the Brother of

that Pompignan who meditated lamentably on the Book of Lamentations:



  Saves-voux pourquoi Jeremie

  Se lamentait toute sa vie?

  C'est qu'il prevoyait

  Que Pompignan le traduirait!



Poor Bishop Pompignan withdraws; having got Lafayette for helper or

substitute:  this latter, as nocturnal Vice-President, with a thin house in

disconsolate humour, sits sleepless, with lights unsnuffed;--waiting what

the hours will bring.



So at Versailles.  But at Paris, agitated Besenval, before retiring for the

night, has stept over to old M. de Sombreuil, of the Hotel des Invalides

hard by.  M. de Sombreuil has, what is a great secret, some eight-and-

twenty thousand stand of muskets deposited in his cellars there; but no

trust in the temper of his Invalides.  This day, for example, he sent

twenty of the fellows down to unscrew those muskets; lest Sedition might

snatch at them; but scarcely, in six hours, had the twenty unscrewed twenty

gun-locks, or dogsheads (chiens) of locks,--each Invalide his dogshead!  If

ordered to fire, they would, he imagines, turn their cannon against

himself.



Unfortunate old military gentlemen, it is your hour, not of glory!  Old

Marquis de Launay too, of the Bastille, has pulled up his drawbridges long

since, 'and retired into his interior;' with sentries walking on his

battlements, under the midnight sky, aloft over the glare of illuminated

Paris;--whom a National Patrol, passing that way, takes the liberty of

firing at; 'seven shots towards twelve at night,' which do not take effect. 

(Deux Amis de la Liberte, i. 312.)  This was the 13th day of July, 1789; a

worse day, many said, than the last 13th was, when only hail fell out of

Heaven, not madness rose out of Tophet, ruining worse than crops!



In these same days, as Chronology will teach us, hot old Marquis Mirabeau

lies stricken down, at Argenteuil,--not within sound of these alarm-guns;

for he properly is not there, and only the body of him now lies, deaf and

cold forever.  It was on Saturday night that he, drawing his last life-

breaths, gave up the ghost there;--leaving a world, which would never go to

his mind, now broken out, seemingly, into deliration and the culbute

generale.  What is it to him, departing elsewhither, on his long journey? 

The old Chateau Mirabeau stands silent, far off, on its scarped rock, in

that 'gorge of two windy valleys;' the pale-fading spectre now of a

Chateau:  this huge World-riot, and France, and the World itself, fades

also, like a shadow on the great still mirror-sea; and all shall be as God

wills.



Young Mirabeau, sad of heart, for he loved this crabbed brave old Father,

sad of heart, and occupied with sad cares,--is withdrawn from Public

History.  The great crisis transacts itself without him.  (Fils Adoptif,

Mirabeau, vi. l. 1.)







Chapter 1.5.VI.



Storm and Victory.



But, to the living and the struggling, a new, Fourteenth morning dawns. 

Under all roofs of this distracted City, is the nodus of a drama, not

untragical, crowding towards solution.  The bustlings and preparings, the

tremors and menaces; the tears that fell from old eyes!  This day, my sons,

ye shall quit you like men.  By the memory of your fathers' wrongs, by the

hope of your children's rights!  Tyranny impends in red wrath:  help for

you is none if not in your own right hands.  This day ye must do or die.



From earliest light, a sleepless Permanent Committee has heard the old cry,

now waxing almost frantic, mutinous:  Arms!  Arms!  Provost Flesselles, or

what traitors there are among you, may think of those Charleville Boxes.  A

hundred-and-fifty thousand of us; and but the third man furnished with so

much as a pike!  Arms are the one thing needful:  with arms we are an

unconquerable man-defying National Guard; without arms, a rabble to be

whiffed with grapeshot.



Happily the word has arisen, for no secret can be kept,--that there lie

muskets at the Hotel des Invalides.  Thither will we:  King's Procureur M.

Ethys de Corny, and whatsoever of authority a Permanent Committee can lend,

shall go with us.  Besenval's Camp is there; perhaps he will not fire on

us; if he kill us we shall but die.



Alas, poor Besenval, with his troops melting away in that manner, has not

the smallest humour to fire!  At five o'clock this morning, as he lay

dreaming, oblivious in the Ecole Militaire, a 'figure' stood suddenly at

his bedside:  'with face rather handsome; eyes inflamed, speech rapid and

curt, air audacious:'  such a figure drew Priam's curtains!  The message

and monition of the figure was, that resistance would be hopeless; that if

blood flowed, wo to him who shed it.  Thus spoke the figure; and vanished. 

'Withal there was a kind of eloquence that struck one.'  Besenval admits

that he should have arrested him, but did not.  (Besenval, iii. 414.)  Who

this figure, with inflamed eyes, with speech rapid and curt, might be? 

Besenval knows but mentions not.  Camille Desmoulins?  Pythagorean Marquis

Valadi, inflamed with 'violent motions all night at the Palais Royal?' 

Fame names him, 'Young M. Meillar'; (Tableaux de la Revolution, Prise de la

Bastille (a folio Collection of Pictures and Portraits, with letter-press,

not always uninstructive,--part of it said to be by Chamfort).)  Then shuts

her lips about him for ever.



In any case, behold about nine in the morning, our National Volunteers

rolling in long wide flood, south-westward to the Hotel des Invalides; in

search of the one thing needful.  King's procureur M. Ethys de Corny and

officials are there; the Cure of Saint-Etienne du Mont marches unpacific,

at the head of his militant Parish; the Clerks of the Bazoche in red coats

we see marching, now Volunteers of the Bazoche; the Volunteers of the

Palais Royal:--National Volunteers, numerable by tens of thousands; of one

heart and mind.  The King's muskets are the Nation's; think, old M. de

Sombreuil, how, in this extremity, thou wilt refuse them!  Old M. de

Sombreuil would fain hold parley, send Couriers; but it skills not:  the

walls are scaled, no Invalide firing a shot; the gates must be flung open. 

Patriotism rushes in, tumultuous, from grundsel up to ridge-tile, through

all rooms and passages; rummaging distractedly for arms.  What cellar, or

what cranny can escape it?  The arms are found; all safe there; lying

packed in straw,--apparently with a view to being burnt!  More ravenous

than famishing lions over dead prey, the multitude, with clangour and

vociferation, pounces on them; struggling, dashing, clutching:--to the

jamming-up, to the pressure, fracture and probable extinction, of the

weaker Patriot.  (Deux Amis, i. 302.)  And so, with such protracted crash

of deafening, most discordant Orchestra-music, the Scene is changed:  and

eight-and-twenty thousand sufficient firelocks are on the shoulders of so

many National Guards, lifted thereby out of darkness into fiery light.



Let Besenval look at the glitter of these muskets, as they flash by! 

Gardes Francaises, it is said, have cannon levelled on him; ready to open,

if need were, from the other side of the River.  (Besenval, iii. 416.) 

Motionless sits he; 'astonished,' one may flatter oneself, 'at the proud

bearing (fiere contenance) of the Parisians.'--And now, to the Bastille, ye

intrepid Parisians!  There grapeshot still threatens; thither all men's

thoughts and steps are now tending.



Old de Launay, as we hinted, withdrew 'into his interior' soon after

midnight of Sunday.  He remains there ever since, hampered, as all military

gentlemen now are, in the saddest conflict of uncertainties.  The Hotel-de-

Ville 'invites' him to admit National Soldiers, which is a soft name for

surrendering.  On the other hand, His Majesty's orders were precise.  His

garrison is but eighty-two old Invalides, reinforced by thirty-two young

Swiss; his walls indeed are nine feet thick, he has cannon and powder; but,

alas, only one day's provision of victuals.  The city too is French, the

poor garrison mostly French.  Rigorous old de Launay, think what thou wilt

do!



All morning, since nine, there has been a cry everywhere:  To the Bastille!

Repeated 'deputations of citizens' have been here, passionate for arms;

whom de Launay has got dismissed by soft speeches through portholes. 

Towards noon, Elector Thuriot de la Rosiere gains admittance; finds de

Launay indisposed for surrender; nay disposed for blowing up the place

rather.  Thuriot mounts with him to the battlements:  heaps of paving-

stones, old iron and missiles lie piled; cannon all duly levelled; in every

embrasure a cannon,--only drawn back a little!  But outwards behold, O

Thuriot, how the multitude flows on, welling through every street; tocsin

furiously pealing, all drums beating the generale:  the Suburb Saint-

Antoine rolling hitherward wholly, as one man!  Such vision (spectral yet

real) thou, O Thuriot, as from thy Mount of Vision, beholdest in this

moment:  prophetic of what other Phantasmagories, and loud-gibbering

Spectral Realities, which, thou yet beholdest not, but shalt!  "Que voulez

vous?" said de Launay, turning pale at the sight, with an air of reproach,

almost of menace.  "Monsieur," said Thuriot, rising into the moral-sublime,

"What mean you?  Consider if I could not precipitate both of us from this

height,"--say only a hundred feet, exclusive of the walled ditch! 

Whereupon de Launay fell silent.  Thuriot shews himself from some pinnacle,

to comfort the multitude becoming suspicious, fremescent:  then descends;

departs with protest; with warning addressed also to the Invalides,--on

whom, however, it produces but a mixed indistinct impression.  The old

heads are none of the clearest; besides, it is said, de Launay has been

profuse of beverages (prodigua des buissons).  They think, they will not

fire,--if not fired on, if they can help it; but must, on the whole, be

ruled considerably by circumstances.



Wo to thee, de Launay, in such an hour, if thou canst not, taking some one

firm decision, rule circumstances!  Soft speeches will not serve; hard

grape-shot is questionable; but hovering between the two is unquestionable. 

Ever wilder swells the tide of men; their infinite hum waxing ever louder,

into imprecations, perhaps into crackle of stray musketry,--which latter,

on walls nine feet thick, cannot do execution.  The Outer Drawbridge has

been lowered for Thuriot; new deputation of citizens (it is the third, and

noisiest of all) penetrates that way into the Outer Court:  soft speeches

producing no clearance of these, de Launay gives fire; pulls up his

Drawbridge.  A slight sputter;--which has kindled the too combustible

chaos; made it a roaring fire-chaos!  Bursts forth insurrection, at sight

of its own blood (for there were deaths by that sputter of fire), into

endless rolling explosion of musketry, distraction, execration;--and

overhead, from the Fortress, let one great gun, with its grape-shot, go

booming, to shew what we could do.  The Bastille is besieged!



On, then, all Frenchmen that have hearts in their bodies!  Roar with all

your throats, of cartilage and metal, ye Sons of Liberty; stir

spasmodically whatsoever of utmost faculty is in you, soul, body or spirit;

for it is the hour!  Smite, thou Louis Tournay, cartwright of the Marais,

old-soldier of the Regiment Dauphine; smite at that Outer Drawbridge chain,

though the fiery hail whistles round thee!  Never, over nave or felloe, did

thy axe strike such a stroke.  Down with it, man; down with it to Orcus: 

let the whole accursed Edifice sink thither, and Tyranny be swallowed up

for ever!  Mounted, some say on the roof of the guard-room, some 'on

bayonets stuck into joints of the wall,' Louis Tournay smites, brave Aubin

Bonnemere (also an old soldier) seconding him:  the chain yields, breaks;

the huge Drawbridge slams down, thundering (avec fracas).  Glorious:  and

yet, alas, it is still but the outworks.  The Eight grim Towers, with their

Invalides' musketry, their paving stones and cannon-mouths, still soar

aloft intact;--Ditch yawning impassable, stone-faced; the inner Drawbridge

with its back towards us:  the Bastille is still to take!



To describe this Siege of the Bastille (thought to be one of the most

important in history) perhaps transcends the talent of mortals.  Could one

but, after infinite reading, get to understand so much as the plan of the

building!  But there is open Esplanade, at the end of the Rue Saint-

Antoine; there are such Forecourts, Cour Avance, Cour de l'Orme, arched

Gateway (where Louis Tournay now fights); then new drawbridges, dormant-

bridges, rampart-bastions, and the grim Eight Towers:  a labyrinthic Mass,

high-frowning there, of all ages from twenty years to four hundred and

twenty;--beleaguered, in this its last hour, as we said, by mere Chaos come

again!  Ordnance of all calibres; throats of all capacities; men of all

plans, every man his own engineer:  seldom since the war of Pygmies and

Cranes was there seen so anomalous a thing.  Half-pay Elie is home for a

suit of regimentals; no one would heed him in coloured clothes:  half-pay

Hulin is haranguing Gardes Francaises in the Place de Greve.  Frantic

Patriots pick up the grape-shots; bear them, still hot (or seemingly so),

to the Hotel-de-Ville:--Paris, you perceive, is to be burnt!  Flesselles is

'pale to the very lips' for the roar of the multitude grows deep.  Paris

wholly has got to the acme of its frenzy; whirled, all ways, by panic

madness.  At every street-barricade, there whirls simmering, a minor

whirlpool,--strengthening the barricade, since God knows what is coming;

and all minor whirlpools play distractedly into that grand Fire-Mahlstrom

which is lashing round the Bastille.



And so it lashes and it roars.  Cholat the wine-merchant has become an

impromptu cannoneer.  See Georget, of the Marine Service, fresh from Brest,

ply the King of Siam's cannon.  Singular (if we were not used to the like): 

Georget lay, last night, taking his ease at his inn; the King of Siam's

cannon also lay, knowing nothing of him, for a hundred years.  Yet now, at

the right instant, they have got together, and discourse eloquent music.

For, hearing what was toward, Georget sprang from the Brest Diligence, and

ran.  Gardes Francaises also will be here, with real artillery:  were not

the walls so thick!--Upwards from the Esplanade, horizontally from all

neighbouring roofs and windows, flashes one irregular deluge of musketry,--

without effect.  The Invalides lie flat, firing comparatively at their ease

from behind stone; hardly through portholes, shew the tip of a nose.  We

fall, shot; and make no impression!



Let conflagration rage; of whatsoever is combustible!  Guard-rooms are

burnt, Invalides mess-rooms.  A distracted 'Peruke-maker with two fiery

torches' is for burning 'the saltpetres of the Arsenal;'--had not a woman

run screaming; had not a Patriot, with some tincture of Natural Philosophy,

instantly struck the wind out of him (butt of musket on pit of stomach),

overturned barrels, and stayed the devouring element.  A young beautiful

lady, seized escaping in these Outer Courts, and thought falsely to be de

Launay's daughter, shall be burnt in de Launay's sight; she lies swooned on

a paillasse:  but again a Patriot, it is brave Aubin Bonnemere the old

soldier, dashes in, and rescues her.  Straw is burnt; three cartloads of

it, hauled thither, go up in white smoke:  almost to the choking of

Patriotism itself; so that Elie had, with singed brows, to drag back one

cart; and Reole the 'gigantic haberdasher' another.  Smoke as of Tophet;

confusion as of Babel; noise as of the Crack of Doom!



Blood flows, the aliment of new madness.  The wounded are carried into

houses of the Rue Cerisaie; the dying leave their last mandate not to yield

till the accursed Stronghold fall.  And yet, alas, how fall?  The walls are

so thick!  Deputations, three in number, arrive from the Hotel-de-Ville;

Abbe Fouchet (who was of one) can say, with what almost superhuman courage

of benevolence.  (Fauchet's Narrative (Deux Amis, i. 324.).)  These wave

their Town-flag in the arched Gateway; and stand, rolling their drum; but

to no purpose.  In such Crack of Doom, de Launay cannot hear them, dare not

believe them:  they return, with justified rage, the whew of lead still

singing in their ears.  What to do?  The Firemen are here, squirting with

their fire-pumps on the Invalides' cannon, to wet the touchholes; they

unfortunately cannot squirt so high; but produce only clouds of spray. 

Individuals of classical knowledge propose catapults.  Santerre, the

sonorous Brewer of the Suburb Saint-Antoine, advises rather that the place

be fired, by a 'mixture of phosphorous and oil-of-turpentine spouted up

through forcing pumps:'  O Spinola-Santerre, hast thou the mixture ready? 

Every man his own engineer!  And still the fire-deluge abates not; even

women are firing, and Turks; at least one woman (with her sweetheart), and

one Turk.  (Deux Amis (i. 319); Dusaulx, &c.)  Gardes Francaises have come: 

real cannon, real cannoneers.  Usher Maillard is busy; half-pay Elie, half-

pay Hulin rage in the midst of thousands.



How the great Bastille Clock ticks (inaudible) in its Inner Court there, at

its ease, hour after hour; as if nothing special, for it or the world, were

passing!  It tolled One when the firing began; and is now pointing towards

Five, and still the firing slakes not.--Far down, in their vaults, the

seven Prisoners hear muffled din as of earthquakes; their Turnkeys answer

vaguely.



Wo to thee, de Launay, with thy poor hundred Invalides!  Broglie is

distant, and his ears heavy:  Besenval hears, but can send no help.  One

poor troop of Hussars has crept, reconnoitring, cautiously along the Quais,

as far as the Pont Neuf.  "We are come to join you," said the Captain; for

the crowd seems shoreless.  A large-headed dwarfish individual, of smoke-

bleared aspect, shambles forward, opening his blue lips, for there is sense

in him; and croaks:  "Alight then, and give up your arms!" the Hussar-

Captain is too happy to be escorted to the Barriers, and dismissed on

parole.  Who the squat individual was?  Men answer, it is M. Marat, author

of the excellent pacific Avis au Peuple!  Great truly, O thou remarkable

Dogleech, is this thy day of emergence and new birth:  and yet this same

day come four years--!--But let the curtains of the future hang.



What shall de Launay do?  One thing only de Launay could have done:  what

he said he would do.  Fancy him sitting, from the first, with lighted

taper, within arm's length of the Powder-Magazine; motionless, like old

Roman Senator, or bronze Lamp-holder; coldly apprising Thuriot, and all

men, by a slight motion of his eye, what his resolution was:--Harmless he

sat there, while unharmed; but the King's Fortress, meanwhile, could,

might, would, or should, in nowise, be surrendered, save to the King's

Messenger:  one old man's life worthless, so it be lost with honour; but

think, ye brawling canaille, how will it be when a whole Bastille springs

skyward!--In such statuesque, taper-holding attitude, one fancies de Launay

might have left Thuriot, the red Clerks of the Bazoche, Cure of Saint-

Stephen and all the tagrag-and-bobtail of the world, to work their will.



And yet, withal, he could not do it.  Hast thou considered how each man's

heart is so tremulously responsive to the hearts of all men; hast thou

noted how omnipotent is the very sound of many men?  How their shriek of

indignation palsies the strong soul; their howl of contumely withers with

unfelt pangs?  The Ritter Gluck confessed that the ground-tone of the

noblest passage, in one of his noblest Operas, was the voice of the

Populace he had heard at Vienna, crying to their Kaiser:  Bread!  Bread! 

Great is the combined voice of men; the utterance of their instincts, which

are truer than their thoughts:  it is the greatest a man encounters, among

the sounds and shadows, which make up this World of Time.  He who can

resist that, has his footing some where beyond Time.  De Launay could not

do it.  Distracted, he hovers between the two; hopes in the middle of

despair; surrenders not his Fortress; declares that he will blow it up,

seizes torches to blow it up, and does not blow it.  Unhappy old de Launay,

it is the death-agony of thy Bastille and thee!  Jail, Jailoring and

Jailor, all three, such as they may have been, must finish.



For four hours now has the World-Bedlam roared:  call it the World-

Chimaera, blowing fire!  The poor Invalides have sunk under their

battlements, or rise only with reversed muskets:  they have made a white

flag of napkins; go beating the chamade, or seeming to beat, for one can

hear nothing.  The very Swiss at the Portcullis look weary of firing;

disheartened in the fire-deluge:  a porthole at the drawbridge is opened,

as by one that would speak.  See Huissier Maillard, the shifty man!  On his

plank, swinging over the abyss of that stone-Ditch; plank resting on

parapet, balanced by weight of Patriots,--he hovers perilous:  such a Dove

towards such an Ark!  Deftly, thou shifty Usher:  one man already fell; and

lies smashed, far down there, against the masonry!  Usher Maillard falls

not:  deftly, unerring he walks, with outspread palm.  The Swiss holds a

paper through his porthole; the shifty Usher snatches it, and returns. 

Terms of surrender:  Pardon, immunity to all!  Are they accepted?--"Foi

d'officier, On the word of an officer," answers half-pay Hulin,--or half-

pay Elie, for men do not agree on it, "they are!"  Sinks the drawbridge,--

Usher Maillard bolting it when down; rushes-in the living deluge:  the

Bastille is fallen!  Victoire!  La Bastille est prise!  (Histoire de la

Revolution, par Deux Amis de la Liberte, i. 267-306; Besenval, iii. 410-

434; Dusaulx, Prise de la Bastille, 291-301.  Bailly, Memoires (Collection

de Berville et Barriere), i. 322 et seqq.)







Chapter 1.5.VII.



Not a Revolt.



Why dwell on what follows?  Hulin's foi d'officer should have been kept,

but could not.  The Swiss stand drawn up; disguised in white canvas smocks;

the Invalides without disguise; their arms all piled against the wall.  The

first rush of victors, in ecstacy that the death-peril is passed, 'leaps

joyfully on their necks;' but new victors rush, and ever new, also in

ecstacy not wholly of joy.  As we said, it was a living deluge, plunging

headlong; had not the Gardes Francaises, in their cool military way,

'wheeled round with arms levelled,' it would have plunged suicidally, by

the hundred or the thousand, into the Bastille-ditch.



And so it goes plunging through court and corridor; billowing

uncontrollable, firing from windows--on itself:  in hot frenzy of triumph,

of grief and vengeance for its slain.  The poor Invalides will fare ill;

one Swiss, running off in his white smock, is driven back, with a death-

thrust.  Let all prisoners be marched to the Townhall, to be judged!--Alas,

already one poor Invalide has his right hand slashed off him; his maimed

body dragged to the Place de Greve, and hanged there.  This same right

hand, it is said, turned back de Launay from the Powder-Magazine, and saved

Paris.



De Launay, 'discovered in gray frock with poppy-coloured riband,' is for

killing himself with the sword of his cane.  He shall to the Hotel-de-

Ville; Hulin Maillard and others escorting him; Elie marching foremost

'with the capitulation-paper on his sword's point.'  Through roarings and

cursings; through hustlings, clutchings, and at last through strokes!  Your

escort is hustled aside, felled down; Hulin sinks exhausted on a heap of

stones.  Miserable de Launay!  He shall never enter the Hotel de Ville: 

only his 'bloody hair-queue, held up in a bloody hand;' that shall enter,

for a sign.  The bleeding trunk lies on the steps there; the head is off

through the streets; ghastly, aloft on a pike.



Rigorous de Launay has died; crying out, "O friends, kill me fast!" 

Merciful de Losme must die; though Gratitude embraces him, in this fearful

hour, and will die for him; it avails not.  Brothers, your wrath is cruel!

Your Place de Greve is become a Throat of the Tiger; full of mere fierce

bellowings, and thirst of blood.  One other officer is massacred; one other

Invalide is hanged on the Lamp-iron:  with difficulty, with generous

perseverance, the Gardes Francaises will save the rest.  Provost Flesselles

stricken long since with the paleness of death, must descend from his seat,

'to be judged at the Palais Royal:'--alas, to be shot dead, by an unknown

hand, at the turning of the first street!--



O evening sun of July, how, at this hour, thy beams fall slant on reapers

amid peaceful woody fields; on old women spinning in cottages; on ships far

out in the silent main; on Balls at the Orangerie of Versailles, where

high-rouged Dames of the Palace are even now dancing with double-jacketted

Hussar-Officers;--and also on this roaring Hell porch of a Hotel-de-Ville! 

Babel Tower, with the confusion of tongues, were not Bedlam added with the

conflagration of thoughts, was no type of it.  One forest of distracted

steel bristles, endless, in front of an Electoral Committee; points itself,

in horrid radii, against this and the other accused breast.  It was the

Titans warring with Olympus; and they scarcely crediting it, have

conquered:  prodigy of prodigies; delirious,--as it could not but be. 

Denunciation, vengeance; blaze of triumph on a dark ground of terror:  all

outward, all inward things fallen into one general wreck of madness!



Electoral Committee?  Had it a thousand throats of brass, it would not

suffice.  Abbe Lefevre, in the Vaults down below, is black as Vulcan,

distributing that 'five thousand weight of Powder;' with what perils, these

eight-and-forty hours!  Last night, a Patriot, in liquor, insisted on

sitting to smoke on the edge of one of the Powder-barrels; there smoked he,

independent of the world,--till the Abbe 'purchased his pipe for three

francs,' and pitched it far.



Elie, in the grand Hall, Electoral Committee looking on, sits 'with drawn

sword bent in three places;' with battered helm, for he was of the Queen's

Regiment, Cavalry; with torn regimentals, face singed and soiled;

comparable, some think, to 'an antique warrior;'--judging the people;

forming a list of Bastille Heroes.  O Friends, stain not with blood the

greenest laurels ever gained in this world:  such is the burden of Elie's

song; could it but be listened to.  Courage, Elie!  Courage, ye Municipal

Electors!  A declining sun; the need of victuals, and of telling news, will

bring assuagement, dispersion:  all earthly things must end.



Along the streets of Paris circulate Seven Bastille Prisoners, borne

shoulder-high:  seven Heads on pikes; the Keys of the Bastille; and much

else.  See also the Garde Francaises, in their steadfast military way,

marching home to their barracks, with the Invalides and Swiss kindly

enclosed in hollow square.  It is one year and two months since these same

men stood unparticipating, with Brennus d'Agoust at the Palais de Justice,

when Fate overtook d'Espremenil; and now they have participated; and will

participate.  Not Gardes Francaises henceforth, but Centre Grenadiers of

the National Guard:  men of iron discipline and humour,--not without a kind

of thought in them!



Likewise ashlar stones of the Bastille continue thundering through the

dusk; its paper-archives shall fly white.  Old secrets come to view; and

long-buried Despair finds voice.  Read this portion of an old Letter:

(Dated, a la Bastille, 7 Octobre, 1752; signed Queret-Demery.  Bastille

Devoilee, in Linguet, Memoires sur la Bastille (Paris, 1821), p. 199.)  'If

for my consolation Monseigneur would grant me for the sake of God and the

Most Blessed Trinity, that I could have news of my dear wife; were it only

her name on card to shew that she is alive!  It were the greatest

consolation I could receive; and I should for ever bless the greatness of

Monseigneur.'  Poor Prisoner, who namest thyself Queret Demery, and hast no

other history,--she is dead, that dear wife of thine, and thou art dead! 

'Tis fifty years since thy breaking heart put this question; to be heard

now first, and long heard, in the hearts of men.



But so does the July twilight thicken; so must Paris, as sick children, and

all distracted creatures do, brawl itself finally into a kind of sleep. 

Municipal Electors, astonished to find their heads still uppermost, are

home:  only Moreau de Saint-Mery of tropical birth and heart, of coolest

judgment; he, with two others, shall sit permanent at the Townhall.  Paris

sleeps; gleams upward the illuminated City:  patrols go clashing, without

common watchword; there go rumours; alarms of war, to the extent of

'fifteen thousand men marching through the Suburb Saint-Antoine,'--who

never got it marched through.  Of the day's distraction judge by this of

the night:  Moreau de Saint-Mery, 'before rising from his seat, gave

upwards of three thousand orders.'  (Dusaulx.)  What a head; comparable to

Friar Bacon's Brass Head!  Within it lies all Paris.  Prompt must the

answer be, right or wrong; in Paris is no other Authority extant. 

Seriously, a most cool clear head;--for which also thou O brave Saint-Mery,

in many capacities, from august Senator to Merchant's-Clerk, Book-dealer,

Vice-King; in many places, from Virginia to Sardinia, shalt, ever as a

brave man, find employment.  (Biographie Universelle, para Moreau Saint-

Mery (by Fournier-Pescay).)



Besenval has decamped, under cloud of dusk, 'amid a great affluence of

people,' who did not harm him; he marches, with faint-growing tread, down

the left bank of the Seine, all night,--towards infinite space.  Resummoned

shall Besenval himself be; for trial, for difficult acquittal.  His King's-

troops, his Royal Allemand, are gone hence for ever.



The Versailles Ball and lemonade is done; the Orangery is silent except for

nightbirds.  Over in the Salle des Menus, Vice-president Lafayette, with

unsnuffed lights, 'with some hundred of members, stretched on tables round

him,' sits erect; outwatching the Bear.  This day, a second solemn

Deputation went to his Majesty; a second, and then a third:  with no

effect.  What will the end of these things be?



In the Court, all is mystery, not without whisperings of terror; though ye

dream of lemonade and epaulettes, ye foolish women!  His Majesty, kept in

happy ignorance, perhaps dreams of double-barrels and the Woods of Meudon.

Late at night, the Duke de Liancourt, having official right of entrance,

gains access to the Royal Apartments; unfolds, with earnest clearness, in

his constitutional way, the Job's-news.  "Mais," said poor Louis, "c'est

une revolte, Why, that is a revolt!"--"Sire," answered Liancourt, "It is

not a revolt, it is a revolution."







Chapter 1.5.VIII.



Conquering your King.



On the morrow a fourth Deputation to the Chateau is on foot:  of a more

solemn, not to say awful character, for, besides 'orgies in the Orangery,'

it seems, 'the grain convoys are all stopped;' nor has Mirabeau's thunder

been silent.  Such Deputation is on the point of setting out--when lo, his

Majesty himself attended only by his two Brothers, step in; quite in the

paternal manner; announces that the troops, and all causes of offence, are

gone, and henceforth there shall be nothing but trust, reconcilement, good-

will; whereof he 'permits and even requests,' a National Assembly to assure

Paris in his name!  Acclamation, as of men suddenly delivered from death,

gives answer.  The whole Assembly spontaneously rises to escort his Majesty

back; 'interlacing their arms to keep off the excessive pressure from him;'

for all Versailles is crowding and shouting.  The Chateau Musicians, with a

felicitous promptitude, strike up the Sein de sa Famille (Bosom of one's

Family):  the Queen appears at the balcony with her little boy and girl,

'kissing them several times;' infinite Vivats spread far and wide;--and

suddenly there has come, as it were, a new Heaven-on-Earth.



Eighty-eight august Senators, Bailly, Lafayette, and our repentant

Archbishop among them, take coach for Paris, with the great intelligence;

benedictions without end on their heads.  From the Place Louis Quinze,

where they alight, all the way to the Hotel-de-Ville, it is one sea of

Tricolor cockades, of clear National muskets; one tempest of huzzaings,

hand-clappings, aided by 'occasional rollings' of drum-music.  Harangues of

due fervour are delivered; especially by Lally Tollendal, pious son of the

ill-fated murdered Lally; on whose head, in consequence, a civic crown (of

oak or parsley) is forced,--which he forcibly transfers to Bailly's.



But surely, for one thing, the National Guard must have a General!  Moreau

de Saint-Mery, he of the 'three thousand orders,' casts one of his

significant glances on the Bust of Lafayette, which has stood there ever

since the American War of Liberty.  Whereupon, by acclamation, Lafayette is

nominated.  Again, in room of the slain traitor or quasi-traitor

Flesselles, President Bailly shall be--Provost of the Merchants?  No: 

Mayor of Paris!  So be it.  Maire de Paris!  Mayor Bailly, General

Lafayette; vive Bailly, vive Lafayette--the universal out-of-doors

multitude rends the welkin in confirmation.--And now, finally, let us to

Notre-Dame for a Te Deum.



Towards Notre-Dame Cathedral, in glad procession, these Regenerators of the

Country walk, through a jubilant people; in fraternal manner; Abbe Lefevre,

still black with his gunpowder services, walking arm in arm with the white-

stoled Archbishop.  Poor Bailly comes upon the Foundling Children, sent to

kneel to him; and 'weeps.'  Te Deum, our Archbishop officiating, is not

only sung, but shot--with blank cartridges.  Our joy is boundless as our wo

threatened to be.  Paris, by her own pike and musket, and the valour of her

own heart, has conquered the very wargods,--to the satisfaction now of

Majesty itself.  A courier is, this night, getting under way for Necker: 

the People's Minister, invited back by King, by National Assembly, and

Nation, shall traverse France amid shoutings, and the sound of trumpet and

timbrel.



Seeing which course of things, Messeigneurs of the Court Triumvirate,

Messieurs of the dead-born Broglie-Ministry, and others such, consider that

their part also is clear:  to mount and ride.  Off, ye too-loyal Broglies,

Polignacs, and Princes of the Blood; off while it is yet time!  Did not the

Palais-Royal in its late nocturnal 'violent motions,' set a specific price

(place of payment not mentioned) on each of your heads?--With precautions,

with the aid of pieces of cannon and regiments that can be depended on,

Messeigneurs, between the 16th night and the 17th morning, get to their

several roads.  Not without risk!  Prince Conde has (or seems to have) 'men

galloping at full speed;' with a view, it is thought, to fling him into the

river Oise, at Pont-Sainte-Mayence.  (Weber, ii. 126.)  The Polignacs

travel disguised; friends, not servants, on their coach-box.  Broglie has

his own difficulties at Versailles, runs his own risks at Metz and Verdun;

does nevertheless get safe to Luxemburg, and there rests.



This is what they call the First Emigration; determined on, as appears, in

full Court-conclave; his Majesty assisting; prompt he, for his share of it,

to follow any counsel whatsoever.  'Three Sons of France, and four Princes

of the blood of Saint Louis,' says Weber, 'could not more effectually

humble the Burghers of Paris 'than by appearing to withdraw in fear of

their life.'  Alas, the Burghers of Paris bear it with unexpected Stoicism! 

The Man d'Artois indeed is gone; but has he carried, for example, the Land

D'Artois with him?  Not even Bagatelle the Country-house (which shall be

useful as a Tavern); hardly the four-valet Breeches, leaving the Breeches-

maker!--As for old Foulon, one learns that he is dead; at least a

'sumptuous funeral' is going on; the undertakers honouring him, if no other

will.  Intendant Berthier, his son-in-law, is still living; lurking:  he

joined Besenval, on that Eumenides' Sunday; appearing to treat it with

levity; and is now fled no man knows whither.



The Emigration is not gone many miles, Prince Conde hardly across the Oise,

when his Majesty, according to arrangement, for the Emigration also thought

it might do good,--undertakes a rather daring enterprise:  that of visiting

Paris in person.  With a Hundred Members of Assembly; with small or no

military escort, which indeed he dismissed at the Bridge of Sevres, poor

Louis sets out; leaving a desolate Palace; a Queen weeping, the Present,

the Past, and the Future all so unfriendly for her.



At the Barrier of Passy, Mayor Bailly, in grand gala, presents him with the

keys; harangues him, in Academic style; mentions that it is a great day;

that in Henri Quatre's case, the King had to make conquest of his People,

but in this happier case, the People makes conquest of its King (a conquis

son Roi).  The King, so happily conquered, drives forward, slowly, through

a steel people, all silent, or shouting only Vive la Nation; is harangued

at the Townhall, by Moreau of the three-thousand orders, by King's

Procureur M. Ethys de Corny, by Lally Tollendal, and others; knows not what

to think of it, or say of it; learns that he is 'Restorer of French

Liberty,'--as a Statue of him, to be raised on the site of the Bastille,

shall testify to all men.  Finally, he is shewn at the Balcony, with a

Tricolor cockade in his hat; is greeted now, with vehement acclamation,

from Square and Street, from all windows and roofs:--and so drives home

again amid glad mingled and, as it were, intermarried shouts, of Vive le

Roi and Vive la Nation; wearied but safe.



It was Sunday when the red-hot balls hung over us, in mid air:  it is now

but Friday, and 'the Revolution is sanctioned.'  An August National

Assembly shall make the Constitution; and neither foreign Pandour, domestic

Triumvirate, with levelled Cannon, Guy-Faux powder-plots (for that too was

spoken of); nor any tyrannic Power on the Earth, or under the Earth, shall

say to it, What dost thou?--So jubilates the people; sure now of a

Constitution.  Cracked Marquis Saint-Huruge is heard under the windows of

the Chateau; murmuring sheer speculative-treason.  (Campan, ii. 46-64.)







Chapter 1.5.IX.



The Lanterne.



The Fall of the Bastille may be said to have shaken all France to the

deepest foundations of its existence.  The rumour of these wonders flies

every where:  with the natural speed of Rumour; with an effect thought to

be preternatural, produced by plots.  Did d'Orleans or Laclos, nay did

Mirabeau (not overburdened with money at this time) send riding Couriers

out from Paris; to gallop 'on all radii,' or highways, towards all points

of France?  It is a miracle, which no penetrating man will call in

question.  (Toulongeon, (i. 95); Weber, &c. &c.)



Already in most Towns, Electoral Committees were met; to regret Necker, in

harangue and resolution.  In many a Town, as Rennes, Caen, Lyons, an

ebullient people was already regretting him in brickbats and musketry.  But

now, at every Town's-end in France, there do arrive, in these days of

terror,--'men,' as men will arrive; nay, 'men on horseback,' since Rumour

oftenest travels riding.  These men declare, with alarmed countenance, The

BRIGANDS to be coming, to be just at hand; and do then--ride on, about

their further business, be what it might!  Whereupon the whole population

of such Town, defensively flies to arms.  Petition is soon thereafter

forwarded to National Assembly; in such peril and terror of peril, leave to

organise yourself cannot be withheld:  the armed population becomes

everywhere an enrolled National Guard.  Thus rides Rumour, careering along

all radii, from Paris outwards, to such purpose:  in few days, some say in

not many hours, all France to the utmost borders bristles with bayonets. 

Singular, but undeniable,--miraculous or not!--But thus may any chemical

liquid; though cooled to the freezing-point, or far lower, still continue

liquid; and then, on the slightest stroke or shake, it at once rushes

wholly into ice.  Thus has France, for long months and even years, been

chemically dealt with; brought below zero; and now, shaken by the Fall of a

Bastille, it instantaneously congeals:  into one crystallised mass, of

sharp-cutting steel!  Guai a chi la tocca; 'Ware who touches it!



In Paris, an Electoral Committee, with a new Mayor and General, is urgent

with belligerent workmen to resume their handicrafts.  Strong Dames of the

Market (Dames de la Halle) deliver congratulatory harangues; present

'bouquets to the Shrine of Sainte Genevieve.'  Unenrolled men deposit their

arms,--not so readily as could be wished; and receive 'nine francs.'  With

Te Deums, Royal Visits, and sanctioned Revolution, there is halcyon

weather; weather even of preternatural brightness; the hurricane being

overblown.



Nevertheless, as is natural, the waves still run high, hollow rocks

retaining their murmur.  We are but at the 22nd of the month, hardly above

a week since the Bastille fell, when it suddenly appears that old Foulon is

alive; nay, that he is here, in early morning, in the streets of Paris; the

extortioner, the plotter, who would make the people eat grass, and was a

liar from the beginning!--It is even so.  The deceptive 'sumptuous funeral'

(of some domestic that died); the hiding-place at Vitry towards

Fontainbleau, have not availed that wretched old man.  Some living domestic

or dependant, for none loves Foulon, has betrayed him to the Village. 

Merciless boors of Vitry unearth him; pounce on him, like hell-hounds: 

Westward, old Infamy; to Paris, to be judged at the Hotel-de-Ville!  His

old head, which seventy-four years have bleached, is bare; they have tied

an emblematic bundle of grass on his back; a garland of nettles and

thistles is round his neck:  in this manner; led with ropes; goaded on with

curses and menaces, must he, with his old limbs, sprawl forward; the

pitiablest, most unpitied of all old men.



Sooty Saint-Antoine, and every street, mustering its crowds as he passes,--

the Place de Greve, the Hall of the Hotel-de-Ville will scarcely hold his

escort and him.  Foulon must not only be judged righteously; but judged

there where he stands, without any delay.  Appoint seven judges, ye

Municipals, or seventy-and-seven; name them yourselves, or we will name

them:  but judge him!  (Histoire Parlementaire, ii. 146-9.)  Electoral

rhetoric, eloquence of Mayor Bailly, is wasted explaining the beauty of the

Law's delay.  Delay, and still delay!  Behold, O Mayor of the People, the

morning has worn itself into noon; and he is still unjudged!--Lafayette,

pressingly sent for, arrives; gives voice:  This Foulon, a known man, is

guilty almost beyond doubt; but may he not have accomplices?  Ought not the

truth to be cunningly pumped out of him,--in the Abbaye Prison?  It is a

new light!  Sansculottism claps hands;--at which hand-clapping, Foulon (in

his fainness, as his Destiny would have it) also claps.  "See! they

understand one another!" cries dark Sansculottism, blazing into fury of

suspicion.--"Friends," said 'a person in good clothes,' stepping forward,

"what is the use of judging this man?  Has he not been judged these thirty

years?"  With wild yells, Sansculottism clutches him, in its hundred hands: 

he is whirled across the Place de Greve, to the 'Lanterne,' Lamp-iron which

there is at the corner of the Rue de la Vannerie; pleading bitterly for

life,--to the deaf winds.  Only with the third rope (for two ropes broke,

and the quavering voice still pleaded), can he be so much as got hanged! 

His Body is dragged through the streets; his Head goes aloft on a pike, the

mouth filled with grass:  amid sounds as of Tophet, from a grass-eating

people.  (Deux Amis de la Liberte, ii. 60-6.)



Surely if Revenge is a 'kind of Justice,' it is a 'wild' kind!  O mad

Sansculottism hast thou risen, in thy mad darkness, in thy soot and rags;

unexpectedly, like an Enceladus, living-buried, from under his Trinacria? 

They that would make grass be eaten do now eat grass, in this manner? 

After long dumb-groaning generations, has the turn suddenly become thine?--

To such abysmal overturns, and frightful instantaneous inversions of the

centre-of-gravity, are human Solecisms all liable, if they but knew it; the

more liable, the falser (and topheavier) they are!--



To add to the horror of Mayor Bailly and his Municipals, word comes that

Berthier has also been arrested; that he is on his way hither from

Compiegne.  Berthier, Intendant (say, Tax-levier) of Paris; sycophant and

tyrant; forestaller of Corn; contriver of Camps against the people;--

accused of many things:  is he not Foulon's son-in-law; and, in that one

point, guilty of all?  In these hours too, when Sansculottism has its blood

up!  The shuddering Municipals send one of their number to escort him, with

mounted National Guards.



At the fall of day, the wretched Berthier, still wearing a face of courage,

arrives at the Barrier; in an open carriage; with the Municipal beside him;

five hundred horsemen with drawn sabres; unarmed footmen enough, not

without noise!  Placards go brandished round him; bearing legibly his

indictment, as Sansculottism, with unlegal brevity, 'in huge letters,'

draws it up.  ('Il a vole le Roi et la France (He robbed the King and

France).'  'He devoured the substance of the People.'  'He was the slave of

the rich, and the tyrant of the poor.'  'He drank the blood of the widow

and orphan.'  'He betrayed his country.'  See Deux Amis, ii. 67-73.)  Paris

is come forth to meet him:  with hand-clappings, with windows flung up;

with dances, triumph-songs, as of the Furies!  Lastly the Head of Foulon: 

this also meets him on a pike.  Well might his 'look become glazed,' and

sense fail him, at such sight!--Nevertheless, be the man's conscience what

it may, his nerves are of iron.  At the Hotel-de-Ville, he will answer

nothing.  He says, he obeyed superior order; they have his papers; they may

judge and determine:  as for himself, not having closed an eye these two

nights, he demands, before all things, to have sleep.  Leaden sleep, thou

miserable Berthier!  Guards rise with him, in motion towards the Abbaye. 

At the very door of the Hotel-de-Ville, they are clutched; flung asunder,

as by a vortex of mad arms; Berthier whirls towards the Lanterne.  He

snatches a musket; fells and strikes, defending himself like a mad lion; is

borne down, trampled, hanged, mangled:  his Head too, and even his Heart,

flies over the City on a pike.



Horrible, in Lands that had known equal justice!  Not so unnatural in Lands

that had never known it.  Le sang qui coule est-il donc si pure? asks

Barnave; intimating that the Gallows, though by irregular methods, has its

own.--Thou thyself, O Reader, when thou turnest that corner of the Rue de

la Vannerie, and discernest still that same grim Bracket of old Iron, wilt

not want for reflections.  'Over a grocer's shop,' or otherwise; with 'a

bust of Louis XIV. in the niche under it,' or now no longer in the niche,--

it still sticks there:  still holding out an ineffectual light, of fish-

oil; and has seen worlds wrecked, and says nothing.



But to the eye of enlightened Patriotism, what a thunder-cloud was this;

suddenly shaping itself in the radiance of the halcyon weather!  Cloud of

Erebus blackness:  betokening latent electricity without limit.  Mayor

Bailly, General Lafayette throw up their commissions, in an indignant

manner;--need to be flattered back again.  The cloud disappears, as

thunder-clouds do.  The halcyon weather returns, though of a grayer

complexion; of a character more and more evidently not supernatural.



Thus, in any case, with what rubs soever, shall the Bastille be abolished

from our Earth; and with it, Feudalism, Despotism; and, one hopes,

Scoundrelism generally, and all hard usage of man by his brother man. 

Alas, the Scoundrelism and hard usage are not so easy of abolition!  But as

for the Bastille, it sinks day after day, and month after month; its

ashlars and boulders tumbling down continually, by express order of our

Municipals.  Crowds of the curious roam through its caverns; gaze on the

skeletons found walled up, on the oubliettes, iron cages, monstrous stone-

blocks with padlock chains.  One day we discern Mirabeau there; along with

the Genevese Dumont.  (Dumont, Souvenirs sur Mirabeau, p. 305.)  Workers

and onlookers make reverent way for him; fling verses, flowers on his path,

Bastille-papers and curiosities into his carriage, with vivats.



Able Editors compile Books from the Bastille Archives; from what of them

remain unburnt.  The Key of that Robber-Den shall cross the Atlantic; shall

lie on Washington's hall-table.  The great Clock ticks now in a private

patriotic Clockmaker's apartment; no longer measuring hours of mere

heaviness.  Vanished is the Bastille, what we call vanished:  the body, or

sandstones, of it hanging, in benign metamorphosis, for centuries to come,

over the Seine waters, as Pont Louis Seize; (Dulaure:  Histoire de Paris,

viii. 434.) the soul of it living, perhaps still longer, in the memories of

men.



So far, ye august Senators, with your Tennis-Court Oaths, your inertia and

impetus, your sagacity and pertinacity, have ye brought us.  "And yet

think, Messieurs," as the Petitioner justly urged, "you who were our

saviours, did yourselves need saviours,"--the brave Bastillers, namely;

workmen of Paris; many of them in straightened pecuniary circumstances! 

(Moniteur:  Seance du Samedi 18 Juillet 1789 (in Histoire Parlementaire,

ii. 137.)  Subscriptions are opened; Lists are formed, more accurate than

Elie's; harangues are delivered.  A Body of Bastille Heroes, tolerably

complete, did get together;--comparable to the Argonauts; hoping to endure

like them.  But in little more than a year, the whirlpool of things threw

them asunder again, and they sank.  So many highest superlatives achieved

by man are followed by new higher; and dwindle into comparatives and

positives!  The Siege of the Bastille, weighed with which, in the

Historical balance, most other sieges, including that of Troy Town, are

gossamer, cost, as we find, in killed and mortally wounded, on the part of

the Besiegers, some Eighty-three persons:  on the part of the Besieged,

after all that straw-burning, fire-pumping, and deluge of musketry, One

poor solitary invalid, shot stone-dead (roide-mort) on the battlements;

(Dusaulx:  Prise de la Bastille, p. 447, &c.)  The Bastille Fortress, like

the City of Jericho, was overturned by miraculous sound.
