








BOOK 2.II.



NANCI



Chapter 2.2.I.



Bouille.



Dimly visible, at Metz on the North-Eastern frontier, a certain brave

Bouille, last refuge of Royalty in all straits and meditations of flight,

has for many months hovered occasionally in our eye; some name or shadow of

a brave Bouille:  let us now, for a little, look fixedly at him, till he

become a substance and person for us.  The man himself is worth a glance;

his position and procedure there, in these days, will throw light on many

things.



For it is with Bouille as with all French Commanding Officers; only in a

more emphatic degree.  The grand National Federation, we already guess, was

but empty sound, or worse:  a last loudest universal Hep-hep-hurrah, with

full bumpers, in that National Lapithae-feast of Constitution-making; as in

loud denial of the palpably existing; as if, with hurrahings, you would

shut out notice of the inevitable already knocking at the gates!  Which new

National bumper, one may say, can but deepen the drunkenness; and so, the

louder it swears Brotherhood, will the sooner and the more surely lead to

Cannibalism.  Ah, under that fraternal shine and clangour, what a deep

world of irreconcileable discords lie momentarily assuaged, damped down for

one moment!  Respectable military Federates have barely got home to their

quarters; and the inflammablest, 'dying, burnt up with liquors, and

kindness,' has not yet got extinct; the shine is hardly out of men's eyes,

and still blazes filling all men's memories,--when your discords burst

forth again very considerably darker than ever.  Let us look at Bouille,

and see how.



Bouille for the present commands in the Garrison of Metz, and far and wide

over the East and North; being indeed, by a late act of Government with

sanction of National Assembly, appointed one of our Four supreme Generals.

Rochambeau and Mailly, men and Marshals of note in these days, though to us

of small moment, are two of his colleagues; tough old babbling Luckner,

also of small moment for us, will probably be the third.  Marquis de

Bouille is a determined Loyalist; not indeed disinclined to moderate

reform, but resolute against immoderate.  A man long suspect to Patriotism;

who has more than once given the august Assembly trouble; who would not,

for example, take the National Oath, as he was bound to do, but always put

it off on this or the other pretext, till an autograph of Majesty requested

him to do it as a favour.  There, in this post if not of honour, yet of

eminence and danger, he waits, in a silent concentered manner; very dubious

of the future.  'Alone,' as he says, or almost alone, of all the old

military Notabilities, he has not emigrated; but thinks always, in

atrabiliar moments, that there will be nothing for him too but to cross the

marches.  He might cross, say, to Treves or Coblentz where Exiled Princes

will be one day ranking; or say, over into Luxemburg where old Broglie

loiters and languishes.  Or is there not the great dim Deep of European

Diplomacy; where your Calonnes, your Breteuils are beginning to hover,

dimly discernible?



With immeasurable confused outlooks and purposes, with no clear purpose but

this of still trying to do His Majesty a service, Bouille waits; struggling

what he can to keep his district loyal, his troops faithful, his garrisons

furnished.  He maintains, as yet, with his Cousin Lafayette, some thin

diplomatic correspondence, by letter and messenger; chivalrous

constitutional professions on the one side, military gravity and brevity on

the other; which thin correspondence one can see growing ever the thinner

and hollower, towards the verge of entire vacuity.  (Bouille, Memoires

(London, 1797), i. c. 8.)  A quick, choleric, sharply discerning,

stubbornly endeavouring man; with suppressed-explosive resolution, with

valour, nay headlong audacity:  a man who was more in his place, lionlike

defending those Windward Isles, or, as with military tiger-spring,

clutching Nevis and Montserrat from the English,--than here in this

suppressed condition, muzzled and fettered by diplomatic packthreads;

looking out for a civil war, which may never arrive.  Few years ago Bouille

was to have led a French East-Indian Expedition, and reconquered or

conquered Pondicherri and the Kingdoms of the Sun:  but the whole world is

suddenly changed, and he with it; Destiny willed it not in that way but in

this.







Chapter 2.2.II.



Arrears and Aristocrats.



Indeed, as to the general outlook of things, Bouille himself augurs not

well of it.  The French Army, ever since those old Bastille days, and

earlier, has been universally in the questionablest state, and growing

daily worse.  Discipline, which is at all times a kind of miracle, and

works by faith, broke down then; one sees not with that near prospect of

recovering itself.  The Gardes Francaises played a deadly game; but how

they won it, and wear the prizes of it, all men know.  In that general

overturn, we saw the Hired Fighters refuse to fight.  The very Swiss of

Chateau-Vieux, which indeed is a kind of French Swiss, from Geneva and the

Pays de Vaud, are understood to have declined.  Deserters glided over;

Royal-Allemand itself looked disconsolate, though stanch of purpose.  In a

word, we there saw Military Rule, in the shape of poor Besenval with that

convulsive unmanageable Camp of his, pass two martyr days on the Champ-de-

Mars; and then, veiling itself, so to speak, 'under the cloud of night,'

depart 'down the left bank of the Seine,' to seek refuge elsewhere; this

ground having clearly become too hot for it.



But what new ground to seek, what remedy to try?  Quarters that were

'uninfected:'  this doubtless, with judicious strictness of drilling, were

the plan.  Alas, in all quarters and places, from Paris onward to the

remotest hamlet, is infection, is seditious contagion:  inhaled, propagated

by contact and converse, till the dullest soldier catch it!  There is

speech of men in uniform with men not in uniform; men in uniform read

journals, and even write in them.  (See Newspapers of July, 1789 (in Hist.

Parl. ii. 35), &c.)  There are public petitions or remonstrances, private

emissaries and associations; there is discontent, jealousy, uncertainty,

sullen suspicious humour.  The whole French Army, fermenting in dark heat,

glooms ominous, boding good to no one.



So that, in the general social dissolution and revolt, we are to have this

deepest and dismallest kind of it, a revolting soldiery?  Barren, desolate

to look upon is this same business of revolt under all its aspects; but how

infinitely more so, when it takes the aspect of military mutiny!  The very

implement of rule and restraint, whereby all the rest was managed and held

in order, has become precisely the frightfullest immeasurable implement of

misrule; like the element of Fire, our indispensable all-ministering

servant, when it gets the mastery, and becomes conflagration.  Discipline

we called a kind of miracle:  in fact, is it not miraculous how one man

moves hundreds of thousands; each unit of whom it may be loves him not, and

singly fears him not, yet has to obey him, to go hither or go thither, to

march and halt, to give death, and even to receive it, as if a Fate had

spoken; and the word-of-command becomes, almost in the literal sense, a

magic-word?



Which magic-word, again, if it be once forgotten; the spell of it once

broken!  The legions of assiduous ministering spirits rise on you now as

menacing fiends; your free orderly arena becomes a tumult-place of the

Nether Pit, and the hapless magician is rent limb from limb.  Military mobs

are mobs with muskets in their hands; and also with death hanging over

their heads, for death is the penalty of disobedience and they have

disobeyed.  And now if all mobs are properly frenzies, and work

frenetically with mad fits of hot and of cold, fierce rage alternating so

incoherently with panic terror, consider what your military mob will be,

with such a conflict of duties and penalties, whirled between remorse and

fury, and, for the hot fit, loaded fire-arms in its hand!  To the soldier

himself, revolt is frightful, and oftenest perhaps pitiable; and yet so

dangerous, it can only be hated, cannot be pitied.  An anomalous class of

mortals these poor Hired Killers!  With a frankness, which to the Moralist

in these times seems surprising, they have sworn to become machines; and

nevertheless they are still partly men.  Let no prudent person in authority

remind them of this latter fact; but always let force, let injustice above

all, stop short clearly on this side of the rebounding-point!  Soldiers, as

we often say, do revolt:  were it not so, several things which are

transient in this world might be perennial.



Over and above the general quarrel which all sons of Adam maintain with

their lot here below, the grievances of the French soldiery reduce

themselves to two, First that their Officers are Aristocrats; secondly that

they cheat them of their Pay.  Two grievances; or rather we might say one,

capable of becoming a hundred; for in that single first proposition, that

the Officers are Aristocrats, what a multitude of corollaries lie ready! 

It is a bottomless ever-flowing fountain of grievances this; what you may

call a general raw-material of grievance, wherefrom individual grievance

after grievance will daily body itself forth.  Nay there will even be a

kind of comfort in getting it, from time to time, so embodied.  Peculation

of one's Pay!  It is embodied; made tangible, made denounceable; exhalable,

if only in angry words.



For unluckily that grand fountain of grievances does exist:  Aristocrats

almost all our Officers necessarily are; they have it in the blood and

bone.  By the law of the case, no man can pretend to be the pitifullest

lieutenant of militia, till he have first verified, to the satisfaction of

the Lion-King, a Nobility of four generations.  Not Nobility only, but four

generations of it:  this latter is the improvement hit upon, in

comparatively late years, by a certain War-minister much pressed for

commissions.  (Dampmartin, Evenemens, i. 89.)  An improvement which did

relieve the over-pressed War-minister, but which split France still further

into yawning contrasts of Commonalty and Nobility, nay of new Nobility and

old; as if already with your new and old, and then with your old, older and

oldest, there were not contrasts and discrepancies enough;--the general

clash whereof men now see and hear, and in the singular whirlpool, all

contrasts gone together to the bottom!  Gone to the bottom or going; with

uproar, without return; going every where save in the Military section of

things; and there, it may be asked, can they hope to continue always at the

top?  Apparently, not.



It is true, in a time of external Peace, when there is no fighting but only

drilling, this question, How you rise from the ranks, may seem theoretical

rather.  But in reference to the Rights of Man it is continually practical.

The soldier has sworn to be faithful not to the King only, but to the Law

and the Nation.  Do our commanders love the Revolution? ask all soldiers.

Unhappily no, they hate it, and love the Counter-Revolution.  Young

epauletted men, with quality-blood in them, poisoned with quality-pride, do

sniff openly, with indignation struggling to become contempt, at our Rights

of Man, as at some newfangled cobweb, which shall be brushed down again. 

Old officers, more cautious, keep silent, with closed uncurled lips; but

one guesses what is passing within.  Nay who knows, how, under the

plausiblest word of command, might lie Counter-Revolution itself, sale to

Exiled Princes and the Austrian Kaiser:  treacherous Aristocrats

hoodwinking the small insight of us common men?--In such manner works that

general raw-material of grievance; disastrous; instead of trust and

reverence, breeding hate, endless suspicion, the impossibility of

commanding and obeying.  And now when this second more tangible grievance

has articulated itself universally in the mind of the common man: 

Peculation of his Pay!  Peculation of the despicablest sort does exist, and

has long existed; but, unless the new-declared Rights of Man, and all

rights whatsoever, be a cobweb, it shall no longer exist.



The French Military System seems dying a sorrowful suicidal death.  Nay

more, citizen, as is natural, ranks himself against citizen in this cause. 

The soldier finds audience, of numbers and sympathy unlimited, among the

Patriot lower-classes.  Nor are the higher wanting to the officer.  The

officer still dresses and perfumes himself for such sad unemigrated soiree

as there may still be; and speaks his woes,--which woes, are they not

Majesty's and Nature's?  Speaks, at the same time, his gay defiance, his

firm-set resolution.  Citizens, still more Citizenesses, see the right and

the wrong; not the Military System alone will die by suicide, but much

along with it.  As was said, there is yet possible a deepest overturn than

any yet witnessed:  that deepest upturn of the black-burning sulphurous

stratum whereon all rests and grows!



But how these things may act on the rude soldier-mind, with its military

pedantries, its inexperience of all that lies off the parade-ground;

inexperience as of a child, yet fierceness of a man and vehemence of a

Frenchman!  It is long that secret communings in mess-room and guard-room,

sour looks, thousandfold petty vexations between commander and commanded,

measure every where the weary military day.  Ask Captain Dampmartin; an

authentic, ingenious literary officer of horse; who loves the Reign of

Liberty, after a sort; yet has had his heart grieved to the quick many

times, in the hot South-Western region and elsewhere; and has seen riot,

civil battle by daylight and by torchlight, and anarchy hatefuller than

death.  How insubordinate Troopers, with drink in their heads, meet Captain

Dampmartin and another on the ramparts, where there is no escape or side-

path; and make military salute punctually, for we look calm on them; yet

make it in a snappish, almost insulting manner:  how one morning they

'leave all their chamois shirts' and superfluous buffs, which they are

tired of, laid in piles at the Captain's doors; whereat 'we laugh,' as the

ass does, eating thistles:  nay how they 'knot two forage-cords together,'

with universal noisy cursing, with evident intent to hang the Quarter-

master:--all this the worthy Captain, looking on it through the ruddy-and-

sable of fond regretful memory, has flowingly written down.  (Dampmartin,

Evenemens, i. 122-146.)  Men growl in vague discontent; officers fling up

their commissions, and emigrate in disgust.



Or let us ask another literary Officer; not yet Captain; Sublieutenant

only, in the Artillery Regiment La Fere:  a young man of twenty-one; not

unentitled to speak; the name of him is Napoleon Buonaparte.  To such

height of Sublieutenancy has he now got promoted, from Brienne School, five

years ago; 'being found qualified in mathematics by La Place.'  He is lying

at Auxonne, in the West, in these months; not sumptuously lodged--'in the

house of a Barber, to whose wife he did not pay the customary degree of

respect;' or even over at the Pavilion, in a chamber with bare walls; the

only furniture an indifferent 'bed without curtains, two chairs, and in the

recess of a window a table covered with books and papers:  his Brother

Louis sleeps on a coarse mattrass in an adjoining room.'  However, he is

doing something great:  writing his first Book or Pamphlet,--eloquent

vehement Letter to M. Matteo Buttafuoco, our Corsican Deputy, who is not a

Patriot but an Aristocrat, unworthy of Deputyship.  Joly of Dole is

Publisher.  The literary Sublieutenant corrects the proofs; 'sets out on

foot from Auxonne, every morning at four o'clock, for Dole:  after looking

over the proofs, he partakes of an extremely frugal breakfast with Joly,

and immediately prepares for returning to his Garrison; where he arrives

before noon, having thus walked above twenty miles in the course of the

morning.'



This Sublieutenant can remark that, in drawing-rooms, on streets, on

highways, at inns, every where men's minds are ready to kindle into a

flame.  That a Patriot, if he appear in the drawing-room, or amid a group

of officers, is liable enough to be discouraged, so great is the majority

against him:  but no sooner does he get into the street, or among the

soldiers, than he feels again as if the whole Nation were with him.  That

after the famous Oath, To the King, to the Nation and Law, there was a

great change; that before this, if ordered to fire on the people, he for

one would have done it in the King's name; but that after this, in the

Nation's name, he would not have done it.  Likewise that the Patriot

officers, more numerous too in the Artillery and Engineers than elsewhere,

were few in number; yet that having the soldiers on their side, they ruled

the regiment; and did often deliver the Aristocrat brother officer out of

peril and strait.  One day, for example, 'a member of our own mess roused

the mob, by singing, from the windows of our dining-room, O Richard, O my

King; and I had to snatch him from their fury.'  (Norvins, Histoire de

Napoleon, i. 47; Las Cases, Memoires (translated into Hazlitt's Life of

Napoleon, i. 23-31.)



All which let the reader multiply by ten thousand; and spread it with

slight variations over all the camps and garrisons of France.  The French

Army seems on the verge of universal mutiny.



Universal mutiny!  There is in that what may well make Patriot

Constitutionalism and an august Assembly shudder.  Something behoves to be

done; yet what to do no man can tell.  Mirabeau proposes even that the

Soldiery, having come to such a pass, be forthwith disbanded, the whole Two

Hundred and Eighty Thousands of them; and organised anew.  (Moniteur, 1790.

No. 233.)  Impossible this, in so sudden a manner! cry all men.  And yet

literally, answer we, it is inevitable, in one manner or another.  Such an

Army, with its four-generation Nobles, its Peculated Pay, and men knotting

forage cords to hang their quartermaster, cannot subsist beside such a

Revolution.  Your alternative is a slow-pining chronic dissolution and new

organization; or a swift decisive one; the agonies spread over years, or

concentrated into an hour.  With a Mirabeau for Minister or Governor the

latter had been the choice; with no Mirabeau for Governor it will naturally

be the former.







Chapter 2.2.III.



Bouille at Metz.



To Bouille, in his North-Eastern circle, none of these things are

altogether hid.  Many times flight over the marches gleams out on him as a

last guidance in such bewilderment:  nevertheless he continues here: 

struggling always to hope the best, not from new organisation but from

happy Counter-Revolution and return to the old.  For the rest it is clear

to him that this same National Federation, and universal swearing and

fraternising of People and Soldiers, has done 'incalculable mischief.'  So

much that fermented secretly has hereby got vent and become open:  National

Guards and Soldiers of the line, solemnly embracing one another on all

parade-fields, drinking, swearing patriotic oaths, fall into disorderly

street-processions, constitutional unmilitary exclamations and hurrahings.

On which account the Regiment Picardie, for one, has to be drawn out in the

square of the barracks, here at Metz, and sharply harangued by the General

himself; but expresses penitence.  (Bouille, Memoires, i. 113.)



Far and near, as accounts testify, insubordination has begun grumbling

louder and louder.  Officers have been seen shut up in their mess-rooms;

assaulted with clamorous demands, not without menaces.  The insubordinate

ringleader is dismissed with 'yellow furlough,' yellow infamous thing they

call cartouche jaune:  but ten new ringleaders rise in his stead, and the

yellow cartouche ceases to be thought disgraceful.  'Within a fortnight,'

or at furthest a month, of that sublime Feast of Pikes, the whole French

Army, demanding Arrears, forming Reading Clubs, frequenting Popular

Societies, is in a state which Bouille can call by no name but that of

mutiny.  Bouille knows it as few do; and speaks by dire experience.  Take

one instance instead of many.



It is still an early day of August, the precise date now undiscoverable,

when Bouille, about to set out for the waters of Aix la Chapelle, is once

more suddenly summoned to the barracks of Metz.  The soldiers stand ranked

in fighting order, muskets loaded, the officers all there on compulsion;

and require, with many-voiced emphasis, to have their arrears paid. 

Picardie was penitent; but we see it has relapsed:  the wide space bristles

and lours with mere mutinous armed men.  Brave Bouille advances to the

nearest Regiment, opens his commanding lips to harangue; obtains nothing

but querulous-indignant discordance, and the sound of so many thousand

livres legally due.  The moment is trying; there are some ten thousand

soldiers now in Metz, and one spirit seems to have spread among them.



Bouille is firm as the adamant; but what shall he do?  A German Regiment,

named of Salm, is thought to be of better temper:  nevertheless Salm too

may have heard of the precept, Thou shalt not steal; Salm too may know that

money is money.  Bouille walks trustfully towards the Regiment de Salm,

speaks trustful words; but here again is answered by the cry of forty-four

thousand livres odd sous.  A cry waxing more and more vociferous, as Salm's

humour mounts; which cry, as it will produce no cash or promise of cash,

ends in the wide simultaneous whirr of shouldered muskets, and a determined

quick-time march on the part of Salm--towards its Colonel's house, in the

next street, there to seize the colours and military chest.  Thus does

Salm, for its part; strong in the faith that meum is not tuum, that fair

speeches are not forty-four thousand livres odd sous.



Unrestrainable!  Salm tramps to military time, quick consuming the way. 

Bouille and the officers, drawing sword, have to dash into double quick

pas-de-charge, or unmilitary running; to get the start; to station

themselves on the outer staircase, and stand there with what of death-

defiance and sharp steel they have; Salm truculently coiling itself up,

rank after rank, opposite them, in such humour as we can fancy, which

happily has not yet mounted to the murder-pitch.  There will Bouille stand,

certain at least of one man's purpose; in grim calmness, awaiting the

issue.  What the intrepidest of men and generals can do is done.  Bouille,

though there is a barricading picket at each end of the street, and death

under his eyes, contrives to send for a Dragoon Regiment with orders to

charge:  the dragoon officers mount; the dragoon men will not:  hope is

none there for him.  The street, as we say, barricaded; the Earth all shut

out, only the indifferent heavenly Vault overhead:  perhaps here or there a

timorous householder peering out of window, with prayer for Bouille;

copious Rascality, on the pavement, with prayer for Salm:  there do the two

parties stand;--like chariots locked in a narrow thoroughfare; like locked

wrestlers at a dead-grip!  For two hours they stand; Bouille's sword

glittering in his hand, adamantine resolution clouding his brows:  for two

hours by the clocks of Metz.  Moody-silent stands Salm, with occasional

clangour; but does not fire.  Rascality from time to time urges some

grenadier to level his musket at the General; who looks on it as a bronze

General would; and always some corporal or other strikes it up.



In such remarkable attitude, standing on that staircase for two hours, does

brave Bouille, long a shadow, dawn on us visibly out of the dimness, and

become a person.  For the rest, since Salm has not shot him at the first

instant, and since in himself there is no variableness, the danger will

diminish.  The Mayor, 'a man infinitely respectable,' with his Municipals

and tricolor sashes, finally gains entrance; remonstrates, perorates,

promises; gets Salm persuaded home to its barracks.  Next day, our

respectable Mayor lending the money, the officers pay down the half of the

demand in ready cash.  With which liquidation Salm pacifies itself, and for

the present all is hushed up, as much as may be.  (Bouille, i. 140-5.)



Such scenes as this of Metz, or preparations and demonstrations towards

such, are universal over France:  Dampmartin, with his knotted forage-cords

and piled chamois jackets, is at Strasburg in the South-East; in these same

days or rather nights, Royal Champagne is 'shouting Vive la Nation, au

diable les Aristocrates, with some thirty lit candles,' at Hesdin, on the

far North-West.  "The garrison of Bitche," Deputy Rewbell is sorry to

state, "went out of the town, with drums beating; deposed its officers; and

then returned into the town, sabre in hand."  (Moniteur (in Hist. Parl.

vii. 29).)  Ought not a National Assembly to occupy itself with these

objects?  Military France is everywhere full of sour inflammatory humour,

which exhales itself fuliginously, this way or that:  a whole continent of

smoking flax; which, blown on here or there by any angry wind, might so

easily start into a blaze, into a continent of fire!



Constitutional Patriotism is in deep natural alarm at these things.  The

august Assembly sits diligently deliberating; dare nowise resolve, with

Mirabeau, on an instantaneous disbandment and extinction; finds that a

course of palliatives is easier.  But at least and lowest, this grievance

of the Arrears shall be rectified.  A plan, much noised of in those days,

under the name 'Decree of the Sixth of August,' has been devised for that.

Inspectors shall visit all armies; and, with certain elected corporals and

'soldiers able to write,' verify what arrears and peculations do lie due,

and make them good.  Well, if in this way the smoky heat be cooled down; if

it be not, as we say, ventilated over-much, or, by sparks and collision

somewhere, sent up!







Chapter 2.2.IV.



Arrears at Nanci.



We are to remark, however, that of all districts, this of Bouille's seems

the inflammablest.  It was always to Bouille and Metz that Royalty would

fly:  Austria lies near; here more than elsewhere must the disunited People

look over the borders, into a dim sea of Foreign Politics and Diplomacies,

with hope or apprehension, with mutual exasperation.



It was but in these days that certain Austrian troops, marching peaceably

across an angle of this region, seemed an Invasion realised; and there

rushed towards Stenai, with musket on shoulder, from all the winds, some

thirty thousand National Guards, to inquire what the matter was. 

(Moniteur, Seance du 9 Aout 1790.)  A matter of mere diplomacy it proved;

the Austrian Kaiser, in haste to get to Belgium, had bargained for this

short cut.  The infinite dim movement of European Politics waved a skirt

over these spaces, passing on its way; like the passing shadow of a condor;

and such a winged flight of thirty thousand, with mixed cackling and

crowing, rose in consequence!  For, in addition to all, this people, as we

said, is much divided:  Aristocrats abound; Patriotism has both Aristocrats

and Austrians to watch.  It is Lorraine, this region; not so illuminated as

old France:  it remembers ancient Feudalisms; nay, within man's memory, it

had a Court and King of its own, or indeed the splendour of a Court and

King, without the burden.  Then, contrariwise, the Mother Society, which

sits in the Jacobins Church at Paris, has Daughters in the Towns here;

shrill-tongued, driven acrid:  consider how the memory of good King

Stanislaus, and ages of Imperial Feudalism, may comport with this New acrid

Evangel, and what a virulence of discord there may be!  In all which, the

Soldiery, officers on one side, private men on the other, takes part, and

now indeed principal part; a Soldiery, moreover, all the hotter here as it

lies the denser, the frontier Province requiring more of it.



So stands Lorraine:  but the capital City, more especially so.  The

pleasant City of Nanci, which faded Feudalism loves, where King Stanislaus

personally dwelt and shone, has an Aristocrat Municipality, and then also a

Daughter Society:  it has some forty thousand divided souls of population;

and three large Regiments, one of which is Swiss Chateau-Vieux, dear to

Patriotism ever since it refused fighting, or was thought to refuse, in the

Bastille days.  Here unhappily all evil influences seem to meet

concentered; here, of all places, may jealousy and heat evolve itself. 

These many months, accordingly, man has been set against man, Washed

against Unwashed; Patriot Soldier against Aristocrat Captain, ever the more

bitterly; and a long score of grudges has been running up.



Nameable grudges, and likewise unnameable:  for there is a punctual nature

in Wrath; and daily, were there but glances of the eye, tones of the voice,

and minutest commissions or omissions, it will jot down somewhat, to

account, under the head of sundries, which always swells the sum-total. 

For example, in April last, in those times of preliminary Federation, when

National Guards and Soldiers were every where swearing brotherhood, and all

France was locally federating, preparing for the grand National Feast of

Pikes, it was observed that these Nanci Officers threw cold water on the

whole brotherly business; that they first hung back from appearing at the

Nanci Federation; then did appear, but in mere redingote and undress, with

scarcely a clean shirt on; nay that one of them, as the National Colours

flaunted by in that solemn moment, did, without visible necessity, take

occasion to spit.  (Deux Amis, v. 217.)



Small 'sundries as per journal,' but then incessant ones!  The Aristocrat

Municipality, pretending to be Constitutional, keeps mostly quiet; not so

the Daughter Society, the five thousand adult male Patriots of the place,

still less the five thousand female:  not so the young, whiskered or

whiskerless, four-generation Noblesse in epaulettes; the grim Patriot Swiss

of Chateau-Vieux, effervescent infantry of Regiment du Roi, hot troopers of

Mestre-de-Camp!  Walled Nanci, which stands so bright and trim, with its

straight streets, spacious squares, and Stanislaus' Architecture, on the

fruitful alluvium of the Meurthe; so bright, amid the yellow cornfields in

these Reaper-Months,--is inwardly but a den of discord, anxiety,

inflammability, not far from exploding.  Let Bouille look to it.  If that

universal military heat, which we liken to a vast continent of smoking

flax, do any where take fire, his beard, here in Lorraine and Nanci, may

the most readily of all get singed by it.



Bouille, for his part, is busy enough, but only with the general

superintendence; getting his pacified Salm, and all other still tolerable

Regiments, marched out of Metz, to southward towns and villages; to rural

Cantonments as at Vic, Marsal and thereabout, by the still waters; where is

plenty of horse-forage, sequestered parade-ground, and the soldier's

speculative faculty can be stilled by drilling.  Salm, as we said, received

only half payment of arrears; naturally not without grumbling. 

Nevertheless that scene of the drawn sword may, after all, have raised

Bouille in the mind of Salm; for men and soldiers love intrepidity and

swift inflexible decision, even when they suffer by it.  As indeed is not

this fundamentally the quality of qualities for a man?  A quality which by

itself is next to nothing, since inferior animals, asses, dogs, even mules

have it; yet, in due combination, it is the indispensable basis of all.



Of Nanci and its heats, Bouille, commander of the whole, knows nothing

special; understands generally that the troops in that City are perhaps the

worst.  (Bouille, i. c. 9.)  The Officers there have it all, as they have

long had it, to themselves; and unhappily seem to manage it ill.  'Fifty

yellow furloughs,' given out in one batch, do surely betoken difficulties.

But what was Patriotism to think of certain light-fencing Fusileers 'set

on,' or supposed to be set on, 'to insult the Grenadier-club,' considerate

speculative Grenadiers, and that reading-room of theirs?  With shoutings,

with hootings; till the speculative Grenadier drew his side-arms too; and

there ensued battery and duels!  Nay more, are not swashbucklers of the

same stamp 'sent out' visibly, or sent out presumably, now in the dress of

Soldiers to pick quarrels with the Citizens; now, disguised as Citizens, to

pick quarrels with the Soldiers?  For a certain Roussiere, expert in fence,

was taken in the very fact; four Officers (presumably of tender years)

hounding him on, who thereupon fled precipitately!  Fence-master Roussiere,

haled to the guardhouse, had sentence of three months' imprisonment:  but

his comrades demanded 'yellow furlough' for him of all persons; nay,

thereafter they produced him on parade; capped him in paper-helmet

inscribed, Iscariot; marched him to the gate of City; and there sternly

commanded him to vanish for evermore.



On all which suspicions, accusations and noisy procedure, and on enough of

the like continually accumulating, the Officer could not but look with

disdainful indignation; perhaps disdainfully express the same in words, and

'soon after fly over to the Austrians.'



So that when it here as elsewhere comes to the question of Arrears, the

humour and procedure is of the bitterest:  Regiment Mestre-de-Camp getting,

amid loud clamour, some three gold louis a-man,--which have, as usual, to

be borrowed from the Municipality; Swiss Chateau-Vieux applying for the

like, but getting instead instantaneous courrois, or cat-o'-nine-tails,

with subsequent unsufferable hisses from the women and children; Regiment

du Roi, sick of hope deferred, at length seizing its military chest, and

marching it to quarters, but next day marching it back again, through

streets all struck silent:--unordered paradings and clamours, not without

strong liquor; objurgation, insubordination; your military ranked

Arrangement going all (as the Typographers say of set types, in a similar

case) rapidly to pie!  (Deux Amis, v. c. 8.)  Such is Nanci in these early

days of August; the sublime Feast of Pikes not yet a month old.



Constitutional Patriotism, at Paris and elsewhere, may well quake at the

news.  War-Minister Latour du Pin runs breathless to the National Assembly,

with a written message that 'all is burning, tout brule, tout presse.'  The

National Assembly, on spur of the instant, renders such Decret, and 'order

to submit and repent,' as he requires; if it will avail any thing.  On the

other hand, Journalism, through all its throats, gives hoarse outcry,

condemnatory, elegiac-applausive.  The Forty-eight Sections, lift up

voices; sonorous Brewer, or call him now Colonel Santerre, is not silent,

in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine.  For, meanwhile, the Nanci Soldiers have

sent a Deputation of Ten, furnished with documents and proofs; who will

tell another story than the 'all-is-burning' one.  Which deputed Ten,

before ever they reach the Assembly Hall, assiduous Latour du Pin picks up,

and on warrant of Mayor Bailly, claps in prison!  Most unconstitutionally;

for they had officers' furloughs.  Whereupon Saint-Antoine, in indignant

uncertainty of the future, closes its shops.  Is Bouille a traitor then,

sold to Austria?  In that case, these poor private sentinels have revolted

mainly out of Patriotism?



New Deputation, Deputation of National Guardsmen now, sets forth from Nanci

to enlighten the Assembly.  It meets the old deputed Ten returning, quite

unexpectedly unhanged; and proceeds thereupon with better prospects; but

effects nothing.  Deputations, Government Messengers, Orderlies at hand-

gallops, Alarms, thousand-voiced Rumours, go vibrating continually;

backwards and forwards,--scattering distraction.  Not till the last week of

August does M. de Malseigne, selected as Inspector, get down to the scene

of mutiny; with Authority, with cash, and 'Decree of the Sixth of August.' 

He now shall see these Arrears liquidated, justice done, or at least tumult

quashed.







Chapter 2.2.V.



Inspector Malseigne.



Of Inspector Malseigne we discern, by direct light, that he is 'of

Herculean stature;' and infer, with probability, that he is of truculent

moustachioed aspect,--for Royalist Officers now leave the upper lip

unshaven; that he is of indomitable bull-heart; and also, unfortunately, of

thick bull-head.



On Tuesday the 24th of August, 1790, he opens session as Inspecting

Commissioner; meets those 'elected corporals, and soldiers that can write.' 

He finds the accounts of Chateau-Vieux to be complex; to require delay and

reference:  he takes to haranguing, to reprimanding; ends amid audible

grumbling.  Next morning, he resumes session, not at the Townhall as

prudent Municipals counselled, but once more at the barracks. 

Unfortunately Chateau-Vieux, grumbling all night, will now hear of no delay

or reference; from reprimanding on his part, it goes to bullying,--answered

with continual cries of "Jugez tout de suite, Judge it at once;" whereupon

M. de Malseigne will off in a huff.  But lo, Chateau Vieux, swarming all

about the barrack-court, has sentries at every gate; M. de Malseigne,

demanding egress, cannot get it, though Commandant Denoue backs him; can

get only "Jugez tout de suite."  Here is a nodus!



Bull-hearted M. de Malseigne draws his sword; and will force egress. 

Confused splutter.  M. de Malseigne's sword breaks; he snatches Commandant

Denoue's:  the sentry is wounded.  M. de Malseigne, whom one is loath to

kill, does force egress,--followed by Chateau-Vieux all in disarray; a

spectacle to Nanci.  M. de Malseigne walks at a sharp pace, yet never runs;

wheeling from time to time, with menaces and movements of fence; and so

reaches Denoue's house, unhurt; which house Chateau-Vieux, in an agitated

manner, invests,--hindered as yet from entering, by a crowd of officers

formed on the staircase.  M. de Malseigne retreats by back ways to the

Townhall, flustered though undaunted; amid an escort of National Guards. 

From the Townhall he, on the morrow, emits fresh orders, fresh plans of

settlement with Chateau-Vieux; to none of which will Chateau-Vieux listen:

whereupon finally he, amid noise enough, emits order that Chateau-Vieux

shall march on the morrow morning, and quarter at Sarre Louis.  Chateau-

Vieux flatly refuses marching; M. de Malseigne 'takes act,' due notarial

protest, of such refusal,--if happily that may avail him.



This is end of Thursday; and, indeed, of M. de Malseigne's Inspectorship,

which has lasted some fifty hours.  To such length, in fifty hours, has he

unfortunately brought it.  Mestre-de-Camp and Regiment du Roi hang, as it

were, fluttering:  Chateau-Vieux is clean gone, in what way we see.  Over

night, an Aide-de-Camp of Lafayette's, stationed here for such emergency,

sends swift emissaries far and wide, to summon National Guards.  The

slumber of the country is broken by clattering hoofs, by loud fraternal

knockings; every where the Constitutional Patriot must clutch his fighting-

gear, and take the road for Nanci.



And thus the Herculean Inspector has sat all Thursday, among terror-struck

Municipals, a centre of confused noise:  all Thursday, Friday, and till

Saturday towards noon.  Chateau-Vieux, in spite of the notarial protest,

will not march a step.  As many as four thousand National Guards are

dropping or pouring in; uncertain what is expected of them, still more

uncertain what will be obtained of them.  For all is uncertainty,

commotion, and suspicion:  there goes a word that Bouille, beginning to

bestir himself in the rural Cantonments eastward, is but a Royalist

traitor; that Chateau-Vieux and Patriotism are sold to Austria, of which

latter M. de Malseigne is probably some agent.  Mestre-de-Camp and Roi

flutter still more questionably:  Chateau-Vieux, far from marching, 'waves

red flags out of two carriages,' in a passionate manner, along the streets;

and next morning answers its Officers:  "Pay us, then; and we will march

with you to the world's end!"



Under which circumstances, towards noon on Saturday, M. de Malseigne thinks

it were good perhaps to inspect the ramparts,--on horseback.  He mounts,

accordingly, with escort of three troopers.  At the gate of the city, he

bids two of them wait for his return; and with the third, a trooper to be

depended upon, he--gallops off for Luneville; where lies a certain

Carabineer Regiment not yet in a mutinous state!  The two left troopers

soon get uneasy; discover how it is, and give the alarm.  Mestre-de-Camp,

to the number of a hundred, saddles in frantic haste, as if sold to

Austria; gallops out pellmell in chase of its Inspector.  And so they spur,

and the Inspector spurs; careering, with noise and jingle, up the valley of

the River Meurthe, towards Luneville and the midday sun:  through an

astonished country; indeed almost their own astonishment.



What a hunt, Actaeon-like;--which Actaeon de Malseigne happily gains!  To

arms, ye Carabineers of Luneville:  to chastise mutinous men, insulting

your General Officer, insulting your own quarters;--above all things, fire

soon, lest there be parleying and ye refuse to fire!  The Carabineers fire

soon, exploding upon the first stragglers of Mestre-de-Camp; who shrink at

the very flash, and fall back hastily on Nanci, in a state not far from

distraction.  Panic and fury:  sold to Austria without an if; so much per

regiment, the very sums can be specified; and traitorous Malseigne is fled! 

Help, O Heaven; help, thou Earth,--ye unwashed Patriots; ye too are sold

like us!



Effervescent Regiment du Roi primes its firelocks, Mestre-de-Camp saddles

wholly:  Commandant Denoue is seized, is flung in prison with a 'canvass

shirt' (sarreau de toile) about him; Chateau-Vieux bursts up the magazines;

distributes 'three thousand fusils' to a Patriot people:  Austria shall

have a hot bargain.  Alas, the unhappy hunting-dogs, as we said, have

hunted away their huntsman; and do now run howling and baying, on what

trail they know not; nigh rabid!



And so there is tumultuous march of men, through the night; with halt on

the heights of Flinval, whence Luneville can be seen all illuminated.  Then

there is parley, at four in the morning; and reparley; finally there is

agreement:  the Carabineers give in; Malseigne is surrendered, with

apologies on all sides.  After weary confused hours, he is even got under

way; the Lunevillers all turning out, in the idle Sunday, to see such

departure:  home-going of mutinous Mestre-de-Camp with its Inspector

captive.  Mestre-de-Camp accordingly marches; the Lunevillers look.  See!

at the corner of the first street, our Inspector bounds off again, bull-

hearted as he is; amid the slash of sabres, the crackle of musketry; and

escapes, full gallop, with only a ball lodged in his buff-jerkin.  The

Herculean man!  And yet it is an escape to no purpose.  For the

Carabineers, to whom after the hardest Sunday's ride on record, he has come

circling back, 'stand deliberating by their nocturnal watch-fires;'

deliberating of Austria, of traitors, and the rage of Mestre-de-Camp.  So

that, on the whole, the next sight we have is that of M. de Malseigne, on

the Monday afternoon, faring bull-hearted through the streets of Nanci; in

open carriage, a soldier standing over him with drawn sword; amid the

'furies of the women,' hedges of National Guards, and confusion of Babel: 

to the Prison beside Commandant Denoue!  That finally is the lodging of

Inspector Malseigne.  (Deux Amis, v. 206-251; Newspapers and Documents (in

Hist. Parl. vii. 59-162.)



Surely it is time Bouille were drawing near.  The Country all round,

alarmed with watchfires, illuminated towns, and marching and rout, has been

sleepless these several nights.  Nanci, with its uncertain National Guards,

with its distributed fusils, mutinous soldiers, black panic and redhot ire,

is not a City but a Bedlam.









Chapter 2.2.VI.



Bouille at Nanci.



Haste with help, thou brave Bouille:  if swift help come not, all is now

verily 'burning;' and may burn,--to what lengths and breadths!  Much, in

these hours, depends on Bouille; as it shall now fare with him, the whole

Future may be this way or be that.  If, for example, he were to loiter

dubitating, and not come:  if he were to come, and fail:  the whole

Soldiery of France to blaze into mutiny, National Guards going some this

way, some that; and Royalism to draw its rapier, and Sansculottism to

snatch its pike; and the Spirit if Jacobinism, as yet young, girt with sun-

rays, to grow instantaneously mature, girt with hell-fire,--as mortals, in

one night of deadly crisis, have had their heads turned gray!



Brave Bouille is advancing fast, with the old inflexibility; gathering

himself, unhappily 'in small affluences,' from East, from West and North;

and now on Tuesday morning, the last day of the month, he stands all

concentred, unhappily still in small force, at the village of Frouarde,

within some few miles.  Son of Adam with a more dubious task before him is

not in the world this Tuesday morning.  A weltering inflammable sea of

doubt and peril, and Bouille sure of simply one thing, his own

determination.  Which one thing, indeed, may be worth many.  He puts a most

firm face on the matter:  'Submission, or unsparing battle and destruction;

twenty-four hours to make your choice:'  this was the tenor of his

Proclamation; thirty copies of which he sent yesterday to Nanci:--all

which, we find, were intercepted and not posted.  (Compare Bouille,

Memoires, i. 153-176; Deux Amis, v. 251-271; Hist. Parl. ubi supra.)



Nevertheless, at half-past eleven, this morning, seemingly by way of

answer, there does wait on him at Frouarde, some Deputation from the

mutinous Regiments, from the Nanci Municipals, to see what can be done. 

Bouille receives this Deputation, 'in a large open court adjoining his

lodging:'  pacified Salm, and the rest, attend also, being invited to do

it,--all happily still in the right humour.  The Mutineers pronounce

themselves with a decisiveness, which to Bouille seems insolence; and

happily to Salm also.  Salm, forgetful of the Metz staircase and sabre,

demands that the scoundrels 'be hanged' there and then.  Bouille represses

the hanging; but answers that mutinous Soldiers have one course, and not

more than one:  To liberate, with heartfelt contrition, Messieurs Denoue

and de Malseigne; to get ready forthwith for marching off, whither he shall

order; and 'submit and repent,' as the National Assembly has decreed, as he

yesterday did in thirty printed Placards proclaim.  These are his terms,

unalterable as the decrees of Destiny.  Which terms as they, the Mutineer

deputies, seemingly do not accept, it were good for them to vanish from

this spot, and even promptly; with him too, in few instants, the word will

be, Forward!  The Mutineer deputies vanish, not unpromptly; the Municipal

ones, anxious beyond right for their own individualities, prefer abiding

with Bouille.



Brave Bouille, though he puts a most firm face on the matter, knows his

position full well:  how at Nanci, what with rebellious soldiers, with

uncertain National Guards, and so many distributed fusils, there rage and

roar some ten thousand fighting men; while with himself is scarcely the

third part of that number, in National Guards also uncertain, in mere

pacified Regiments,--for the present full of rage, and clamour to march;

but whose rage and clamour may next moment take such a fatal new figure. 

On the top of one uncertain billow, therewith to calm billows!  Bouille

must 'abandon himself to Fortune;' who is said sometimes to favour the

brave.  At half-past twelve, the Mutineer deputies having vanished, our

drums beat; we march:  for Nanci!  Let Nanci bethink itself, then; for

Bouille has thought and determined.



And yet how shall Nanci think:  not a City but a Bedlam!  Grim Chateau-

Vieux is for defence to the death; forces the Municipality to order, by tap

of drum, all citizens acquainted with artillery to turn out, and assist in

managing the cannon.  On the other hand, effervescent Regiment du Roi, is

drawn up in its barracks; quite disconsolate, hearing the humour Salm is

in; and ejaculates dolefully from its thousand throats:  "La loi, la loi,

Law, law!"  Mestre-de-Camp blusters, with profane swearing, in mixed terror

and furor; National Guards look this way and that, not knowing what to do.

What a Bedlam-City:  as many plans as heads; all ordering, none obeying: 

quiet none,--except the Dead, who sleep underground, having done their

fighting!



And, behold, Bouille proves as good as his word:  'at half-past two' scouts

report that he is within half a league of the gates; rattling along, with

cannon, and array; breathing nothing but destruction.  A new Deputation,

Municipals, Mutineers, Officers, goes out to meet him; with passionate

entreaty for yet one other hour.  Bouille grants an hour.  Then, at the end

thereof, no Denoue or Malseigne appearing as promised, he rolls his drums,

and again takes the road.  Towards four o'clock, the terror-struck Townsmen

may see him face to face.  His cannons rattle there, in their carriages;

his vanguard is within thirty paces of the Gate Stanislaus.  Onward like a

Planet, by appointed times, by law of Nature!  What next?  Lo, flag of

truce and chamade; conjuration to halt:  Malseigne and Denoue are on the

street, coming hither; the soldiers all repentant, ready to submit and

march!  Adamantine Bouille's look alters not; yet the word Halt is given: 

gladder moment he never saw.  Joy of joys!  Malseigne and Denoue do verily

issue; escorted by National Guards; from streets all frantic, with sale to

Austria and so forth:  they salute Bouille, unscathed.  Bouille steps aside

to speak with them, and with other heads of the Town there; having already

ordered by what Gates and Routes the mutineer Regiments shall file out.



Such colloquy with these two General Officers and other principal Townsmen,

was natural enough; nevertheless one wishes Bouille had postponed it, and

not stepped aside.  Such tumultuous inflammable masses, tumbling along,

making way for each other; this of keen nitrous oxide, that of sulphurous

fire-damp,--were it not well to stand between them, keeping them well

separate, till the space be cleared?  Numerous stragglers of Chateau-Vieux

and the rest have not marched with their main columns, which are filing out

by the appointed Gates, taking station in the open meadows.  National

Guards are in a state of nearly distracted uncertainty; the populace, armed

and unharmed, roll openly delirious,--betrayed, sold to the Austrians, sold

to the Aristocrats.  There are loaded cannon with lit matches among them,

and Bouille's vanguard is halted within thirty paces of the Gate.  Command

dwells not in that mad inflammable mass; which smoulders and tumbles there,

in blind smoky rage; which will not open the Gate when summoned; says it

will open the cannon's throat sooner!--Cannonade not, O Friends, or be it

through my body! cries heroic young Desilles, young Captain of Roi,

clasping the murderous engine in his arms, and holding it.  Chateau-Vieux

Swiss, by main force, with oaths and menaces, wrench off the heroic youth;

who undaunted, amid still louder oaths seats himself on the touch-hole. 

Amid still louder oaths; with ever louder clangour,--and, alas, with the

loud crackle of first one, and then three other muskets; which explode into

his body; which roll it in the dust,--and do also, in the loud madness of

such moment, bring lit cannon-match to ready priming; and so, with one

thunderous belch of grapeshot, blast some fifty of Bouille's vanguard into

air!



Fatal!  That sputter of the first musket-shot has kindled such a cannon-

shot, such a death-blaze; and all is now redhot madness, conflagration as

of Tophet.  With demoniac rage, the Bouille vanguard storms through that

Gate Stanislaus; with fiery sweep, sweeps Mutiny clear away, to death, or

into shelters and cellars; from which latter, again, Mutiny continues

firing.  The ranked Regiments hear it in their meadow; they rush back again

through the nearest Gates; Bouille gallops in, distracted, inaudible;--and

now has begun, in Nanci, as in that doomed Hall of the Nibelungen, 'a

murder grim and great.'



Miserable:  such scene of dismal aimless madness as the anger of Heaven but

rarely permits among men!  From cellar or from garret, from open street in

front, from successive corners of cross-streets on each hand, Chateau-Vieux

and Patriotism keep up the murderous rolling-fire, on murderous not

Unpatriotic fires.  Your blue National Captain, riddled with balls, one


hardly knows on whose side fighting, requests to be laid on the colours to

die:  the patriotic Woman (name not given, deed surviving) screams to

Chateau-Vieux that it must not fire the other cannon; and even flings a

pail of water on it, since screaming avails not.  (Deux Amis, v. 268.) 

Thou shalt fight; thou shalt not fight; and with whom shalt thou fight! 

Could tumult awaken the old Dead, Burgundian Charles the Bold might stir

from under that Rotunda of his:  never since he, raging, sank in the

ditches, and lost Life and Diamond, was such a noise heard here.



Three thousand, as some count, lie mangled, gory; the half of Chateau-Vieux

has been shot, without need of Court Martial.  Cavalry, of Mestre-de-Camp

or their foes, can do little.  Regiment du Roi was persuaded to its

barracks; stands there palpitating.  Bouille, armed with the terrors of the

Law, and favoured of Fortune, finally triumphs.  In two murderous hours he

has penetrated to the grand Squares, dauntless, though with loss of forty

officers and five hundred men:  the shattered remnants of Chateau-Vieux are

seeking covert.  Regiment du Roi, not effervescent now, alas no, but having

effervesced, will offer to ground its arms; will 'march in a quarter of an

hour.'  Nay these poor effervesced require 'escort' to march with, and get

it; though they are thousands strong, and have thirty ball-cartridges a

man!  The Sun is not yet down, when Peace, which might have come bloodless,

has come bloody:  the mutinous Regiments are on march, doleful, on their

three Routes; and from Nanci rises wail of women and men, the voice of

weeping and desolation; the City weeping for its slain who awaken not. 

These streets are empty but for victorious patrols.



Thus has Fortune, favouring the brave, dragged Bouille, as himself says,

out of such a frightful peril, 'by the hair of the head.'  An intrepid

adamantine man this Bouille:--had he stood in old Broglie's place, in those

Bastille days, it might have been all different!  He has extinguished

mutiny, and immeasurable civil war.  Not for nothing, as we see; yet at a

rate which he and Constitutional Patriotism considers cheap.  Nay, as for

Bouille, he, urged by subsequent contradiction which arose, declares

coldly, it was rather against his own private mind, and more by public

military rule of duty, that he did extinguish it, (Bouille, i. 175.)--

immeasurable civil war being now the only chance.  Urged, we say, by

subsequent contradiction!  Civil war, indeed, is Chaos; and in all vital

Chaos, there is new Order shaping itself free:  but what a faith this, that

of all new Orders out of Chaos and Possibility of Man and his Universe,

Louis Sixteenth and Two-Chamber Monarchy were precisely the one that would

shape itself!  It is like undertaking to throw deuce-ace, say only five

hundred successive times, and any other throw to be fatal--for Bouille. 

Rather thank Fortune, and Heaven, always, thou intrepid Bouille; and let

contradiction of its way!  Civil war, conflagrating universally over France

at this moment, might have led to one thing or to another thing: 

meanwhile, to quench conflagration, wheresoever one finds it, wheresoever

one can; this, in all times, is the rule for man and General Officer.



But at Paris, so agitated and divided, fancy how it went, when the

continually vibrating Orderlies vibrated thither at hand gallop, with such

questionable news!  High is the gratulation; and also deep the indignation.

An august Assembly, by overwhelming majorities, passionately thanks

Bouille; a King's autograph, the voices of all Loyal, all Constitutional

men run to the same tenor.  A solemn National funeral-service, for the Law-

defenders slain at Nanci; is said and sung in the Champ de Mars; Bailly,

Lafayette and National Guards, all except the few that protested, assist. 

With pomp and circumstance, with episcopal Calicoes in tricolor girdles,

Altar of Fatherland smoking with cassolettes, or incense-kettles; the vast

Champ-de-Mars wholly hung round with black mortcloth,--which mortcloth and

expenditure Marat thinks had better have been laid out in bread, in these

dear days, and given to the hungry living Patriot.  (Ami du Peuple (in

Hist. Parl., ubi supra.)  On the other hand, living Patriotism, and Saint-

Antoine, which we have seen noisily closing its shops and such like,

assembles now 'to the number of forty thousand;' and, with loud cries,

under the very windows of the thanking National Assembly, demands revenge

for murdered Brothers, judgment on Bouille, and instant dismissal of War-

Minister Latour du Pin.



At sound and sight of which things, if not War-Minister Latour, yet 'Adored

Minister' Necker, sees good on the 3d of September 1790, to withdraw softly

almost privily,--with an eye to the 'recovery of his health.'  Home to

native Switzerland; not as he last came; lucky to reach it alive!  Fifteen

months ago, we saw him coming, with escort of horse, with sound of clarion

and trumpet:  and now at Arcis-sur-Aube, while he departs unescorted

soundless, the Populace and Municipals stop him as a fugitive, are not

unlike massacring him as a traitor; the National Assembly, consulted on the

matter, gives him free egress as a nullity.  Such an unstable 'drift-mould

of Accident' is the substance of this lower world, for them that dwell in

houses of clay; so, especially in hot regions and times, do the proudest

palaces we build of it take wings, and become Sahara sand-palaces, spinning

many pillared in the whirlwind, and bury us under their sand!--



In spite of the forty thousand, the National Assembly persists in its

thanks; and Royalist Latour du Pin continues Minister.  The forty thousand

assemble next day, as loud as ever; roll towards Latour's Hotel; find

cannon on the porch-steps with flambeau lit; and have to retire

elsewhither, and digest their spleen, or re-absorb it into the blood.



Over in Lorraine, meanwhile, they of the distributed fusils, ringleaders of

Mestre-de-Camp, of Roi, have got marked out for judgment;--yet shall never

get judged.  Briefer is the doom of Chateau-Vieux.  Chateau-Vieux is, by

Swiss law, given up for instant trial in Court-Martial of its own officers. 

Which Court-Martial, with all brevity (in not many hours), has hanged some

Twenty-three, on conspicuous gibbets; marched some Three-score in chains to

the Galleys; and so, to appearance, finished the matter off.  Hanged men do

cease for ever from this Earth; but out of chains and the Galleys there may

be resuscitation in triumph.  Resuscitation for the chained Hero; and even

for the chained Scoundrel, or Semi-scoundrel!  Scottish John Knox, such

World-Hero, as we know, sat once nevertheless pulling grim-taciturn at the

oar of French Galley, 'in the Water of Lore;' and even flung their Virgin-

Mary over, instead of kissing her,--as 'a pented bredd,' or timber Virgin,

who could naturally swim.  (Knox's History of the Reformation, b. i.)  So,

ye of Chateau-Vieux, tug patiently, not without hope!



But indeed at Nanci generally, Aristocracy rides triumphant, rough. 

Bouille is gone again, the second day; an Aristocrat Municipality, with

free course, is as cruel as it had before been cowardly.  The Daughter

Society, as the mother of the whole mischief, lies ignominiously

suppressed; the Prisons can hold no more; bereaved down-beaten Patriotism

murmurs, not loud but deep.  Here and in the neighbouring Towns, 'flattened

balls' picked from the streets of Nanci are worn at buttonholes:  balls

flattened in carrying death to Patriotism; men wear them there, in

perpetual memento of revenge.  Mutineer Deserters roam the woods; have to

demand charity at the musket's end.  All is dissolution, mutual rancour,

gloom and despair:--till National-Assembly Commissioners arrive, with a

steady gentle flame of Constitutionalism in their hearts; who gently lift

up the down-trodden, gently pull down the too uplifted; reinstate the

Daughter Society, recall the Mutineer Deserter; gradually levelling, strive

in all wise ways to smooth and soothe.  With such gradual mild levelling on

the one side; as with solemn funeral-service, Cassolettes, Courts-Martial,

National thanks,--all that Officiality can do is done.  The buttonhole will

drop its flat ball; the black ashes, so far as may be, get green again.



This is the 'Affair of Nanci;' by some called the 'Massacre of Nanci;'--

properly speaking, the unsightly wrong-side of that thrice glorious Feast

of Pikes, the right-side of which formed a spectacle for the very gods. 

Right-side and wrong lie always so near:  the one was in July, in August

the other!  Theatres, the theatres over in London, are bright with their

pasteboard simulacrum of that 'Federation of the French People,' brought

out as Drama:  this of Nanci, we may say, though not played in any

pasteboard Theatre, did for many months enact itself, and even walk

spectrally--in all French heads.  For the news of it fly pealing through

all France; awakening, in town and village, in clubroom, messroom, to the

utmost borders, some mimic reflex or imaginative repetition of the

business; always with the angry questionable assertion:  It was right; It

was wrong.  Whereby come controversies, duels, embitterment, vain jargon;

the hastening forward, the augmenting and intensifying of whatever new

explosions lie in store for us.



Meanwhile, at this cost or at that, the mutiny, as we say, is stilled.  The

French Army has neither burst up in universal simultaneous delirium; nor

been at once disbanded, put an end to, and made new again.  It must die in

the chronic manner, through years, by inches; with partial revolts, as of

Brest Sailors or the like, which dare not spread; with men unhappy,

insubordinate; officers unhappier, in Royalist moustachioes, taking horse,

singly or in bodies, across the Rhine: (See Dampmartin, i. 249, &c. &c.) 

sick dissatisfaction, sick disgust on both sides; the Army moribund, fit

for no duty:--till it do, in that unexpected manner, Phoenix-like, with

long throes, get both dead and newborn; then start forth strong, nay

stronger and even strongest.



Thus much was the brave Bouille hitherto fated to do.  Wherewith let him

again fade into dimness; and at Metz or the rural Cantonments, assiduously

drilling, mysteriously diplomatising, in scheme within scheme, hover as

formerly a faint shadow, the hope of Royalty.
