








BOOK 3.III.



THE GIRONDINS





Chapter 3.3.I.



Cause and Effect.



This huge Insurrectionary Movement, which we liken to a breaking out of

Tophet and the Abyss, has swept away Royalty, Aristocracy, and a King's

life.  The question is, What will it next do; how will it henceforth shape

itself?  Settle down into a reign of Law and Liberty; according as the

habits, persuasions and endeavours of the educated, monied, respectable

class prescribe?  That is to say:  the volcanic lava-flood, bursting up in

the manner described, will explode and flow according to Girondin Formula

and pre-established rule of Philosophy?  If so, for our Girondin friends it

will be well.



Meanwhile were not the prophecy rather that as no external force, Royal or

other, now remains which could control this Movement, the Movement will

follow a course of its own; probably a very original one?  Further, that

whatsoever man or men can best interpret the inward tendencies it has, and

give them voice and activity, will obtain the lead of it?  For the rest,

that as a thing without order, a thing proceeding from beyond and beneath

the region of order, it must work and welter, not as a Regularity but as a

Chaos; destructive and self-destructive; always till something that has

order arise, strong enough to bind it into subjection again?  Which

something, we may further conjecture, will not be a Formula, with

philosophical propositions and forensic eloquence; but a Reality, probably

with a sword in its hand!



As for the Girondin Formula, of a respectable Republic for the Middle

Classes, all manner of Aristocracies being now sufficiently demolished,

there seems little reason to expect that the business will stop there. 

Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, these are the words; enunciative and

prophetic.  Republic for the respectable washed Middle Classes, how can

that be the fulfilment thereof?  Hunger and nakedness, and nightmare

oppression lying heavy on Twenty-five million hearts; this, not the wounded

vanities or contradicted philosophies of philosophical Advocates, rich

Shopkeepers, rural Noblesse, was the prime mover in the French Revolution;

as the like will be in all such Revolutions, in all countries.  Feudal

Fleur-de-lys had become an insupportably bad marching banner, and needed to

be torn and trampled:  but Moneybag of Mammon (for that, in these times, is

what the respectable Republic for the Middle Classes will signify) is a

still worse, while it lasts.  Properly, indeed, it is the worst and basest

of all banners, and symbols of dominion among men; and indeed is possible

only in a time of general Atheism, and Unbelief in any thing save in brute

Force and Sensualism; pride of birth, pride of office, any known kind of

pride being a degree better than purse-pride.  Freedom, Equality,

Brotherhood:  not in the Moneybag, but far elsewhere, will Sansculottism

seek these things.



We say therefore that an Insurrectionary France, loose of control from

without, destitute of supreme order from within, will form one of the most

tumultuous Activities ever seen on this Earth; such as no Girondin Formula

can regulate.  An immeasurable force, made up of forces manifold,

heterogeneous, compatible and incompatible.  In plainer words, this France

must needs split into Parties; each of which seeking to make itself good,

contradiction, exasperation will arise; and Parties on Parties find that

they cannot work together, cannot exist together.



As for the number of Parties, there will, strictly counting, be as many

Parties as there are Opinions.  According to which rule, in this National

Convention itself, to say nothing of France generally, the number of

Parties ought to be Seven Hundred and Forty-Nine; for every unit entertains

his opinion.  But now as every unit has at once an individual nature, or

necessity to follow his own road, and a gregarious nature or necessity to

see himself travelling by the side of others,--what can there be but

dissolutions, precipitations, endless turbulence of attracting and

repelling; till once the master-element get evolved, and this wild alchemy

arrange itself again?



To the length of Seven Hundred and Forty-nine Parties, however, no Nation

was ever yet seen to go.  Nor indeed much beyond the length of Two Parties;

two at a time;--so invincible is man's tendency to unite, with all the

invincible divisiveness he has!  Two Parties, we say, are the usual number

at one time:  let these two fight it out, all minor shades of party

rallying under the shade likest them; when the one has fought down the

other, then it, in its turn, may divide, self-destructive; and so the

process continue, as far as needful.  This is the way of Revolutions, which

spring up as the French one has done; when the so-called Bonds of Society

snap asunder; and all Laws that are not Laws of Nature become naught and

Formulas merely.



But quitting these somewhat abstract considerations, let History note this

concrete reality which the streets of Paris exhibit, on Monday the 25th of

February 1793.  Long before daylight that morning, these streets are noisy

and angry.  Petitioning enough there has been; a Convention often

solicited.  It was but yesterday there came a Deputation of Washerwomen

with Petition; complaining that not so much as soap could be had; to say

nothing of bread, and condiments of bread.  The cry of women, round the

Salle de Manege, was heard plaintive:  "Du pain et du savon, Bread and

Soap."  (Moniteur &c. (Hist. Parl. xxiv. 332-348.)



And now from six o'clock, this Monday morning, one perceives the Baker's

Queues unusually expanded, angrily agitating themselves.  Not the Baker

alone, but two Section Commissioners to help him, manage with difficulty

the daily distribution of loaves.  Soft-spoken assiduous, in the early

candle-light, are Baker and Commissioners:  and yet the pale chill February

sunrise discloses an unpromising scene.  Indignant Female Patriots, partly

supplied with bread, rush now to the shops, declaring that they will have

groceries.  Groceries enough:  sugar-barrels rolled forth into the street,

Patriot Citoyennes weighing it out at a just rate of eleven-pence a pound;

likewise coffee-chests, soap-chests, nay cinnamon and cloves-chests, with

aquavitae and other forms of alcohol,--at a just rate, which some do not

pay; the pale-faced Grocer silently wringing his hands!  What help?  The

distributive Citoyennes are of violent speech and gesture, their long

Eumenides' hair hanging out of curl; nay in their girdles pistols are seen

sticking:  some, it is even said, have beards,--male Patriots in petticoats

and mob-cap.  Thus, in the streets of Lombards, in the street of Five-

Diamonds, street of Pullies, in most streets of Paris does it effervesce,

the livelong day; no Municipality, no Mayor Pache, though he was War-

Minister lately, sends military against it, or aught against it but

persuasive-eloquence, till seven at night, or later.



On Monday gone five weeks, which was the twenty-first of January, we saw

Paris, beheading its King, stand silent, like a petrified City of

Enchantment:  and now on this Monday it is so noisy, selling sugar! 

Cities, especially Cities in Revolution, are subject to these alternations;

the secret courses of civic business and existence effervescing and

efflorescing, in this manner, as a concrete Phenomenon to the eye.  Of

which Phenomenon, when secret existence becoming public effloresces on the

street, the philosophical cause-and-effect is not so easy to find.  What,

for example, may be the accurate philosophical meaning, and meanings, of

this sale of sugar?  These things that have become visible in the street of

Pullies and over Paris, whence are they, we say; and whither?--



That Pitt has a hand in it, the gold of Pitt:  so much, to all reasonable

Patriot men, may seem clear.  But then, through what agents of Pitt? 

Varlet, Apostle of Liberty, was discerned again of late, with his pike and

his red nightcap.  Deputy Marat published in his journal, this very day,

complaining of the bitter scarcity, and sufferings of the people, till he

seemed to get wroth:  'If your Rights of Man were anything but a piece of

written paper, the plunder of a few shops, and a forestaller or two hung up

at the door-lintels, would put an end to such things.'  (Hist. Parl. xxiv.

353-356.)  Are not these, say the Girondins, pregnant indications?  Pitt

has bribed the Anarchists; Marat is the agent of Pitt:  hence this sale of

sugar.  To the Mother Society, again, it is clear that the scarcity is

factitious; is the work of Girondins, and such like; a set of men sold

partly to Pitt; sold wholly to their own ambitions, and hard-hearted

pedantries; who will not fix the grain-prices, but prate pedantically of

free-trade; wishing to starve Paris into violence, and embroil it with the

Departments:  hence this sale of sugar.



And, alas, if to these two notabilities, of a Phenomenon and such Theories

of a Phenomenon, we add this third notability, That the French Nation has

believed, for several years now, in the possibility, nay certainty and near

advent, of a universal Millennium, or reign of Freedom, Equality,

Fraternity, wherein man should be the brother of man, and sorrow and sin

flee away?  Not bread to eat, nor soap to wish with; and the reign of

perfect Felicity ready to arrive, due always since the Bastille fell!  How

did our hearts burn within us, at that Feast of Pikes, when brother flung

himself on brother's bosom; and in sunny jubilee, Twenty-five millions

burst forth into sound and cannon-smoke!  Bright was our Hope then, as

sunlight; red-angry is our Hope grown now, as consuming fire.  But, O

Heavens, what enchantment is it, or devilish legerdemain, of such effect,

that Perfect Felicity, always within arm's length, could never be laid hold

of, but only in her stead Controversy and Scarcity?  This set of traitors

after that set!  Tremble, ye traitors; dread a People which calls itself

patient, long-suffering; but which cannot always submit to have its pocket

picked, in this way,--of a Millennium!



Yes, Reader, here is a miracle.  Out of that putrescent rubbish of

Scepticism, Sensualism, Sentimentalism, hollow Machiavelism, such a Faith

has verily risen; flaming in the heart of a People.  A whole People,

awakening as it were to consciousness in deep misery, believes that it is

within reach of a Fraternal Heaven-on-Earth.  With longing arms, it

struggles to embrace the Unspeakable; cannot embrace it, owing to certain

causes.--Seldom do we find that a whole People can be said to have any

Faith at all; except in things which it can eat and handle.  Whensoever it

gets any Faith, its history becomes spirit-stirring, note-worthy.  But

since the time when steel Europe shook itself simultaneously, at the word

of Hermit Peter, and rushed towards the Sepulchre where God had lain, there

was no universal impulse of Faith that one could note.  Since Protestantism

went silent, no Luther's voice, no Zisca's drum any longer proclaiming that

God's Truth was not the Devil's Lie; and the last of the Cameronians

(Renwick was the name of him; honour to the name of the brave!) sank, shot,

on the Castle Hill of Edinburgh, there was no partial impulse of Faith

among Nations.  Till now, behold, once more this French Nation believes! 

Herein, we say, in that astonishing Faith of theirs, lies the miracle.  It

is a Faith undoubtedly of the more prodigious sort, even among Faiths; and

will embody itself in prodigies.  It is the soul of that world-prodigy

named French Revolution; whereat the world still gazes and shudders.



But, for the rest, let no man ask History to explain by cause-and-effect

how the business proceeded henceforth.  This battle of Mountain and

Gironde, and what follows, is the battle of Fanaticisms and Miracles;

unsuitable for cause-and-effect.  The sound of it, to the mind, is as a

hubbub of voices in distraction; little of articulate is to be gathered by

long listening and studying; only battle-tumult, shouts of triumph, shrieks

of despair.  The Mountain has left no Memoirs; the Girondins have left

Memoirs, which are too often little other than long-drawn Interjections, of

Woe is me and Cursed be ye.  So soon as History can philosophically

delineate the conflagration of a kindled Fireship, she may try this other

task.  Here lay the bitumen-stratum, there the brimstone one; so ran the

vein of gunpowder, of nitre, terebinth and foul grease:  this, were she

inquisitive enough, History might partly know.  But how they acted and

reacted below decks, one fire-stratum playing into the other, by its nature

and the art of man, now when all hands ran raging, and the flames lashed

high over shrouds and topmast:  this let not History attempt.



The Fireship is old France, the old French Form of Life; her creed a

Generation of men.  Wild are their cries and their ragings there, like

spirits tormented in that flame.  But, on the whole, are they not gone, O

Reader?  Their Fireship and they, frightening the world, have sailed away;

its flames and its thunders quite away, into the Deep of Time.  One thing

therefore History will do:  pity them all; for it went hard with them all.

Not even the seagreen Incorruptible but shall have some pity, some human

love, though it takes an effort.  And now, so much once thoroughly

attained, the rest will become easier.  To the eye of equal brotherly pity,

innumerable perversions dissipate themselves; exaggerations and execrations

fall off, of their own accord.  Standing wistfully on the safe shore, we

will look, and see, what is of interest to us, what is adapted to us.







Chapter 3.3.II.



Culottic and Sansculottic.



Gironde and Mountain are now in full quarrel; their mutual rage, says

Toulongeon, is growing a 'pale' rage.  Curious, lamentable:  all these men

have the word Republic on their lips; in the heart of every one of them is

a passionate wish for something which he calls Republic:  yet see their

death-quarrel!  So, however, are men made.  Creatures who live in

confusion; who, once thrown together, can readily fall into that confusion

of confusions which quarrel is, simply because their confusions differ from

one another; still more because they seem to differ!  Men's words are a

poor exponent of their thought; nay their thought itself is a poor exponent

of the inward unnamed Mystery, wherefrom both thought and action have their

birth.  No man can explain himself, can get himself explained; men see not

one another but distorted phantasms which they call one another; which they

hate and go to battle with:  for all battle is well said to be

misunderstanding.



But indeed that similitude of the Fireship; of our poor French brethren, so

fiery themselves, working also in an element of fire, was not

insignificant.  Consider it well, there is a shade of the truth in it.  For

a man, once committed headlong to republican or any other

Transcendentalism, and fighting and fanaticising amid a Nation of his like,

becomes as it were enveloped in an ambient atmosphere of Transcendentalism

and Delirium:  his individual self is lost in something that is not

himself, but foreign though inseparable from him.  Strange to think of, the

man's cloak still seems to hold the same man:  and yet the man is not

there, his volition is not there; nor the source of what he will do and

devise; instead of the man and his volition there is a piece of Fanaticism

and Fatalism incarnated in the shape of him.  He, the hapless incarnated

Fanaticism, goes his road; no man can help him, he himself least of all. 

It is a wonderful tragical predicament;--such as human language, unused to

deal with these things, being contrived for the uses of common life,

struggles to shadow out in figures.  The ambient element of material fire

is not wilder than this of Fanaticism; nor, though visible to the eye, is

it more real.  Volition bursts forth involuntary; rapt along; the movement

of free human minds becomes a raging tornado of fatalism, blind as the

winds; and Mountain and Gironde, when they recover themselves, are alike

astounded to see where it has flung and dropt them.  To such height of

miracle can men work on men; the Conscious and the Unconscious blended

inscrutably in this our inscrutable Life; endless Necessity environing

Freewill!



The weapons of the Girondins are Political Philosophy, Respectability and

Eloquence.  Eloquence, or call it rhetoric, really of a superior order;

Vergniaud, for instance, turns a period as sweetly as any man of that

generation.  The weapons of the Mountain are those of mere nature: 

Audacity and Impetuosity which may become Ferocity, as of men complete in

their determination, in their conviction; nay of men, in some cases, who as

Septemberers must either prevail or perish.  The ground to be fought for is

Popularity:  further you may either seek Popularity with the friends of

Freedom and Order, or with the friends of Freedom Simple; to seek it with

both has unhappily become impossible.  With the former sort, and generally

with the Authorities of the Departments, and such as read Parliamentary

Debates, and are of Respectability, and of a peace-loving monied nature,

the Girondins carry it.  With the extreme Patriot again, with the indigent

millions, especially with the Population of Paris who do not read so much

as hear and see, the Girondins altogether lose it, and the Mountain carries

it.



Egoism, nor meanness of mind, is not wanting on either side.  Surely not on

the Girondin side; where in fact the instinct of self-preservation, too

prominently unfolded by circumstances, cuts almost a sorry figure; where

also a certain finesse, to the length even of shuffling and shamming, now

and then shews itself.  They are men skilful in Advocate-fence.  They have

been called the Jesuits of the Revolution; (Dumouriez, Memoires, iii. 314.)

but that is too hard a name.  It must be owned likewise that this rude

blustering Mountain has a sense in it of what the Revolution means; which

these eloquent Girondins are totally void of.  Was the Revolution made, and

fought for, against the world, these four weary years, that a Formula might

be substantiated; that Society might become methodic, demonstrable by

logic; and the old Noblesse with their pretensions vanish?  Or ought it not

withal to bring some glimmering of light and alleviation to the Twenty-five

Millions, who sat in darkness, heavy-laden, till they rose with pikes in

their hands?  At least and lowest, one would think, it should bring them a

proportion of bread to live on?  There is in the Mountain here and there;

in Marat People's-friend; in the incorruptible Seagreen himself, though

otherwise so lean and formularly, a heartfelt knowledge of this latter

fact;--without which knowledge all other knowledge here is naught, and the

choicest forensic eloquence is as sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal. 

Most cold, on the other hand, most patronising, unsubstantial is the tone

of the Girondins towards 'our poorer brethren;'--those brethren whom one

often hears of under the collective name of 'the masses,' as if they were

not persons at all, but mounds of combustible explosive material, for

blowing down Bastilles with!  In very truth, a Revolutionist of this kind,

is he not a Solecism?  Disowned by Nature and Art; deserving only to be

erased, and disappear!  Surely, to our poorer brethren of Paris, all this

Girondin patronage sounds deadening and killing:  if fine-spoken and

incontrovertible in logic, then all the falser, all the hatefuller in fact.



Nay doubtless, pleading for Popularity, here among our poorer brethren of

Paris, the Girondin has a hard game to play.  If he gain the ear of the

Respectable at a distance, it is by insisting on September and such like;

it is at the expense of this Paris where he dwells and perorates.  Hard to

perorate in such an auditory!  Wherefore the question arises:  Could we not

get ourselves out of this Paris?  Twice or oftener such an attempt is made. 

If not we ourselves, thinks Guadet, then at least our Suppleans might do

it.  For every Deputy has his Suppleant, or Substitute, who will take his

place if need be:  might not these assemble, say at Bourges, which is a

quiet episcopal Town, in quiet Berri, forty good leagues off?  In that

case, what profit were it for the Paris Sansculottery to insult us; our

Suppleans sitting quiet in Bourges, to whom we could run?  Nay even the

Primary electoral Assemblies, thinks Guadet, might be reconvoked, and a New

Convention got, with new orders from the Sovereign people; and right glad

were Lyons, were Bourdeaux, Rouen, Marseilles, as yet Provincial Towns, to

welcome us in their turn, and become a sort of Capital Towns; and teach

these Parisians reason.



Fond schemes; which all misgo!  If decreed, in heat of eloquent logic, to-

day, they are repealed, by clamour, and passionate wider considerations, on

the morrow.  (Moniteur, 1793, No. 140, &c.)  Will you, O Girondins, parcel

us into separate Republics, then; like the Swiss, like your Americans; so

that there be no Metropolis or indivisible French Nation any more?  Your

Departmental Guard seemed to point that way!  Federal Republic? 

Federalist?  Men and Knitting-women repeat Federaliste, with or without

much Dictionary-meaning; but go on repeating it, as is usual in such cases,

till the meaning of it becomes almost magical, fit to designate all mystery

of Iniquity; and Federaliste has grown a word of Exorcism and Apage-

Satanas.  But furthermore, consider what 'poisoning of public opinion' in

the Departments, by these Brissot, Gorsas, Caritat-Condorcet Newspapers! 

And then also what counter-poisoning, still feller in quality, by a Pere

Duchesne of Hebert, brutallest Newspaper yet published on Earth; by a

Rougiff of Guffroy; by the 'incendiary leaves of Marat!'  More than once,

on complaint given and effervescence rising, it is decreed that a man

cannot both be Legislator and Editor; that he shall choose between the one

function and the other.  (Hist. Parl. xxv. 25, &c.)  But this too, which

indeed could help little, is revoked or eluded; remains a pious wish

mainly.



Meanwhile, as the sad fruit of such strife, behold, O ye National

Representatives, how between the friends of Law and the friends of Freedom

everywhere, mere heats and jealousies have arisen; fevering the whole

Republic!  Department, Provincial Town is set against Metropolis, Rich

against Poor, Culottic against Sansculottic, man against man.  From the

Southern Cities come Addresses of an almost inculpatory character; for

Paris has long suffered Newspaper calumny.  Bourdeaux demands a reign of

Law and Respectability, meaning Girondism, with emphasis.  With emphasis

Marseilles demands the like.  Nay from Marseilles there come two Addresses: 

one Girondin; one Jacobin Sansculottic.  Hot Rebecqui, sick of this

Convention-work, has given place to his Substitute, and gone home; where

also, with such jarrings, there is work to be sick of.



Lyons, a place of Capitalists and Aristocrats, is in still worse state;

almost in revolt.  Chalier the Jacobin Town-Councillor has got, too

literally, to daggers-drawn with Nievre-Chol the Moderantin Mayor; one of

your Moderate, perhaps Aristocrat, Royalist or Federalist Mayors!  Chalier,

who pilgrimed to Paris 'to behold Marat and the Mountain,' has verily

kindled himself at their sacred urn:  for on the 6th of February last,

History or Rumour has seen him haranguing his Lyons Jacobins in a quite

transcendental manner, with a drawn dagger in his hand; recommending (they

say) sheer September-methods, patience being worn out; and that the Jacobin

Brethren should, impromptu, work the Guillotine themselves!  One sees him

still, in Engravings:  mounted on a table; foot advanced, body contorted; a

bald, rude, slope-browed, infuriated visage of the canine species, the eyes

starting from their sockets; in his puissant right-hand the brandished

dagger, or horse-pistol, as some give it; other dog-visages kindling under

him:--a man not likely to end well!  However, the Guillotine was not got

together impromptu, that day, 'on the Pont Saint-Clair,' or elsewhere; but

indeed continued lying rusty in its loft:  (Hist. Parl. xxiv. 385-93; xxvi.

229, &c.)  Nievre-Chol with military went about, rumbling cannon, in the

most confused manner; and the 'nine hundred prisoners' received no hurt. 

So distracted is Lyons grown, with its cannon rumbling.  Convention

Commissioners must be sent thither forthwith:  if even they can appease it,

and keep the Guillotine in its loft?



Consider finally if, on all these mad jarrings of the Southern Cities, and

of France generally, a traitorous Crypto-Royalist class is not looking and

watching; ready to strike in, at the right season!  Neither is there bread;

neither is there soap:  see the Patriot women selling out sugar, at a just

rate of twenty-two sous per pound!  Citizen Representatives, it were verily

well that your quarrels finished, and the reign of Perfect Felicity began.







Chapter 3.3.III.



Growing shrill.



On the whole, one cannot say that the Girondins are wanting to themselves,

so far as good-will might go.  They prick assiduously into the sore-places

of the Mountain; from principle, and also from jesuitism.



Besides September, of which there is now little to be made except

effervescence, we discern two sore-places where the Mountain often suffers: 

Marat and Orleans Egalite.  Squalid Marat, for his own sake and for the

Mountain's, is assaulted ever and anon; held up to France, as a squalid

bloodthirsty Portent, inciting to the pillage of shops; of whom let the

Mountain have the credit!  The Mountain murmurs, ill at ease:  this

'Maximum of Patriotism,' how shall they either own him or disown him?  As

for Marat personally, he, with his fixed-idea, remains invulnerable to such

things:  nay the People's-friend is very evidently rising in importance, as

his befriended People rises.  No shrieks now, when he goes to speak;

occasional applauses rather, furtherance which breeds confidence.  The day

when the Girondins proposed to 'decree him accused' (decreter d'accusation,

as they phrase it) for that February Paragraph, of 'hanging up a

Forestaller or two at the door-lintels,' Marat proposes to have them

'decreed insane;' and, descending the Tribune-steps, is heard to articulate

these most unsenatorial ejaculations:  "Les Cochons, les imbecilles, Pigs,

idiots!"  Oftentimes he croaks harsh sarcasm, having really a rough rasping

tongue, and a very deep fund of contempt for fine outsides; and once or

twice, he even laughs, nay 'explodes into laughter, rit aux eclats,' at the

gentilities and superfine airs of these Girondin "men of statesmanship,"

with their pedantries, plausibilities, pusillanimities:  "these two years,"

says he, "you have been whining about attacks, and plots, and danger from

Paris; and you have not a scratch to shew for yourselves."  (Moniteur,

Seance du 20 Mai 1793.)--Danton gruffly rebukes him, from time to time:  a

Maximum of Patriotism, whom one can neither own nor disown!



But the second sore-place of the Mountain is this anomalous Monseigneur

Equality Prince d'Orleans.  Behold these men, says the Gironde; with a

whilom Bourbon Prince among them:  they are creatures of the d'Orleans

Faction; they will have Philippe made King; one King no sooner guillotined

than another made in his stead!  Girondins have moved, Buzot moved long

ago, from principle and also from jesuitism, that the whole race of

Bourbons should be marched forth from the soil of France; this Prince

Egalite to bring up the rear.  Motions which might produce some effect on

the public;--which the Mountain, ill at ease, knows not what to do with.



And poor Orleans Egalite himself, for one begins to pity even him, what

does he do with them?  The disowned of all parties, the rejected and

foolishly be-drifted hither and hither, to what corner of Nature can he now

drift with advantage?  Feasible hope remains not for him:  unfeasible hope,

in pallid doubtful glimmers, there may still come, bewildering, not

cheering or illuminating,--from the Dumouriez quarter; and how, if not the

timewasted Orleans Egalite, then perhaps the young unworn Chartres Egalite

might rise to be a kind of King?  Sheltered, if shelter it be, in the

clefts of the Mountain, poor Egalite will wait:  one refuge in Jacobinism,

one in Dumouriez and Counter-Revolution, are there not two chances? 

However, the look of him, Dame Genlis says, is grown gloomy; sad to see. 

Sillery also, the Genlis's Husband, who hovers about the Mountain, not on

it, is in a bad way.  Dame Genlis has come to Raincy, out of England and

Bury St. Edmunds, in these days; being summoned by Egalite, with her young

charge, Mademoiselle Egalite, that so Mademoiselle might not be counted

among Emigrants and hardly dealt with.  But it proves a ravelled business: 

Genlis and charge find that they must retire to the Netherlands; must wait

on the Frontiers for a week or two; till Monseigneur, by Jacobin help, get

it wound up.  'Next morning,' says Dame Genlis, 'Monseigneur, gloomier than

ever, gave me his arm, to lead me to the carriage.  I was greatly troubled;

Mademoiselle burst into tears; her Father was pale and trembling.  After I

had got seated, he stood immovable at the carriage-door, with his eyes

fixed on me; his mournful and painful look seemed to implore pity;--"Adieu,

Madame!" said he.  The altered sound of his voice completely overcame me;

not able to utter a word, I held out my hand; he grasped it close; then

turning, and advancing sharply towards the postillions, he gave them a

sign, and we rolled away.'  (Genlis, Memoires (London, 1825), iv. 118.)



Nor are Peace-makers wanting; of whom likewise we mention two; one fast on

the crown of the Mountain, the other not yet alighted anywhere:  Danton and

Barrere.  Ingenious Barrere, Old-Constituent and Editor from the slopes of

the Pyrenees, is one of the usefullest men of this Convention, in his way. 

Truth may lie on both sides, on either side, or on neither side; my

friends, ye must give and take:  for the rest, success to the winning side!

This is the motto of Barrere.  Ingenious, almost genial; quick-sighted,

supple, graceful; a man that will prosper.  Scarcely Belial in the

assembled Pandemonium was plausibler to ear and eye.  An indispensable man: 

in the great Art of Varnish he may be said to seek his fellow.  Has there

an explosion arisen, as many do arise, a confusion, unsightliness, which no

tongue can speak of, nor eye look on; give it to Barrere; Barrere shall be

Committee-Reporter of it; you shall see it transmute itself into a

regularity, into the very beauty and improvement that was needed.  Without

one such man, we say, how were this Convention bested?  Call him not, as

exaggerative Mercier does, 'the greatest liar in France:'  nay it may be

argued there is not truth enough in him to make a real lie of.  Call him,

with Burke, Anacreon of the Guillotine, and a man serviceable to this

Convention.



The other Peace-maker whom we name is Danton.  Peace, O peace with one

another! cries Danton often enough:  Are we not alone against the world; a

little band of brothers?  Broad Danton is loved by all the Mountain; but

they think him too easy-tempered, deficient in suspicion:  he has stood

between Dumouriez and much censure, anxious not to exasperate our only

General:  in the shrill tumult Danton's strong voice reverberates, for

union and pacification.  Meetings there are; dinings with the Girondins: 

it is so pressingly essential that there be union.  But the Girondins are

haughty and respectable; this Titan Danton is not a man of Formulas, and

there rests on him a shadow of September.  "Your Girondins have no

confidence in me:"  this is the answer a conciliatory Meillan gets from

him; to all the arguments and pleadings this conciliatory Meillan can

bring, the repeated answer is, "Ils n'ont point de confiance."  (Memoires

de Meillan, Representant du Peuple (Paris, 1823), p. 51.)--The tumult will

get ever shriller; rage is growing pale.



In fact, what a pang is it to the heart of a Girondin, this first withering

probability that the despicable unphilosophic anarchic Mountain, after all,

may triumph!  Brutal Septemberers, a fifth-floor Tallien, 'a Robespierre

without an idea in his head,' as Condorcet says, 'or a feeling in his

heart:'  and yet we, the flower of France, cannot stand against them;

behold the sceptre departs from us; from us and goes to them!  Eloquence,

Philosophism, Respectability avail not:  'against Stupidity the very gods

fight to no purpose,



  'Mit der Dummheit kampfen Gotter selbst vergebens!'



Shrill are the plaints of Louvet; his thin existence all acidified into

rage, and preternatural insight of suspicion.  Wroth is young Barbaroux;

wroth and scornful.  Silent, like a Queen with the aspic on her bosom, sits

the wife of Roland; Roland's Accounts never yet got audited, his name

become a byword.  Such is the fortune of war, especially of revolution. 

The great gulf of Tophet, and Tenth of August, opened itself at the magic

of your eloquent voice; and lo now, it will not close at your voice!  It is

a dangerous thing such magic.  The Magician's Famulus got hold of the

forbidden Book, and summoned a goblin:  Plait-il, What is your will? said

the Goblin.  The Famulus, somewhat struck, bade him fetch water:  the swift

goblin fetched it, pail in each hand; but lo, would not cease fetching it! 

Desperate, the Famulus shrieks at him, smites at him, cuts him in two; lo,

two goblin water-carriers ply; and the house will be swum away in Deucalion

Deluges.







Chapter 3.3.IV.



Fatherland in Danger.



Or rather we will say, this Senatorial war might have lasted long; and

Party tugging and throttling with Party might have suppressed and smothered

one another, in the ordinary bloodless Parliamentary way; on one condition: 

that France had been at least able to exist, all the while.  But this

Sovereign People has a digestive faculty, and cannot do without bread. 

Also we are at war, and must have victory; at war with Europe, with Fate

and Famine:  and behold, in the spring of the year, all victory deserts us.



Dumouriez had his outposts stretched as far as Aix-la-Chapelle, and the

beautifullest plan for pouncing on Holland, by stratagem, flat-bottomed

boats and rapid intrepidity; wherein too he had prospered so far; but

unhappily could prosper no further.  Aix-la-Chapelle is lost; Maestricht

will not surrender to mere smoke and noise:  the flat-bottomed boats must

launch themselves again, and return the way they came.  Steady now, ye

rapidly intrepid men; retreat with firmness, Parthian-like!  Alas, were it

General Miranda's fault; were it the War-minister's fault; or were it

Dumouriez's own fault and that of Fortune:  enough, there is nothing for it

but retreat,--well if it be not even flight; for already terror-stricken

cohorts and stragglers pour off, not waiting for order; flow disastrous, as

many as ten thousand of them, without halt till they see France again. 

(Dumouriez, iv. 16-73.)  Nay worse:  Dumouriez himself is perhaps secretly

turning traitor?  Very sharp is the tone in which he writes to our

Committees.  Commissioners and Jacobin Pillagers have done such

incalculable mischief; Hassenfratz sends neither cartridges nor clothing;

shoes we have, deceptively 'soled with wood and pasteboard.'  Nothing in

short is right.  Danton and Lacroix, when it was they that were

Commissioners, would needs join Belgium to France;--of which Dumouriez

might have made the prettiest little Duchy for his own secret behoof!  With

all these things the General is wroth; and writes to us in a sharp tone. 

Who knows what this hot little General is meditating?  Dumouriez Duke of

Belgium or Brabant; and say, Egalite the Younger King of France:  there

were an end for our Revolution!--Committee of Defence gazes, and shakes its

head:  who except Danton, defective in suspicion, could still struggle to

be of hope?



And General Custine is rolling back from the Rhine Country; conquered Mentz

will be reconquered, the Prussians gathering round to bombard it with shot

and shell.  Mentz may resist, Commissioner Merlin, the Thionviller, 'making

sallies, at the head of the besieged;'--resist to the death; but not longer

than that.  How sad a reverse for Mentz!  Brave Foster, brave Lux planted

Liberty-trees, amid ca-ira-ing music, in the snow-slush of last winter,

there:  and made Jacobin Societies; and got the Territory incorporated with

France:  they came hither to Paris, as Deputies or Delegates, and have

their eighteen francs a-day:  but see, before once the Liberty-Tree is got

rightly in leaf, Mentz is changing into an explosive crater; vomiting fire,

bevomited with fire!



Neither of these men shall again see Mentz; they have come hither only to

die.  Foster has been round the Globe; he saw Cook perish under Owyhee

clubs; but like this Paris he has yet seen or suffered nothing.  Poverty

escorts him:  from home there can nothing come, except Job's-news; the

eighteen daily francs, which we here as Deputy or Delegate with difficulty

'touch,' are in paper assignats, and sink fast in value.  Poverty,

disappointment, inaction, obloquy; the brave heart slowly breaking!  Such

is Foster's lot.  For the rest, Demoiselle Theroigne smiles on you in the

Soirees; 'a beautiful brownlocked face,' of an exalted temper; and

contrives to keep her carriage.  Prussian Trenck, the poor subterranean

Baron, jargons and jangles in an unmelodious manner.  Thomas Paine's face

is red-pustuled, 'but the eyes uncommonly bright.'  Convention Deputies ask

you to dinner:  very courteous; and 'we all play at plumsack.'  (Forster's

Briefwechsel, ii. 514, 460, 631.)  'It is the Explosion and New-creation of

a World,' says Foster; 'and the actors in it, such small mean objects,

buzzing round one like a handful of flies.'--



Likewise there is war with Spain.  Spain will advance through the gorges of

the Pyrenees; rustling with Bourbon banners; jingling with artillery and

menace.  And England has donned the red coat; and marches, with Royal

Highness of York,--whom some once spake of inviting to be our King. 

Changed that humour now:  and ever more changing; till no hatefuller thing

walk this Earth than a denizen of that tyrannous Island; and Pitt be

declared and decreed, with effervescence, 'L'ennemi du genre humain, The

enemy of mankind;' and, very singular to say, you make an order that no

Soldier of Liberty give quarter to an Englishman.  Which order however, the

Soldier of Liberty does but partially obey.  We will take no Prisoners

then, say the Soldiers of Liberty; they shall all be 'Deserters' that we

take.  (See Dampmartin, Evenemens, ii. 213-30.)  It is a frantic order; and

attended with inconvenience.  For surely, if you give no quarter, the plain

issue is that you will get none; and so the business become as broad as it

was long.--Our 'recruitment of Three Hundred Thousand men,' which was the

decreed force for this year, is like to have work enough laid to its hand.



So many enemies come wending on; penetrating through throats of Mountains,

steering over the salt sea; towards all points of our territory; rattling

chains at us.  Nay worst of all:  there is an enemy within our own

territory itself.  In the early days of March, the Nantes Postbags do not

arrive; there arrive only instead of them Conjecture, Apprehension, bodeful

wind of Rumour.  The bodefullest proves true!  Those fanatic Peoples of La

Vendee will no longer keep under:  their fire of insurrection, heretofore

dissipated with difficulty, blazes out anew, after the King's Death, as a

wide conflagration; not riot, but civil war.  Your Cathelineaus, your

Stofflets, Charettes, are other men than was thought:  behold how their

Peasants, in mere russet and hodden, with their rude arms, rude array, with

their fanatic Gaelic frenzy and wild-yelling battle-cry of God and the

King, dash at us like a dark whirlwind; and blow the best-disciplined

Nationals we can get into panic and sauve-qui-peut!  Field after field is

theirs; one sees not where it will end.  Commandant Santerre may be sent

thither; but with non-effect; he might as well have returned and brewed

beer.



It has become peremptorily necessary that a National Convention cease

arguing, and begin acting.  Yield one party of you to the other, and do it

swiftly.  No theoretic outlook is here, but the close certainty of ruin;

the very day that is passing over must be provided for.



It was Friday the eighth of March when this Job's-post from Dumouriez,

thickly preceded and escorted by so many other Job's-posts, reached the

National Convention.  Blank enough are most faces.  Little will it avail

whether our Septemberers be punished or go unpunished; if Pitt and Cobourg

are coming in, with one punishment for us all; nothing now between Paris

itself and the Tyrants but a doubtful Dumouriez, and hosts in loose-flowing

loud retreat!--Danton the Titan rises in this hour, as always in the hour

of need.  Great is his voice, reverberating from the domes:--Citizen-

Representatives, shall we not, in such crisis of Fate, lay aside discords?

Reputation:  O what is the reputation of this man or of that?  Que mon nom

soit fletri, que la France soit libre, Let my name be blighted; let France

be free!  It is necessary now again that France rise, in swift vengeance,

with her million right-hands, with her heart as of one man.  Instantaneous

recruitment in Paris; let every Section of Paris furnish its thousands;

every section of France!  Ninety-six Commissioners of us, two for each

Section of the Forty-eight, they must go forthwith, and tell Paris what the

Country needs of her.  Let Eighty more of us be sent, post-haste, over

France; to spread the fire-cross, to call forth the might of men.  Let the

Eighty also be on the road, before this sitting rise.  Let them go, and

think what their errand is.  Speedy Camp of Fifty thousand between Paris

and the North Frontier; for Paris will pour forth her volunteers!  Shoulder

to shoulder; one strong universal death-defiant rising and rushing; we

shall hurl back these Sons of Night yet again; and France, in spite of the

world, be free!  (Moniteur (in Hist. Parl. xxv. 6).)--So sounds the Titan's

voice:  into all Section-houses; into all French hearts.  Sections sit in

Permanence, for recruitment, enrolment, that very night.  Convention

Commissioners, on swift wheels, are carrying the fire-cross from Town to

Town, till all France blaze.



And so there is Flag of Fatherland in Danger waving from the Townhall,

Black Flag from the top of Notre-Dame Cathedral; there is Proclamation, hot

eloquence; Paris rushing out once again to strike its enemies down.  That,

in such circumstances, Paris was in no mild humour can be conjectured. 

Agitated streets; still more agitated round the Salle de Manege! 

Feuillans-Terrace crowds itself with angry Citizens, angrier Citizenesses;

Varlet perambulates with portable-chair:  ejaculations of no measured kind,

as to perfidious fine-spoken Hommes d'etat, friends of Dumouriez, secret-

friends of Pitt and Cobourg, burst from the hearts and lips of men.  To

fight the enemy?  Yes, and even to "freeze him with terror, glacer

d'effroi;" but first to have domestic Traitors punished!  Who are they

that, carping and quarrelling, in their jesuitic most moderate way, seek to

shackle the Patriotic movement?  That divide France against Paris, and

poison public opinion in the Departments?  That when we ask for bread, and

a Maximum fixed-price, treat us with lectures on Free-trade in grains?  Can

the human stomach satisfy itself with lectures on Free-trade; and are we to

fight the Austrians in a moderate manner, or in an immoderate?  This

Convention must be purged.



"Set up a swift Tribunal for Traitors, a Maximum for Grains:"  thus speak

with energy the Patriot Volunteers, as they defile through the Convention

Hall, just on the wing to the Frontiers;--perorating in that heroical

Cambyses' vein of theirs:  beshouted by the Galleries and Mountain;

bemurmured by the Right-side and Plain.  Nor are prodigies wanting:  lo,

while a Captain of the Section Poissonniere perorates with vehemence about

Dumouriez, Maximum, and Crypto-Royalist Traitors, and his troop beat chorus

with him, waving their Banner overhead, the eye of a Deputy discerns, in

this same Banner, that the cravates or streamers of it have Royal fleurs-

de-lys!  The Section-Captain shrieks; his troop shriek, horror-struck, and

'trample the Banner under foot:'  seemingly the work of some Crypto-

Royalist Plotter?  Most probable; (Choix des Rapports, xi. 277.)--or

perhaps at bottom, only the old Banner of the Section, manufactured prior

to the Tenth of August, when such streamers were according to rule!  (Hist.

Parl. xxv. 72.)



History, looking over the Girondin Memoirs, anxious to disentangle the

truth of them from the hysterics, finds these days of March, especially

this Sunday the Tenth of March, play a great part.  Plots, plots:  a plot

for murdering the Girondin Deputies; Anarchists and Secret-Royalists

plotting, in hellish concert, for that end!  The far greater part of which

is hysterics.  What we do find indisputable is that Louvet and certain

Girondins were apprehensive they might be murdered on Saturday, and did not

go to the evening sitting:  but held council with one another, each

inciting his fellow to do something resolute, and end these Anarchists:  to

which, however, Petion, opening the window, and finding the night very wet,

answered only, "Ils ne feront rien," and 'composedly resumed his violin,'

says Louvet:  (Louvet, Memoires, p. 72.)  thereby, with soft Lydian

tweedledeeing, to wrap himself against eating cares.  Also that Louvet felt

especially liable to being killed; that several Girondins went abroad to

seek beds: liable to being killed; but were not.  Further that, in very

truth, Journalist Deputy Gorsas, poisoner of the Departments, he and his

Printer had their houses broken into (by a tumult of Patriots, among whom

red-capped Varlet, American Fournier loom forth, in the darkness of the

rain and riot); had their wives put in fear; their presses, types and

circumjacent equipments beaten to ruin; no Mayor interfering in time;

Gorsas himself escaping, pistol in hand, 'along the coping of the back

wall.'  Further that Sunday, the morrow, was not a workday; and the streets

were more agitated than ever:  Is it a new September, then, that these

Anarchists intend?  Finally, that no September came;--and also that

hysterics, not unnaturally, had reached almost their acme.  (Meillan, pp.

23, 24; Louvet, pp. 71-80.)



Vergniaud denounces and deplores; in sweetly turned periods.  Section

Bonconseil, Good-counsel so-named, not Mauconseil or Ill-counsel as it once

was,--does a far notabler thing:  demands that Vergniaud, Brissot, Guadet,

and other denunciatory fine-spoken Girondins, to the number of Twenty-two,

be put under arrest!  Section Good-counsel, so named ever since the Tenth

of August, is sharply rebuked, like a Section of Ill-counsel; (Moniteur

(Seance du 12 Mars), 15 Mars.) but its word is spoken, and will not fall to

the ground.



In fact, one thing strikes us in these poor Girondins; their fatal

shortness of vision; nay fatal poorness of character, for that is the root

of it.  They are as strangers to the People they would govern; to the thing

they have come to work in.  Formulas, Philosophies, Respectabilities, what

has been written in Books, and admitted by the Cultivated Classes; this

inadequate Scheme of Nature's working is all that Nature, let her work as

she will, can reveal to these men.  So they perorate and speculate; and

call on the Friends of Law, when the question is not Law or No-Law, but

Life or No-Life.  Pedants of the Revolution, if not Jesuits of it!  Their

Formalism is great; great also is their Egoism.  France rising to fight

Austria has been raised only by Plot of the Tenth of March, to kill Twenty-

two of them!  This Revolution Prodigy, unfolding itself into terrific

stature and articulation, by its own laws and Nature's, not by the laws of

Formula, has become unintelligible, incredible as an impossibility, the

waste chaos of a Dream.'  A Republic founded on what they call the Virtues;

on what we call the Decencies and Respectabilities:  this they will have,

and nothing but this.  Whatsoever other Republic Nature and Reality send,

shall be considered as not sent; as a kind of Nightmare Vision, and thing

non-extant; disowned by the Laws of Nature, and of Formula.  Alas!  Dim for

the best eyes is this Reality; and as for these men, they will not look at

it with eyes at all, but only through 'facetted spectacles' of Pedantry,

wounded Vanity; which yield the most portentous fallacious spectrum. 

Carping and complaining forever of Plots and Anarchy, they will do one

thing:  prove, to demonstration, that the Reality will not translate into

their Formula; that they and their Formula are incompatible with the

Reality:  and, in its dark wrath, the Reality will extinguish it and them!

What a man kens he cans.  But the beginning of a man's doom is that vision

be withdrawn from him; that he see not the reality, but a false spectrum of

the reality; and, following that, step darkly, with more or less velocity,

downwards to the utter Dark; to Ruin, which is the great Sea of Darkness,

whither all falsehoods, winding or direct, continually flow!



This Tenth of March we may mark as an epoch in the Girondin destinies; the

rage so exasperated itself, the misconception so darkened itself.  Many

desert the sittings; many come to them armed.  (Meillan (Memoires, pp. 85,

24).)  An honourable Deputy, setting out after breakfast, must now, besides

taking his Notes, see whether his Priming is in order.



Meanwhile with Dumouriez in Belgium it fares ever worse.  Were it again

General Miranda's fault, or some other's fault, there is no doubt whatever

but the 'Battle of Nerwinden,' on the 18th of March, is lost; and our rapid

retreat has become a far too rapid one.  Victorious Cobourg, with his

Austrian prickers, hangs like a dark cloud on the rear of us:  Dumouriez

never off horseback night or day; engagement every three hours; our whole

discomfited Host rolling rapidly inwards, full of rage, suspicion, and

sauve-qui-peut!  And then Dumouriez himself, what his intents may be? 

Wicked seemingly and not charitable!  His despatches to Committee openly

denounce a factious Convention, for the woes it has brought on France and

him.  And his speeches--for the General has no reticence!  The Execution of

the Tyrant this Dumouriez calls the Murder of the King.  Danton and

Lacroix, flying thither as Commissioners once more, return very doubtful;

even Danton now doubts.



Three Jacobin Missionaries, Proly, Dubuisson, Pereyra, have flown forth;

sped by a wakeful Mother Society:  they are struck dumb to hear the General

speak.  The Convention, according to this General, consists of three

hundred scoundrels and four hundred imbeciles:  France cannot do without a

King.  "But we have executed our King."  "And what is it to me," hastily

cries Dumouriez, a General of no reticence, "whether the King's name be

Ludovicus or Jacobus?"  "Or Philippus!" rejoins Proly;--and hastens to

report progress.  Over the Frontiers such hope is there.







Chapter 3.3.V.



Sansculottism Accoutred.



Let us look, however, at the grand internal Sansculottism and Revolution

Prodigy, whether it stirs and waxes:  there and not elsewhere hope may

still be for France.  The Revolution Prodigy, as Decree after Decree issues

from the Mountain, like creative fiats, accordant with the nature of the

Thing,--is shaping itself rapidly, in these days, into terrific stature and

articulation, limb after limb.  Last March, 1792, we saw all France flowing

in blind terror; shutting town-barriers, boiling pitch for Brigands: 

happier, this March, that it is a seeing terror; that a creative Mountain

exists, which can say fiat!  Recruitment proceeds with fierce celerity: 

nevertheless our Volunteers hesitate to set out, till Treason be punished

at home; they do not fly to the frontiers; but only fly hither and thither,

demanding and denouncing.  The Mountain must speak new fiat, and new fiats.



And does it not speak such?  Take, as first example, those Comites

Revolutionnaires for the arrestment of Persons Suspect.  Revolutionary

Committee, of Twelve chosen Patriots, sits in every Township of France;

examining the Suspect, seeking arms, making domiciliary visits and

arrestments;--caring, generally, that the Republic suffer no detriment. 

Chosen by universal suffrage, each in its Section, they are a kind of

elixir of Jacobinism; some Forty-four Thousand of them awake and alive over

France!  In Paris and all Towns, every house-door must have the names of

the inmates legibly printed on it, 'at a height not exceeding five feet

from the ground;' every Citizen must produce his certificatory Carte de

Civisme, signed by Section-President; every man be ready to give account of

the faith that is in him.  Persons Suspect had as well depart this soil of

Liberty!  And yet departure too is bad:  all Emigrants are declared

Traitors, their property become National; they are 'dead in Law,'--save

indeed that for our behoof they shall 'live yet fifty years in Law,' and

what heritages may fall to them in that time become National too!  A mad

vitality of Jacobinism, with Forty-four Thousand centres of activity,

circulates through all fibres of France.



Very notable also is the Tribunal Extraordinaire: (Moniteur, No. 70, (du 11

Mars), No. 76, &c.)  decreed by the Mountain; some Girondins dissenting,

for surely such a Court contradicts every formula;--other Girondins

assenting, nay co-operating, for do not we all hate Traitors, O ye people

of Paris?--Tribunal of the Seventeenth in Autumn last was swift; but this

shall be swifter.  Five Judges; a standing Jury, which is named from Paris

and the Neighbourhood, that there be not delay in naming it:  they are

subject to no Appeal; to hardly any Law-forms, but must 'get themselves

convinced' in all readiest ways; and for security are bound 'to vote

audibly;' audibly, in the hearing of a Paris Public.  This is the Tribunal

Extraordinaire; which, in few months, getting into most lively action,

shall be entitled Tribunal Revolutionnaire, as indeed it from the very

first has entitled itself:  with a Herman or a Dumas for Judge President,

with a Fouquier-Tinville for Attorney-General, and a Jury of such as

Citizen Leroi, who has surnamed himself Dix-Aout, 'Leroi August-Tenth,' it

will become the wonder of the world.  Herein has Sansculottism fashioned

for itself a Sword of Sharpness:  a weapon magical; tempered in the Stygian

hell-waters; to the edge of it all armour, and defence of strength or of

cunning shall be soft; it shall mow down Lives and Brazen-gates; and the

waving of it shed terror through the souls of men.



But speaking of an amorphous Sansculottism taking form, ought we not above

all things to specify how the Amorphous gets itself a Head?  Without

metaphor, this Revolution Government continues hitherto in a very anarchic

state.  Executive Council of Ministers, Six in number, there is; but they,

especially since Roland's retreat, have hardly known whether they were

Ministers or not.  Convention Committees sit supreme over them; but then

each Committee as supreme as the others:  Committee of Twenty-one, of

Defence, of General Surety; simultaneous or successive, for specific

purposes.  The Convention alone is all-powerful,-- especially if the

Commune go with it; but is too numerous for an administrative body. 

Wherefore, in this perilous quick-whirling condition of the Republic,

before the end of March, we obtain our small Comite de Salut Public;

(Moniteur, No. 83 (du 24 Mars 1793) Nos. 86, 98, 99, 100.) as it were, for

miscellaneous accidental purposes, requiring despatch;--as it proves, for a

sort of universal supervision, and universal subjection.  They are to

report weekly, these new Committee-men; but to deliberate in secret.  Their

number is Nine, firm Patriots all, Danton one of them:  Renewable every

month;--yet why not reelect them if they turn out well?  The flower of the

matter is that they are but nine; that they sit in secret.  An

insignificant-looking thing at first, this Committee; but with a principle

of growth in it!  Forwarded by fortune, by internal Jacobin energy, it will

reduce all Committees and the Convention itself to mute obedience, the Six

Ministers to Six assiduous Clerks; and work its will on the Earth and under

Heaven, for a season.  'A Committee of Public Salvation,' whereat the world

still shrieks and shudders.



If we call that Revolutionary Tribunal a Sword, which Sansculottism has

provided for itself, then let us call the 'Law of the Maximum,' a

Provender-scrip, or Haversack, wherein better or worse some ration of bread

may be found.  It is true, Political Economy, Girondin free-trade, and all

law of supply and demand, are hereby hurled topsyturvy:  but what help? 

Patriotism must live; the 'cupidity of farmers' seems to have no bowels. 

Wherefore this Law of the Maximum, fixing the highest price of grains, is,

with infinite effort, got passed; (Moniteur (du 20 Avril, &c. to 20 Mai,

1793).) and shall gradually extend itself into a Maximum for all manner of

comestibles and commodities:  with such scrambling and topsyturvying as may

be fancied!  For now, if, for example, the farmer will not sell?  The

farmer shall be forced to sell.  An accurate Account of what grain he has

shall be delivered in to the Constituted Authorities:  let him see that he

say not too much; for in that case, his rents, taxes and contributions will

rise proportionally:  let him see that he say not too little; for, on or

before a set day, we shall suppose in April, less than one-third of this

declared quantity, must remain in his barns, more than two-thirds of it

must have been thrashed and sold.  One can denounce him, and raise

penalties.



By such inextricable overturning of all Commercial relation will

Sansculottism keep life in; since not otherwise.  On the whole, as Camille

Desmoulins says once, "while the Sansculottes fight, the Monsieurs must

pay."  So there come Impots Progressifs, Ascending Taxes; which consume,

with fast-increasing voracity, and 'superfluous-revenue' of men:  beyond

fifty-pounds a-year you are not exempt; rising into the hundreds you bleed

freely; into the thousands and tens of thousands, you bleed gushing.  Also

there come Requisitions; there comes 'Forced-Loan of a Milliard,' some

Fifty-Millions Sterling; which of course they that have must lend. 

Unexampled enough:  it has grown to be no country for the Rich, this; but a

country for the Poor!  And then if one fly, what steads it?  Dead in Law;

nay kept alive fifty years yet, for their accursed behoof!  In this manner,

therefore, it goes; topsyturvying, ca-ira-ing;--and withal there is endless

sale of Emigrant National-Property, there is Cambon with endless cornucopia

of Assignats.  The Trade and Finance of Sansculottism; and how, with

Maximum and Bakers'-queues, with Cupidity, Hunger, Denunciation and Paper-

money, it led its galvanic-life, and began and ended,--remains the most

interesting of all Chapters in Political Economy:  still to be written.



All which things are they not clean against Formula?  O Girondin Friends,

it is not a Republic of the Virtues we are getting; but only a Republic of

the Strengths, virtuous and other!







Chapter 3.3.VI.



The Traitor.



But Dumouriez, with his fugitive Host, with his King Ludovicus or King

Philippus?  There lies the crisis; there hangs the question:  Revolution

Prodigy, or Counter-Revolution?--One wide shriek covers that North-East

region.  Soldiers, full of rage, suspicion and terror, flock hither and

thither; Dumouriez the many-counselled, never off horseback, knows now no

counsel that were not worse than none:  the counsel, namely, of joining

himself with Cobourg; marching to Paris, extinguishing Jacobinism, and,

with some new King Ludovicus or King Philippus, resting the Constitution of

1791!  (Dumouriez, Memoires, iv. c. 7-10.)



Is Wisdom quitting Dumouriez; the herald of Fortune quitting him? 

Principle, faith political or other, beyond a certain faith of mess-rooms,

and honour of an officer, had him not to quit.  At any rate, his quarters

in the Burgh of Saint-Amand; his headquarters in the Village of Saint-Amand

des Boues, a short way off,--have become a Bedlam.  National

Representatives, Jacobin Missionaries are riding and running:  of the

'three Towns,' Lille, Valenciennes or even Conde, which Dumouriez wanted to

snatch for himself, not one can be snatched:  your Captain is admitted, but

the Town-gate is closed on him, and then the Prison gate, and 'his men

wander about the ramparts.'  Couriers gallop breathless; men wait, or seem

waiting, to assassinate, to be assassinated; Battalions nigh frantic with

such suspicion and uncertainty, with Vive-la-Republique and Sauve-qui-peut,

rush this way and that;--Ruin and Desperation in the shape of Cobourg lying

entrenched close by.



Dame Genlis and her fair Princess d'Orleans find this Burgh of Saint-Amand

no fit place for them; Dumouriez's protection is grown worse than none. 

Tough Genlis one of the toughest women; a woman, as it were, with nine

lives in her; whom nothing will beat:  she packs her bandboxes; clear for

flight in a private manner.  Her beloved Princess she will--leave here,

with the Prince Chartres Egalite her Brother.  In the cold grey of the

April morning, we find her accordingly established in her hired vehicle, on

the street of Saint-Amand; postilions just cracking their whips to go,--

when behold the young Princely Brother, struggling hitherward, hastily

calling; bearing the Princess in his arms!  Hastily he has clutched the

poor young lady up, in her very night-gown, nothing saved of her goods

except the watch from the pillow:  with brotherly despair he flings her in,

among the bandboxes, into Genlis's chaise, into Genlis's arms:  Leave her

not, in the name of Mercy and Heaven!  A shrill scene, but a brief one:--

the postilions crack and go.  Ah, whither?  Through by-roads and broken

hill-passes:  seeking their way with lanterns after nightfall; through

perils, and Cobourg Austrians, and suspicious French Nationals; finally,

into Switzerland; safe though nigh moneyless.  (Genlis, iv. 139.)  The

brave young Egalite has a most wild Morrow to look for; but now only

himself to carry through it.



For indeed over at that Village named of the Mudbaths, Saint-Amand des

Boues, matters are still worse.  About four o'clock on Tuesday afternoon,

the 2d of April 1793, two Couriers come galloping as if for life:  Mon

General!  Four National Representatives, War-Minister at their head, are

posting hitherward, from Valenciennes:  are close at hand,--with what

intents one may guess!  While the Couriers are yet speaking, War-Minister

and National Representatives, old Camus the Archivist for chief speaker of

them, arrive.  Hardly has Mon General had time to order out the Huzzar

Regiment de Berchigny; that it take rank and wait near by, in case of

accident.  And so, enter War-Minister Beurnonville, with an embrace of

friendship, for he is an old friend; enter Archivist Camus and the other

three, following him.



They produce Papers, invite the General to the bar of the Convention: 

merely to give an explanation or two.  The General finds it unsuitable, not

to say impossible, and that "the service will suffer."  Then comes

reasoning; the voice of the old Archivist getting loud.  Vain to reason

loud with this Dumouriez; he answers mere angry irreverences.  And so, amid

plumed staff-officers, very gloomy-looking; in jeopardy and uncertainty,

these poor National messengers debate and consult, retire and re-enter, for

the space of some two hours:  without effect.  Whereupon Archivist Camus,

getting quite loud, proclaims, in the name of the National Convention, for

he has the power to do it, That General Dumouriez is arrested:  "Will you

obey the National Mandate, General!"  "Pas dans ce moment-ci, Not at this

particular moment," answers the General also aloud; then glancing the other

way, utters certain unknown vocables, in a mandatory manner; seemingly a

German word-of-command.  (Dumouriez, iv. 159, &c.)  Hussars clutch the Four

National Representatives, and Beurnonville the War-minister; pack them out

of the apartment; out of the Village, over the lines to Cobourg, in two

chaises that very night,--as hostages, prisoners; to lie long in Maestricht

and Austrian strongholds!  (Their Narrative, written by Camus (in

Toulongeon, iii. app. 60-87).)  Jacta est alea.



This night Dumouriez prints his 'Proclamation;' this night and the morrow

the Dumouriez Army, in such darkness visible, and rage of semi-desperation

as there is, shall meditate what the General is doing, what they themselves

will do in it.  Judge whether this Wednesday was of halcyon nature, for any

one!  But, on the Thursday morning, we discern Dumouriez with small escort,

with Chartres Egalite and a few staff-officers, ambling along the Conde

Highway:  perhaps they are for Conde, and trying to persuade the Garrison

there; at all events, they are for an interview with Cobourg, who waits in

the woods by appointment, in that quarter.  Nigh the Village of Doumet,

three National Battalions, a set of men always full of Jacobinism, sweep

past us; marching rather swiftly,--seemingly in mistake, by a way we had

not ordered.  The General dismounts, steps into a cottage, a little from

the wayside; will give them right order in writing.  Hark! what strange

growling is heard:  what barkings are heard, loud yells of "Traitors," of

"Arrest:"  the National Battalions have wheeled round, are emitting shot! 

Mount, Dumouriez, and spring for life!  Dumouriez and Staff strike the

spurs in, deep; vault over ditches, into the fields, which prove to be

morasses; sprawl and plunge for life; bewhistled with curses and lead. 

Sunk to the middle, with or without horses, several servants killed, they

escape out of shot-range, to General Mack the Austrian's quarters.  Nay

they return on the morrow, to Saint-Amand and faithful foreign Berchigny;

but what boots it?  The Artillery has all revolted, is jingling off to

Valenciennes:  all have revolted, are revolting; except only foreign

Berchigny, to the extent of some poor fifteen hundred, none will follow

Dumouriez against France and Indivisible Republic:  Dumouriez's

occupation's gone.  (Memoires, iv. 162-180.)



Such an instinct of Frenehhood and Sansculottism dwells in these men:  they

will follow no Dumouriez nor Lafayette, nor any mortal on such errand. 

Shriek may be of Sauve-qui-peut, but will also be of Vive-la-Republique. 

New National Representatives arrive; new General Dampierre, soon killed in

battle; new General Custine; the agitated Hosts draw back to some Camp of

Famars; make head against Cobourg as they can.



And so Dumouriez is in the Austrian quarters; his drama ended, in this

rather sorry manner.  A most shifty, wiry man; one of Heaven's Swiss that

wanted only work.  Fifty years of unnoticed toil and valour; one year of

toil and valour, not unnoticed, but seen of all countries and centuries;

then thirty other years again unnoticed, of Memoir-writing, English

Pension, scheming and projecting to no purpose:  Adieu thou Swiss of

Heaven, worthy to have been something else!



His Staff go different ways.  Brave young Egalite reaches Switzerland and

the Genlis Cottage; with a strong crabstick in his hand, a strong heart in

his body:  his Princedom in now reduced to that.  Egalite the Father sat

playing whist, in his Palais Egalite, at Paris, on the 6th day of this same

month of April, when a catchpole entered:  Citoyen Egalite is wanted at the

Convention Committee!  (See Montgaillard, iv. 144.)  Examination, requiring

Arrestment; finally requiring Imprisonment, transference to Marseilles and

the Castle of If!  Orleansdom has sunk in the black waters; Palais Egalite,

which was Palais Royal, is like to become Palais National.







Chapter 3.3.VII.



In Fight.



Our Republic, by paper Decree, may be 'One and Indivisible;' but what

profits it while these things are?  Federalists in the Senate, renegadoes

in the Army, traitors everywhere!  France, all in desperate recruitment

since the Tenth of March, does not fly to the frontier, but only flies

hither and thither.  This defection of contemptuous diplomatic Dumouriez

falls heavy on the fine-spoken high-sniffing Hommes d'etat, whom he

consorted with; forms a second epoch in their destinies.



Or perhaps more strictly we might say, the second Girondin epoch, though

little noticed then, began on the day when, in reference to this defection,

the Girondins broke with Danton.  It was the first day of April; Dumouriez

had not yet plunged across the morasses to Cobourg, but was evidently

meaning to do it, and our Commissioners were off to arrest him; when what

does the Girondin Lasource see good to do, but rise, and jesuitically

question and insinuate at great length, whether a main accomplice of

Dumouriez had not probably been--Danton?  Gironde grins sardonic assent;

Mountain holds its breath.  The figure of Danton, Levasseur says, while

this speech went on, was noteworthy.  He sat erect, with a kind of internal

convulsion struggling to keep itself motionless; his eye from time to time

flashing wilder, his lip curling in Titanic scorn.  (Memoires de Rene

Levasseur (Bruxelles, 1830), i. 164.)  Lasource, in a fine-spoken attorney-

manner, proceeds:  there is this probability to his mind, and there is

that; probabilities which press painfully on him, which cast the Patriotism

of Danton under a painful shade; which painful shade he, Lasource, will

hope that Danton may find it not impossible to dispel.



"Les Scelerats!" cries Danton, starting up, with clenched right-hand,

Lasource having done:  and descends from the Mountain, like a lava-flood;

his answer not unready.  Lasource's probabilities fly like idle dust; but

leave a result behind them.  "Ye were right, friends of the Mountain,"

begins Danton, "and I was wrong:  there is no peace possible with these

men.  Let it be war then!  They will not save the Republic with us:  it

shall be saved without them; saved in spite of them."  Really a burst of

rude Parliamentary eloquence this; which is still worth reading, in the old

Moniteur!  With fire-words the exasperated rude Titan rives and smites

these Girondins; at every hit the glad Mountain utters chorus:  Marat, like

a musical bis, repeating the last phrase.  (Seance du 1er Avril, 1793 (in

Hist. Parl. xxv. 24-35).)  Lasource's probabilities are gone:  but Danton's

pledge of battle remains lying.



A third epoch, or scene in the Girondin Drama, or rather it is but the

completion of this second epoch, we reckon from the day when the patience

of virtuous Petion finally boiled over; and the Girondins, so to speak,

took up this battle-pledge of Danton's and decreed Marat accused.  It was

the eleventh of the same month of April, on some effervescence rising, such

as often rose; and President had covered himself, mere Bedlam now ruling;

and Mountain and Gironde were rushing on one another with clenched right-

hands, and even with pistols in them; when, behold, the Girondin Duperret

drew a sword!  Shriek of horror rose, instantly quenching all other

effervescence, at sight of the clear murderous steel; whereupon Duperret

returned it to the leather again;--confessing that he did indeed draw it,

being instigated by a kind of sacred madness, "sainte fureur," and pistols

held at him; but that if he parricidally had chanced to scratch the outmost

skin of National Representation with it, he too carried pistols, and would

have blown his brains out on the spot.  (Hist. Parl. xv. 397.)



But now in such posture of affairs, virtuous Petion rose, next morning, to

lament these effervescences, this endless Anarchy invading the Legislative

Sanctuary itself; and here, being growled at and howled at by the Mountain,

his patience, long tried, did, as we say, boil over; and he spake

vehemently, in high key, with foam on his lips; 'whence,' says Marat, 'I

concluded he had got 'la rage,' the rabidity, or dog-madness.  Rabidity

smites others rabid:  so there rises new foam-lipped demand to have

Anarchists extinguished; and specially to have Marat put under Accusation. 

Send a Representative to the Revolutionary Tribunal?  Violate the

inviolability of a Representative?  Have a care, O Friends!  This poor

Marat has faults enough; but against Liberty or Equality, what fault?  That

he has loved and fought for it, not wisely but too well.  In dungeons and

cellars, in pinching poverty, under anathema of men; even so, in such

fight, has he grown so dingy, bleared; even so has his head become a

Stylites one!  Him you will fling to your Sword of Sharpness; while Cobourg

and Pitt advance on us, fire-spitting?



The Mountain is loud, the Gironde is loud and deaf; all lips are foamy. 

With 'Permanent-Session of twenty-four hours,' with vote by rollcall, and a

dead-lift effort, the Gironde carries it:  Marat is ordered to the

Revolutionary Tribunal, to answer for that February Paragraph of

Forestallers at the door-lintel, with other offences; and, after a little

hesitation, he obeys.  (Moniteur (du 16 Avril 1793, et seqq).)



Thus is Danton's battle-pledge taken up:  there is, as he said there would

be, 'war without truce or treaty, ni treve ni composition.'  Wherefore,

close now with one another, Formula and Reality, in death-grips, and

wrestle it out; both of you cannot live, but only one!







Chapter 3.3.VIII.



In Death-Grips.



It proves what strength, were it only of inertia, there is in established

Formulas, what weakness in nascent Realities, and illustrates several

things, that this death-wrestle should still have lasted some six weeks or

more.  National business, discussion of the Constitutional Act, for our

Constitution should decidedly be got ready, proceeds along with it.  We

even change our Locality; we shift, on the Tenth of May, from the old Salle

de Manege, into our new Hall, in the Palace, once a King's but now the

Republic's, of the Tuileries.  Hope and ruth, flickering against despair

and rage, still struggles in the minds of men.



It is a most dark confused death-wrestle, this of the six weeks.  Formalist

frenzy against Realist frenzy; Patriotism, Egoism, Pride, Anger, Vanity,

Hope and Despair, all raised to the frenetic pitch:  Frenzy meets Frenzy,

like dark clashing whirlwinds; neither understands the other; the weaker,

one day, will understand that it is verily swept down!  Girondism is strong

as established Formula and Respectability:  do not as many as Seventy-two

of the Departments, or say respectable Heads of Departments, declare for

us?  Calvados, which loves its Buzot, will even rise in revolt, so hint the

Addresses; Marseilles, cradle of Patriotism, will rise; Bourdeaux will

rise, and the Gironde Department, as one man; in a word, who will not rise,

were our Representation Nationale to be insulted, or one hair of a Deputy's

head harmed!  The Mountain, again, is strong as Reality and Audacity.  To

the Reality of the Mountain are not all furthersome things possible?  A new

Tenth of August, if needful; nay a new Second of September!--



But, on Wednesday afternoon, twenty-fourth day of April, year 1793, what

tumult as of fierce jubilee is this?  It is Marat returning from

Revolutionary Tribunal!  A week or more of death-peril:  and now there is

triumphant acquittal; Revolutionary Tribunal can find no accusation against

this man.  And so the eye of History beholds Patriotism, which had gloomed

unutterable things all week, break into loud jubilee, embrace its Marat;

lift him into a chair of triumph, bear him shoulder-high through the

streets.  Shoulder-high is the injured People's-friend, crowned with an

oak-garland; amid the wavy sea of red nightcaps, carmagnole jackets,

grenadier bonnets and female mob-caps; far-sounding like a sea!  The

injured People's-friend has here reached his culminating-point; he too

strikes the stars with his sublime head.



But the Reader can judge with what face President Lasource, he of the

'painful probabilities,' who presides in this Convention Hall, might

welcome such jubilee-tide, when it got thither, and the Decreed of

Accusation floating on the top of it!  A National Sapper, spokesman on the

occasion, says, the People know their Friend, and love his life as their

own; "whosoever wants Marat's head must get the Sapper's first."  (Seance

(in Moniteur, No. 116 (du 26 Avril, An 1er).)  Lasource answered with some

vague painful mumblement,--which, says Levasseur, one could not help

tittering at.  (Levasseur, Memoires, i. c. 6.)  Patriot Sections,

Volunteers not yet gone to the Frontiers, come demanding the "purgation of

traitors from your own bosom;" the expulsion, or even the trial and

sentence, of a factious Twenty-two.



Nevertheless the Gironde has got its Commission of Twelve; a Commission

specially appointed for investigating these troubles of the Legislative

Sanctuary:  let Sansculottism say what it will, Law shall triumph.  Old-

Constituent Rabaut Saint-Etienne presides over this Commission:  "it is the

last plank whereon a wrecked Republic may perhaps still save herself." 

Rabaut and they therefore sit, intent; examining witnesses; launching

arrestments; looking out into a waste dim sea of troubles.--the womb of

Formula, or perhaps her grave!  Enter not that sea, O Reader!  There are

dim desolation and confusion; raging women and raging men.  Sections come

demanding Twenty-two; for the number first given by Section Bonconseil

still holds, though the names should even vary.  Other Sections, of the

wealthier kind, come denouncing such demand; nay the same Section will

demand to-day, and denounce the demand to-morrow, according as the

wealthier sit, or the poorer.  Wherefore, indeed, the Girondins decree that

all Sections shall close 'at ten in the evening;' before the working people

come:  which Decree remains without effect.  And nightly the Mother of

Patriotism wails doleful; doleful, but her eye kindling!  And Fournier

l'Americain is busy, and the two Banker Freys, and Varlet Apostle of

Liberty; the bull-voice of Marquis Saint-Huruge is heard.  And shrill women

vociferate from all Galleries, the Convention ones and downwards.  Nay a

'Central Committee' of all the Forty-eight Sections, looms forth huge and

dubious; sitting dim in the Archeveche, sending Resolutions, receiving

them:  a Centre of the Sections; in dread deliberation as to a New Tenth of

August!



One thing we will specify to throw light on many:  the aspect under which,

seen through the eyes of these Girondin Twelve, or even seen through one's

own eyes, the Patriotism of the softer sex presents itself.  There are

Female Patriots, whom the Girondins call Megaeras, and count to the extent

of eight thousand; with serpent-hair, all out of curl; who have changed the

distaff for the dagger.  They are of 'the Society called Brotherly,'

Fraternelle, say Sisterly, which meets under the roof of the Jacobins. 

'Two thousand daggers,' or so, have been ordered,--doubtless, for them. 

They rush to Versailles, to raise more women; but the Versailles women will

not rise.  (Buzot, Memoires, pp. 69, 84; Meillan, Memoires,  pp. 192, 195,

196.  See Commission des Douze (in Choix des Rapports, xii. 69-131).)



Nay, behold, in National Garden of Tuileries,--Demoiselle Theroigne herself

is become as a brownlocked Diana (were that possible) attacked by her own

dogs, or she-dogs!  The Demoiselle, keeping her carriage, is for Liberty

indeed, as she has full well shewn; but then for Liberty with

Respectability:  whereupon these serpent-haired Extreme She-Patriots now do

fasten on her, tatter her, shamefully fustigate her, in their shameful way;

almost fling her into the Garden-ponds, had not help intervened.  Help,

alas, to small purpose.  The poor Demoiselle's head and nervous-system,

none of the soundest, is so tattered and fluttered that it will never

recover; but flutter worse and worse, till it crack; and within year and

day we hear of her in madhouse, and straitwaistcoat, which proves

permanent!--Such brownlocked Figure did flutter, and inarticulately jabber

and gesticulate, little able to speak the obscure meaning it had, through

some segment of that Eighteenth Century of Time.  She disappears here from

the Revolution and Public History, for evermore.  (Deux Amis, vii. 77-80;

Forster, i. 514; Moore, i. 70.  She did not die till 1817; in the

Salpetriere, in the most abject state of insanity; see Esquirol, Des

Maladies Mentales (Paris, 1838), i. 445-50.)



Another thing we will not again specify, yet again beseech the Reader to

imagine:  the reign of Fraternity and Perfection.  Imagine, we say, O

Reader, that the Millennium were struggling on the threshold, and yet not

so much as groceries could be had,--owing to traitors.  With what impetus

would a man strike traitors, in that case?  Ah, thou canst not imagine it: 

thou hast thy groceries safe in the shops, and little or no hope of a

Millennium ever coming!--But, indeed, as to the temper there was in men and

women, does not this one fact say enough:  the height SUSPICION had risen

to?  Preternatural we often called it; seemingly in the language of

exaggeration:  but listen to the cold deposition of witnesses.  Not a

musical Patriot can blow himself a snatch of melody from the French Horn,

sitting mildly pensive on the housetop, but Mercier will recognise it to be

a signal which one Plotting Committee is making to another.  Distraction

has possessed Harmony herself; lurks in the sound of Marseillese and ca-

ira.  (Mercier, Nouveau Paris, vi. 63.)  Louvet, who can see as deep into a

millstone as the most, discerns that we shall be invited back to our old

Hall of the Manege, by a Deputation; and then the Anarchists will massacre

Twenty-two of us, as we walk over.  It is Pitt and Cobourg; the gold of

Pitt.--Poor Pitt!  They little know what work he has with his own Friends

of the People; getting them bespied, beheaded, their habeas-corpuses

suspended, and his own Social Order and strong-boxes kept tight,--to fancy

him raising mobs among his neighbours!



But the strangest fact connected with French or indeed with human

Suspicion, is perhaps this of Camille Desmoulins.  Camille's head, one of

the clearest in France, has got itself so saturated through every fibre

with Preternaturalism of Suspicion, that looking back on that Twelfth of

July 1789, when the thousands rose round him, yelling responsive at his

word in the Palais Royal Garden, and took cockades, he finds it explicable

only on this hypothesis, That they were all hired to do it, and set on by

the Foreign and other Plotters.  'It was not for nothing,' says Camille

with insight, 'that this multitude burst up round me when I spoke!'  No,

not for nothing.  Behind, around, before, it is one huge Preternatural

Puppet-play of Plots; Pitt pulling the wires.  (See Histoire des

Brissotins, par Camille Desmoulins (a Pamphlet of Camille's, Paris, 1793).)

Almost I conjecture that I Camille myself am a Plot, and wooden with

wires.--The force of insight could no further go.



Be this as it will, History remarks that the Commission of Twelve, now

clear enough as to the Plots; and luckily having 'got the threads of them

all by the end,' as they say,--are launching Mandates of Arrest rapidly in

these May days; and carrying matters with a high hand; resolute that the

sea of troubles shall be restrained.  What chief Patriot, Section-President

even, is safe?  They can arrest him; tear him from his warm bed, because he

has made irregular Section Arrestments!  They arrest Varlet Apostle of

Liberty.  They arrest Procureur-Substitute Hebert, Pere Duchesne; a

Magistrate of the People, sitting in Townhall; who, with high solemnity of

martyrdom, takes leave of his colleagues; prompt he, to obey the Law; and

solemnly acquiescent, disappears into prison.



The swifter fly the Sections, energetically demanding him back; demanding

not arrestment of Popular Magistrates, but of a traitorous Twenty-two. 

Section comes flying after Section;--defiling energetic, with their

Cambyses' vein of oratory:  nay the Commune itself comes, with Mayor Pache

at its head; and with question not of Hebert and the Twenty-two alone, but

with this ominous old question made new, "Can you save the Republic, or

must we do it?"  To whom President Max Isnard makes fiery answer:  If by

fatal chance, in any of those tumults which since the Tenth of March are

ever returning, Paris were to lift a sacrilegious finger against the

National Representation, France would rise as one man, in never-imagined

vengeance, and shortly "the traveller would ask, on which side of the Seine

Paris had stood!"  (Moniteur, Seance du 25 Mai, 1793.)  Whereat the

Mountain bellows only louder, and every Gallery; Patriot Paris boiling

round.



And Girondin Valaze has nightly conclaves at his house; sends billets;

'Come punctually, and well armed, for there is to be business.'  And

Megaera women perambulate the streets, with flags, with lamentable alleleu.

(Meillan, Memoires, p. 195; Buzot, pp. 69, 84.)  And the Convention-doors

are obstructed by roaring multitudes:  find-spoken hommes d'etat are

hustled, maltreated, as they pass; Marat will apostrophise you, in such

death-peril, and say, Thou too art of them.  If Roland ask leave to quit

Paris, there is order of the day.  What help?  Substitute Hebert, Apostle

Varlet, must be given back; to be crowned with oak-garlands.  The

Commission of Twelve, in a Convention overwhelmed with roaring Sections, is

broken; then on the morrow, in a Convention of rallied Girondins, is

reinstated.  Dim Chaos, or the sea of troubles, is struggling through all

its elements; writhing and chafing towards some creation.









Chapter 3.3.IX.



Extinct.



Accordingly, on Friday, the Thirty-first of May 1793, there comes forth

into the summer sunlight one of the strangest scenes.  Mayor Pache with

Municipality arrives at the Tuileries Hall of Convention; sent for, Paris

being in visible ferment; and gives the strangest news.



How, in the grey of this morning, while we sat Permanent in Townhall,

watchful for the commonweal, there entered, precisely as on a Tenth of

August, some Ninety-six extraneous persons; who declared themselves to be

in a state of Insurrection; to be plenipotentiary Commissioners from the

Forty-eight Sections, sections or members of the Sovereign People, all in a

state of Insurrection; and further that we, in the name of said Sovereign

in Insurrection, were dismissed from office.  How we thereupon laid off our

sashes, and withdrew into the adjacent Saloon of Liberty.  How in a moment

or two, we were called back; and reinstated; the Sovereign pleasing to

think us still worthy of confidence.  Whereby, having taken new oath of

office, we on a sudden find ourselves Insurrectionary Magistrates, with

extraneous Committee of Ninety-six sitting by us; and a Citoyen Henriot,

one whom some accuse of Septemberism, is made Generalissimo of the National

Guard; and, since six o'clock, the tocsins ring and the drums beat:--Under

which peculiar circumstances, what would an august National Convention

please to direct us to do?  (Compare Debats de la Convention (Paris, 1828),

iv. 187-223; Moniteur, Nos. 152, 3, 4, An 1er.)



Yes, there is the question!  "Break the Insurrectionary Authorities,"

answers some with vehemence.  Vergniaud at least will have "the National

Representatives all die at their post;" this is sworn to, with ready loud

acclaim.  But as to breaking the Insurrectionary Authorities,--alas, while

we yet debate, what sound is that?  Sound of the Alarm-Cannon on the Pont

Neuf; which it is death by the Law to fire without order from us!



It does boom off there, nevertheless; sending a sound through all hearts. 

And the tocsins discourse stern music; and Henriot with his Armed Force has

enveloped us!  And Section succeeds Section, the livelong day; demanding

with Cambyses'-oratory, with the rattle of muskets, That traitors, Twenty-

two or more, be punished; that the Commission of Twelve be irrecoverably

broken.  The heart of the Gironde dies within it; distant are the Seventy-

two respectable Departments, this fiery Municipality is near!  Barrere is

for a middle course; granting something.  The Commission of Twelve declares

that, not waiting to be broken, it hereby breaks itself, and is no more. 

Fain would Reporter Rabaut speak his and its last-words; but he is bellowed

off.  Too happy that the Twenty-two are still left unviolated!--Vergniaud,

carrying the laws of refinement to a great length, moves, to the amazement

of some, that 'the Sections of Paris have deserved well of their country.' 

Whereupon, at a late hour of the evening, the deserving Sections retire to

their respective places of abode.  Barrere shall report on it.  With busy

quill and brain he sits, secluded; for him no sleep to-night.  Friday the

last of May has ended in this manner.



The Sections have deserved well:  but ought they not to deserve better? 

Faction and Girondism is struck down for the moment, and consents to be a

nullity; but will it not, at another favourabler moment rise, still feller;

and the Republic have to be saved in spite of it?  So reasons Patriotism,

still Permanent; so reasons the Figure of Marat, visible in the dim

Section-world, on the morrow.  To the conviction of men!--And so at

eventide of Saturday, when Barrere had just got it all varnished in the

course of the day, and his Report was setting off in the evening mail-bags,

tocsin peals out again!  Generale is beating; armed men taking station in

the Place Vendome and elsewhere for the night; supplied with provisions and

liquor.  There under the summer stars will they wait, this night, what is

to be seen and to be done, Henriot and Townhall giving due signal.



The Convention, at sound of generale, hastens back to its Hall; but to the

number only of a Hundred; and does little business, puts off business till

the morrow.  The Girondins do not stir out thither, the Girondins are

abroad seeking beds.  Poor Rabaut, on the morrow morning, returning to his

post, with Louvet and some others, through streets all in ferment, wrings

his hands, ejaculating, "Illa suprema dies!"  (Louvet, Memoires, p. 89.) 

It has become Sunday, the second day of June, year 1793, by the old style;

by the new style, year One of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity.  We have got

to the last scene of all, that ends this history of the Girondin

Senatorship.



It seems doubtful whether any terrestrial Convention had ever met in such

circumstances as this National one now does.  Tocsin is pealing; Barriers

shut; all Paris is on the gaze, or under arms.  As many as a Hundred

Thousand under arms they count:  National Force; and the Armed Volunteers,

who should have flown to the Frontiers and La Vendee; but would not,

treason being unpunished; and only flew hither and thither!  So many,

steady under arms, environ the National Tuileries and Garden.  There are

horse, foot, artillery, sappers with beards:  the artillery one can see

with their camp-furnaces in this National Garden, heating bullets red, and

their match is lighted.  Henriot in plumes rides, amid a plumed Staff:  all

posts and issues are safe; reserves lie out, as far as the Wood of

Boulogne; the choicest Patriots nearest the scene.  One other circumstance

we will note:  that a careful Municipality, liberal of camp-furnaces, has

not forgotten provision-carts.  No member of the Sovereign need now go home

to dinner; but can keep rank,--plentiful victual circulating unsought. 

Does not this People understand Insurrection?  Ye, not uninventive,

Gualches!--



Therefore let a National Representation, 'mandatories of the Sovereign,'

take thought of it.  Expulsion of your Twenty-two, and your Commission of

Twelve:  we stand here till it be done!  Deputation after Deputation, in

ever stronger language, comes with that message.  Barrere proposes a middle

course:--Will not perhaps the inculpated Deputies consent to withdraw

voluntarily; to make a generous demission, and self-sacrifice for the sake

of one's country?  Isnard, repentant of that search on which river-bank

Paris stood, declares himself ready to demit.  Ready also is Te-Deum

Fauchet; old Dusaulx of the Bastille, 'vieux radoteur, old dotard,' as

Marat calls him, is still readier.  On the contrary, Lanjuinais the Breton

declares that there is one man who never will demit voluntarily; but will

protest to the uttermost, while a voice is left him.  And he accordingly

goes on protesting; amid rage and clangor; Legendre crying at last: 

"Lanjuinais, come down from the Tribune, or I will fling thee down, ou je

te jette en bas!"  For matters are come to extremity.  Nay they do clutch

hold of Lanjuinais, certain zealous Mountain-men; but cannot fling him

down, for he 'cramps himself on the railing;' and 'his clothes get torn.' 

Brave Senator, worthy of pity!  Neither will Barbaroux demit; he "has sworn

to die at his post, and will keep that oath."  Whereupon the Galleries all

rise with explosion; brandishing weapons, some of them; and rush out

saying:  "Allons, then; we must save our country!"  Such a Session is this

of Sunday the second of June.



Churches fill, over Christian Europe, and then empty themselves; but this

Convention empties not, the while:  a day of shrieking contention, of

agony, humiliation and tearing of coatskirts; illa suprema dies!  Round

stand Henriot and his Hundred Thousand, copiously refreshed from tray and

basket:  nay he is 'distributing five francs a-piece;' we Girondins saw it

with our eyes; five francs to keep them in heart!  And distraction of armed

riot encumbers our borders, jangles at our Bar; we are prisoners in our own

Hall:  Bishop Gregoire could not get out for a besoin actuel without four

gendarmes to wait on him!  What is the character of a National

Representative become?  And now the sunlight falls yellower on western

windows, and the chimney-tops are flinging longer shadows; the refreshed

Hundred Thousand, nor their shadows, stir not!  What to resolve on?  Motion

rises, superfluous one would think, That the Convention go forth in a body;

ascertain with its own eyes whether it is free or not.  Lo, therefore, from

the Eastern Gate of the Tuileries, a distressed Convention issuing;

handsome Herault Sechelles at their head; he with hat on, in sign of public

calamity, the rest bareheaded,--towards the Gate of the Carrousel; wondrous

to see:  towards Henriot and his plumed staff.  "In the name of the

National Convention, make way!"  Not an inch of the way does Henriot make: 

"I receive no orders, till the Sovereign, yours and mine, has been obeyed." 

The Convention presses on; Henriot prances back, with his staff, some

fifteen paces, "To arms!  Cannoneers to your guns!"--flashes out his

puissant sword, as the Staff all do, and the Hussars all do.  Cannoneers

brandish the lit match; Infantry present arms,--alas, in the level way, as

if for firing!  Hatted Herault leads his distressed flock, through their

pinfold of a Tuileries again; across the Garden, to the Gate on the

opposite side.  Here is Feuillans Terrace, alas, there is our old Salle de

Manege; but neither at this Gate of the Pont Tournant is there egress.  Try

the other; and the other:  no egress!  We wander disconsolate through armed

ranks; who indeed salute with Live the Republic, but also with Die the

Gironde.  Other such sight, in the year One of Liberty, the westering sun

never saw.



And now behold Marat meets us; for he lagged in this Suppliant Procession

of ours:  he has got some hundred elect Patriots at his heels:  he orders

us in the Sovereign's name to return to our place, and do as we are bidden

and bound.  The Convention returns.  "Does not the Convention," says

Couthon with a singular power of face, "see that it is free?"--none but

friends round it?  The Convention, overflowing with friends and armed

Sectioners, proceeds to vote as bidden.  Many will not vote, but remain

silent; some one or two protest, in words:  the Mountain has a clear

unanimity.  Commission of Twelve, and the denounced Twenty-two, to whom we

add Ex-Ministers Claviere and Lebrun:  these, with some slight extempore

alterations (this or that orator proposing, but Marat disposing), are voted

to be under 'Arrestment in their own houses.'  Brissot, Buzot, Vergniaud,

Guadet, Louvet, Gensonne, Barbaroux, Lasource, Lanjuinais, Rabaut,--Thirty-

two, by the tale; all that we have known as Girondins, and more than we

have known.  They, 'under the safeguard of the French People;' by and by,

under the safeguard of two Gendarmes each, shall dwell peaceably in their

own houses; as Non-Senators; till further order.  Herewith ends Seance of

Sunday the second of June 1793.



At ten o'clock, under mild stars, the Hundred Thousand, their work well

finished, turn homewards.  This same day, Central Insurrection Committee

has arrested Madame Roland; imprisoned her in the Abbaye.  Roland has fled,

no one knows whither.



Thus fell the Girondins, by Insurrection; and became extinct as a Party: 

not without a sigh from most Historians.  The men were men of parts, of

Philosophic culture, decent behaviour; not condemnable in that they were

Pedants and had not better parts; not condemnable, but most unfortunate. 

They wanted a Republic of the Virtues, wherein themselves should be head;

and they could only get a Republic of the Strengths, wherein others than

they were head.



For the rest, Barrere shall make Report of it.  The night concludes with a

'civic promenade by torchlight:' (Buzot, Memoires, p. 310.  See Pieces

Justificatives, of Narratives, Commentaries, &c. in Buzot, Louvet, Meillan: 

Documens Complementaires, in Hist. Parl. xxviii. 1-78.)  surely the true

reign of Fraternity is now not far?
