








BOOK 3.IV. 



TERROR





Chapter 3.4.I.



Charlotte Corday.



In the leafy months of June and July, several French Departments germinate

a set of rebellious paper-leaves, named Proclamations, Resolutions,

Journals, or Diurnals 'of the Union for Resistance to Oppression.'  In

particular, the Town of Caen, in Calvados, sees its paper-leaf of Bulletin

de Caen suddenly bud, suddenly establish itself as Newspaper there; under

the Editorship of Girondin National Representatives!



For among the proscribed Girondins are certain of a more desperate humour.

Some, as Vergniaud, Valaze, Gensonne, 'arrested in their own houses' will

await with stoical resignation what the issue may be.  Some, as Brissot,

Rabaut, will take to flight, to concealment; which, as the Paris Barriers

are opened again in a day or two, is not yet difficult.  But others there

are who will rush, with Buzot, to Calvados; or far over France, to Lyons,

Toulon, Nantes and elsewhither, and then rendezvous at Caen:  to awaken as

with war-trumpet the respectable Departments; and strike down an anarchic

Mountain Faction; at least not yield without a stroke at it.  Of this

latter temper we count some score or more, of the Arrested, and of the Not-

yet-arrested; a Buzot, a Barbaroux, Louvet, Guadet, Petion, who have

escaped from Arrestment in their own homes; a Salles, a Pythagorean Valady,

a Duchatel, the Duchatel that came in blanket and nightcap to vote for the

life of Louis, who have escaped from danger and likelihood of Arrestment. 

These, to the number at one time of Twenty-seven, do accordingly lodge

here, at the 'Intendance, or Departmental Mansion,' of the Town of Caen;

welcomed by Persons in Authority; welcomed and defrayed, having no money of

their own.  And the Bulletin de Caen comes forth, with the most animating

paragraphs:  How the Bourdeaux Department, the Lyons Department, this

Department after the other is declaring itself; sixty, or say sixty-nine,

or seventy-two (Meillan, p. 72, 73; Louvet, p. 129.) respectable

Departments either declaring, or ready to declare.  Nay Marseilles, it

seems, will march on Paris by itself, if need be.  So has Marseilles Town

said, That she will march.  But on the other hand, that Montelimart Town

has said, No thoroughfare; and means even to 'bury herself' under her own

stone and mortar first--of this be no mention in Bulletin of Caen.



Such animating paragraphs we read in this Newspaper; and fervours, and

eloquent sarcasm:  tirades against the Mountain, frame pen of Deputy

Salles; which resemble, say friends, Pascal's Provincials.  What is more to

the purpose, these Girondins have got a General in chief, one Wimpfen,

formerly under Dumouriez; also a secondary questionable General Puisaye,

and others; and are doing their best to raise a force for war.  National

Volunteers, whosoever is of right heart:  gather in, ye National

Volunteers, friends of Liberty; from our Calvados Townships, from the Eure,

from Brittany, from far and near; forward to Paris, and extinguish Anarchy! 

Thus at Caen, in the early July days, there is a drumming and parading, a

perorating and consulting:  Staff and Army; Council; Club of Carabots,

Anti-jacobin friends of Freedom, to denounce atrocious Marat.  With all

which, and the editing of Bulletins, a National Representative has his

hands full.



At Caen it is most animated; and, as one hopes, more or less animated in

the 'Seventy-two Departments that adhere to us.'  And in a France begirt

with Cimmerian invading Coalitions, and torn with an internal La Vendee,

this is the conclusion we have arrived at:  to put down Anarchy by Civil

War!  Durum et durum, the Proverb says, non faciunt murum.  La Vendee

burns:  Santerre can do nothing there; he may return home and brew beer. 

Cimmerian bombshells fly all along the North.  That Siege of Mentz is

become famed;--lovers of the Picturesque (as Goethe will testify), washed

country-people of both sexes, stroll thither on Sundays, to see the

artillery work and counterwork; 'you only duck a little while the shot

whizzes past.'  (Belagerung von Mainz (Goethe's Werke, xxx. 278-334).) 

Conde is capitulating to the Austrians; Royal Highness of York, these

several weeks, fiercely batters Valenciennes.  For, alas, our fortified

Camp of Famars was stormed; General Dampierre was killed; General Custine

was blamed,--and indeed is now come to Paris to give 'explanations.'



Against all which the Mountain and atrocious Marat must even make head as

they can.  They, anarchic Convention as they are, publish Decrees,

expostulatory, explanatory, yet not without severity; they ray forth

Commissioners, singly or in pairs, the olive-branch in one hand, yet the

sword in the other.  Commissioners come even to Caen; but without effect. 

Mathematical Romme, and Prieur named of the Cote d'Or, venturing thither,

with their olive and sword, are packed into prison:  there may Romme lie,

under lock and key, 'for fifty days;' and meditate his New Calendar, if he

please.  Cimmeria and Civil War!  Never was Republic One and Indivisible at

a lower ebb.--



Amid which dim ferment of Caen and the World, History specially notices one

thing:  in the lobby of the Mansion de l'Intendance, where busy Deputies

are coming and going, a young Lady with an aged valet, taking grave

graceful leave of Deputy Barbaroux.  (Meillan, p.75; Louvet, p. 114.)  She

is of stately Norman figure; in her twenty-fifth year; of beautiful still

countenance:  her name is Charlotte Corday, heretofore styled d'Armans,

while Nobility still was.  Barbaroux has given her a Note to Deputy

Duperret,--him who once drew his sword in the effervescence.  Apparently

she will to Paris on some errand?  'She was a Republican before the

Revolution, and never wanted energy.'  A completeness, a decision is in

this fair female Figure:  'by energy she means the spirit that will prompt

one to sacrifice himself for his country.'  What if she, this fair young

Charlotte, had emerged from her secluded stillness, suddenly like a Star;

cruel-lovely, with half-angelic, half-demonic splendour; to gleam for a

moment, and in a moment be extinguished:  to be held in memory, so bright

complete was she, through long centuries!--Quitting Cimmerian Coalitions

without, and the dim-simmering Twenty-five millions within, History will

look fixedly at this one fair Apparition of a Charlotte Corday; will note

whither Charlotte moves, how the little Life burns forth so radiant, then

vanishes swallowed of the Night.



With Barbaroux's Note of Introduction, and slight stock of luggage, we see

Charlotte, on Tuesday the ninth of July, seated in the Caen Diligence, with

a place for Paris.  None takes farewell of her, wishes her Good-journey: 

her Father will find a line left, signifying that she is gone to England,

that he must pardon her and forget her.  The drowsy Diligence lumbers

along; amid drowsy talk of Politics, and praise of the Mountain; in which

she mingles not; all night, all day, and again all night.  On Thursday, not

long before none, we are at the Bridge of Neuilly; here is Paris with her

thousand black domes,--the goal and purpose of thy journey!  Arrived at the

Inn de la Providence in the Rue des Vieux Augustins, Charlotte demands a

room; hastens to bed; sleeps all afternoon and night, till the morrow

morning.



On the morrow morning, she delivers her Note to Duperret.  It relates to

certain Family Papers which are in the Minister of the Interior's hand;

which a Nun at Caen, an old Convent-friend of Charlotte's, has need of;

which Duperret shall assist her in getting:  this then was Charlotte's

errand to Paris?  She has finished this, in the course of Friday;--yet says

nothing of returning.  She has seen and silently investigated several

things.  The Convention, in bodily reality, she has seen; what the Mountain

is like.  The living physiognomy of Marat she could not see; he is sick at

present, and confined to home.



About eight on the Saturday morning, she purchases a large sheath-knife in

the Palais Royal; then straightway, in the Place des Victoires, takes a

hackney-coach:  "To the Rue de l'Ecole de Medecine, No. 44."  It is the

residence of the Citoyen Marat!--The Citoyen Marat is ill, and cannot be

seen; which seems to disappoint her much.  Her business is with Marat,

then?  Hapless beautiful Charlotte; hapless squalid Marat!  From Caen in

the utmost West, from Neuchatel in the utmost East, they two are drawing

nigh each other; they two have, very strangely, business together.--

Charlotte, returning to her Inn, despatches a short Note to Marat;

signifying that she is from Caen, the seat of rebellion; that she desires

earnestly to see him, and 'will put it in his power to do France a great

service.'  No answer.  Charlotte writes another Note, still more pressing;

sets out with it by coach, about seven in the evening, herself.  Tired day-

labourers have again finished their Week; huge Paris is circling and

simmering, manifold, according to its vague wont:  this one fair Figure has

decision in it; drives straight,--towards a purpose.



It is yellow July evening, we say, the thirteenth of the month; eve of the

Bastille day,--when 'M. Marat,' four years ago, in the crowd of the Pont

Neuf, shrewdly required of that Besenval Hussar-party, which had such

friendly dispositions, "to dismount, and give up their arms, then;" and

became notable among Patriot men!  Four years:  what a road he has

travelled;--and sits now, about half-past seven of the clock, stewing in

slipper-bath; sore afflicted; ill of Revolution Fever,--of what other

malady this History had rather not name.  Excessively sick and worn, poor

man:  with precisely elevenpence-halfpenny of ready money, in paper; with

slipper-bath; strong three-footed stool for writing on, the while; and a

squalid--Washerwoman, one may call her:  that is his civic establishment in

Medical-School Street; thither and not elsewhither has his road led him. 

Not to the reign of Brotherhood and Perfect Felicity; yet surely on the way

towards that?--Hark, a rap again!  A musical woman's-voice, refusing to be

rejected:  it is the Citoyenne who would do France a service.  Marat,

recognising from within, cries, Admit her.  Charlotte Corday is admitted.



Citoyen Marat, I am from Caen the seat of rebellion, and wished to speak

with you.--Be seated, mon enfant.  Now what are the Traitors doing at Caen?

What Deputies are at Caen?--Charlotte names some Deputies.  "Their heads

shall fall within a fortnight," croaks the eager People's-Friend, clutching

his tablets to write:  Barbaroux, Petion, writes he with bare shrunk arm,

turning aside in the bath:  Petion, and Louvet, and--Charlotte has drawn

her knife from the sheath; plunges it, with one sure stroke, into the

writer's heart.  "A moi, chere amie, Help, dear!"  No more could the Death-

choked say or shriek.  The helpful Washerwoman running in, there is no

Friend of the People, or Friend of the Washerwoman, left; but his life with

a groan gushes out, indignant, to the shades below.  (Moniteur, Nos. 197,

198, 199; Hist. Parl. xxviii. 301-5; Deux Amis, x. 368-374.)



And so Marat People's-Friend is ended; the lone Stylites has got hurled

down suddenly from his Pillar,--whither He that made him does know. 

Patriot Paris may sound triple and tenfold, in dole and wail; re-echoed by

Patriot France; and the Convention, 'Chabot pale with terror declaring that

they are to be all assassinated,' may decree him Pantheon Honours, Public

Funeral, Mirabeau's dust making way for him; and Jacobin Societies, in

lamentable oratory, summing up his character, parallel him to One, whom

they think it honour to call 'the good Sansculotte,'--whom we name not

here.  (See Eloge funebre de Jean-Paul Marat, prononce a Strasbourg (in

Barbaroux, p. 125-131); Mercier, &c.)  Also a Chapel may be made, for the

urn that holds his Heart, in the Place du Carrousel; and new-born children

be named Marat; and Lago-de-Como Hawkers bake mountains of stucco into

unbeautiful Busts; and David paint his Picture, or Death-scene; and such

other Apotheosis take place as the human genius, in these circumstances,

can devise:  but Marat returns no more to the light of this Sun.  One sole

circumstance we have read with clear sympathy, in the old Moniteur

Newspaper:  how Marat's brother comes from Neuchatel to ask of the

Convention 'that the deceased Jean-Paul Marat's musket be given him.' 

(Seance du 16 Septembre 1793.)  For Marat too had a brother, and natural

affections; and was wrapt once in swaddling-clothes, and slept safe in a

cradle like the rest of us.  Ye children of men!--A sister of his, they

say, lives still to this day in Paris.



As for Charlotte Corday her work is accomplished; the recompense of it is

near and sure.  The chere amie, and neighbours of the house, flying at her,

she 'overturns some movables,' entrenches herself till the gendarmes

arrive; then quietly surrenders; goes quietly to the Abbaye Prison:  she

alone quiet, all Paris sounding in wonder, in rage or admiration, round

her.  Duperret is put in arrest, on account of her; his Papers sealed,--

which may lead to consequences.  Fauchet, in like manner; though Fauchet

had not so much as heard of her.  Charlotte, confronted with these two

Deputies, praises the grave firmness of Duperret, censures the dejection of

Fauchet.



On Wednesday morning, the thronged Palais de Justice and Revolutionary

Tribunal can see her face; beautiful and calm:  she dates it 'fourth day of

the Preparation of Peace.'  A strange murmur ran through the Hall, at sight

of her; you could not say of what character.  (Proces de Charlotte Corday,

&c. (Hist. Parl. xxviii. 311-338).)  Tinville has his indictments and tape-

papers the cutler of the Palais Royal will testify that he sold her the

sheath-knife; "all these details are needless," interrupted Charlotte; "it

is I that killed Marat."  By whose instigation?--"By no one's."  What

tempted you, then?  His crimes.  "I killed one man," added she, raising her

voice extremely (extremement), as they went on with their questions, "I

killed one man to save a hundred thousand; a villain to save innocents; a

savage wild-beast to give repose to my country.  I was a Republican before

the Revolution; I never wanted energy."  There is therefore nothing to be

said.  The public gazes astonished:  the hasty limners sketch her features,

Charlotte not disapproving; the men of law proceed with their formalities.

The doom is Death as a murderess.  To her Advocate she gives thanks; in

gentle phrase, in high-flown classical spirit.  To the Priest they send her

she gives thanks; but needs not any shriving, or ghostly or other aid from

him.



On this same evening, therefore, about half-past seven o'clock, from the

gate of the Conciergerie, to a City all on tiptoe, the fatal Cart issues: 

seated on it a fair young creature, sheeted in red smock of Murderess; so

beautiful, serene, so full of life; journeying towards death,--alone amid

the world.  Many take off their hats, saluting reverently; for what heart

but must be touched?  (Deux Amis, x. 374-384.)  Others growl and howl. 

Adam Lux, of Mentz, declares that she is greater than Brutus; that it were

beautiful to die with her:  the head of this young man seems turned.  At

the Place de la Revolution, the countenance of Charlotte wears the same

still smile.  The executioners proceed to bind her feet; she resists,

thinking it meant as an insult; on a word of explanation, she submits with

cheerful apology.  As the last act, all being now ready, they take the

neckerchief from her neck:  a blush of maidenly shame overspreads that fair

face and neck; the cheeks were still tinged with it, when the executioner

lifted the severed head, to shew it to the people.  'It is most true,' says

Foster, 'that he struck the cheek insultingly; for I saw it with my eyes: 

the Police imprisoned him for it.'  (Briefwechsel, i. 508.)



In this manner have the Beautifullest and the Squalidest come in collision,

and extinguished one another.  Jean-Paul Marat and Marie-Anne Charlotte

Corday both, suddenly, are no more.  'Day of the Preparation of Peace?' 

Alas, how were peace possible or preparable, while, for example, the hearts

of lovely Maidens, in their convent-stillness, are dreaming not of Love-

paradises, and the light of Life; but of Codrus'-sacrifices, and death well

earned?  That Twenty-five million hearts have got to such temper, this is

the Anarchy; the soul of it lies in this:  whereof not peace can be the

embodyment!  The death of Marat, whetting old animosities tenfold, will be

worse than any life.  O ye hapless Two, mutually extinctive, the Beautiful

and the Squalid, sleep ye well,--in the Mother's bosom that bore you both!



This was the History of Charlotte Corday; most definite, most complete;

angelic-demonic:  like a Star!  Adam Lux goes home, half-delirious; to pour

forth his Apotheosis of her, in paper and print; to propose that she have a

statue with this inscription, Greater than Brutus.  Friends represent his

danger; Lux is reckless; thinks it were beautiful to die with her.







Chapter 3.4.II.



In Civil War.



But during these same hours, another guillotine is at work, on another: 

Charlotte, for the Girondins, dies at Paris to-day; Chalier, by the

Girondins, dies at Lyons to-morrow.



From rumbling of cannon along the streets of that City, it has come to

firing of them, to rabid fighting:  Nievre-Chol and the Girondins triumph;-

-behind whom there is, as everywhere, a Royalist Faction waiting to strike

in.  Trouble enough at Lyons; and the dominant party carrying it with a

high hand!  For indeed, the whole South is astir; incarcerating Jacobins;

arming for Girondins:  wherefore we have got a 'Congress of Lyons;' also a

'Revolutionary Tribunal of Lyons,' and Anarchists shall tremble.  So

Chalier was soon found guilty, of Jacobinism, of murderous Plot, 'address

with drawn dagger on the sixth of February last;' and, on the morrow, he

also travels his final road, along the streets of Lyons, 'by the side of an

ecclesiastic, with whom he seems to speak earnestly,'--the axe now

glittering high.  He could weep, in old years, this man, and 'fall on his

knees on the pavement,' blessing Heaven at sight of Federation Programs or

like; then he pilgrimed to Paris, to worship Marat and the Mountain:  now

Marat and he are both gone;--we said he could not end well.  Jacobinism

groans inwardly, at Lyons; but dare not outwardly.  Chalier, when the

Tribunal sentenced him, made answer:  "My death will cost this City dear."



Montelimart Town is not buried under its ruins; yet Marseilles is actually

marching, under order of a 'Lyons Congress;' is incarcerating Patriots; the

very Royalists now shewing face.  Against which a General Cartaux fights,

though in small force; and with him an Artillery Major, of the name of--

Napoleon Buonaparte.  This Napoleon, to prove that the Marseillese have no

chance ultimately, not only fights but writes; publishes his Supper of

Beaucaire, a Dialogue which has become curious.  (See Hazlitt, ii. 529-41.) 

Unfortunate Cities, with their actions and their reactions!  Violence to be

paid with violence in geometrical ratio; Royalism and Anarchism both

striking in;--the final net-amount of which geometrical series, what man

shall sum?



The Bar of Iron has never yet floated in Marseilles Harbour; but the Body

of Rebecqui was found floating, self-drowned there.  Hot Rebecqui seeing

how confusion deepened, and Respectability grew poisoned with Royalism,

felt that there was no refuge for a Republican but death.  Rebecqui

disappeared:  no one knew whither; till, one morning, they found the empty

case or body of him risen to the top, tumbling on the salt waves;

(Barbaroux, p. 29.) and perceived that Rebecqui had withdrawn forever.--

Toulon likewise is incarcerating Patriots; sending delegates to Congress;

intriguing, in case of necessity, with the Royalists and English. 

Montpellier, Bourdeaux, Nantes:  all France, that is not under the swoop of

Austria and Cimmeria, seems rushing into madness, and suicidal ruin.  The

Mountain labours; like a volcano in a burning volcanic Land.  Convention

Committees, of Surety, of Salvation, are busy night and day:  Convention

Commissioners whirl on all highways; bearing olive-branch and sword, or now

perhaps sword only.  Chaumette and Municipals come daily to the Tuileries

demanding a Constitution:  it is some weeks now since he resolved, in

Townhall, that a Deputation 'should go every day' and demand a

Constitution, till one were got; (Deux Amis, x. 345.) whereby suicidal

France might rally and pacify itself; a thing inexpressibly desirable.



This then is the fruit your Anti-anarchic Girondins have got from that

Levying of War in Calvados?  This fruit, we may say; and no other

whatsoever.  For indeed, before either Charlotte's or Chalier's head had

fallen, the Calvados War itself had, as it were, vanished, dreamlike, in a

shriek!  With 'seventy-two Departments' on one's side, one might have hoped

better things.  But it turns out that Respectabilities, though they will

vote, will not fight.  Possession is always nine points in Law; but in

Lawsuits of this kind, one may say, it is ninety-and-nine points.  Men do

what they were wont to do; and have immense irresolution and inertia:  they

obey him who has the symbols that claim obedience.  Consider what, in

modern society, this one fact means:  the Metropolis is with our enemies! 

Metropolis, Mother-city; rightly so named:  all the rest are but as her

children, her nurselings.  Why, there is not a leathern Diligence, with its

post-bags and luggage-boots, that lumbers out from her, but is as a huge

life-pulse; she is the heart of all.  Cut short that one leathern

Diligence, how much is cut short!--General Wimpfen, looking practically

into the matter, can see nothing for it but that one should fall back on

Royalism; get into communication with Pitt!  Dark innuendoes he flings out,

to that effect:  whereat we Girondins start, horrorstruck.  He produces as

his Second in command a certain 'Ci-devant,' one Comte Puisaye; entirely

unknown to Louvet; greatly suspected by him.



Few wars, accordingly, were ever levied of a more insufficient character

than this of Calvados.  He that is curious in such things may read the

details of it in the Memoirs of that same Ci-devant Puisaye, the much-

enduring man and Royalist:  How our Girondin National Forces, marching off

with plenty of wind-music, were drawn out about the old Chateau of

Brecourt, in the wood-country near Vernon, to meet the Mountain National

forces advancing from Paris.  How on the fifteenth afternoon of July, they

did meet,--and, as it were, shrieked mutually, and took mutually to flight

without loss.  How Puisaye thereafter, for the Mountain Nationals fled

first, and we thought ourselves the victors,--was roused from his warm bed

in the Castle of Brecourt; and had to gallop without boots; our Nationals,

in the night-watches, having fallen unexpectedly into sauve qui peut:--and

in brief the Calvados War had burnt priming; and the only question now was,

Whitherward to vanish, in what hole to hide oneself!  (Memoires de Puisaye

(London, 1803), ii. 142-67.)



The National Volunteers rush homewards, faster than they came.  The

Seventy-two Respectable Departments, says Meillan, 'all turned round, and

forsook us, in the space of four-and-twenty hours.'  Unhappy those who, as

at Lyons for instance, have gone too far for turning!  'One morning,' we

find placarded on our Intendance Mansion, the Decree of Convention which

casts us Hors la loi, into Outlawry:  placarded by our Caen Magistrates;--

clear hint that we also are to vanish.  Vanish, indeed:  but whitherward? 

Gorsas has friends in Rennes; he will hide there,--unhappily will not lie

hid.  Guadet, Lanjuinais are on cross roads; making for Bourdeaux.  To

Bourdeaux! cries the general voice, of Valour alike and of Despair.  Some

flag of Respectability still floats there, or is thought to float.



Thitherward therefore; each as he can!  Eleven of these ill-fated Deputies,

among whom we may count, as twelfth, Friend Riouffe the Man of Letters, do

an original thing.  Take the uniform of National Volunteers, and retreat

southward with the Breton Battalion, as private soldiers of that corps. 

These brave Bretons had stood truer by us than any other.  Nevertheless, at

the end of a day or two, they also do now get dubious, self-divided; we

must part from them; and, with some half-dozen as convoy or guide, retreat

by ourselves,--a solitary marching detachment, through waste regions of the

West.  (Louvet, pp. 101-37; Meillan, pp. 81, 241-70.)







Chapter 3.4.III.



Retreat of the Eleven.



It is one of the notablest Retreats, this of the Eleven, that History

presents:  The handful of forlorn Legislators retreating there,

continually, with shouldered firelock and well-filled cartridge-box, in the

yellow autumn; long hundreds of miles between them and Bourdeaux; the

country all getting hostile, suspicious of the truth; simmering and buzzing

on all sides, more and more.  Louvet has preserved the Itinerary of it; a

piece worth all the rest he ever wrote.



O virtuous Petion, with thy early-white head, O brave young Barbaroux, has

it come to this?  Weary ways, worn shoes, light purse;--encompassed with

perils as with a sea!  Revolutionary Committees are in every Township; of

Jacobin temper; our friends all cowed, our cause the losing one.  In the

Borough of Moncontour, by ill chance, it is market-day:  to the gaping

public such transit of a solitary Marching Detachment is suspicious; we

have need of energy, of promptitude and luck, to be allowed to march

through.  Hasten, ye weary pilgrims!  The country is getting up; noise of

you is bruited day after day, a solitary Twelve retreating in this

mysterious manner:  with every new day, a wider wave of inquisitive

pursuing tumult is stirred up till the whole West will be in motion. 

'Cussy is tormented with gout, Buzot is too fat for marching.'  Riouffe,

blistered, bleeding, marching only on tiptoe; Barbaroux limps with sprained

ancle, yet ever cheery, full of hope and valour.  Light Louvet glances

hare-eyed, not hare-hearted:  only virtuous Petion's serenity 'was but once

seen ruffled.'  (Meillan, pp. 119-137.)  They lie in straw-lofts, in woody

brakes; rudest paillasse on the floor of a secret friend is luxury.  They

are seized in the dead of night by Jacobin mayors and tap of drum; get off

by firm countenance, rattle of muskets, and ready wit.



Of Bourdeaux, through fiery La Vendee and the long geographical spaces that

remain, it were madness to think:  well, if you can get to Quimper on the

sea-coast, and take shipping there.  Faster, ever faster!  Before the end

of the march, so hot has the country grown, it is found advisable to march

all night.  They do it; under the still night-canopy they plod along;--and

yet behold, Rumour has outplodded them.  In the paltry Village of Carhaix

(be its thatched huts, and bottomless peat-bogs, long notable to the

Traveller), one is astonished to find light still glimmering:  citizens are

awake, with rush-lights burning, in that nook of the terrestrial Planet; as

we traverse swiftly the one poor street, a voice is heard saying, "There

they are, Les voila qui passent!"  (Louvet, pp. 138-164.)  Swifter, ye

doomed lame Twelve:  speed ere they can arm; gain the Woods of Quimper

before day, and lie squatted there!



The doomed Twelve do it; though with difficulty, with loss of road, with

peril, and the mistakes of a night.  In Quimper are Girondin friends, who

perhaps will harbour the homeless, till a Bourdeaux ship weigh.  Wayworn,

heartworn, in agony of suspense, till Quimper friendship get warning, they

lie there, squatted under the thick wet boscage; suspicious of the face of

man.  Some pity to the brave; to the unhappy!  Unhappiest of all

Legislators, O when ye packed your luggage, some score, or two-score months

ago; and mounted this or the other leathern vehicle, to be Conscript

Fathers of a regenerated France, and reap deathless laurels,--did ye think

your journey was to lead hither?  The Quimper Samaritans find them

squatted; lift them up to help and comfort; will hide them in sure places.

Thence let them dissipate gradually; or there they can lie quiet, and write

Memoirs, till a Bourdeaux ship sail.



And thus, in Calvados all is dissipated; Romme is out of prison, meditating

his Calendar; ringleaders are locked in his room.  At Caen the Corday

family mourns in silence; Buzot's House is a heap of dust and demolition;

and amid the rubbish sticks a Gallows, with this inscription, Here dwelt

the Traitor Buzot who conspired against the Republic.  Buzot and the other

vanished Deputies are hors la loi, as we saw; their lives free to take

where they can be found.  The worse fares it with the poor Arrested visible

Deputies at Paris.  'Arrestment at home' threatens to become 'Confinement

in the  Luxembourg;' to end:  where?  For example, what pale-visaged thin

man is this, journeying towards Switzerland as a Merchant of Neuchatel,

whom they arrest in the town of Moulins?  To Revolutionary Committee he is

suspect.  To Revolutionary Committee, on probing the matter, he is

evidently:  Deputy Brissot!  Back to thy Arrestment, poor Brissot; or

indeed to strait confinement,--whither others are fared to follow.  Rabaut

has built himself a false-partition, in a friend's house; lives, in

invisible darkness, between two walls.  It will end, this same Arrestment

business, in Prison, and the Revolutionary Tribunal.



Nor must we forget Duperret, and the seal put on his papers by reason of

Charlotte.  One Paper is there, fit to breed woe enough:  A secret solemn

Protest against that suprema dies of the Second of June!  This Secret

Protest our poor Duperret had drawn up, the same week, in all plainness of

speech; waiting the time for publishing it:  to which Secret Protest his

signature, and that of other honourable Deputies not a few, stands legibly

appended.  And now, if the seals were once broken, the Mountain still

victorious?  Such Protestors, your Merciers, Bailleuls, Seventy-three by

the tale, what yet remains of Respectable Girondism in the Convention, may

tremble to think!--These are the fruits of levying civil war.



Also we find, that, in these last days of July, the famed Siege of Mentz is

finished; the Garrison to march out with honours of war; not to serve

against the Coalition for a year!  Lovers of the Picturesque, and Goethe

standing on the Chaussee of Mentz, saw, with due interest, the Procession

issuing forth, in all solemnity:



'Escorted by Prussian horse came first the French Garrison.  Nothing could

look stranger than this latter:  a column of Marseillese, slight, swarthy,

party-coloured, in patched clothes, came tripping on;--as if King Edwin had

opened the Dwarf Hill, and sent out his nimble Host of Dwarfs.  Next

followed regular troops; serious, sullen; not as if downcast or ashamed. 

But the remarkablest appearance, which struck every one, was that of the

Chasers (Chasseurs) coming out mounted:  they had advanced quite silent to

where we stood, when their Band struck up the Marseillaise.  This

Revolutionary Te-Deum has in itself something mournful and bodeful, however

briskly played; but at present they gave it in altogether slow time,

proportionate to the creeping step they rode at.  It was piercing and

fearful, and a most serious-looking thing, as these cavaliers, long, lean

men, of a certain age, with mien suitable to the music, came pacing on: 

singly you might have likened them to Don Quixote; in mass, they were

highly dignified.



'But now a single troop became notable:  that of the Commissioners or

Representans.  Merlin of Thionville, in hussar uniform, distinguishing

himself by wild beard and look, had another person in similar costume on

his left; the crowd shouted out, with rage, at sight of this latter, the

name of a Jacobin Townsman and Clubbist; and shook itself to seize him. 

Merlin drew bridle; referred to his dignity as French Representative, to

the vengeance that should follow any injury done; he would advise every one

to compose himself, for this was not the last time they would see him here. 

(Belagerung von Maintz (Goethe's Werke, xxx. 315.)  Thus rode Merlin;

threatening in defeat.  But what now shall stem that tide of Prussians

setting in through the open North-East?'  Lucky, if fortified Lines of

Weissembourg, and impassibilities of Vosges Mountains, confine it to French

Alsace, keep it from submerging the very heart of the country!



Furthermore, precisely in the same days, Valenciennes Siege is finished, in

the North-West:--fallen, under the red hail of York!  Conde fell some

fortnight since.  Cimmerian Coalition presses on.  What seems very notable

too, on all these captured French Towns there flies not the Royalist fleur-

de-lys, in the name of a new Louis the Pretender; but the Austrian flag

flies; as if Austria meant to keep them for herself!  Perhaps General

Custines, still in Paris, can give some explanation of the fall of these

strong-places?  Mother Society, from tribune and gallery, growls loud that

he ought to do it;--remarks, however, in a splenetic manner that 'the

Monsieurs of the Palais Royal' are calling, Long-life to this General.



The Mother Society, purged now, by successive 'scrutinies or epurations,'

from all taint of Girondism, has become a great Authority:  what we can

call shield-bearer, or bottle-holder, nay call it fugleman, to the purged

National Convention itself.  The Jacobins Debates are reported in the

Moniteur, like Parliamentary ones.







Chapter 3.4.IV.



O Nature.



But looking more specially into Paris City, what is this that History, on

the 10th of August, Year One of Liberty, 'by old-style, year 1793,'

discerns there?  Praised be the Heavens, a new Feast of Pikes!



For Chaumette's 'Deputation every day' has worked out its result:  a

Constitution.  It was one of the rapidest Constitutions ever put together;

made, some say in eight days, by Herault Sechelles and others:  probably a

workmanlike, roadworthy Constitution enough;--on which point, however, we

are, for some reasons, little called to form a judgment.  Workmanlike or

not, the Forty-four Thousand Communes of France, by overwhelming

majorities, did hasten to accept it; glad of any Constitution whatsoever. 

Nay Departmental Deputies have come, the venerablest Republicans of each

Department, with solemn message of Acceptance; and now what remains but

that our new Final Constitution be proclaimed, and sworn to, in Feast of

Pikes?  The Departmental Deputies, we say, are come some time ago;--

Chaumette very anxious about them, lest Girondin Monsieurs, Agio-jobbers,

or were it even Filles de joie of a Girondin temper, corrupt their morals. 

(Deux Amis, xi. 73.)  Tenth of August, immortal Anniversary, greater almost

than Bastille July, is the Day.



Painter David has not been idle.  Thanks to David and the French genius,

there steps forth into the sunlight, this day, a Scenic Phantasmagory

unexampled:--whereof History, so occupied with Real-Phantasmagories, will

say but little.



For one thing, History can notice with satisfaction, on the ruins of the

Bastille, a Statue of Nature; gigantic, spouting water from her two

mammelles.  Not a Dream this; but a Fact, palpable visible.  There she

spouts, great Nature; dim, before daybreak.  But as the coming Sun ruddies

the East, come countless Multitudes, regulated and unregulated; come

Departmental Deputies, come Mother Society and Daughters; comes National

Convention, led on by handsome Herault; soft wind-music breathing note of

expectation.  Lo, as great Sol scatters his first fire-handful, tipping the

hills and chimney-heads with gold, Herault is at great Nature's feet (she

is Plaster of Paris merely); Herault lifts, in an iron saucer, water

spouted from the sacred breasts; drinks of it, with an eloquent Pagan

Prayer, beginning, "O Nature!" and all the Departmental Deputies drink,

each with what best suitable ejaculation or prophetic-utterance is in him;-

-amid breathings, which become blasts, of wind-music; and the roar of

artillery and human throats:  finishing well the first act of this

solemnity.



Next are processionings along the Boulevards:  Deputies or Officials bound

together by long indivisible tricolor riband; general 'members of the

Sovereign' walking pellmell, with pikes, with hammers, with the tools and

emblems of their crafts; among which we notice a Plough, and ancient Baucis

and Philemon seated on it, drawn by their children.  Many-voiced harmony

and dissonance filling the air.  Through Triumphal Arches enough:  at the

basis of the first of which, we descry--whom thinkest thou?--the Heroines

of the Insurrection of Women.  Strong Dames of the Market, they sit there

(Theroigne too ill to attend, one fears), with oak-branches, tricolor

bedizenment; firm-seated on their Cannons.  To whom handsome Herault,

making pause of admiration, addresses soothing eloquence; whereupon they

rise and fall into the march.



And now mark, in the Place de la Revolution, what other August Statue may

this be; veiled in canvas,--which swiftly we shear off by pulley and cord?

The Statue of Liberty!  She too is of plaster, hoping to become of metal;

stands where a Tyrant Louis Quinze once stood.  'Three thousand birds' are

let loose, into the whole world, with labels round their neck, We are free;

imitate us.  Holocaust of Royalist and ci-devant trumpery, such as one

could still gather, is burnt; pontifical eloquence must be uttered, by

handsome Herault, and Pagan orisons offered up.



And then forward across the River; where is new enormous Statuary; enormous

plaster Mountain; Hercules-Peuple, with uplifted all-conquering club;

'many-headed Dragon of Girondin Federalism rising from fetid marsh;'--

needing new eloquence from Herault.  To say nothing of Champ-de-Mars, and

Fatherland's Altar there; with urn of slain Defenders, Carpenter's-level of

the Law; and such exploding, gesticulating and perorating, that Herault's

lips must be growing white, and his tongue cleaving to the roof of his

mouth.  (Choix des Rapports, xii. 432-42.)



Towards six-o'clock let the wearied President, let Paris Patriotism

generally sit down to what repast, and social repasts, can be had; and with

flowing tankard or light-mantling glass, usher in this New and Newest Era.

In fact, is not Romme's New Calendar getting ready?  On all housetops

flicker little tricolor Flags, their flagstaff a Pike and Liberty-Cap.  On

all house-walls, for no Patriot, not suspect, will be behind another, there

stand printed these words:  Republic one and indivisible, Liberty,

Equality, Fraternity, or Death.



As to the New Calendar, we may say here rather than elsewhere that

speculative men have long been struck with the inequalities and

incongruities of the Old Calendar; that a New one has long been as good as

determined on.  Marechal the Atheist, almost ten years ago, proposed a New

Calendar, free at least from superstition:  this the Paris Municipality

would now adopt, in defect of a better; at all events, let us have either

this of Marechal's or a better,--the New Era being come.  Petitions, more

than once, have been sent to that effect; and indeed, for a year past, all

Public Bodies, Journalists, and Patriots in general, have dated First Year

of the Republic.  It is a subject not without difficulties.  But the

Convention has taken it up; and Romme, as we say, has been meditating it;

not Marechal's New Calendar, but a better New one of Romme's and our own.

Romme, aided by a Monge, a Lagrange and others, furnishes mathematics;

Fabre d'Eglantine furnishes poetic nomenclature:  and so, on the 5th of

October 1793, after trouble enough, they bring forth this New Republican

Calendar of theirs, in a complete state; and by Law, get it put in action.



Four equal Seasons, Twelve equal Months of thirty days each:  this makes

three hundred and sixty days; and five odd days remain to be disposed of. 

The five odd days we will make Festivals, and name the five Sansculottides,

or Days without Breeches.  Festival of Genius; Festival of Labour; of

Actions; of Rewards; of Opinion:  these are the five Sansculottides. 

Whereby the great Circle, or Year, is made complete:  solely every fourth

year, whilom called Leap-year, we introduce a sixth Sansculottide; and name

it Festival of the Revolution.  Now as to the day of commencement, which

offers difficulties, is it not one of the luckiest coincidences that the

Republic herself commenced on the 21st of September; close on the Vernal

Equinox?  Vernal Equinox, at midnight for the meridian of Paris, in the

year whilom Christian 1792, from that moment shall the New Era reckon

itself to begin.  Vendemiaire, Brumaire, Frimaire; or as one might say, in

mixed English, Vintagearious, Fogarious, Frostarious:  these are our three

Autumn months.  Nivose, Pluviose, Ventose, or say Snowous, Rainous,

Windous, make our Winter season.  Germinal, Floreal, Prairial, or Buddal,

Floweral, Meadowal, are our Spring season.  Messidor, Thermidor, Fructidor,

that is to say (dor being Greek for gift) Reapidor, Heatidor, Fruitidor,

are Republican Summer.  These Twelve, in a singular manner, divide the

Republican Year.  Then as to minuter subdivisions, let us venture at once

on a bold stroke:  adopt your decimal subdivision; and instead of world-old

Week, or Se'ennight, make it a Tennight or Decade;--not without results. 

There are three Decades, then, in each of the months; which is very

regular; and the Decadi, or Tenth-day, shall always be 'the Day of Rest.' 

And the Christian Sabbath, in that case?  Shall shift for itself!



This, in brief, in this New Calendar of Romme and the Convention;

calculated for the meridian of Paris, and Gospel of Jean-Jacques:  not one

of the least afflicting occurrences for the actual British reader of French

History;--confusing the soul with Messidors, Meadowals; till at last, in

self-defence, one is forced to construct some ground-scheme, or rule of

Commutation from New-style to Old-style, and have it lying by him.  Such

ground-scheme, almost worn out in our service, but still legible and

printable, we shall now, in a Note, present to the reader.  For the Romme

Calendar, in so many Newspapers, Memoirs, Public Acts, has stamped itself

deep into that section of Time:  a New Era that lasts some Twelve years and

odd is not to be despised.  Let the reader, therefore, with such ground-

scheme, help himself, where needful, out of New-style into Old-style,

called also 'slave-style, stile-esclave;'--whereof we, in these pages,

shall as much as possible use the latter only.



(September 22nd of 1792 is Vendemiaire 1st of Year One, and the new months

are all of 30 days each; therefore:



To the number of the          We have the number of the

day in                 Add    day in                      Days



    Vendemiaire         21        September                30

    Brumaire            21        October                  31

    Frimaire            20        November                 30



    Nivose              20        December                 31

    Pluviose            19        January                  31

    Ventose             18        February                 28



    Germinal            20        March                    31

    Floreal             19        April                    30

    Prairial            19        May                      31



    Messidor            18       June                     30

    Thermidor           18       July                     31

    Fructidor           17       August                   31



There are 5 Sansculottides, and in leap-year a sixth, to be added at the

end of Fructidor.



The New Calendar ceased on the 1st of January 1806.  See Choix des

Rapports, xiii. 83-99; xix. 199.)



Thus with new Feast of Pikes, and New Era or New Calendar, did France

accept her New Constitution:  the most Democratic Constitution ever

committed to paper.  How it will work in practice?  Patriot Deputations

from time to time solicit fruition of it; that it be set a-going.  Always,

however, this seems questionable; for the moment, unsuitable.  Till, in

some weeks, Salut Public, through the organ of Saint-Just, makes report,

that, in the present alarming circumstances, the state of France is

Revolutionary; that her 'Government must be Revolutionary till the Peace!' 

Solely as Paper, then, and as a Hope, must this poor New Constitution

exist;--in which shape we may conceive it lying; even now, with an infinity

of other things, in that Limbo near the Moon.  Further than paper it never

got, nor ever will get.







Chapter 3.4.V.



Sword of Sharpness.



In fact it is something quite other than paper theorems, it is iron and

audacity that France now needs.



Is not La Vendee still blazing;--alas too literally; rogue Rossignol

burning the very corn-mills?  General Santerre could do nothing there;

General Rossignol, in blind fury, often in liquor, can do less than

nothing.  Rebellion spreads, grows ever madder.  Happily those lean

Quixote-figures, whom we saw retreating out of Mentz, 'bound not to serve

against the Coalition for a year,' have got to Paris.  National Convention

packs them into post-vehicles and conveyances; sends them swiftly, by post,

into La Vendee!  There valiantly struggling, in obscure battle and

skirmish, under rogue Rossignol, let them, unlaurelled, save the Republic,

and 'be cut down gradually to the last man.'  (Deux Amis, xi. 147; xiii.

160-92, &c.)



Does not the Coalition, like a fire-tide, pour in; Prussia through the

opened North-East; Austria, England through the North-West?  General

Houchard prospers no better there than General Custine did:  let him look

to it!  Through the Eastern and the Western Pyrenees Spain has deployed

itself; spreads, rustling with Bourbon banners, over the face of the South.

Ashes and embers of confused Girondin civil war covered that region

already.  Marseilles is damped down, not quenched; to be quenched in blood.

Toulon, terrorstruck, too far gone for turning, has flung itself, ye

righteous Powers,--into the hands of the English!  On Toulon Arsenal there

flies a Flag,--nay not even the Fleur-de-lys of a Louis Pretender; there

flies that accursed St. George's Cross of the English and Admiral Hood! 

What remnants of sea-craft, arsenals, roperies, war-navy France had, has

given itself to these enemies of human nature, 'ennemis du genre humain.' 

Beleaguer it, bombard it, ye Commissioners Barras, Freron, Robespierre

Junior; thou General Cartaux, General Dugommier; above all, thou remarkable

Artillery-Major, Napoleon Buonaparte!  Hood is fortifying himself,

victualling himself; means, apparently, to make a new Gibraltar of it.



But lo, in the Autumn night, late night, among the last of August, what

sudden red sunblaze is this that has risen over Lyons City; with a noise to

deafen the world?  It is the Powder-tower of Lyons, nay the Arsenal with

four Powder-towers, which has caught fire in the Bombardment; and sprung

into the air, carrying 'a hundred and seventeen houses' after it.  With a

light, one fancies, as of the noon sun; with a roar second only to the Last

Trumpet!  All living sleepers far and wide it has awakened.  What a sight

was that, which the eye of History saw, in the sudden nocturnal sunblaze! 

The roofs of hapless Lyons, and all its domes and steeples made momentarily

clear; Rhone and Saone streams flashing suddenly visible; and height and

hollow, hamlet and smooth stubblefield, and all the region round;--heights,

alas, all scarped and counterscarped, into trenches, curtains, redouts;

blue Artillery-men, little Powder-devilkins, plying their hell-trade there,

through the not ambrosial night!  Let the darkness cover it again; for it

pains the eye.  Of a truth, Chalier's death is costing this City dear. 

Convention Commissioners, Lyons Congresses have come and gone; and action

there was and reaction; bad ever growing worse; till it has come to this: 

Commissioner Dubois-Crance, 'with seventy thousand men, and all the

Artillery of several Provinces,' bombarding Lyons day and night.



Worse things still are in store.  Famine is in Lyons, and ruin, and fire. 

Desperate are the sallies of the besieged; brave Precy, their National

Colonel and Commandant, doing what is in man:  desperate but ineffectual. 

Provisions cut off; nothing entering our city but shot and shells!  The

Arsenal has roared aloft; the very Hospital will be battered down, and the

sick buried alive.  A Black Flag hung on this latter noble Edifice,

appealing to the pity of the beseigers; for though maddened, were they not

still our brethren?  In their blind wrath, they took it for a flag of

defiance, and aimed thitherward the more.  Bad is growing ever worse here: 

and how will the worse stop, till it have grown worst of all?  Commissioner

Dubois will listen to no pleading, to no speech, save this only, 'We

surrender at discretion.'  Lyons contains in it subdued Jacobins; dominant

Girondins; secret Royalists.  And now, mere deaf madness and cannon-shot

enveloping them, will not the desperate Municipality fly, at last, into the

arms of Royalism itself?  Majesty of Sardinia was to bring help, but it

failed.  Emigrant Autichamp, in name of the Two Pretender Royal Highnesses,

is coming through Switzerland with help; coming, not yet come:  Precy

hoists the Fleur-de-lys!



At sight of which, all true Girondins sorrowfully fling down their arms:--

Let our Tricolor brethren storm us, then, and slay us in their wrath:  with

you we conquer not.  The famishing women and children are sent forth:  deaf

Dubois sends them back;--rains in mere fire and madness.  Our 'redouts of

cotton-bags' are taken, retaken; Precy under his Fleur-de-lys is valiant as

Despair.  What will become of Lyons?  It is a siege of seventy days.  (Deux

Amis, xi. 80-143.)



Or see, in these same weeks, far in the Western waters:  breasting through

the Bay of Biscay, a greasy dingy little Merchantship, with Scotch skipper;

under hatches whereof sit, disconsolate,--the last forlorn nucleus of

Girondism, the Deputies from Quimper!  Several have dissipated themselves,

whithersoever they could.  Poor Riouffe fell into the talons of

Revolutionary Committee, and Paris Prison.  The rest sit here under

hatches; reverend Petion with his grey hair, angry Buzot, suspicious

Louvet, brave young Barbaroux, and others.  They have escaped from Quimper,

in this sad craft; are now tacking and struggling; in danger from the

waves, in danger from the English, in still worse danger from the French;--

banished by Heaven and Earth to the greasy belly of this Scotch skipper's

Merchant-vessel, unfruitful Atlantic raving round.  They are for Bourdeaux,

if peradventure hope yet linger there.  Enter not Bourdeaux, O Friends! 

Bloody Convention Representatives, Tallien and such like, with their

Edicts, with their Guillotine, have arrived there; Respectability is driven

under ground; Jacobinism lords it on high.  From that Reole landingplace,

or Beak of Ambes, as it were, Pale Death, waving his Revolutionary Sword of

sharpness, waves you elsewhither!



On one side or the other of that Bec d'Ambes, the Scotch Skipper with

difficulty moors, a dexterous greasy man; with difficulty lands his

Girondins;--who, after reconnoitring, must rapidly burrow in the Earth; and

so, in subterranean ways, in friends' back-closets, in cellars, barn-lofts,

in Caves of Saint-Emilion and Libourne, stave off cruel Death.  (Louvet, p.

180-199.)  Unhappiest of all Senators!







Chapter 3.4.VI.



Risen against Tyrants.



Against all which incalculable impediments, horrors and disasters, what can

a Jacobin Convention oppose?  The uncalculating Spirit of Jacobinism, and

Sansculottic sans-formulistic Frenzy!  Our Enemies press in on us, says

Danton, but they shall not conquer us, "we will burn France to ashes

rather, nous brulerons la France."



Committees, of Surete or Salut, have raised themselves 'a la hauteur, to

the height of circumstances.'  Let all mortals raise themselves a la

hauteur.  Let the Forty-four thousand Sections and their Revolutionary

Committees stir every fibre of the Republic; and every Frenchman feel that

he is to do or die.  They are the life-circulation of Jacobinism, these

Sections and Committees:  Danton, through the organ of Barrere and Salut

Public, gets decreed, That there be in Paris, by law, two meetings of

Section weekly; also, that the Poorer Citizen be paid for attending, and

have his day's-wages of Forty Sous.  (Moniteur, Seance du 5 Septembre,

1793.)  This is the celebrated 'Law of the Forty Sous;' fiercely stimulant

to Sansculottism, to the life-circulation of Jacobinism.



On the twenty-third of August, Committee of Public Salvation, as usual

through Barrere, had promulgated, in words not unworthy of remembering,

their Report, which is soon made into a Law, of Levy in Mass.  'All France,

and whatsoever it contains of men or resources, is put under requisition,'

says Barrere; really in Tyrtaean words, the best we know of his.  'The

Republic is one vast besieged city.'  Two hundred and fifty Forges shall,

in these days, be set up in the Luxembourg Garden, and round the outer wall

of the Tuileries; to make gun-barrels; in sight of Earth and Heaven!  From

all hamlets, towards their Departmental Town; from all their Departmental

Towns, towards the appointed Camp and seat of war, the Sons of Freedom

shall march; their banner is to bear:  'Le Peuple Francais debout contres

les Tyrans, The French People risen against Tyrants.'  'The young men shall

go to the battle; it is their task to conquer:  the married men shall forge

arms, transport baggage and artillery; provide subsistence:  the women

shall work at soldiers' clothes, make tents; serve in the hospitals.  The

children shall scrape old-linen into surgeon's-lint:  the aged men shall

have themselves carried into public places; and there, by their words,

excite the courage of the young; preach hatred to Kings and unity to the

Republic.'  (Debats, Seance du 23 Aout 1793.)  Tyrtaean words, which tingle

through all French hearts.



In this humour, then, since no other serves, will France rush against its

enemies.  Headlong, reckoning no cost or consequence; heeding no law or

rule but that supreme law, Salvation of the People!  The weapons are all

the iron that is in France; the strength is that of all the men, women and

children that are in France.  There, in their two hundred and fifty shed-

smithies, in Garden of Luxembourg or Tuileries, let them forge gun-barrels,

in sight of Heaven and Earth.



Nor with heroic daring against the Foreign foe, can black vengeance against

the Domestic be wanting.  Life-circulation of the Revolutionary Committees

being quickened by that Law of the Forty Sous, Deputy Merlin, not the

Thionviller, whom we saw ride out of Mentz, but Merlin of Douai, named

subsequently Merlin Suspect,--comes, about a week after, with his world-

famous Law of the Suspect:  ordering all Sections, by their Committees,

instantly to arrest all Persons Suspect; and explaining withal who the

Arrestable and Suspect specially are.  "Are Suspect," says he, "all who by

their actions, by their connexions, speakings, writings have"--in short

become Suspect.  (Moniteur, Seance du 17 Septembre 1793.)  Nay Chaumette,

illuminating the matter still further, in his Municipal Placards and

Proclamations, will bring it about that you may almost recognise a Suspect

on the streets, and clutch him there,--off to Committee, and Prison.  Watch

well your words, watch well your looks:  if Suspect of nothing else, you

may grow, as came to be a saying, 'Suspect of being Suspect!'  For are we

not in a State of Revolution?



No frightfuller Law ever ruled in a Nation of men.  All Prisons and Houses

of Arrest in French land are getting crowded to the ridge-tile:  Forty-four

thousand Committees, like as many companies of reapers or gleaners,

gleaning France, are gathering their harvest, and storing it in these

Houses.  Harvest of Aristocrat tares!  Nay, lest the Forty-four thousand,

each on its own harvest-field, prove insufficient, we are to have an

ambulant 'Revolutionary Army:'  six thousand strong, under right captains,

this shall perambulate the country at large, and strike in wherever it

finds such harvest-work slack.  So have Municipality and Mother Society

petitioned; so has Convention decreed.  (Ibid. Seances du 5, 9, 11

Septembre.)  Let Aristocrats, Federalists, Monsieurs vanish, and all men

tremble:  'The Soil of Liberty shall be purged,'--with a vengeance!



Neither hitherto has the Revolutionary Tribunal been keeping holyday. 

Blanchelande, for losing Saint-Domingo; 'Conspirators of Orleans,' for

'assassinating,' for assaulting the sacred Deputy Leonard-Bourdon:  these

with many Nameless, to whom life was sweet, have died.  Daily the great

Guillotine has its due.  Like a black Spectre, daily at eventide, glides

the Death-tumbril through the variegated throng of things.  The variegated

street shudders at it, for the moment; next moment forgets it:  The

Aristocrats!  They were guilty against the Republic; their death, were it

only that their goods are confiscated, will be useful to the Republic; Vive

la Republique!



In the last days of August, fell a notabler head:  General Custine's. 

Custine was accused of harshness, of unskilfulness, perfidiousness; accused

of many things:  found guilty, we may say, of one thing, unsuccessfulness. 

Hearing his unexpected Sentence, 'Custine fell down before the Crucifix,'

silent for the space of two hours:  he fared, with moist eyes and a book of

prayer, towards the Place de la Revolution; glanced upwards at the clear

suspended axe; then mounted swiftly aloft, (Deux Amis, xi. 148-188.)

swiftly was struck away from the lists of the Living.  He had fought in

America; he was a proud, brave man; and his fortune led him hither.



On the 2nd of this same month, at three in the morning, a vehicle rolled

off, with closed blinds, from the Temple to the Conciergerie.  Within it

were two Municipals; and Marie-Antoinette, once Queen of France!  There in

that Conciergerie, in ignominious dreary cell, she, cut off from children,

kindred, friend and hope, sits long weeks; expecting when the end will be.

(See Memoires particuliers de la Captivite a la Tour du Temple (by the

Duchesse d'Angouleme, Paris, 21 Janvier 1817).)



The Guillotine, we find, gets always a quicker motion, as other things are

quickening.  The Guillotine, by its speed of going, will give index of the

general velocity of the Republic.  The clanking of its huge axe, rising and

falling there, in horrid systole-diastole, is portion of the whole enormous

Life-movement and pulsation of the Sansculottic System!--'Orleans

Conspirators' and Assaulters had to die, in spite of much weeping and

entreating; so sacred is the person of a Deputy.  Yet the sacred can become

desecrated:  your very Deputy is not greater than the Guillotine.  Poor

Deputy Journalist Gorsas:  we saw him hide at Rennes, when the Calvados War

burnt priming.  He stole afterwards, in August, to Paris; lurked several

weeks about the Palais ci-devant Royal; was seen there, one day; was

clutched, identified, and without ceremony, being already 'out of the Law,'

was sent to the Place de la Revolution.  He died, recommending his wife and

children to the pity of the Republic.  It is the ninth day of October 1793. 

Gorsas is the first Deputy that dies on the scaffold; he will not be the

last.



Ex-Mayor Bailly is in prison; Ex-Procureur Manuel.  Brissot and our poor

Arrested Girondins have become Incarcerated Indicted Girondins; universal

Jacobinism clamouring for their punishment.  Duperret's Seals are broken!

Those Seventy-three Secret Protesters, suddenly one day, are reported upon,

are decreed accused; the Convention-doors being 'previously shut,' that

none implicated might escape.  They were marched, in a very rough manner,

to Prison that evening.  Happy those of them who chanced to be absent! 

Condorcet has vanished into darkness; perhaps, like Rabaut, sits between

two walls, in the house of a friend.







Chapter 3.4.VII.



Marie-Antoinette.



On Monday the Fourteenth of October, 1793, a Cause is pending in the Palais

de Justice, in the new Revolutionary Court, such as these old stone-walls

never witnessed:  the Trial of Marie-Antoinette.  The once brightest of

Queens, now tarnished, defaced, forsaken, stands here at Fouquier

Tinville's Judgment-bar; answering for her life!  The Indictment was

delivered her last night.  (Proces de la Reine (Deux Amis, xi. 251-381.) 

To such changes of human fortune what words are adequate?  Silence alone is

adequate.



There are few Printed things one meets with, of such tragic almost ghastly

significance as those bald Pages of the Bulletin du Tribunal

Revolutionnaire, which bear title, Trial of the Widow Capet.  Dim, dim, as

if in disastrous eclipse; like the pale kingdoms of Dis!  Plutonic Judges,

Plutonic Tinville; encircled, nine times, with Styx and Lethe, with Fire-

Phlegethon and Cocytus named of Lamentation!  The very witnesses summoned

are like Ghosts:  exculpatory, inculpatory, they themselves are all

hovering over death and doom; they are known, in our imagination, as the

prey of the Guillotine.  Tall ci-devant Count d'Estaing, anxious to shew

himself Patriot, cannot escape; nor Bailly, who, when asked If he knows the

Accused, answers with a reverent inclination towards her, "Ah, yes, I know

Madame."  Ex-Patriots are here, sharply dealt with, as Procureur Manuel;

Ex-Ministers, shorn of their splendour.  We have cold Aristocratic

impassivity, faithful to itself even in Tartarus; rabid stupidity, of

Patriot Corporals, Patriot Washerwomen, who have much to say of Plots,

Treasons, August Tenth, old Insurrection of Women.  For all now has become

a crime, in her who has lost.



Marie-Antoinette, in this her utter abandonment and hour of extreme need,

is not wanting to herself, the imperial woman.  Her look, they say, as that

hideous Indictment was reading, continued calm; 'she was sometimes observed

moving her fingers, as when one plays on the Piano.'  You discern, not

without interest, across that dim Revolutionary Bulletin itself, how she

bears herself queenlike.  Her answers are prompt, clear, often of Laconic

brevity; resolution, which has grown contemptuous without ceasing to be

dignified, veils itself in calm words.  "You persist then in denial?"--"My

plan is not denial:  it is the truth I have said, and I persist in that." 

Scandalous Hebert has borne his testimony as to many things:  as to one

thing, concerning Marie-Antoinette and her little Son,--wherewith Human

Speech had better not further be soiled.  She has answered Hebert; a

Juryman begs to observe that she has not answered as to this.  "I have not

answered," she exclaims with noble emotion, "because Nature refuses to

answer such a charge brought against a Mother.  I appeal to all the Mothers

that are here."  Robespierre, when he heard of it, broke out into something

almost like swearing at the brutish blockheadism of this Hebert; (Vilate,

Causes secretes de la Revolution de Thermidor (Paris, 1825), p. 179.) on

whose foul head his foul lie has recoiled.  At four o'clock on Wednesday

morning, after two days and two nights of interrogating, jury-charging, and

other darkening of counsel, the result comes out:  Sentence of Death. 

"Have you anything to say?"  The Accused shook her head, without speech. 

Night's candles are burning out; and with her too Time is finishing, and it

will be Eternity and Day.  This Hall of Tinville's is dark, ill-lighted

except where she stands.  Silently she withdraws from it, to die.



Two Processions, or Royal Progresses, three-and-twenty years apart, have

often struck us with a strange feeling of contrast.  The first is of a

beautiful Archduchess and Dauphiness, quitting her Mother's City, at the

age of Fifteen; towards hopes such as no other Daughter of Eve then had: 

'On the morrow,' says Weber an eye witness, 'the Dauphiness left Vienna. 

The whole City crowded out; at first with a sorrow which was silent.  She

appeared:  you saw her sunk back into her carriage; her face bathed in

tears; hiding her eyes now with her handkerchief, now with her hands;

several times putting out her head to see yet again this Palace of her

Fathers, whither she was to return no more.  She motioned her regret, her

gratitude to the good Nation, which was crowding here to bid her farewell.

Then arose not only tears; but piercing cries, on all sides.  Men and women

alike abandoned themselves to such expression of their sorrow.  It was an

audible sound of wail, in the streets and avenues of Vienna.  The last

Courier that followed her disappeared, and the crowd melted away.'  (Weber,

i. 6.)



The young imperial Maiden of Fifteen has now become a worn discrowned Widow

of Thirty-eight; grey before her time:  this is the last Procession:  'Few

minutes after the Trial ended, the drums were beating to arms in all

Sections; at sunrise the armed force was on foot, cannons getting placed at

the extremities of the Bridges, in the Squares, Crossways, all along from

the Palais de Justice to the Place de la Revolution.  By ten o'clock,

numerous patrols were circulating in the Streets; thirty thousand foot and

horse drawn up under arms.  At eleven, Marie-Antoinette was brought out. 

She had on an undress of pique blanc:  she was led to the place of

execution, in the same manner as an ordinary criminal; bound, on a Cart;

accompanied by a Constitutional Priest in Lay dress; escorted by numerous

detachments of infantry and cavalry.  These, and the double row of troops

all along her road, she appeared to regard with indifference.  On her

countenance there was visible neither abashment nor pride.  To the cries of

Vive la Republique and Down with Tyranny, which attended her all the way,

she seemed to pay no heed.  She spoke little to her Confessor.  The

tricolor Streamers on the housetops occupied her attention, in the Streets

du Roule and Saint-Honore; she also noticed the Inscriptions on the house-

fronts.  On reaching the Place de la Revolution, her looks turned towards

the Jardin National, whilom Tuileries; her face at that moment gave signs

of lively emotion.  She mounted the Scaffold with courage enough; at a

quarter past Twelve, her head fell; the Executioner shewed it to the

people, amid universal long-continued cries of 'Vive la Republique.'  (Deux

Amis, xi. 301.)







Chapter 3.4.VIII.



The Twenty-two.





Whom next, O Tinville?  The next are of a different colour:  our poor

Arrested Girondin Deputies.  What of them could still be laid hold of; our

Vergniaud, Brissot, Fauchet, Valaze, Gensonne; the once flower of French

Patriotism, Twenty-two by the tale:  hither, at Tinville's Bar, onward from

'safeguard of the French People,' from confinement in the Luxembourg,

imprisonment in the Conciergerie, have they now, by the course of things,

arrived.  Fouquier Tinville must give what account of them he can.



Undoubtedly this Trial of the Girondins is the greatest that Fouquier has

yet had to do.  Twenty-two, all chief Republicans, ranged in a line there;

the most eloquent in France; Lawyers too; not without friends in the

auditory.  How will Tinville prove these men guilty of Royalism,

Federalism, Conspiracy against the Republic?  Vergniaud's eloquence awakes

once more; 'draws tears,' they say.  And Journalists report, and the Trial

lengthens itself out day after day; 'threatens to become eternal,' murmur

many.  Jacobinism and Municipality rise to the aid of Fouquier.  On the

28th of the month, Hebert and others come in deputation to inform a Patriot

Convention that the Revolutionary Tribunal is quite 'shackled by forms of

Law;' that a Patriot Jury ought to have 'the power of cutting short, of

terminer les debats , when they feel themselves convinced.'  Which pregnant

suggestion, of cutting short, passes itself, with all despatch, into a

Decree.



Accordingly, at ten o'clock on the night of the 30th of October, the

Twenty-two, summoned back once more, receive this information, That the

Jury feeling themselves convinced have cut short, have brought in their

verdict; that the Accused are found guilty, and the Sentence on one and all

of them is Death with confiscation of goods.



Loud natural clamour rises among the poor Girondins; tumult; which can only

be repressed by the gendarmes.  Valaze stabs himself; falls down dead on

the spot.  The rest, amid loud clamour and confusion, are driven back to

their Conciergerie; Lasource exclaiming, "I die on the day when the People

have lost their reason; ye will die when they recover it."  (Greek,--Plut.

Opp. t. iv. p. 310. ed. Reiske, 1776.)  No help!  Yielding to violence, the

Doomed uplift the Hymn of the Marseillese; return singing to their dungeon.



Riouffe, who was their Prison-mate in these last days, has lovingly

recorded what death they made.  To our notions, it is not an edifying

death.  Gay satirical Pot-pourri by Ducos; rhymed Scenes of Tragedy,

wherein Barrere and Robespierre discourse with Satan; death's eve spent in

'singing' and 'sallies of gaiety,' with 'discourses on the happiness of

peoples:'  these things, and the like of these, we have to accept for what

they are worth.  It is the manner in which the Girondins make their Last

Supper.  Valaze, with bloody breast, sleeps cold in death; hears not their

singing.  Vergniaud has his dose of poison; but it is not enough for his

friends, it is enough only for himself; wherefore he flings it from him;

presides at this Last Supper of the Girondins, with wild coruscations of

eloquence, with song and mirth.  Poor human Will struggles to assert

itself; if not in this way, then in that.  (Memoires de Riouffe (in

Memoires sur les Prisons, Paris, 1823), p. 48-55.)



But on the morrow morning all Paris is out; such a crowd as no man had

seen.  The Death-carts, Valaze's cold corpse stretched among the yet living

Twenty-one, roll along.  Bareheaded, hands bound; in their shirt-sleeves,

coat flung loosely round the neck:  so fare the eloquent of France;

bemurmured, beshouted.  To the shouts of Vive la Republique, some of them

keep answering with counter-shouts of Vive la Republique.  Others, as

Brissot, sit sunk in silence.  At the foot of the scaffold they again

strike up, with appropriate variations, the Hymn of the Marseillese.  Such

an act of music; conceive it well!  The yet Living chant there; the chorus

so rapidly wearing weak!  Samson's axe is rapid; one head per minute, or

little less.  The chorus is worn out; farewell for evermore ye Girondins. 

Te-Deum Fauchet has become silent; Valaze's dead head is lopped:  the

sickle of the Guillotine has reaped the Girondins all away.  'The eloquent,

the young, the beautiful and brave!' exclaims Riouffe.  O Death, what feast

is toward in thy ghastly Halls?



Nor alas, in the far Bourdeaux region, will Girondism fare better.  In

caves of Saint-Emilion, in loft and cellar, the weariest months, roll on;

apparel worn, purse empty; wintry November come; under Tallien and his

Guillotine, all hope now gone.  Danger drawing ever nigher, difficulty

pressing ever straiter, they determine to separate.  Not unpathetic the

farewell; tall Barbaroux, cheeriest of brave men, stoops to clasp his

Louvet:  "In what place soever thou findest my mother," cries he, "try to

be instead of a son to her:  no resource of mine but I will share with thy

Wife, should chance ever lead me where she is."  (Louvet, p. 213.)



Louvet went with Guadet, with Salles and Valady; Barbaroux with Buzot and

Petion.  Valady soon went southward, on a way of his own.  The two friends

and Louvet had a miserable day and night; the 14th of November month, 1793.

Sunk in wet, weariness and hunger, they knock, on the morrow, for help, at

a friend's country-house; the fainthearted friend refuses to admit them. 

They stood therefore under trees, in the pouring rain.  Flying desperate,

Louvet thereupon will to Paris.  He sets forth, there and then, splashing

the mud on each side of him, with a fresh strength gathered from fury or

frenzy.  He passes villages, finding 'the sentry asleep in his box in the

thick rain;' he is gone, before the man can call after him.  He bilks

Revolutionary Committees; rides in carriers' carts, covered carts and open;

lies hidden in one, under knapsacks and cloaks of soldiers' wives on the

Street of Orleans, while men search for him:  has hairbreadth escapes that

would fill three romances:  finally he gets to Paris to his fair Helpmate;

gets to Switzerland, and waits better days.



Poor Guadet and Salles were both taken, ere long; they died by the

Guillotine in Bourdeaux; drums beating to drown their voice.  Valady also

is caught, and guillotined.  Barbaroux and his two comrades weathered it

longer, into the summer of 1794; but not long enough.  One July morning,

changing their hiding place, as they have often to do, 'about a league from

Saint-Emilion, they observe a great crowd of country-people;' doubtless

Jacobins come to take them?  Barbaroux draws a pistol, shoots himself dead.

Alas, and it was not Jacobins; it was harmless villagers going to a village

wake.  Two days afterwards, Buzot and Petion were found in a Cornfield,

their bodies half-eaten with dogs.  (Recherches Historiques sur les

Girondins (in Memoires de Buzot), p. 107.)



Such was the end of Girondism.  They arose to regenerate France, these men;

and have accomplished this.  Alas, whatever quarrel we had with them, has

not their cruel fate abolished it?  Pity only survives.  So many excellent

souls of heroes sent down to Hades; they themselves given as a prey of dogs

and all manner of birds!  But, here too, the will of the Supreme Power was

accomplished.  As Vergniaud said:  'The Revolution, like Saturn, is

devouring its own children.'
