








BOOK VI.



CONSOLIDATION





Chapter 1.6.I.



Make the Constitution.



Here perhaps is the place to fix, a little more precisely, what these two

words, French Revolution, shall mean; for, strictly considered, they may

have as many meanings as there are speakers of them.  All things are in

revolution; in change from moment to moment, which becomes sensible from

epoch to epoch:  in this Time-World of ours there is properly nothing else

but revolution and mutation, and even nothing else conceivable. 

Revolution, you answer, means speedier change.  Whereupon one has still to

ask:  How speedy?  At what degree of speed; in what particular points of

this variable course, which varies in velocity, but can never stop till

Time itself stops, does revolution begin and end; cease to be ordinary

mutation, and again become such?  It is a thing that will depend on

definition more or less arbitrary.



For ourselves we answer that French Revolution means here the open violent

Rebellion, and Victory, of disimprisoned Anarchy against corrupt worn-out

Authority:  how Anarchy breaks prison; bursts up from the infinite Deep,

and rages uncontrollable, immeasurable, enveloping a world; in phasis after

phasis of fever-frenzy;--'till the frenzy burning itself out, and what

elements of new Order it held (since all Force holds such) developing

themselves, the Uncontrollable be got, if not reimprisoned, yet harnessed,

and its mad forces made to work towards their object as sane regulated

ones.  For as Hierarchies and Dynasties of all kinds, Theocracies,

Aristocracies, Autocracies, Strumpetocracies, have ruled over the world; so

it was appointed, in the decrees of Providence, that this same Victorious

Anarchy, Jacobinism, Sansculottism, French Revolution, Horrors of French

Revolution, or what else mortals name it, should have its turn.  The

'destructive wrath' of Sansculottism:  this is what we speak, having

unhappily no voice for singing.



Surely a great Phenomenon:  nay it is a transcendental one, overstepping

all rules and experience; the crowning Phenomenon of our Modern Time.  For

here again, most unexpectedly, comes antique Fanaticism in new and newest

vesture; miraculous, as all Fanaticism is.  Call it the Fanaticism of

'making away with formulas, de humer les formulas.'  The world of formulas,

the formed regulated world, which all habitable world is,--must needs hate

such Fanaticism like death; and be at deadly variance with it.  The world

of formulas must conquer it; or failing that, must die execrating it,

anathematising it;--can nevertheless in nowise prevent its being and its

having been.  The Anathemas are there, and the miraculous Thing is there.



Whence it cometh?  Whither it goeth?  These are questions!  When the age of

Miracles lay faded into the distance as an incredible tradition, and even

the age of Conventionalities was now old; and Man's Existence had for long

generations rested on mere formulas which were grown hollow by course of

time; and it seemed as if no Reality any longer existed but only Phantasms

of realities, and God's Universe were the work of the Tailor and

Upholsterer mainly, and men were buckram masks that went about becking and

grimacing there,--on a sudden, the Earth yawns asunder, and amid Tartarean

smoke, and glare of fierce brightness, rises SANSCULOTTISM, many-headed,

fire-breathing, and asks:  What think ye of me?  Well may the buckram masks

start together, terror-struck; 'into expressive well-concerted groups!'  It

is indeed, Friends, a most singular, most fatal thing.  Let whosoever is

but buckram and a phantasm look to it:  ill verily may it fare with him;

here methinks he cannot much longer be.  Wo also to many a one who is not

wholly buckram, but partially real and human!  The age of Miracles has come

back!  'Behold the World-Phoenix, in fire-consummation and fire-creation;

wide are her fanning wings; loud is her death-melody, of battle-thunders

and falling towns; skyward lashes the funeral flame, enveloping all things: 

it is the Death-Birth of a World!'



Whereby, however, as we often say, shall one unspeakable blessing seem

attainable.  This, namely:  that Man and his Life rest no more on

hollowness and a Lie, but on solidity and some kind of Truth.  Welcome, the

beggarliest truth, so it be one, in exchange for the royallest sham!  Truth

of any kind breeds ever new and better truth; thus hard granite rock will

crumble down into soil, under the blessed skyey influences; and cover

itself with verdure, with fruitage and umbrage.  But as for Falsehood,

which in like contrary manner, grows ever falser,--what can it, or what

should it do but decease, being ripe; decompose itself, gently or even

violently, and return to the Father of it,--too probably in flames of fire?



Sansculottism will burn much; but what is incombustible it will not burn. 

Fear not Sansculottism; recognise it for what it is, the portentous,

inevitable end of much, the miraculous beginning of much.  One other thing

thou mayest understand of it:  that it too came from God; for has it not

been?  From of old, as it is written, are His goings forth; in the great

Deep of things; fearful and wonderful now as in the beginning:  in the

whirlwind also He speaks! and the wrath of men is made to praise Him.--But

to gauge and measure this immeasurable Thing, and what is called account

for it, and reduce it to a dead logic-formula, attempt not!  Much less

shalt thou shriek thyself hoarse, cursing it; for that, to all needful

lengths, has been already done.  As an actually existing Son of Time, look,

with unspeakable manifold interest, oftenest in silence, at what the Time

did bring:  therewith edify, instruct, nourish thyself, or were it but to

amuse and gratify thyself, as it is given thee.



Another question which at every new turn will rise on us, requiring ever

new reply is this:  Where the French Revolution specially is?  In the

King's Palace, in his Majesty's or her Majesty's managements, and

maltreatments, cabals, imbecilities and woes, answer some few:--whom we do

not answer.  In the National Assembly, answer a large mixed multitude:  who

accordingly seat themselves in the Reporter's Chair; and therefrom noting

what Proclamations, Acts, Reports, passages of logic-fence, bursts of

parliamentary eloquence seem notable within doors, and what tumults and

rumours of tumult become audible from without,--produce volume on volume;

and, naming it History of the French Revolution, contentedly publish the

same.  To do the like, to almost any extent, with so many Filed Newspapers,

Choix des Rapports, Histoires Parlementaires as there are, amounting to

many horseloads, were easy for us.  Easy but unprofitable.  The National

Assembly, named now Constituent Assembly, goes its course; making the

Constitution; but the French Revolution also goes its course.



In general, may we not say that the French Revolution lies in the heart and

head of every violent-speaking, of every violent-thinking French Man?  How

the Twenty-five Millions of such, in their perplexed combination, acting

and counter-acting may give birth to events; which event successively is

the cardinal one; and from what point of vision it may best be surveyed: 

this is a problem.  Which problem the best insight, seeking light from all

possible sources, shifting its point of vision whithersoever vision or

glimpse of vision can be had, may employ itself in solving; and be well

content to solve in some tolerably approximate way.



As to the National Assembly, in so far as it still towers eminent over

France, after the manner of a car-borne Carroccio, though now no longer in

the van; and rings signals for retreat or for advance,--it is and continues

a reality among other realities.  But in so far as it sits making the

Constitution, on the other hand, it is a fatuity and chimera mainly.  Alas,

in the never so heroic building of Montesquieu-Mably card-castles, though

shouted over by the world, what interest is there?  Occupied in that way,

an august National Assembly becomes for us little other than a Sanhedrim of

pedants, not of the gerund-grinding, yet of no fruitfuller sort; and its

loud debatings and recriminations about Rights of Man, Right of Peace and

War, Veto suspensif, Veto absolu, what are they but so many Pedant's-

curses, 'May God confound you for your Theory of Irregular Verbs!'



A Constitution can be built, Constitutions enough a la Sieyes:  but the

frightful difficulty is that of getting men to come and live in them! 

Could Sieyes have drawn thunder and lightning out of Heaven to sanction his

Constitution, it had been well:  but without any thunder?  Nay, strictly

considered, is it not still true that without some such celestial sanction,

given visibly in thunder or invisibly otherwise, no Constitution can in the

long run be worth much more than the waste-paper it is written on?  The

Constitution, the set of Laws, or prescribed Habits of Acting, that men

will live under, is the one which images their Convictions,--their Faith as

to this wondrous Universe, and what rights, duties, capabilities they have

there; which stands sanctioned therefore, by Necessity itself, if not by a

seen Deity, then by an unseen one.  Other laws, whereof there are always

enough ready-made, are usurpations; which men do not obey, but rebel

against, and abolish, by their earliest convenience.



The question of questions accordingly were, Who is it that especially for

rebellers and abolishers, can make a Constitution?  He that can image forth

the general Belief when there is one; that can impart one when, as here,

there is none.  A most rare man; ever as of old a god-missioned man!  Here,

however, in defect of such transcendent supreme man, Time with its infinite

succession of merely superior men, each yielding his little contribution,

does much.  Force likewise (for, as Antiquarian Philosophers teach, the

royal Sceptre was from the first something of a Hammer, to crack such heads

as could not be convinced) will all along find somewhat to do.  And thus in

perpetual abolition and reparation, rending and mending, with struggle and

strife, with present evil and the hope and effort towards future good, must

the Constitution, as all human things do, build itself forward; or unbuild

itself, and sink, as it can and may.  O Sieyes, and ye other Committeemen,

and Twelve Hundred miscellaneous individuals from all parts of France! 

What is the Belief of France, and yours, if ye knew it?  Properly that

there shall be no Belief; that all formulas be swallowed.  The Constitution

which will suit that?  Alas, too clearly, a No-Constitution, an Anarchy;--

which also, in due season, shall be vouchsafed you.



But, after all, what can an unfortunate National Assembly do?  Consider

only this, that there are Twelve Hundred miscellaneous individuals; not a

unit of whom but has his own thinking-apparatus, his own speaking-

apparatus!  In every unit of them is some belief and wish, different for

each, both that France should be regenerated, and also that he individually

should do it.  Twelve Hundred separate Forces, yoked miscellaneously to any

object, miscellaneously to all sides of it; and bid pull for life!



Or is it the nature of National Assemblies generally to do, with endless

labour and clangour, Nothing?  Are Representative Governments mostly at

bottom Tyrannies too!  Shall we say, the Tyrants, the ambitious contentious

Persons, from all corners of the country do, in this manner, get gathered

into one place; and there, with motion and counter-motion, with jargon and

hubbub, cancel one another, like the fabulous Kilkenny Cats; and produce,

for net-result, zero;--the country meanwhile governing or guiding itself,

by such wisdom, recognised or for most part unrecognised, as may exist in

individual heads here and there?--Nay, even that were a great improvement: 

for, of old, with their Guelf Factions and Ghibelline Factions, with their

Red Roses and White Roses, they were wont to cancel the whole country as

well.  Besides they do it now in a much narrower cockpit; within the four

walls of their Assembly House, and here and there an outpost of Hustings

and Barrel-heads; do it with tongues too, not with swords:--all which

improvements, in the art of producing zero, are they not great?  Nay, best

of all, some happy Continents (as the Western one, with its Savannahs,

where whosoever has four willing limbs finds food under his feet, and an

infinite sky over his head) can do without governing.--What Sphinx-

questions; which the distracted world, in these very generations, must

answer or die!







Chapter 1.6.II.



The Constituent Assembly.



One thing an elected Assembly of Twelve Hundred is fit for:  Destroying. 

Which indeed is but a more decided exercise of its natural talent for Doing

Nothing.  Do nothing, only keep agitating, debating; and things will

destroy themselves.



So and not otherwise proved it with an august National Assembly.  It took

the name, Constituent, as if its mission and function had been to construct

or build; which also, with its whole soul, it endeavoured to do:  yet, in

the fates, in the nature of things, there lay for it precisely of all

functions the most opposite to that.  Singular, what Gospels men will

believe; even Gospels according to Jean Jacques!  It was the fixed Faith of

these National Deputies, as of all thinking Frenchmen, that the

Constitution could be made; that they, there and then, were called to make

it.  How, with the toughness of Old Hebrews or Ishmaelite Moslem, did the

otherwise light unbelieving People persist in this their Credo quia

impossibile ; and front the armed world with it; and grow fanatic, and even

heroic, and do exploits by it!  The Constituent Assembly's Constitution,

and several others, will, being printed and not manuscript, survive to

future generations, as an instructive well-nigh incredible document of the

Time:  the most significant Picture of the then existing France; or at

lowest, Picture of these men's Picture of it.



But in truth and seriousness, what could the National Assembly have done? 

The thing to be done was, actually as they said, to regenerate France; to

abolish the old France, and make a new one; quietly or forcibly, by

concession or by violence, this, by the Law of Nature, has become

inevitable.  With what degree of violence, depends on the wisdom of those

that preside over it.  With perfect wisdom on the part of the National

Assembly, it had all been otherwise; but whether, in any wise, it could

have been pacific, nay other than bloody and convulsive, may still be a

question.



Grant, meanwhile, that this Constituent Assembly does to the last continue

to be something.  With a sigh, it sees itself incessantly forced away from

its infinite divine task, of perfecting 'the Theory of Irregular Verbs,'--

to finite terrestrial tasks, which latter have still a significance for us. 

It is the cynosure of revolutionary France, this National Assembly.  All

work of Government has fallen into its hands, or under its control; all men

look to it for guidance.  In the middle of that huge Revolt of Twenty-five

millions, it hovers always aloft as Carroccio or Battle-Standard, impelling

and impelled, in the most confused way; if it cannot give much guidance, it

will still seem to give some.  It emits pacificatory Proclamations, not a

few; with more or with less result.  It authorises the enrolment of

National Guards,--lest Brigands come to devour us, and reap the unripe

crops.  It sends missions to quell 'effervescences;' to deliver men from

the Lanterne.  It can listen to congratulatory Addresses, which arrive

daily by the sackful; mostly in King Cambyses' vein:  also to Petitions and

complaints from all mortals; so that every mortal's complaint, if it cannot

get redressed, may at least hear itself complain.  For the rest, an august

National Assembly can produce Parliamentary Eloquence; and appoint

Committees.  Committees of the Constitution, of Reports, of Researches; and

of much else:  which again yield mountains of Printed Paper; the theme of

new Parliamentary Eloquence, in bursts, or in plenteous smooth-flowing

floods.  And so, from the waste vortex whereon all things go whirling and

grinding, Organic Laws, or the similitude of such, slowly emerge.



With endless debating, we get the Rights of Man written down and

promulgated:  true paper basis of all paper Constitutions.  Neglecting, cry

the opponents, to declare the Duties of Man!  Forgetting, answer we, to

ascertain the Mights of Man;--one of the fatalest omissions!--Nay,

sometimes, as on the Fourth of August, our National Assembly, fired

suddenly by an almost preternatural enthusiasm, will get through whole

masses of work in one night.  A memorable night, this Fourth of August: 

Dignitaries temporal and spiritual; Peers, Archbishops, Parlement-

Presidents, each outdoing the other in patriotic devotedness, come

successively to throw their (untenable) possessions on the 'altar of the

fatherland.'  With louder and louder vivats, for indeed it is 'after

dinner' too,--they abolish Tithes, Seignorial Dues, Gabelle, excessive

Preservation of Game; nay Privilege, Immunity, Feudalism root and branch;

then appoint a Te Deum for it; and so, finally, disperse about three in the

morning, striking the stars with their sublime heads.  Such night,

unforeseen but for ever memorable, was this of the Fourth of August 1789. 

Miraculous, or semi-miraculous, some seem to think it.  A new Night of

Pentecost, shall we say, shaped according to the new Time, and new Church

of Jean Jacques Rousseau?  It had its causes; also its effects.



In such manner labour the National Deputies; perfecting their Theory of

Irregular Verbs; governing France, and being governed by it; with toil and

noise;--cutting asunder ancient intolerable bonds; and, for new ones,

assiduously spinning ropes of sand.  Were their labours a nothing or a

something, yet the eyes of all France being reverently fixed on them,

History can never very long leave them altogether out of sight.



For the present, if we glance into that Assembly Hall of theirs, it will be

found, as is natural, 'most irregular.'  As many as 'a hundred members are

on their feet at once;' no rule in making motions, or only commencements of

a rule; Spectators' Gallery allowed to applaud, and even to hiss; (Arthur

Young, i. 111.)  President, appointed once a fortnight, raising many times

no serene head above the waves.  Nevertheless, as in all human Assemblages,

like does begin arranging itself to like; the perennial rule, Ubi homines

sunt modi sunt, proves valid.  Rudiments of Methods disclose themselves;

rudiments of Parties.  There is a Right Side (Cote Droit), a Left Side

(Cote Gauche); sitting on M. le President's right hand, or on his left: 

the Cote Droit conservative; the Cote Gauche destructive.  Intermediate is

Anglomaniac Constitutionalism, or Two-Chamber Royalism; with its Mouniers,

its Lallys,--fast verging towards nonentity.  Preeminent, on the Right

Side, pleads and perorates Cazales, the Dragoon-captain, eloquent, mildly

fervent; earning for himself the shadow of a name.  There also blusters

Barrel-Mirabeau, the Younger Mirabeau, not without wit:  dusky d'Espremenil

does nothing but sniff and ejaculate; might, it is fondly thought, lay

prostrate the Elder Mirabeau himself, would he but try, (Biographie

Universelle, para D'Espremenil (by Beaulieu).)--which he does not.  Last

and greatest, see, for one moment, the Abbe Maury; with his jesuitic eyes,

his impassive brass face, 'image of all the cardinal sins.'  Indomitable,

unquenchable, he fights jesuitico-rhetorically; with toughest lungs and

heart; for Throne, especially for Altar and Tithes.  So that a shrill voice

exclaims once, from the Gallery:  "Messieurs of the Clergy, you have to be

shaved; if you wriggle too much, you will get cut."  (Dictionnaire des

Hommes Marquans, ii. 519.)



The Left side is also called the d'Orleans side; and sometimes derisively,

the Palais Royal.  And yet, so confused, real-imaginary seems everything,

'it is doubtful,' as Mirabeau said, 'whether d'Orleans himself belong to

that same d'Orleans Party.'  What can be known and seen is, that his moon-

visage does beam forth from that point of space.  There likewise sits

seagreen Robespierre; throwing in his light weight, with decision, not yet

with effect.  A thin lean Puritan and Precisian; he would make away with

formulas; yet lives, moves, and has his being, wholly in formulas, of

another sort.  'Peuple,' such according to Robespierre ought to be the

Royal method of promulgating laws, 'Peuple, this is the Law I have framed

for thee; dost thou accept it?'--answered from Right Side, from Centre and

Left, by inextinguishable laughter.  (Moniteur, No. 67 (in Hist.Parl.).) 

Yet men of insight discern that the Seagreen may by chance go far:  "this

man," observes Mirabeau, "will do somewhat; he believes every word he

says."



Abbe Sieyes is busy with mere Constitutional work:  wherein, unluckily,

fellow-workmen are less pliable than, with one who has completed the

Science of Polity, they ought to be.  Courage, Sieyes nevertheless!  Some

twenty months of heroic travail, of contradiction from the stupid, and the

Constitution shall be built; the top-stone of it brought out with

shouting,--say rather, the top-paper, for it is all Paper; and thou hast

done in it what the Earth or the Heaven could require, thy utmost.  Note

likewise this Trio; memorable for several things; memorable were it only

that their history is written in an epigram:  'whatsoever these Three have

in hand,' it is said, 'Duport thinks it, Barnave speaks it, Lameth does

it.'  (See Toulongeon, i. c. 3.)



But royal Mirabeau?  Conspicuous among all parties, raised above and beyond

them all, this man rises more and more.  As we often say, he has an eye, he

is a reality; while others are formulas and eye-glasses.  In the Transient

he will detect the Perennial, find some firm footing even among Paper-

vortexes.  His fame is gone forth to all lands; it gladdened the heart of

the crabbed old Friend of Men himself before he died.  The very Postilions

of inns have heard of Mirabeau:  when an impatient Traveller complains that

the team is insufficient, his Postilion answers, "Yes, Monsieur, the

wheelers are weak; but my mirabeau (main horse), you see, is a right one,

mais mon mirabeau est excellent."  (Dumont, Souvenirs sur Mirabeau, p.

255.)



And now, Reader, thou shalt quit this noisy Discrepancy of a National

Assembly; not (if thou be of humane mind) without pity.  Twelve Hundred

brother men are there, in the centre of Twenty-five Millions; fighting so

fiercely with Fate and with one another; struggling their lives out, as

most sons of Adam do, for that which profiteth not.  Nay, on the whole, it

is admitted further to be very dull.  "Dull as this day's Assembly," said

some one.  "Why date, Pourquoi dater?" answered Mirabeau.



Consider that they are Twelve Hundred; that they not only speak, but read

their speeches; and even borrow and steal speeches to read!  With Twelve

Hundred fluent speakers, and their Noah's Deluge of vociferous commonplace,

unattainable silence may well seem the one blessing of Life.  But figure

Twelve Hundred pamphleteers; droning forth perpetual pamphlets:  and no man

to gag them!  Neither, as in the American Congress, do the arrangements

seem perfect.  A Senator has not his own Desk and Newspaper here; of

Tobacco (much less of Pipes) there is not the slightest provision. 

Conversation itself must be transacted in a low tone, with continual

interruption:  only 'pencil Notes' circulate freely; 'in incredible numbers

to the foot of the very tribune.'  (See Dumont (pp. 159-67); Arthur Young,

&c.)--Such work is it, regenerating a Nation; perfecting one's Theory of

Irregular Verbs!







Chapter 1.6.III.



The General Overturn.



Of the King's Court, for the present, there is almost nothing whatever to

be said.  Silent, deserted are these halls; Royalty languishes forsaken of

its war-god and all its hopes, till once the Oeil-de-Boeuf rally again. 

The sceptre is departed from King Louis; is gone over to the Salles des

Menus, to the Paris Townhall, or one knows not whither.  In the July days,

while all ears were yet deafened by the crash of the Bastille, and

Ministers and Princes were scattered to the four winds, it seemed as if the

very Valets had grown heavy of hearing.  Besenval, also in flight towards

Infinite Space, but hovering a little at Versailles, was addressing his

Majesty personally for an Order about post-horses; when, lo, 'the Valet in

waiting places himself familiarly between his Majesty and me,' stretching

out his rascal neck to learn what it was!  His Majesty, in sudden choler,

whirled round; made a clutch at the tongs:  'I gently prevented him; he

grasped my hand in thankfulness; and I noticed tears in his eyes.' 

(Besenval, iii. 419.)



Poor King; for French Kings also are men!  Louis Fourteenth himself once

clutched the tongs, and even smote with them; but then it was at Louvois,

and Dame Maintenon ran up.--The Queen sits weeping in her inner apartments,

surrounded by weak women:  she is 'at the height of unpopularity;'

universally regarded as the evil genius of France.  Her friends and

familiar counsellors have all fled; and fled, surely, on the foolishest

errand.  The Chateau Polignac still frowns aloft, on its 'bold and

enormous' cubical rock, amid the blooming champaigns, amid the blue

girdling mountains of Auvergne: (Arthur Young, i. 165.)  but no Duke and

Duchess Polignac look forth from it; they have fled, they have 'met Necker

at Bale;' they shall not return.  That France should see her Nobles resist

the Irresistible, Inevitable, with the face of angry men, was unhappy, not

unexpected:  but with the face and sense of pettish children?  This was her

peculiarity.  They understood nothing; would understand nothing.  Does not,

at this hour, a new Polignac, first-born of these Two, sit reflective in

the Castle of Ham; (A.D. 1835.) in an astonishment he will never recover

from; the most confused of existing mortals?



King Louis has his new Ministry:  mere Popularities; Old-President

Pompignan; Necker, coming back in triumph; and other such.  (Montgaillard,

ii. 108.)  But what will it avail him?  As was said, the sceptre, all but

the wooden gilt sceptre, has departed elsewhither.  Volition, determination

is not in this man:  only innocence, indolence; dependence on all persons

but himself, on all circumstances but the circumstances he were lord of. 

So troublous internally is our Versailles and its work.  Beautiful, if seen

from afar, resplendent like a Sun; seen near at hand, a mere Sun's-

Atmosphere, hiding darkness, confused ferment of ruin!



But over France, there goes on the indisputablest 'destruction of

formulas;' transaction of realities that follow therefrom.  So many

millions of persons, all gyved, and nigh strangled, with formulas; whose

Life nevertheless, at least the digestion and hunger of it, was real

enough!  Heaven has at length sent an abundant harvest; but what profits it

the poor man, when Earth with her formulas interposes?  Industry, in these

times of Insurrection, must needs lie dormant; capital, as usual, not

circulating, but stagnating timorously in nooks.  The poor man is short of

work, is therefore short of money; nay even had he money, bread is not to

be bought for it.  Were it plotting of Aristocrats, plotting of d'Orleans;

were it Brigands, preternatural terror, and the clang of Phoebus Apollo's

silver bow,--enough, the markets are scarce of grain, plentiful only in

tumult.  Farmers seem lazy to thresh;--being either 'bribed;' or needing no

bribe, with prices ever rising, with perhaps rent itself no longer so

pressing.  Neither, what is singular, do municipal enactments, 'That along

with so many measures of wheat you shall sell so many of rye,' and other

the like, much mend the matter.  Dragoons with drawn swords stand ranked

among the corn-sacks, often more dragoons than sacks.  (Arthur Young, i.

129, &c.)  Meal-mobs abound; growing into mobs of a still darker quality.



Starvation has been known among the French Commonalty before this; known

and familiar.  Did we not see them, in the year 1775, presenting, in sallow

faces, in wretchedness and raggedness, their Petition of Grievances; and,

for answer, getting a brand-new Gallows forty feet high?  Hunger and

Darkness, through long years!  For look back on that earlier Paris Riot,

when a Great Personage, worn out by debauchery, was believed to be in want

of Blood-baths; and Mothers, in worn raiment, yet with living hearts under

it, 'filled the public places' with their wild Rachel-cries,--stilled also

by the Gallows.  Twenty years ago, the Friend of Men (preaching to the

deaf) described the Limousin Peasants as wearing a pain-stricken (souffre-

douleur) look, a look past complaint, 'as if the oppression of the great

were like the hail and the thunder, a thing irremediable, the ordinance of

Nature.'  (Fils Adoptif:  Memoires de Mirabeau, i. 364-394.)  And now, if

in some great hour, the shock of a falling Bastille should awaken you; and

it were found to be the ordinance of Art merely; and remediable,

reversible!



Or has the Reader forgotten that 'flood of savages,' which, in sight of the

same Friend of Men, descended from the mountains at Mont d'Or?  Lank-haired

haggard faces; shapes rawboned, in high sabots; in woollen jupes, with

leather girdles studded with copper-nails!  They rocked from foot to foot,

and beat time with their elbows too, as the quarrel and battle which was

not long in beginning went on; shouting fiercely; the lank faces distorted

into the similitude of a cruel laugh.  For they were darkened and hardened: 

long had they been the prey of excise-men and tax-men; of 'clerks with the

cold spurt of their pen.'  It was the fixed prophecy of our old Marquis,

which no man would listen to, that 'such Government by Blind-man's-buff,

stumbling along too far, would end by the General Overturn, the Culbute

Generale!'



No man would listen, each went his thoughtless way;--and Time and Destiny

also travelled on.  The Government by Blind-man's-buff, stumbling along,

has reached the precipice inevitable for it.  Dull Drudgery, driven on, by

clerks with the cold dastard spurt of their pen, has been driven--into a

Communion of Drudges!  For now, moreover, there have come the strangest

confused tidings; by Paris Journals with their paper wings; or still more

portentous, where no Journals are, (See Arthur Young, i. 137, 150, &c.) by

rumour and conjecture:  Oppression not inevitable; a Bastille prostrate,

and the Constitution fast getting ready!  Which Constitution, if it be

something and not nothing, what can it be but bread to eat?



The Traveller, 'walking up hill bridle in hand,' overtakes 'a poor woman;'

the image, as such commonly are, of drudgery and scarcity; 'looking sixty

years of age, though she is not yet twenty-eight.'  They have seven

children, her poor drudge and she:  a farm, with one cow, which helps to

make the children soup; also one little horse, or garron.  They have rents

and quit-rents, Hens to pay to this Seigneur, Oat-sacks to that; King's

taxes, Statute-labour, Church-taxes, taxes enough;--and think the times

inexpressible.  She has heard that somewhere, in some manner, something is

to be done for the poor:  "God send it soon; for the dues and taxes crush

us down (nous ecrasent)!"  (Ibid. i. 134.)



Fair prophecies are spoken, but they are not fulfilled.  There have been

Notables, Assemblages, turnings out and comings in.  Intriguing and

manoeuvring; Parliamentary eloquence and arguing, Greek meeting Greek in

high places, has long gone on; yet still bread comes not.  The harvest is

reaped and garnered; yet still we have no bread.  Urged by despair and by

hope, what can Drudgery do, but rise, as predicted, and produce the General

Overturn?



Fancy, then, some Five full-grown Millions of such gaunt figures, with

their haggard faces (figures haves); in woollen jupes, with copper-studded

leather girths, and high sabots,--starting up to ask, as in forest-

roarings, their washed Upper-Classes, after long unreviewed centuries,

virtually this question:  How have ye treated us; how have ye taught us,

fed us, and led us, while we toiled for you?  The answer can be read in

flames, over the nightly summer sky.  This is the feeding and leading we

have had of you:  EMPTINESS,--of pocket, of stomach, of head, and of heart. 

Behold there is nothing in us; nothing but what Nature gives her wild

children of the desert:  Ferocity and Appetite; Strength grounded on

Hunger.  Did ye mark among your Rights of Man, that man was not to die of

starvation, while there was bread reaped by him?  It is among the Mights of

Man.



Seventy-two Chateaus have flamed aloft in the Maconnais and Beaujolais

alone:  this seems the centre of the conflagration; but it has spread over

Dauphine, Alsace, the Lyonnais; the whole South-East is in a blaze.  All

over the North, from Rouen to Metz, disorder is abroad:  smugglers of salt

go openly in armed bands:  the barriers of towns are burnt; toll-gatherers,

tax-gatherers, official persons put to flight.  'It was thought,' says

Young, 'the people, from hunger, would revolt;' and we see they have done

it.  Desperate Lackalls, long prowling aimless, now finding hope in

desperation itself, everywhere form a nucleus.  They ring the Church bell

by way of tocsin:  and the Parish turns out to the work.  (See Hist. Parl.

ii. 243-6.)  Ferocity, atrocity; hunger and revenge:  such work as we can

imagine!



Ill stands it now with the Seigneur, who, for example, 'has walled up the

only Fountain of the Township;' who has ridden high on his chartier and

parchments; who has preserved Game not wisely but too well.  Churches also,

and Canonries, are sacked, without mercy; which have shorn the flock too

close, forgetting to feed it.  Wo to the land over which Sansculottism, in

its day of vengeance, tramps roughshod,--shod in sabots!  Highbred

Seigneurs, with their delicate women and little ones, had to 'fly half-

naked,' under cloud of night; glad to escape the flames, and even worse. 

You meet them at the tables-d'hote of inns; making wise reflections or

foolish that 'rank is destroyed;' uncertain whither they shall now wend. 

(See Young, i. 149, &c.)  The metayer will find it convenient to be slack

in paying rent.  As for the Tax-gatherer, he, long hunting as a biped of

prey, may now get hunted as one; his Majesty's Exchequer will not 'fill up

the Deficit,' this season:  it is the notion of many that a Patriot

Majesty, being the Restorer of French Liberty, has abolished most taxes,

though, for their private ends, some men make a secret of it.



Where this will end?  In the Abyss, one may prophecy; whither all Delusions

are, at all moments, travelling; where this Delusion has now arrived.  For

if there be a Faith, from of old, it is this, as we often repeat, that no

Lie can live for ever.  The very Truth has to change its vesture, from time

to time; and be born again.  But all Lies have sentence of death written

down against them, and Heaven's Chancery itself; and, slowly or fast,

advance incessantly towards their hour.  'The sign of a Grand Seigneur

being landlord,' says the vehement plain-spoken Arthur Young, 'are wastes,

landes, deserts, ling:  go to his residence, you will find it in the middle

of a forest, peopled with deer, wild boars and wolves.  The fields are

scenes of pitiable management, as the houses are of misery.  To see so many

millions of hands, that would be industrious, all idle and starving:  Oh,

if I were legislator of France, for one day, I would make these great lords

skip again!'  (Arthur Young, i. 12, 48, 84, &c.)  O Arthur, thou now

actually beholdest them skip:--wilt thou grow to grumble at that too?



For long years and generations it lasted, but the time came.  Featherbrain,

whom no reasoning and no pleading could touch, the glare of the firebrand

had to illuminate:  there remained but that method.  Consider it, look at

it!  The widow is gathering nettles for her children's dinner; a perfumed

Seigneur, delicately lounging in the Oeil-de-Boeuf, has an alchemy whereby

he will extract from her the third nettle, and name it Rent and Law:  such

an arrangement must end.  Ought it?  But, O most fearful is such an ending! 

Let those, to whom God, in His great mercy, has granted time and space,

prepare another and milder one.



To women it is a matter of wonder that the Seigneurs did not do something

to help themselves; say, combine, and arm:  for there were a 'hundred and

fifty thousand of them,' all violent enough.  Unhappily, a hundred and

fifty thousand, scattered over wide Provinces, divided by mutual ill-will,

cannot combine.  The highest Seigneurs, as we have seen, had already

emigrated,--with a view of putting France to the blush.  Neither are arms

now the peculiar property of Seigneurs; but of every mortal who has ten

shillings, wherewith to buy a secondhand firelock.



Besides, those starving Peasants, after all, have not four feet and claws,

that you could keep them down permanently in that manner.  They are not

even of black colour; they are mere Unwashed Seigneurs; and a Seigneur too

has human bowels!--The Seigneurs did what they could; enrolled in National

Guards; fled, with shrieks, complaining to Heaven and Earth.  One Seigneur,

famed Memmay of Quincey, near Vesoul, invited all the rustics of his

neighbourhood to a banquet; blew up his Chateau and them with gunpowder;

and instantaneously vanished, no man yet knows whither.  (Hist. Parl. ii.

161.)  Some half dozen years after, he came back; and demonstrated that it

was by accident.



Nor are the authorities idle:  though unluckily, all Authorities,

Municipalities and such like, are in the uncertain transitionary state;

getting regenerated from old Monarchic to new Democratic; no Official yet

knows clearly what he is.  Nevertheless, Mayors old or new do gather

Marechaussees, National Guards, Troops of the line; justice, of the most

summary sort, is not wanting.  The Electoral Committee of Macon, though but

a Committee, goes the length of hanging, for its own behoof, as many as

twenty.  The Prevot of Dauphine traverses the country 'with a movable

column,' with tipstaves, gallows-ropes; for gallows any tree will serve,

and suspend its culprit, or 'thirteen' culprits.



Unhappy country!  How is the fair gold-and-green of the ripe bright Year

defaced with horrid blackness:  black ashes of Chateaus, black bodies of

gibetted Men!  Industry has ceased in it; not sounds of the hammer and saw,

but of the tocsin and alarm-drum.  The sceptre has departed, whither one

knows not;--breaking itself in pieces:  here impotent, there tyrannous.

National Guards are unskilful, and of doubtful purpose; Soldiers are

inclined to mutiny:  there is danger that they two may quarrel, danger that

they may agree.  Strasburg has seen riots:  a Townhall torn to shreds, its

archives scattered white on the winds; drunk soldiers embracing drunk

citizens for three days, and Mayor Dietrich and Marshal Rochambeau reduced

nigh to desperation.  (Arthur Young, i. 141.--Dampmartin:  Evenemens qui se

sont passes sous mes yeux, i. 105-127.)



Through the middle of all which phenomena, is seen, on his triumphant

transit, 'escorted,' through Befort for instance, 'by fifty National

Horsemen and all the military music of the place,'--M. Necker, returning

from Bale!  Glorious as the meridian; though poor Necker himself partly

guesses whither it is leading.  (Biographie Universelle, para Necker (by

Lally-Tollendal).)  One highest culminating day, at the Paris Townhall;

with immortal vivats, with wife and daughter kneeling publicly to kiss his

hand; with Besenval's pardon granted,--but indeed revoked before sunset: 

one highest day, but then lower days, and ever lower, down even to lowest! 

Such magic is in a name; and in the want of a name.  Like some enchanted

Mambrino's Helmet, essential to victory, comes this 'Saviour of France;'

beshouted, becymballed by the world:--alas, so soon, to be disenchanted, to

be pitched shamefully over the lists as a Barber's Bason!  Gibbon 'could

wish to shew him' (in this ejected, Barber's-Bason state) to any man of

solidity, who were minded to have the soul burnt out of him, and become a

caput mortuum, by Ambition, unsuccessful or successful.  (Gibbon's

Letters.)



Another small phasis we add, and no more:  how, in the Autumn months, our

sharp-tempered Arthur has been 'pestered for some days past,' by shot,

lead-drops and slugs, 'rattling five or six times into my chaise and about

my ears;' all the mob of the country gone out to kill game!  (Young, i.

176.)  It is even so.  On the Cliffs of Dover, over all the Marches of

France, there appear, this autumn, two Signs on the Earth:  emigrant

flights of French Seigneurs; emigrant winged flights of French Game! 

Finished, one may say, or as good as finished, is the Preservation of Game

on this Earth; completed for endless Time.  What part it had to play in the

History of Civilisation is played plaudite; exeat!



In this manner does Sansculottism blaze up, illustrating many things;--

producing, among the rest, as we saw, on the Fourth of August, that semi-

miraculous Night of Pentecost in the National Assembly; semi miraculous,

which had its causes, and its effects.  Feudalism is struck dead; not on

parchment only, and by ink; but in very fact, by fire; say, by self-

combustion.  This conflagration of the South-East will abate; will be got

scattered, to the West, or elsewhither:  extinguish it will not, till the

fuel be all done.







Chapter 1.6.IV.



In Queue.



If we look now at Paris, one thing is too evident:  that the Baker's shops

have got their Queues, or Tails; their long strings of purchasers, arranged

in tail, so that the first come be the first served,--were the shop once

open!  This waiting in tail, not seen since the early days of July, again

makes its appearance in August.  In time, we shall see it perfected by

practice to the rank almost of an art; and the art, or quasi-art, of

standing in tail become one of the characteristics of the Parisian People,

distinguishing them from all other Peoples whatsoever.



But consider, while work itself is so scarce, how a man must not only

realise money; but stand waiting (if his wife is too weak to wait and

struggle) for half days in the Tail, till he get it changed for dear bad

bread!  Controversies, to the length, sometimes of blood and battery, must

arise in these exasperated Queues.  Or if no controversy, then it is but

one accordant Pange Lingua of complaint against the Powers that be.  France

has begun her long Curriculum of Hungering, instructive and productive

beyond Academic Curriculums; which extends over some seven most strenuous

years.  As Jean Paul says, of his own Life, 'to a great height shall the

business of Hungering go.'



Or consider, in strange contrast, the jubilee Ceremonies; for, in general,

the aspect of Paris presents these two features:  jubilee ceremonials and

scarcity of victual.  Processions enough walk in jubilee; of Young Women,

decked and dizened, their ribands all tricolor; moving with song and tabor,

to the Shrine of Sainte Genevieve, to thank her that the Bastille is down.

The Strong Men of the Market, and the Strong Women, fail not with their

bouquets and speeches.  Abbe Fauchet, famed in such work (for Abbe Lefevre

could only distribute powder) blesses tricolor cloth for the National

Guard; and makes it a National Tricolor Flag; victorious, or to be

victorious, in the cause of civil and religious liberty all over the world.

Fauchet, we say, is the man for Te-Deums, and public Consecrations;--to

which, as in this instance of the Flag, our National Guard will 'reply with

volleys of musketry,' Church and Cathedral though it be; (See Hist. Parl.

iii. 20; Mercier, Nouveau Paris, &c.) filling Notre Dame with such noisiest

fuliginous Amen, significant of several things.



On the whole, we will say our new Mayor Bailly; our new Commander

Lafayette, named also 'Scipio-Americanus,' have bought their preferment

dear.  Bailly rides in gilt state-coach, with beefeaters and sumptuosity;

Camille Desmoulins, and others, sniffing at him for it:  Scipio bestrides

the 'white charger,' and waves with civic plumes in sight of all France. 

Neither of them, however, does it for nothing; but, in truth, at an

exorbitant rate.  At this rate, namely:  of feeding Paris, and keeping it

from fighting.  Out of the City-funds, some seventeen thousand of the

utterly destitute are employed digging on Montmartre, at tenpence a day,

which buys them, at market price, almost two pounds of bad bread;--they

look very yellow, when Lafayette goes to harangue them.  The Townhall is in

travail, night and day; it must bring forth Bread, a Municipal

Constitution, regulations of all kinds, curbs on the Sansculottic Press;

above all, Bread, Bread.



Purveyors prowl the country far and wide, with the appetite of lions;

detect hidden grain, purchase open grain; by gentle means or forcible, must

and will find grain.  A most thankless task; and so difficult, so

dangerous,--even if a man did gain some trifle by it!  On the 19th August,

there is food for one day.  (See Bailly, Memoires, ii. 137-409.) 

Complaints there are that the food is spoiled, and produces an effect on

the intestines:  not corn but plaster-of-Paris!  Which effect on the

intestines, as well as that 'smarting in the throat and palate,' a Townhall

Proclamation warns you to disregard, or even to consider as drastic-

beneficial.  The Mayor of Saint-Denis, so black was his bread, has, by a

dyspeptic populace, been hanged on the Lanterne there.  National Guards

protect the Paris Corn-Market:  first ten suffice; then six hundred. 

(Hist. Parl. ii. 421.)  Busy are ye, Bailly, Brissot de Warville,

Condorcet, and ye others!



For, as just hinted, there is a Municipal Constitution to be made too.  The

old Bastille Electors, after some ten days of psalmodying over their

glorious victory, began to hear it asked, in a splenetic tone, Who put you

there?  They accordingly had to give place, not without moanings, and

audible growlings on both sides, to a new larger Body, specially elected

for that post.  Which new Body, augmented, altered, then fixed finally at

the number of Three Hundred, with the title of Town Representatives

(Representans de la Commune), now sits there; rightly portioned into

Committees; assiduous making a Constitution; at all moments when not

seeking flour.



And such a Constitution; little short of miraculous:  one that shall

'consolidate the Revolution'!  The Revolution is finished, then?  Mayor

Bailly and all respectable friends of Freedom would fain think so.  Your

Revolution, like jelly sufficiently boiled, needs only to be poured into

shapes, of Constitution, and 'consolidated' therein?  Could it, indeed,

contrive to cool; which last, however, is precisely the doubtful thing, or

even the not doubtful!



Unhappy friends of Freedom; consolidating a Revolution!  They must sit at

work there, their pavilion spread on very Chaos; between two hostile

worlds, the Upper Court-world, the Nether Sansculottic one; and, beaten on

by both, toil painfully, perilously,--doing, in sad literal earnest, 'the

impossible.'







Chapter 1.6.V.



The Fourth Estate.



Pamphleteering opens its abysmal throat wider and wider:  never to close

more.  Our Philosophes, indeed, rather withdraw; after the manner of

Marmontel, 'retiring in disgust the first day.'  Abbe Raynal, grown gray

and quiet in his Marseilles domicile, is little content with this work; the

last literary act of the man will again be an act of rebellion:  an

indignant Letter to the Constituent Assembly; answered by 'the order of the

day.'  Thus also Philosophe Morellet puckers discontented brows; being

indeed threatened in his benefices by that Fourth of August:  it is clearly

going too far.  How astonishing that those 'haggard figures in woollen

jupes' would not rest as satisfied with Speculation, and victorious

Analysis, as we!



Alas, yes:  Speculation, Philosophism, once the ornament and wealth of the

saloon, will now coin itself into mere Practical Propositions, and

circulate on street and highway, universally; with results!  A Fourth

Estate, of Able Editors, springs up; increases and multiplies;

irrepressible, incalculable.  New Printers, new Journals, and ever new (so

prurient is the world), let our Three Hundred curb and consolidate as they

can!  Loustalot, under the wing of Prudhomme dull-blustering Printer, edits

weekly his Revolutions de Paris; in an acrid, emphatic manner.  Acrid,

corrosive, as the spirit of sloes and copperas, is Marat, Friend of the

People; struck already with the fact that the National Assembly, so full of

Aristocrats, 'can do nothing,' except dissolve itself, and make way for a

better; that the Townhall Representatives are little other than babblers

and imbeciles, if not even knaves.  Poor is this man; squalid, and dwells

in garrets; a man unlovely to the sense, outward and inward; a man forbid;-

-and is becoming fanatical, possessed with fixed-idea.  Cruel lusus of

Nature!  Did Nature, O poor Marat, as in cruel sport, knead thee out of her

leavings, and miscellaneous waste clay; and fling thee forth stepdamelike,

a Distraction into this distracted Eighteenth Century?  Work is appointed

thee there; which thou shalt do.  The Three Hundred have summoned and will

again summon Marat:  but always he croaks forth answer sufficient; always

he will defy them, or elude them; and endure no gag.



Carra, 'Ex-secretary of a decapitated Hospodar,' and then of a Necklace-

Cardinal; likewise pamphleteer, Adventurer in many scenes and lands,--draws

nigh to Mercier, of the Tableau de Paris; and, with foam on his lips,

proposes an Annales Patriotiques.  The Moniteur goes its prosperous way;

Barrere 'weeps,' on Paper as yet loyal; Rivarol, Royou are not idle.  Deep

calls to deep:  your Domine Salvum Fac Regem shall awaken Pange Lingua;

with an Ami-du-Peuple there is a King's-Friend Newspaper, Ami-du-Roi. 

Camille Desmoulins has appointed himself Procureur-General de la Lanterne,

Attorney-General of the Lamp-iron; and pleads, not with atrocity, under an

atrocious title; editing weekly his brilliant Revolutions of Paris and

Brabant.  Brilliant, we say:  for if, in that thick murk of Journalism,

with its dull blustering, with its fixed or loose fury, any ray of genius

greet thee, be sure it is Camille's.  The thing that Camille teaches he,

with his light finger, adorns:  brightness plays, gentle, unexpected, amid

horrible confusions; often is the word of Camille worth reading, when no

other's is.  Questionable Camille, how thou glitterest with a fallen,

rebellious, yet still semi-celestial light; as is the star-light on the

brow of Lucifer!  Son of the Morning, into what times and what lands, art

thou fallen!



But in all things is good;--though not good for 'consolidating

Revolutions.'  Thousand wagon-loads of this Pamphleteering and Newspaper

matter, lie rotting slowly in the Public Libraries of our Europe.  Snatched

from the great gulf, like oysters by bibliomaniac pearl-divers, there must

they first rot, then what was pearl, in Camille or others, may be seen as

such, and continue as such.



Nor has public speaking declined, though Lafayette and his Patrols look

sour on it.  Loud always is the Palais Royal, loudest the Cafe de Foy; such

a miscellany of Citizens and Citizenesses circulating there.  'Now and

then,' according to Camille, 'some Citizens employ the liberty of the press

for a private purpose; so that this or the other Patriot finds himself

short of his watch or pocket-handkerchief!'  But, for the rest, in

Camille's opinion, nothing can be a livelier image of the Roman Forum.  'A

Patriot proposes his motion; if it finds any supporters, they make him

mount on a chair, and speak.  If he is applauded, he prospers and redacts;

if he is hissed, he goes his ways.'  Thus they, circulating and perorating. 

Tall shaggy Marquis Saint-Huruge, a man that has had losses, and has

deserved them, is seen eminent, and also heard.  'Bellowing' is the

character of his voice, like that of a Bull of Bashan; voice which drowns

all voices, which causes frequently the hearts of men to leap.  Cracked or

half-cracked is this tall Marquis's head; uncracked are his lungs; the

cracked and the uncracked shall alike avail him.



Consider further that each of the Forty-eight Districts has its own

Committee; speaking and motioning continually; aiding in the search for

grain, in the search for a Constitution; checking and spurring the poor

Three Hundred of the Townhall.  That Danton, with a 'voice reverberating

from the domes,' is President of the Cordeliers District; which has already

become a Goshen of Patriotism.  That apart from the 'seventeen thousand

utterly necessitous, digging on Montmartre,' most of whom, indeed, have got

passes, and been dismissed into Space 'with four shillings,'--there is a

strike, or union, of Domestics out of place; who assemble for public

speaking:  next, a strike of Tailors, for even they will strike and speak;

further, a strike of Journeymen Cordwainers; a strike of Apothecaries:  so

dear is bread.  (Histoire Parlementaire, ii. 359, 417, 423.)  All these,

having struck, must speak; generally under the open canopy; and pass

resolutions;--Lafayette and his Patrols watching them suspiciously from the

distance.



Unhappy mortals:  such tugging and lugging, and throttling of one another,

to divide, in some not intolerable way, the joint Felicity of man in this

Earth; when the whole lot to be divided is such a 'feast of shells!'--

Diligent are the Three Hundred; none equals Scipio Americanus in dealing

with mobs.  But surely all these things bode ill for the consolidating of a

Revolution.

