








BOOK 2.VI.   



THE MARSEILLESE





Chapter 2.6.I.



Executive that does not act.



How could your paralytic National Executive be put 'in action,' in any

measure, by such a Twentieth of June as this?  Quite contrariwise:  a large

sympathy for Majesty so insulted arises every where; expresses itself in

Addresses, Petitions 'Petition of the Twenty Thousand inhabitants of

Paris,' and such like, among all Constitutional persons; a decided rallying

round the Throne.



Of which rallying it was thought King Louis might have made something. 

However, he does make nothing of it, or attempt to make; for indeed his

views are lifted beyond domestic sympathy and rallying, over to Coblentz

mainly:  neither in itself is the same sympathy worth much.  It is sympathy

of men who believe still that the Constitution can march.  Wherefore the

old discord and ferment, of Feuillant sympathy for Royalty, and Jacobin

sympathy for Fatherland, acting against each other from within; with terror

of Coblentz and Brunswick acting from without:--this discord and ferment

must hold on its course, till a catastrophe do ripen and come.  One would

think, especially as Brunswick is near marching, such catastrophe cannot

now be distant.  Busy, ye Twenty-five French Millions; ye foreign

Potentates, minatory Emigrants, German drill-serjeants; each do what his

hand findeth!  Thou, O Reader, at such safe distance, wilt see what they

make of it among them.



Consider therefore this pitiable Twentieth of June as a futility; no

catastrophe, rather a catastasis, or heightening.  Do not its Black

Breeches wave there, in the Historical Imagination, like a melancholy flag

of distress; soliciting help, which no mortal can give?  Soliciting pity,

which thou wert hard-hearted not to give freely, to one and all!  Other

such flags, or what are called Occurrences, and black or bright symbolic

Phenomena; will flit through the Historical Imagination:  these, one after

one, let us note, with extreme brevity.



The first phenomenon is that of Lafayette at the Bar of the Assembly; after

a week and day.  Promptly, on hearing of this scandalous Twentieth of June,

Lafayette has quitted his Command on the North Frontier, in better or worse

order; and got hither, on the 28th, to repress the Jacobins:  not by Letter

now; but by oral Petition, and weight of character, face to face.  The

august Assembly finds the step questionable; invites him meanwhile to the

honours of the sitting.  (Moniteur, Seance du 28 Juin 1792.)  Other honour,

or advantage, there unhappily came almost none; the Galleries all growling;

fiery Isnard glooming; sharp Guadet not wanting in sarcasms.



And out of doors, when the sitting is over, Sieur Resson, keeper of the

Patriot Cafe in these regions, hears in the street a hurly-burly; steps

forth to look, he and his Patriot customers:  it is Lafayette's carriage,

with a tumultuous escort of blue Grenadiers, Cannoneers, even Officers of

the Line, hurrahing and capering round it.  They make a pause opposite

Sieur Resson's door; wag their plumes at him; nay shake their fists,

bellowing A bas les Jacobins; but happily pass on without onslaught.  They

pass on, to plant a Mai before the General's door, and bully considerably.

All which the Sieur Resson cannot but report with sorrow, that night, in

the Mother Society.  (Debats des Jacobins (Hist. Parl. xv. 235).)  But what

no Sieur Resson nor Mother Society can do more than guess is this, That a

council of rank Feuillants, your unabolished Staff of the Guard and who

else has status and weight, is in these very moments privily deliberating

at the General's:  Can we not put down the Jacobins by force?  Next day, a

Review shall be held, in the Tuileries Garden, of such as will turn out,

and try.  Alas, says Toulongeon, hardly a hundred turned out.  Put it off

till tomorrow, then, to give better warning.  On the morrow, which is

Saturday, there turn out 'some thirty;' and depart shrugging their

shoulders!  (Toulongeon, ii. 180.  See also Dampmartin, ii. 161.) 

Lafayette promptly takes carriage again; returns musing on my things.



The dust of Paris is hardly off his wheels, the summer Sunday is still

young, when Cordeliers in deputation pluck up that Mai of his:  before

sunset, Patriots have burnt him in effigy.  Louder doubt and louder rises,

in Section, in National Assembly, as to the legality of such unbidden Anti-

jacobin visit on the part of a General:  doubt swelling and spreading all

over France, for six weeks or so:  with endless talk about usurping

soldiers, about English Monk, nay about Cromwell:  O thou Paris Grandison-

Cromwell!--What boots it?  King Louis himself looked coldly on the

enterprize:  colossal Hero of two Worlds, having weighed himself in the

balance, finds that he is become a gossamer Colossus, only some thirty

turning out.



In a like sense, and with a like issue, works our Department-Directory here

at Paris; who, on the 6th of July, take upon them to suspend Mayor Petion

and Procureur Manuel from all civic functions, for their conduct, replete,

as is alleged, with omissions and commissions, on that delicate Twentieth

of June.  Virtuous Petion sees himself a kind of martyr, or pseudo-martyr,

threatened with several things; drawls out due heroical lamentation; to

which Patriot Paris and Patriot Legislative duly respond.  King Louis and

Mayor Petion have already had an interview on that business of the

Twentieth; an interview and dialogue, distinguished by frankness on both

sides; ending on King Louis's side with the words, "Taisez-vous, Hold your

peace."



For the rest, this of suspending our Mayor does seem a mistimed measure. 

By ill chance, it came out precisely on the day of that famous Baiser de

l'amourette, or miraculous reconciliatory Delilah-Kiss, which we spoke of

long ago.  Which Delilah-Kiss was thereby quite hindered of effect.  For

now his Majesty has to write, almost that same night, asking a reconciled

Assembly for advice!  The reconciled Assembly will not advise; will not

interfere.  The King confirms the suspension; then perhaps, but not till

then will the Assembly interfere, the noise of Patriot Paris getting loud. 

Whereby your Delilah-Kiss, such was the destiny of Parliament First,

becomes a Philistine Battle!



Nay there goes a word that as many as Thirty of our chief Patriot Senators

are to be clapped in prison, by mittimus and indictment of Feuillant

Justices, Juges de Paix; who here in Paris were well capable of such a

thing.  It was but in May last that Juge de Paix Lariviere, on complaint of

Bertrand-Moleville touching that Austrian Committee, made bold to launch

his mittimus against three heads of the Mountain, Deputies Bazire, Chabot,

Merlin, the Cordelier Trio; summoning them to appear before him, and shew

where that Austrian Committee was, or else suffer the consequences.  Which

mittimus the Trio, on their side, made bold to fling in the fire:  and

valiantly pleaded privilege of Parliament.  So that, for his zeal without

knowledge, poor Justice Lariviere now sits in the prison of Orleans,

waiting trial from the Haute Cour there.  Whose example, may it not deter

other rash Justices; and so this word of the Thirty arrestments continue a

word merely?



But on the whole, though Lafayette weighed so light, and has had his Mai

plucked up, Official Feuillantism falters not a whit; but carries its head

high, strong in the letter of the Law.  Feuillants all of these men:  a

Feuillant Directory; founding on high character, and such like; with Duke

de la Rochefoucault for President,--a thing which may prove dangerous for

him!  Dim now is the once bright Anglomania of these admired Noblemen. 

Duke de Liancourt offers, out of Normandy where he is Lord-Lieutenant, not

only to receive his Majesty, thinking of flight thither, but to lend him

money to enormous amounts.  Sire, it is not a Revolt, it is a Revolution;

and truly no rose-water one!  Worthier Noblemen were not in France nor in

Europe than those two:  but the Time is crooked, quick-shifting, perverse;

what straightest course will lead to any goal, in it?



Another phasis which we note, in these early July days, is that of certain

thin streaks of Federate National Volunteers wending from various points

towards Paris, to hold a new Federation-Festival, or Feast of Pikes, on the

Fourteenth there.  So has the National Assembly wished it, so has the

Nation willed it.  In this way, perhaps, may we still have our Patriot Camp

in spite of Veto.  For cannot these Federes, having celebrated their Feast

of Pikes, march on to Soissons; and, there being drilled and regimented,

rush to the Frontiers, or whither we like?  Thus were the one Veto

cunningly eluded!



As indeed the other Veto, about Priests, is also like to be eluded; and

without much cunning.  For Provincial Assemblies, in Calvados as one

instance, are proceeding on their own strength to judge and banish

Antinational Priests.  Or still worse without Provincial Assembly, a

desperate People, as at Bourdeaux, can 'hang two of them on the Lanterne,'

on the way towards judgment.  (Hist. Parl. xvi. 259.)  Pity for the spoken

Veto, when it cannot become an acted one!



It is true, some ghost of a War-minister, or Home-minister, for the time

being, ghost whom we do not name, does write to Municipalities and King's

Commanders, that they shall, by all conceivable methods, obstruct this

Federation, and even turn back the Federes by force of arms:  a message

which scatters mere doubt, paralysis and confusion; irritates the poor

Legislature; reduces the Federes as we see, to thin streaks.  But being

questioned, this ghost and the other ghosts, What it is then that they

propose to do for saving the country?--they answer, That they cannot tell;

that indeed they for their part have, this morning, resigned in a body; and

do now merely respectfully take leave of the helm altogether.  With which

words they rapidly walk out of the Hall, sortent brusquement de la salle,

the 'Galleries cheering loudly,' the poor Legislature sitting 'for a good

while in silence!'  (Moniteur, Seance du Juillet 1792.)  Thus do Cabinet-

ministers themselves, in extreme cases, strike work; one of the strangest

omens.  Other complete Cabinet-ministry there will not be; only fragments,

and these changeful, which never get completed; spectral Apparitions that

cannot so much as appear!  King Louis writes that he now views this

Federation Feast with approval; and will himself have the pleasure to take

part in the same.



And so these thin streaks of Federes wend Parisward through a paralytic

France.  Thin grim streaks; not thick joyful ranks, as of old to the first

Feast of Pikes!  No:  these poor Federates march now towards Austria and

Austrian Committee, towards jeopardy and forlorn hope; men of hard fortune

and temper, not rich in the world's goods.  Municipalities, paralyzed by

War-ministers are shy of affording cash:  it may be, your poor Federates

cannot arm themselves, cannot march, till the Daughter-Society of the place

open her pocket, and subscribe.  There will not have arrived, at the set

day, Three thousand of them in all.  And yet, thin and feeble as these

streaks of Federates seem, they are the only thing one discerns moving with

any clearness of aim, in this strange scene.  Angry buz and simmer; uneasy

tossing and moaning of a huge France, all enchanted, spell-bound by

unmarching Constitution, into frightful conscious and unconscious Magnetic-

sleep; which frightful Magnetic-sleep must now issue soon in one of two

things:  Death or Madness!  The Federes carry mostly in their pocket some

earnest cry and Petition, to have the 'National Executive put in action;'

or as a step towards that, to have the King's Decheance, King's Forfeiture,

or at least his Suspension, pronounced.  They shall be welcome to the

Legislative, to the Mother of Patriotism; and Paris will provide for their

lodging.



Decheance, indeed:  and, what next?  A France spell-free, a Revolution

saved; and any thing, and all things next! so answer grimly Danton and the

unlimited Patriots, down deep in their subterranean region of Plot, whither

they have now dived.  Decheance, answers Brissot with the limited:  And if

next the little Prince Royal were crowned, and some Regency of Girondins

and recalled Patriot Ministry set over him?  Alas, poor Brissot; looking,

as indeed poor man does always, on the nearest morrow as his peaceable

promised land; deciding what must reach to the world's end, yet with an

insight that reaches not beyond his own nose!  Wiser are the unlimited

subterranean Patriots, who with light for the hour itself, leave the rest

to the gods.



Or were it not, as we now stand, the probablest issue of all, that

Brunswick, in Coblentz, just gathering his huge limbs towards him to rise,

might arrive first; and stop both Decheance, and theorizing on it? 

Brunswick is on the eve of marching; with Eighty Thousand, they say; fell

Prussians, Hessians, feller Emigrants:  a General of the Great Frederick,

with such an Army.  And our Armies?  And our Generals?  As for Lafayette,

on whose late visit a Committee is sitting and all France is jarring and

censuring, he seems readier to fight us than fight Brunswick.  Luckner and

Lafayette pretend to be interchanging corps, and are making movements;

which Patriotism cannot understand.  This only is very clear, that their

corps go marching and shuttling, in the interior of the country; much

nearer Paris than formerly!  Luckner has ordered Dumouriez down to him,

down from Maulde, and the Fortified Camp there.  Which order the many-

counselled Dumouriez, with the Austrians hanging close on him, he busy

meanwhile training a few thousands to stand fire and be soldiers, declares

that, come of it what will, he cannot obey.  (Dumouriez, ii. 1, 5.)  Will a

poor Legislative, therefore, sanction Dumouriez; who applies to it, 'not

knowing whether there is any War-ministry?'  Or sanction Luckner and these

Lafayette movements?



The poor Legislative knows not what to do.  It decrees, however, that the

Staff of the Paris Guard, and indeed all such Staffs, for they are

Feuillants mostly, shall be broken and replaced.  It decrees earnestly in

what manner one can declare that the Country is in Danger.  And finally, on

the 11th of July, the morrow of that day when the Ministry struck work, it

decrees that the Country be, with all despatch, declared in Danger. 

Whereupon let the King sanction; let the Municipality take measures:  if

such Declaration will do service, it need not fail.



In Danger, truly, if ever Country was!  Arise, O Country; or be trodden

down to ignominious ruin!  Nay, are not the chances a hundred to one that

no rising of the Country will save it; Brunswick, the Emigrants, and Feudal

Europe drawing nigh?







Chapter 2.6.II.



Let us march.



But to our minds the notablest of all these moving phenomena, is that of

Barbaroux's 'Six Hundred Marseillese who know how to die.'



Prompt to the request of Barbaroux, the Marseilles Municipality has got

these men together:  on the fifth morning of July, the Townhall says,

"Marchez, abatez le Tyran, March, strike down the Tyrant;" (Dampmartin, ii.

183.) and they, with grim appropriate "Marchons," are marching.  Long

journey, doubtful errand; Enfans de la Patrie, may a good genius guide you!

Their own wild heart and what faith it has will guide them:  and is not

that the monition of some genius, better or worse?  Five Hundred and

Seventeen able men, with Captains of fifties and tens; well armed all,

musket on shoulder, sabre on thigh:  nay they drive three pieces of cannon;

for who knows what obstacles may occur?  Municipalities there are,

paralyzed by War-minister; Commandants with orders to stop even Federation

Volunteers; good, when sound arguments will not open a Town-gate, if you

have a petard to shiver it!  They have left their sunny Phocean City and

Sea-haven, with its bustle and its bloom:  the thronging Course, with high-

frondent Avenues, pitchy dockyards, almond and olive groves, orange trees

on house-tops, and white glittering bastides that crown the hills, are all

behind them.  They wend on their wild way, from the extremity of French

land, through unknown cities, toward an unknown destiny; with a purpose

that they know.



Much wondering at this phenomenon, and how, in a peaceable trading City, so

many householders or hearth-holders do severally fling down their crafts

and industrial tools; gird themselves with weapons of war, and set out on a

journey of six hundred miles to 'strike down the tyrant,'--you search in

all Historical Books, Pamphlets, and Newspapers, for some light on it: 

unhappily without effect.  Rumour and Terror precede this march; which

still echo on you; the march itself an unknown thing.  Weber, in the back-

stairs of the Tuileries, has understood that they were Forcats, Galley-

slaves and mere scoundrels, these Marseillese; that, as they marched

through Lyons, the people shut their shops;--also that the number of them

was some Four Thousand.  Equally vague is Blanc Gilli, who likewise murmurs

about Forcats and danger of plunder.  (See Barbaroux, Memoires (Note in p.

40, 41.).)  Forcats they were not; neither was there plunder, or danger of

it.  Men of regular life, or of the best-filled purse, they could hardly

be; the one thing needful in them was that they 'knew how to die.'  Friend

Dampmartin saw them, with his own eyes, march 'gradually' through his

quarters at Villefranche in the Beaujolais:  but saw in the vaguest manner;

being indeed preoccupied, and himself minded for matching just then--across

the Rhine.  Deep was his astonishment to think of such a march, without

appointment or arrangement, station or ration:  for the rest it was 'the

same men he had seen formerly' in the troubles of the South; 'perfectly

civil;' though his soldiers could not be kept from talking a little with

them.  (Dampmartin, ubi supra.)



So vague are all these; Moniteur, Histoire Parlementaire are as good as

silent:  garrulous History, as is too usual, will say nothing where you

most wish her to speak!  If enlightened Curiosity ever get sight of the

Marseilles Council-Books, will it not perhaps explore this strangest of

Municipal procedures; and feel called to fish up what of the Biographies,

creditable or discreditable, of these Five Hundred and Seventeen, the

stream of Time has not yet irrevocably swallowed?



As it is, these Marseillese remain inarticulate, undistinguishable in

feature; a blackbrowed Mass, full of grim fire, who wend there, in the hot

sultry weather:  very singular to contemplate.  They wend; amid the

infinitude of doubt and dim peril; they not doubtful:  Fate and Feudal

Europe, having decided, come girdling in from without:  they, having also

decided, do march within.  Dusty of face, with frugal refreshment, they

plod onwards; unweariable, not to be turned aside.  Such march will become

famous.  The Thought, which works voiceless in this blackbrowed mass, an

inspired Tyrtaean Colonel, Rouget de Lille whom the Earth still holds,

(A.D. 1836.) has translated into grim melody and rhythm; into his Hymn or

March of the Marseillese:  luckiest musical-composition ever promulgated. 

The sound of which will make the blood tingle in men's veins; and whole

Armies and Assemblages will sing it, with eyes weeping and burning, with

hearts defiant of Death, Despot and Devil.



One sees well, these Marseillese will be too late for the Federation Feast.

In fact, it is not Champ-de-Mars Oaths that they have in view.  They have

quite another feat to do:  a paralytic National Executive to set in action.

They must 'strike down' whatsoever 'Tyrant,' or Martyr-Faineant, there may

be who paralyzes it; strike and be struck; and on the whole prosper and

know how to die.







Chapter 2.6.III.



Some Consolation to Mankind.



Of the Federation Feast itself we shall say almost nothing.  There are

Tents pitched in the Champ-de-Mars; tent for National Assembly; tent for

Hereditary Representative,--who indeed is there too early, and has to wait

long in it.  There are Eighty-three symbolical Departmental Trees-of-

Liberty; trees and mais enough:  beautifullest of all these is one huge

mai, hung round with effete Scutcheons, Emblazonries and Genealogy-books;

nay better still, with Lawyers'-bags, 'sacs de procedure:' which shall be

burnt.  The Thirty seat-rows of that famed Slope are again full; we have a

bright Sun; and all is marching, streamering and blaring:  but what avails

it?  Virtuous Mayor Petion, whom Feuillantism had suspended, was reinstated

only last night, by Decree of the Assembly.  Men's humour is of the

sourest.  Men's hats have on them, written in chalk, 'Vive Petion;' and

even, 'Petion or Death, Petion ou la Mort.'



Poor Louis, who has waited till five o'clock before the Assembly would

arrive, swears the National Oath this time, with a quilted cuirass under

his waistcoat which will turn pistol-bullets.  (Campan, ii. c. 20; De

Stael, ii. c. 7.)  Madame de Stael, from that Royal Tent, stretches out the

neck in a kind of agony, lest the waving multitudes which receive him may

not render him back alive.  No cry of Vive le Roi salutes the ear; cries

only of Vive Petion; Petion ou la Mort.  The National Solemnity is as it

were huddled by; each cowering off almost before the evolutions are gone

through.  The very Mai with its Scutcheons and Lawyers'-bags is forgotten,

stands unburnt; till 'certain Patriot Deputies,' called by the people, set

a torch to it, by way of voluntary after-piece.  Sadder Feast of Pikes no

man ever saw.



Mayor Petion, named on hats, is at his zenith in this Federation; Lafayette

again is close upon his nadir.  Why does the stormbell of Saint-Roch speak

out, next Saturday; why do the citizens shut their shops?  (Moniteur,

Seance du 21 Juillet 1792.)  It is Sections defiling, it is fear of

effervescence.  Legislative Committee, long deliberating on Lafayette and

that Anti-jacobin Visit of his, reports, this day, that there is 'not

ground for Accusation!'  Peace, ye Patriots, nevertheless; and let that

tocsin cease:  the Debate is not finished, nor the Report accepted; but

Brissot, Isnard and the Mountain will sift it, and resift it, perhaps for

some three weeks longer.



So many bells, stormbells and noises do ring;--scarcely audible; one

drowning the other.  For example:  in this same Lafayette tocsin, of

Saturday, was there not withal some faint bob-minor, and Deputation of

Legislative, ringing the Chevalier Paul Jones to his long rest; tocsin or

dirge now all one to him!  Not ten days hence Patriot Brissot, beshouted

this day by the Patriot Galleries, shall find himself begroaned by them, on

account of his limited Patriotism; nay pelted at while perorating, and 'hit

with two prunes.'  (Hist. Parl. xvi. 185.)  It is a distracted empty-

sounding world; of bob-minors and bob-majors, of triumph and terror, of

rise and fall!



The more touching is this other Solemnity, which happens on the morrow of

the Lafayette tocsin:  Proclamation that the Country is in Danger.  Not

till the present Sunday could such Solemnity be.  The Legislative decreed

it almost a fortnight ago; but Royalty and the ghost of a Ministry held

back as they could.  Now however, on this Sunday, 22nd day of July 1792, it

will hold back no longer; and the Solemnity in very deed is.  Touching to

behold!  Municipality and Mayor have on their scarfs; cannon-salvo booms

alarm from the Pont-Neuf, and single-gun at intervals all day.  Guards are

mounted, scarfed Notabilities, Halberdiers, and a Cavalcade; with

streamers, emblematic flags; especially with one huge Flag, flapping

mournfully:  Citoyens, la Patrie est en Danger.  They roll through the

streets, with stern-sounding music, and slow rattle of hoofs:  pausing at

set stations, and with doleful blast of trumpet, singing out through

Herald's throat, what the Flag says to the eye:  "Citizens, the Country is

in Danger!"



Is there a man's heart that hears it without a thrill?  The many-voiced

responsive hum or bellow of these multitudes is not of triumph; and yet it

is a sound deeper than triumph.  But when the long Cavalcade and

Proclamation ended; and our huge Flag was fixed on the Pont Neuf, another

like it on the Hotel-de-Ville, to wave there till better days; and each

Municipal sat in the centre of his Section, in a Tent raised in some open

square, Tent surmounted with flags of Patrie en danger, and topmost of all

a Pike and Bonnet Rouge; and, on two drums in front of him, there lay a

plank-table, and on this an open Book, and a Clerk sat, like recording-

angel, ready to write the Lists, or as we say to enlist!  O, then, it

seems, the very gods might have looked down on it.  Young Patriotism,

Culottic and Sansculottic, rushes forward emulous:  That is my name; name,

blood, and life, is all my Country's; why have I nothing more!  Youths of

short stature weep that they are below size.  Old men come forward, a son

in each hand.  Mothers themselves will grant the son of their travail; send

him, though with tears.  And the multitude bellows Vive la Patrie, far

reverberating.  And fire flashes in the eyes of men;--and at eventide, your

Municipal returns to the Townhall, followed by his long train of volunteer

Valour; hands in his List:  says proudly, looking round.  This is my day's

harvest.  (Tableau de la Revolution, para Patrie en Danger.)  They will

march, on the morrow, to Soissons; small bundle holding all their chattels.



So, with Vive la Patrie, Vive la Liberte, stone Paris reverberates like

Ocean in his caves; day after day, Municipals enlisting in tricolor Tent;

the Flag flapping on Pont Neuf and Townhall, Citoyens, la Patrie est en

Danger.  Some Ten thousand fighters, without discipline but full of heart,

are on march in few days.  The like is doing in every Town of France.--

Consider therefore whether the Country will want defenders, had we but a

National Executive?  Let the Sections and Primary Assemblies, at any rate,

become Permanent, and sit continually in Paris, and over France, by

Legislative Decree dated Wednesday the 25th.  (Moniteur, Seance du 25

Juillet 1792.)



Mark contrariwise how, in these very hours, dated the 25th, Brunswick

shakes himself 's'ebranle,' in Coblentz; and takes the road!  Shakes

himself indeed; one spoken word becomes such a shaking.  Successive,

simultaneous dirl of thirty thousand muskets shouldered; prance and jingle

of ten-thousand horsemen, fanfaronading Emigrants in the van; drum, kettle-

drum; noise of weeping, swearing; and the immeasurable lumbering clank of

baggage-waggons and camp-kettles that groan into motion:  all this is

Brunswick shaking himself; not without all this does the one man march,

'covering a space of forty miles.'  Still less without his Manifesto,

dated, as we say, the 25th; a State-Paper worthy of attention!



By this Document, it would seem great things are in store for France.  The

universal French People shall now have permission to rally round Brunswick

and his Emigrant Seigneurs; tyranny of a Jacobin Faction shall oppress them

no more; but they shall return, and find favour with their own good King;

who, by Royal Declaration (three years ago) of the Twenty-third of June,

said that he would himself make them happy.  As for National Assembly, and

other Bodies of Men invested with some temporary shadow of authority, they

are charged to maintain the King's Cities and Strong Places intact, till

Brunswick arrive to take delivery of them.  Indeed, quick submission may

extenuate many things; but to this end it must be quick.  Any National

Guard or other unmilitary person found resisting in arms shall be 'treated

as a traitor;' that is to say, hanged with promptitude.  For the rest, if

Paris, before Brunswick gets thither, offer any insult to the King:  or,

for example, suffer a faction to carry the King away elsewhither; in that

case Paris shall be blasted asunder with cannon-shot and 'military

execution.'  Likewise all other Cities, which may witness, and not resist

to the uttermost, such forced-march of his Majesty, shall be blasted

asunder; and Paris and every City of them, starting-place, course and goal

of said sacrilegious forced-march, shall, as rubbish and smoking ruin, lie

there for a sign.  Such vengeance were indeed signal, 'an insigne

vengeance:'--O Brunswick, what words thou writest and blusterest!  In this

Paris, as in old Nineveh, are so many score thousands that know not the

right hand from the left, and also much cattle.  Shall the very milk-cows,

hard-living cadgers'-asses, and poor little canary-birds die?



Nor is Royal and Imperial Prussian-Austrian Declaration wanting: setting

forth, in the amplest manner, their Sanssouci-Schonbrunn version of this

whole French Revolution, since the first beginning of it; and with what

grief these high heads have seen such things done under the Sun:  however,

'as some small consolation to mankind,' (Annual Register (1792), p. 236.)

they do now despatch Brunswick; regardless of expense, as one might say, of

sacrifices on their own part; for is it not the first duty to console men?



Serene Highnesses, who sit there protocolling and manifestoing, and

consoling mankind! how were it if, for once in the thousand years, your

parchments, formularies, and reasons of state were blown to the four winds;

and Reality Sans-indispensables stared you, even you, in the face; and

Mankind said for itself what the thing was that would console it?--







Chapter 2.6.IV.



Subterranean.



But judge if there was comfort in this to the Sections all sitting

permanent; deliberating how a National Executive could be put in action!



High rises the response, not of cackling terror, but of crowing counter-

defiance, and Vive la Nation; young Valour streaming towards the Frontiers;

Patrie en Danger mutely beckoning on the Pont Neuf.  Sections are busy, in

their permanent Deep; and down, lower still, works unlimited Patriotism,

seeking salvation in plot.  Insurrection, you would say, becomes once more

the sacredest of duties?  Committee, self-chosen, is sitting at the Sign of

the Golden Sun:  Journalist Carra, Camille Desmoulins, Alsatian Westermann

friend of Danton, American Fournier of Martinique;--a Committee not unknown

to Mayor Petion, who, as an official person, must sleep with one eye open. 

Not unknown to Procureur Manuel; least of all to Procureur-Substitute

Danton!  He, wrapped in darkness, being also official, bears it on his

giant shoulder; cloudy invisible Atlas of the whole.



Much is invisible; the very Jacobins have their reticences.  Insurrection

is to be:  but when?  This only we can discern, that such Federes as are

not yet gone to Soissons, as indeed are not inclined to go yet, "for

reasons," says the Jacobin President, "which it may be interesting not to

state," have got a Central Committee sitting close by, under the roof of

the Mother Society herself.  Also, what in such ferment and danger of

effervescence is surely proper, the Forty-eight Sections have got their

Central Committee; intended 'for prompt communication.'  To which Central

Committee the Municipality, anxious to have it at hand, could not refuse an

Apartment in the Hotel-de-Ville.



Singular City!  For overhead of all this, there is the customary baking and

brewing; Labour hammers and grinds.  Frilled promenaders saunter under the

trees; white-muslin promenaderess, in green parasol, leaning on your arm. 

Dogs dance, and shoeblacks polish, on that Pont Neuf itself, where

Fatherland is in danger.  So much goes its course; and yet the course of

all things is nigh altering and ending.



Look at that Tuileries and Tuileries Garden.  Silent all as Sahara; none

entering save by ticket!  They shut their Gates, after the Day of the Black

Breeches; a thing they had the liberty to do.  However, the National

Assembly grumbled something about Terrace of the Feuillants, how said

Terrace lay contiguous to the back entrance to their Salle, and was partly

National Property; and so now National Justice has stretched a Tricolor

Riband athwart, by way of boundary-line, respected with splenetic

strictness by all Patriots.  It hangs there that Tricolor boundary-line;

carries 'satirical inscriptions on cards,' generally in verse; and all

beyond this is called Coblentz, and remains vacant; silent, as a fateful

Golgotha; sunshine and umbrage alternating on it in vain.  Fateful Circuit;

what hope can dwell in it?  Mysterious Tickets of Entry introduce

themselves; speak of Insurrection very imminent.  Rivarol's Staff of Genius

had better purchase blunderbusses; Grenadier bonnets, red Swiss uniforms

may be useful.  Insurrection will come; but likewise will it not be met? 

Staved off, one may hope, till Brunswick arrive?



But consider withal if the Bourne-stones and Portable chairs remain silent;

if the Herald's College of Bill-Stickers sleep!  Louvet's Sentinel warns

gratis on all walls; Sulleau is busy:  People's-Friend Marat and King's-

Friend Royou croak and counter-croak.  For the man Marat, though long

hidden since that Champ-de-Mars Massacre, is still alive.  He has lain, who

knows in what Cellars; perhaps in Legendre's; fed by a steak of Legendre's

killing:  but, since April, the bull-frog voice of him sounds again;

hoarsest of earthly cries.  For the present, black terror haunts him:  O

brave Barbaroux wilt thou not smuggle me to Marseilles, 'disguised as a

jockey?'  (Barbaroux, p. 60.)  In Palais-Royal and all public places, as we

read, there is sharp activity; private individuals haranguing that Valour

may enlist; haranguing that the Executive may be put in action.  Royalist

journals ought to be solemnly burnt:  argument thereupon; debates which

generally end in single-stick, coups de cannes.  (Newspapers, Narratives

and Documents (Hist. Parl. xv. 240; xvi. 399.)  Or think of this; the hour

midnight; place Salle de Manege; august Assembly just adjourning: 

'Citizens of both sexes enter in a rush exclaiming, Vengeance:  they are

poisoning our Brothers;'--baking brayed-glass among their bread at

Soissons!  Vergniaud has to speak soothing words, How Commissioners are

already sent to investigate this brayed-glass, and do what is needful

therein: till the rush of Citizens 'makes profound silence:'  and goes home

to its bed.



Such is Paris; the heart of a France like to it.  Preternatural suspicion,

doubt, disquietude, nameless anticipation, from shore to shore:--and those

blackbrowed Marseillese, marching, dusty, unwearied, through the midst of

it; not doubtful they.  Marching to the grim music of their hearts, they

consume continually the long road, these three weeks and more; heralded by

Terror and Rumour.  The Brest Federes arrive on the 26th; through hurrahing

streets.  Determined men are these also, bearing or not bearing the Sacred

Pikes of Chateau-Vieux; and on the whole decidedly disinclined for Soissons

as yet.  Surely the Marseillese Brethren do draw nigher all days.







Chapter 2.6.V.



At Dinner.



It was a bright day for Charenton, that 29th of the month, when the

Marseillese Brethren actually came in sight.  Barbaroux, Santerre and

Patriots have gone out to meet the grim Wayfarers.  Patriot clasps dusty

Patriot to his bosom; there is footwashing and refection:  'dinner of

twelve hundred covers at the Blue Dial, Cadran Bleu;' and deep interior

consultation, that one wots not of.  (Deux Amis, viii. 90-101.) 

Consultation indeed which comes to little; for Santerre, with an open

purse, with a loud voice, has almost no head.  Here however we repose this

night:  on the morrow is public entry into Paris.



On which public entry the Day-Historians, Diurnalists, or Journalists as

they call themselves, have preserved record enough.  How Saint-Antoine male

and female, and Paris generally, gave brotherly welcome, with bravo and

hand-clapping, in crowded streets; and all passed in the peaceablest

manner;--except it might be our Marseillese pointed out here and there a

riband-cockade, and beckoned that it should be snatched away, and exchanged

for a wool one; which was done.  How the Mother Society in a body has come

as far as the Bastille-ground, to embrace you.  How you then wend onwards,

triumphant, to the Townhall, to be embraced by Mayor Petion; to put down

your muskets in the Barracks of Nouvelle France, not far off;--then towards

the appointed Tavern in the Champs Elysees to enjoy a frugal Patriot

repast.  (Hist. Parl. xvi. 196.  See Barbaroux, p. 51-5.)



Of all which the indignant Tuileries may, by its Tickets of Entry, have

warning.  Red Swiss look doubly sharp to their Chateau-Grates;--though

surely there is no danger?  Blue Grenadiers of the Filles-Saint-Thomas

Section are on duty there this day:  men of Agio, as we have seen; with

stuffed purses, riband-cockades; among whom serves Weber.  A party of these

latter, with Captains, with sundry Feuillant Notabilities, Moreau de Saint-

Mery of the three thousand orders, and others, have been dining, much more

respectably, in a Tavern hard by.  They have dined, and are now drinking

Loyal-Patriotic toasts; while the Marseillese, National-Patriotic merely,

are about sitting down to their frugal covers of delf.  How it happened

remains to this day undemonstrable:  but the external fact is, certain of

these Filles-Saint-Thomas Grenadiers do issue from their Tavern; perhaps

touched, surely not yet muddled with any liquor they have had;--issue in

the professed intention of testifying to the Marseillese, or to the

multitude of Paris Patriots who stroll in these spaces, That they, the

Filles-Saint-Thomas men, if well seen into, are not a whit less Patriotic

than any other class of men whatever.



It was a rash errand!  For how can the strolling multitudes credit such a

thing; or do other indeed than hoot at it, provoking, and provoked;--till

Grenadier sabres stir in the scabbard, and a sharp shriek rises:  "A nous

Marseillais, Help Marseillese!"  Quick as lightning, for the frugal repast

is not yet served, that Marseillese Tavern flings itself open:  by door, by

window; running, bounding, vault forth the Five hundred and Seventeen

undined Patriots; and, sabre flashing from thigh, are on the scene of

controversy.  Will ye parley, ye Grenadier Captains and official Persons;

'with faces grown suddenly pale,' the Deponents say?  (Moniteur, Seances du

30, du 31 Juillet 1792 (Hist. Parl. xvi. 197-210.)  Advisabler were instant

moderately swift retreat!  The Filles-Saint-Thomas retreat, back foremost;

then, alas, face foremost, at treble-quick time; the Marseillese, according

to a Deponent, "clearing the fences and ditches after them like lions: 

Messieurs, it was an imposing spectacle."



Thus they retreat, the Marseillese following.  Swift and swifter, towards

the Tuileries:  where the Drawbridge receives the bulk of the fugitives;

and, then suddenly drawn up, saves them; or else the green mud of the Ditch

does it.  The bulk of them; not all; ah, no!  Moreau de Saint-Mery for

example, being too fat, could not fly fast; he got a stroke, flat-stroke

only, over the shoulder-blades, and fell prone;--and disappears there from

the History of the Revolution.  Cuts also there were, pricks in the

posterior fleshy parts; much rending of skirts, and other discrepant waste.

But poor Sub-lieutenant Duhamel, innocent Change-broker, what a lot for

him!  He turned on his pursuer, or pursuers, with a pistol; he fired and

missed; drew a second pistol, and again fired and missed; then ran: 

unhappily in vain.  In the Rue Saint-Florentin, they clutched him; thrust

him through, in red rage:  that was the end of the New Era, and of all

Eras, to poor Duhamel.



Pacific readers can fancy what sort of grace-before-meat this was to frugal

Patriotism.  Also how the Battalion of the Filles-Saint-Thomas 'drew out in

arms,' luckily without further result; how there was accusation at the Bar

of the Assembly, and counter-accusation and defence; Marseillese

challenging the sentence of free jury court,--which never got to a

decision.  We ask rather, What the upshot of all these distracted wildly

accumulating things may, by probability, be?  Some upshot; and the time

draws nigh!  Busy are Central Committees, of Federes at the Jacobins

Church, of Sections at the Townhall; Reunion of Carra, Camille and Company

at the Golden Sun.  Busy:  like submarine deities, or call them mud-gods,

working there in the deep murk of waters:  till the thing be ready.



And how your National Assembly, like a ship waterlogged, helmless, lies

tumbling; the Galleries, of shrill Women, of Federes with sabres, bellowing

down on it, not unfrightful;--and waits where the waves of chance may

please to strand it; suspicious, nay on the Left side, conscious, what

submarine Explosion is meanwhile a-charging!  Petition for King's

Forfeiture rises often there:  Petition from Paris Section, from Provincial

Patriot Towns; From Alencon, Briancon, and 'the Traders at the Fair of

Beaucaire.'  Or what of these?  On the 3rd of August, Mayor Petion and the

Municipality come petitioning for Forfeiture:  they openly, in their

tricolor Municipal scarfs.  Forfeiture is what all Patriots now want and

expect.  All Brissotins want Forfeiture; with the little Prince Royal for

King, and us for Protector over him.  Emphatic Federes asks the

legislature:  "Can you save us, or not?"  Forty-seven Seconds have agreed

to Forfeiture; only that of the Filles-Saint-Thomas pretending to disagree. 

Nay Section Mauconseil declares Forfeiture to be, properly speaking, come;

Mauconseil for one 'does from this day,' the last of July, 'cease

allegiance to Louis,' and take minute of the same before all men.  A thing

blamed aloud; but which will be praised aloud; and the name Mauconseil, of

Ill-counsel, be thenceforth changed to Bonconseil, of Good-counsel.



President Danton, in the Cordeliers Section, does another thing:  invites

all Passive Citizens to take place among the Active in Section-business,

one peril threatening all.  Thus he, though an official person; cloudy

Atlas of the whole.  Likewise he manages to have that blackbrowed Battalion

of Marseillese shifted to new Barracks, in his own region of the remote

South-East.  Sleek Chaumette, cruel Billaud, Deputy Chabot the Disfrocked,

Huguenin with the tocsin in his heart, will welcome them there.  Wherefore,

again and again:  "O Legislators, can you save us or not?"  Poor

Legislators; with their Legislature waterlogged, volcanic Explosion

charging under it!  Forfeiture shall be debated on the ninth day of August;

that miserable business of Lafayette may be expected to terminate on the

eighth.



Or will the humane Reader glance into the Levee-day of Sunday the fifth? 

The last Levee!  Not for a long time, 'never,' says Bertrand-Moleville, had

a Levee been so brilliant, at least so crowded.  A sad presaging interest

sat on every face; Bertrand's own eyes were filled with tears.  For,

indeed, outside of that Tricolor Riband on the Feuillants Terrace,

Legislature is debating, Sections are defiling, all Paris is astir this

very Sunday, demanding Decheance.  (Hist. Parl. xvi. 337-9.)  Here,

however, within the riband, a grand proposal is on foot, for the hundredth

time, of carrying his Majesty to Rouen and the Castle of Gaillon.  Swiss at

Courbevoye are in readiness; much is ready; Majesty himself seems almost

ready.  Nevertheless, for the hundredth time, Majesty, when near the point

of action, draws back; writes, after one has waited, palpitating, an

endless summer day, that 'he has reason to believe the Insurrection is not

so ripe as you suppose.'  Whereat Bertrand-Moleville breaks forth 'into

extremity at one of spleen and despair, d'humeur et de desespoir.' 

(Bertrand-Moleville, Memoires, ii. 129.)







Chapter 2.6.VI.



The Steeples at Midnight.



For, in truth, the Insurrection is just about ripe.  Thursday is the ninth

of the month August:  if Forfeiture be not pronounced by the Legislature

that day, we must pronounce it ourselves.



Legislature?  A poor waterlogged Legislature can pronounce nothing.  On

Wednesday the eighth, after endless oratory once again, they cannot even

pronounce Accusation again Lafayette; but absolve him,--hear it,

Patriotism!--by a majority of two to one.  Patriotism hears it; Patriotism,

hounded on by Prussian Terror, by Preternatural Suspicion, roars tumultuous

round the Salle de Manege, all day; insults many leading Deputies, of the

absolvent Right-side; nay chases them, collars them with loud menace: 

Deputy Vaublanc, and others of the like, are glad to take refuge in

Guardhouses, and escape by the back window.  And so, next day, there is

infinite complaint; Letter after Letter from insulted Deputy; mere

complaint, debate and self-cancelling jargon:  the sun of Thursday sets

like the others, and no Forfeiture pronounced.  Wherefore in fine, To your

tents, O Israel!



The Mother-Society ceases speaking; groups cease haranguing:  Patriots,

with closed lips now, 'take one another's arm;' walk off, in rows, two and

two, at a brisk business-pace; and vanish afar in the obscure places of the

East.  (Deux Amis, viii. 129-88.)  Santerre is ready; or we will make him

ready.  Forty-seven of the Forty-eight Sections are ready; nay Filles-

Saint-Thomas itself turns up the Jacobin side of it, turns down the

Feuillant side of it, and is ready too.  Let the unlimited Patriot look to

his weapon, be it pike, be it firelock; and the Brest brethren, above all,

the blackbrowed Marseillese prepare themselves for the extreme hour! 

Syndic Roederer knows, and laments or not as the issue may turn, that 'five

thousand ball-cartridges, within these few days, have been distributed to

Federes, at the Hotel-de-Ville.'  (Roederer a la Barre (Seance du 9 Aout

(in Hist. Parl. xvi. 393.)



And ye likewise, gallant gentlemen, defenders of Royalty, crowd ye on your

side to the Tuileries.  Not to a Levee:  no, to a Couchee: where much will

be put to bed.  Your Tickets of Entry are needful; needfuller your

blunderbusses!--They come and crowd, like gallant men who also know how to

die:  old Maille the Camp-Marshal has come, his eyes gleaming once again,

though dimmed by the rheum of almost four-score years.  Courage, Brothers! 

We have a thousand red Swiss; men stanch of heart, steadfast as the granite

of their Alps.  National Grenadiers are at least friends of Order;

Commandant Mandat breathes loyal ardour, will "answer for it on his head." 

Mandat will, and his Staff; for the Staff, though there stands a doom and

Decree to that effect, is happily never yet dissolved.



Commandant Mandat has corresponded with Mayor Petion; carries a written

Order from him these three days, to repel force by force.  A squadron on

the Pont Neuf with cannon shall turn back these Marseillese coming across

the River:  a squadron at the Townhall shall cut Saint-Antoine in two, 'as

it issues from the Arcade Saint-Jean;' drive one half back to the obscure

East, drive the other half forward through 'the Wickets of the Louvre.' 

Squadrons not a few, and mounted squadrons; squadrons in the Palais Royal,

in the Place Vendome:  all these shall charge, at the right moment; sweep

this street, and then sweep that.  Some new Twentieth of June we shall

have; only still more ineffectual?  Or probably the Insurrection will not

dare to rise at all?  Mandat's Squadrons, Horse-Gendarmerie and blue Guards

march, clattering, tramping; Mandat's Cannoneers rumble.  Under cloud of

night; to the sound of his generale, which begins drumming when men should

go to bed.  It is the 9th night of August, 1792.



On the other hand, the Forty-eight Sections correspond by swift messengers;

are choosing each their 'three Delegates with full powers.'  Syndic

Roederer, Mayor Petion are sent for to the Tuileries:  courageous

Legislators, when the drum beats danger, should repair to their Salle. 

Demoiselle Theroigne has on her grenadier-bonnet, short-skirted riding-

habit; two pistols garnish her small waist, and sabre hangs in baldric by

her side.



Such a game is playing in this Paris Pandemonium, or City of All the

Devils!--And yet the Night, as Mayor Petion walks here in the Tuileries

Garden, 'is beautiful and calm;' Orion and the Pleiades glitter down quite

serene.  Petion has come forth, the 'heat' inside was so oppressive. 

(Roederer, Chronique de Cinquante Jours:  Recit de Petion.  Townhall

Records, &c. (in Hist. Parl. xvi. 399-466.)  Indeed, his Majesty's

reception of him was of the roughest; as it well might be.  And now there

is no outgate; Mandat's blue Squadrons turn you back at every Grate; nay

the Filles-Saint-Thomas Grenadiers give themselves liberties of tongue, How

a virtuous Mayor 'shall pay for it, if there be mischief,' and the like;

though others again are full of civility.  Surely if any man in France is

in straights this night, it is Mayor Petion:  bound, under pain of death,

one may say, to smile dexterously with the one side of his face, and weep

with the other;--death if he do it not dexterously enough!  Not till four

in the morning does a National Assembly, hearing of his plight, summon him

over 'to give account of Paris;' of which he knows nothing:  whereby

however he shall get home to bed, and only his gilt coach be left. 

Scarcely less delicate is Syndic Roederer's task; who must wait whether he

will lament or not, till he see the issue.  Janus Bifrons, or Mr. Facing-

both-ways, as vernacular Bunyan has it!  They walk there, in the meanwhile,

these two Januses, with others of the like double conformation; and 'talk

of indifferent matters.'



Roederer, from time to time, steps in; to listen, to speak; to send for the

Department-Directory itself, he their Procureur Syndic not seeing how to

act.  The Apartments are all crowded; some seven hundred gentlemen in black

elbowing, bustling; red Swiss standing like rocks; ghost, or partial-ghost

of a Ministry, with Roederer and advisers, hovering round their Majesties;

old Marshall Maille kneeling at the King's feet, to say, He and these

gallant gentlemen are come to die for him.  List! through the placid

midnight; clang of the distant stormbell!  So, in very sooth; steeple after

steeple takes up the wondrous tale.  Black Courtiers listen at the windows,

opened for air; discriminate the steeple-bells: (Roederer, ubi supra.) 

this is the tocsin of Saint-Roch; that again, is it not Saint-Jacques,

named de la Boucherie?  Yes, Messieurs!  Or even Saint-Germain l'Auxerrois,

hear ye it not?  The same metal that rang storm, two hundred and twenty

years ago; but by a Majesty's order then; on Saint-Bartholomew's Eve (24th

August, 1572.)--So go the steeple-bells; which Courtiers can discriminate. 

Nay, meseems, there is the Townhall itself; we know it by its sound!  Yes,

Friends, that is the Townhall; discoursing so, to the Night.  Miraculously;

by miraculous metal-tongue and man's arm:  Marat himself, if you knew it,

is pulling at the rope there!  Marat is pulling; Robespierre lies deep,

invisible for the next forty hours; and some men have heart, and some have

as good as none, and not even frenzy will give them any.



What struggling confusion, as the issue slowly draws on; and the doubtful

Hour, with pain and blind struggle, brings forth its Certainty, never to be

abolished!--The Full-power Delegates, three from each Section, a Hundred

and forty-four in all, got gathered at the Townhall, about midnight. 

Mandat's Squadron, stationed there, did not hinder their entering:  are

they not the 'Central Committee of the Sections' who sit here usually;

though in greater number tonight?  They are there:  presided by Confusion,

Irresolution, and the Clack of Tongues.  Swift scouts fly; Rumour buzzes,

of black Courtiers, red Swiss, of Mandat and his Squadrons that shall

charge.  Better put off the Insurrection?  Yes, put it off.  Ha, hark! 

Saint-Antoine booming out eloquent tocsin, of its own accord!--Friends, no: 

ye cannot put off the Insurrection; but must put it on, and live with it,

or die with it.



Swift now, therefore:  let these actual Old Municipals, on sight of the

Full-powers, and mandate of the Sovereign elective People, lay down their

functions; and this New Hundred and forty-four take them up!  Will ye nill

ye, worthy Old Municipals, ye must go.  Nay is it not a happiness for many

a Municipal that he can wash his hands of such a business; and sit there

paralyzed, unaccountable, till the Hour do bring forth; or even go home to

his night's rest?  (Section Documents, Townhall Documents (Hist. Parl. ubi

supra).)  Two only of the Old, or at most three, we retain Mayor Petion,

for the present walking in the Tuileries; Procureur Manuel; Procureur

Substitute Danton, invisible Atlas of the whole.  And so, with our Hundred

and forty-four, among whom are a Tocsin-Huguenin, a Billaud, a Chaumette;

and Editor-Talliens, and Fabre d'Eglantines, Sergents, Panises; and in

brief, either emergent, or else emerged and full-blown, the entire Flower

of unlimited Patriotism:  have we not, as by magic, made a New

Municipality; ready to act in the unlimited manner; and declare itself

roundly, 'in a State of Insurrection!'--First of all, then, be Commandant

Mandat sent for, with that Mayor's-Order of his; also let the New

Municipals visit those Squadrons that were to charge; and let the stormbell

ring its loudest;--and, on the whole, Forward, ye Hundred and forty-four;

retreat is now none for you!



Reader, fancy not, in thy languid way, that Insurrection is easy. 

Insurrection is difficult:  each individual uncertain even of his next

neighbour; totally uncertain of his distant neighbours, what strength is

with him, what strength is against him; certain only that, in case of

failure, his individual portion is the gallows!  Eight hundred thousand

heads, and in each of them a separate estimate of these uncertainties, a

separate theorem of action conformable to that:  out of so many

uncertainties, does the certainty, and inevitable net-result never to be

abolished, go on, at all moments, bodying itself forth;--leading thee also

towards civic-crowns or an ignominious noose.



Could the Reader take an Asmodeus's Flight, and waving open all roofs and

privacies, look down from the Tower of Notre Dame, what a Paris were it! 

Of treble-voice whimperings or vehemence, of bass-voice growlings,

dubitations; Courage screwing itself to desperate defiance; Cowardice

trembling silent within barred doors;--and all round, Dulness calmly

snoring; for much Dulness, flung on its mattresses, always sleeps.  O,

between the clangour of these high-storming tocsins and that snore of

Dulness, what a gamut:  of trepidation, excitation, desperation; and above

it mere Doubt, Danger, Atropos and Nox!



Fighters of this section draw out; hear that the next Section does not; and

thereupon draw in.  Saint-Antoine, on this side the River, is uncertain of

Saint-Marceau on that.  Steady only is the snore of Dulness, are the Six

Hundred Marseillese that know how to die!  Mandat, twice summoned to the

Townhall, has not come.  Scouts fly incessant, in distracted haste; and the

many-whispering voices of Rumour.  Theroigne and unofficial Patriots flit,

dim-visible, exploratory, far and wide; like Night-birds on the wing.  Of

Nationals some Three thousand have followed Mandat and his generale; the

rest follow each his own theorem of the uncertainties:  theorem, that one

should march rather with Saint-Antoine; innumerable theorems, that in such

a case the wholesomest were sleep.  And so the drums beat, in made fits,

and the stormbells peal.  Saint-Antoine itself does but draw out and draw

in; Commandant Santerre, over there, cannot believe that the Marseillese

and Saint Marceau will march.  Thou laggard sonorous Beer-vat, with the

loud voice and timber head, is it time now to palter?  Alsatian Westermann

clutches him by the throat with drawn sabre:  whereupon the Timber-headed

believes.  In this manner wanes the slow night; amid fret, uncertainty and

tocsin; all men's humour rising to the hysterical pitch; and nothing done.



However, Mandat, on the third summons does come;--come, unguarded;

astonished to find the Municipality new.  They question him straitly on

that Mayor's-Order to resist force by force; on that strategic scheme of

cutting Saint-Antoine in two halves:  he answers what he can:  they think

it were right to send this strategic National Commandant to the Abbaye

Prison, and let a Court of Law decide on him.  Alas, a Court of Law, not

Book-Law but primeval Club-Law, crowds and jostles out of doors; all

fretted to the hysterical pitch; cruel as Fear, blind as the Night:  such

Court of Law, and no other, clutches poor Mandat from his constables; beats

him down, massacres him, on the steps of the Townhall.  Look to it, ye new

Municipals; ye People, in a state of Insurrection!  Blood is shed, blood

must be answered for;--alas, in such hysterical humour, more blood will

flow:  for it is as with the Tiger in that; he has only to begin.



Seventeen Individuals have been seized in the Champs Elysees, by

exploratory Patriotism; they flitting dim-visible, by it flitting dim-

visible.  Ye have pistols, rapiers, ye Seventeen?  One of those accursed

'false Patrols;' that go marauding, with Anti-National intent; seeking what

they can spy, what they can spill!  The Seventeen are carried to the

nearest Guard-house; eleven of them escape by back passages.  "How is

this?"  Demoiselle Theroigne appears at the front entrance, with sabre,

pistols, and a train; denounces treasonous connivance; demands, seizes, the

remaining six, that the justice of the People be not trifled with.  Of

which six two more escape in the whirl and debate of the Club-Law Court;

the last unhappy Four are massacred, as Mandat was:  Two Ex-Bodyguards; one

dissipated Abbe; one Royalist Pamphleteer, Sulleau, known to us by name,

Able Editor, and wit of all work.  Poor Sulleau:  his Acts of the Apostles,

and brisk Placard-Journals (for he was an able man) come to Finis, in this

manner; and questionable jesting issues suddenly in horrid earnest!  Such

doings usher in the dawn of the Tenth of August, 1792.



Or think what a night the poor National Assembly has had:  sitting there,

'in great paucity,' attempting to debate;--quivering and shivering;

pointing towards all the thirty-two azimuths at once, as the magnet-needle

does when thunderstorm is in the air!  If the Insurrection come?  If it

come, and fail?  Alas, in that case, may not black Courtiers, with

blunderbusses, red Swiss with bayonets rush over, flushed with victory, and

ask us:  Thou undefinable, waterlogged, self-distractive, self-destructive

Legislative, what dost thou here unsunk?--Or figure the poor National

Guards, bivouacking 'in temporary tents' there; or standing ranked,

shifting from leg to leg, all through the weary night; New tricolor

Municipals ordering one thing, old Mandat Captains ordering another! 

Procureur Manuel has ordered the cannons to be withdrawn from the Pont

Neuf; none ventured to disobey him.  It seemed certain, then, the old Staff

so long doomed has finally been dissolved, in these hours; and Mandat is

not our Commandant now, but Santerre?  Yes, friends:  Santerre henceforth,-

-surely Mandat no more!  The Squadrons that were to charge see nothing

certain, except that they are cold, hungry, worn down with watching; that

it were sad to slay French brothers; sadder to be slain by them.  Without

the Tuileries Circuit, and within it, sour uncertain humour sways these

men:  only the red Swiss stand steadfast.  Them their officers refresh now

with a slight wetting of brandy; wherein the Nationals, too far gone for

brandy, refuse to participate.



King Louis meanwhile had laid him down for a little sleep:  his wig when he

reappeared had lost the powder on one side.  (Roederer, ubi supra.)  Old

Marshal Maille and the gentlemen in black rise always in spirits, as the

Insurrection does not rise:  there goes a witty saying now, "Le tocsin ne

rend pas."  The tocsin, like a dry milk-cow, does not yield.  For the rest,

could one not proclaim Martial Law?  Not easily; for now, it seems, Mayor

Petion is gone.  On the other hand, our Interim Commandant, poor Mandat

being off, 'to the Hotel-de-Ville,' complains that so many Courtiers in

black encumber the service, are an eyesorrow to the National Guards.  To

which her Majesty answers with emphasis, That they will obey all, will

suffer all, that they are sure men these.



And so the yellow lamplight dies out in the gray of morning, in the King's

Palace, over such a scene.  Scene of jostling, elbowing, of confusion, and

indeed conclusion, for the thing is about to end.  Roederer and spectral

Ministers jostle in the press; consult, in side cabinets, with one or with

both Majesties.  Sister Elizabeth takes the Queen to the window:  "Sister,

see what a beautiful sunrise," right over the Jacobins church and that

quarter!  How happy if the tocsin did not yield!  But Mandat returns not;

Petion is gone:  much hangs wavering in the invisible Balance.  About five

o'clock, there rises from the Garden a kind of sound; as of a shout to

which had become a howl, and instead of Vive le Roi were ending in Vive la

Nation.  "Mon Dieu!" ejaculates a spectral Minister, "what is he doing down

there?"  For it is his Majesty, gone down with old Marshal Maille to review

the troops; and the nearest companies of them answer so.  Her Majesty

bursts into a stream of tears.  Yet on stepping from the cabinet her eyes

are dry and calm, her look is even cheerful.  'The Austrian lip, and the

aquiline nose, fuller than usual, gave to her countenance,' says Peltier,

(In Toulongeon, ii. 241.) 'something of Majesty, which they that did not

see her in these moments cannot well have an idea of.'  O thou Theresa's

Daughter!



King Louis enters, much blown with the fatigue; but for the rest with his

old air of indifference.  Of all hopes now surely the joyfullest were, that

the tocsin did not yield.







Chapter 2.6.VII.



The Swiss.



Unhappy Friends, the tocsin does yield, has yielded!  Lo ye, how with the

first sun-rays its Ocean-tide, of pikes and fusils, flows glittering from

the far East;--immeasurable; born of the Night!  They march there, the grim

host; Saint-Antoine on this side of the River; Saint-Marceau on that, the

blackbrowed Marseillese in the van.  With hum, and grim murmur, far-heard;

like the Ocean-tide, as we say:  drawn up, as if by Luna and Influences,

from the great Deep of Waters, they roll gleaming on; no King, Canute or

Louis, can bid them roll back.  Wide-eddying side-currents, of onlookers,

roll hither and thither, unarmed, not voiceless; they, the steel host, roll

on.  New-Commandant Santerre, indeed, has taken seat at the Townhall; rests

there, in his half-way-house.  Alsatian Westermann, with flashing sabre,

does not rest; nor the Sections, nor the Marseillese, nor Demoiselle

Theroigne; but roll continually on.



And now, where are Mandat's Squadrons that were to charge?  Not a Squadron

of them stirs:  or they stir in the wrong direction, out of the way; their

officers glad that they will even do that.  It is to this hour uncertain

whether the Squadron on the Pont Neuf made the shadow of resistance, or did

not make the shadow:  enough, the blackbrowed Marseillese, and Saint-

Marceau following them, do cross without let; do cross, in sure hope now of

Saint-Antoine and the rest; do billow on, towards the Tuileries, where

their errand is.  The Tuileries, at sound of them, rustles responsive:  the

red Swiss look to their priming; Courtiers in black draw their

blunderbusses, rapiers, poniards, some have even fire-shovels; every man

his weapon of war.



Judge if, in these circumstances, Syndic Roederer felt easy!  Will the kind

Heavens open no middle-course of refuge for a poor Syndic who halts between

two?  If indeed his Majesty would consent to go over to the Assembly!  His

Majesty, above all her Majesty, cannot agree to that.  Did her Majesty

answer the proposal with a "Fi donc;" did she say even, she would be nailed

to the walls sooner?  Apparently not.  It is written also that she offered

the King a pistol; saying, Now or else never was the time to shew himself.

Close eye-witnesses did not see it, nor do we.  That saw only that she was

queenlike, quiet; that she argued not, upbraided not, with the Inexorable;

but, like Caesar in the Capitol, wrapped her mantle, as it beseems Queens

and Sons of Adam to do.  But thou, O Louis! of what stuff art thou at all? 

Is there no stroke in thee, then, for Life and Crown?  The silliest hunted

deer dies not so.  Art thou the languidest of all mortals; or the mildest-

minded?  Thou art the worst-starred.



The tide advances; Syndic Roederer's and all men's straits grow straiter

and straiter.  Fremescent clangor comes from the armed Nationals in the

Court; far and wide is the infinite hubbub of tongues.  What counsel?  And

the tide is now nigh!  Messengers, forerunners speak hastily through the

outer Grates; hold parley sitting astride the walls.  Syndic Roederer goes

out and comes in.  Cannoneers ask him:  Are we to fire against the people? 

King's Ministers ask him:  Shall the King's House be forced?  Syndic

Roederer has a hard game to play.  He speaks to the Cannoneers with

eloquence, with fervour; such fervour as a man can, who has to blow hot and

cold in one breath.  Hot and cold, O Roederer?  We, for our part, cannot

live and die!  The Cannoneers, by way of answer, fling down their

linstocks.--Think of this answer, O King Louis, and King's Ministers:  and

take a poor Syndic's safe middle-course, towards the Salle de Manege.  King

Louis sits, his hands leant on knees, body bent forward; gazes for a space

fixedly on Syndic Roederer; then answers, looking over his shoulder to the

Queen:  Marchons!  They march; King Louis, Queen, Sister Elizabeth, the two

royal children and governess:  these, with Syndic Roederer, and Officials

of the Department; amid a double rank of National Guards.  The men with

blunderbusses, the steady red Swiss gaze mournfully, reproachfully; but

hear only these words from Syndic Roederer:  "The King is going to the

Assembly; make way."  It has struck eight, on all clocks, some minutes ago: 

the King has left the Tuileries--for ever.



O ye stanch Swiss, ye gallant gentlemen in black, for what a cause are ye

to spend and be spent!  Look out from the western windows, ye may see King

Louis placidly hold on his way; the poor little Prince Royal 'sportfully

kicking the fallen leaves.'  Fremescent multitude on the Terrace of the

Feuillants whirls parallel to him; one man in it, very noisy, with a long

pole:  will they not obstruct the outer Staircase, and back-entrance of the

Salle, when it comes to that?  King's Guards can go no further than the

bottom step there.  Lo, Deputation of Legislators come out; he of the long

pole is stilled by oratory; Assembly's Guards join themselves to King's

Guards, and all may mount in this case of necessity; the outer Staircase is

free, or passable.  See, Royalty ascends; a blue Grenadier lifts the poor

little Prince Royal from the press; Royalty has entered in.  Royalty has

vanished for ever from your eyes.--And ye?  Left standing there, amid the

yawning abysses, and earthquake of Insurrection; without course; without

command:  if ye perish it must be as more than martyrs, as martyrs who are

now without a cause!  The black Courtiers disappear mostly; through such

issues as they can.  The poor Swiss know not how to act:  one duty only is

clear to them, that of standing by their post; and they will perform that.



But the glittering steel tide has arrived; it beats now against the Chateau

barriers, and eastern Courts; irresistible, loud-surging far and wide;--

breaks in, fills the Court of the Carrousel, blackbrowed Marseillese in the

van.  King Louis gone, say you; over to the Assembly!  Well and good:  but

till the Assembly pronounce Forfeiture of him, what boots it?  Our post is

in that Chateau or stronghold of his; there till then must we continue. 

Think, ye stanch Swiss, whether it were good that grim murder began, and

brothers blasted one another in pieces for a stone edifice?--Poor Swiss!

they know not how to act:  from the southern windows, some fling

cartridges, in sign of brotherhood; on the eastern outer staircase, and

within through long stairs and corridors, they stand firm-ranked, peaceable

and yet refusing to stir.  Westermann speaks to them in Alsatian German;

Marseillese plead, in hot Provencal speech and pantomime; stunning hubbub

pleads and threatens, infinite, around.  The Swiss stand fast, peaceable

and yet immovable; red granite pier in that waste-flashing sea of steel.



Who can help the inevitable issue; Marseillese and all France, on this

side; granite Swiss on that?  The pantomime grows hotter and hotter;

Marseillese sabres flourishing by way of action; the Swiss brow also

clouding itself, the Swiss thumb bringing its firelock to the cock.  And

hark! high-thundering above all the din, three Marseillese cannon from the

Carrousel, pointed by a gunner of bad aim, come rattling over the roofs! 

Ye Swiss, therefore:  Fire!  The Swiss fire; by volley, by platoon, in

rolling-fire:  Marseillese men not a few, and 'a tall man that was louder

than any,' lie silent, smashed, upon the pavement;--not a few Marseillese,

after the long dusty march, have made halt here.  The Carrousel is void;

the black tide recoiling; 'fugitives rushing as far as Saint-Antoine before

they stop.'  The Cannoneers without linstock have squatted invisible, and

left their cannon; which the Swiss seize.



Think what a volley:  reverberating doomful to the four corners of Paris,

and through all hearts; like the clang of Bellona's thongs!  The

blackbrowed Marseillese, rallying on the instant, have become black Demons

that know how to die.  Nor is Brest behind-hand; nor Alsatian Westermann;

Demoiselle Theroigne is Sybil Theroigne:  Vengeance Victoire,ou la mort! 

From all Patriot artillery, great and small; from Feuillants Terrace, and

all terraces and places of the widespread Insurrectionary sea, there roars

responsive a red whirlwind.  Blue Nationals, ranked in the Garden, cannot

help their muskets going off, against Foreign murderers.  For there is a

sympathy in muskets, in heaped masses of men:  nay, are not Mankind, in

whole, like tuned strings, and a cunning infinite concordance and unity;

you smite one string, and all strings will begin sounding,--in soft sphere-

melody, in deafening screech of madness!  Mounted Gendarmerie gallop

distracted; are fired on merely as a thing running; galloping over the Pont

Royal, or one knows not whither.  The brain of Paris, brain-fevered in the

centre of it here, has gone mad; what you call, taken fire.



Behold, the fire slackens not; nor does the Swiss rolling-fire slacken from

within.  Nay they clutched cannon, as we saw: and now, from the other side,

they clutch three pieces more; alas, cannon without linstock; nor will the

steel-and-flint answer, though they try it.  (Deux Amis, viii. 179-88.) 

Had it chanced to answer!  Patriot onlookers have their misgivings; one

strangest Patriot onlooker thinks that the Swiss, had they a commander,

would beat.  He is a man not unqualified to judge; the name of him is

Napoleon Buonaparte.  (See Hist. Parl. (xvii. 56); Las Cases, &c.)  And

onlookers, and women, stand gazing, and the witty Dr. Moore of Glasgow

among them, on the other side of the River:  cannon rush rumbling past

them; pause on the Pont Royal; belch out their iron entrails there, against

the Tuileries; and at every new belch, the women and onlookers shout and

clap hands.  (Moore, Journal during a Residence in France (Dublin, 1793),

i. 26.)  City of all the Devils!  In remote streets, men are drinking

breakfast-coffee; following their affairs; with a start now and then, as

some dull echo reverberates a note louder.  And here?  Marseillese fall

wounded; but Barbaroux has surgeons; Barbaroux is close by, managing,

though underhand, and under cover.  Marseillese fall death-struck; bequeath

their firelock, specify in which pocket are the cartridges; and die,

murmuring, "Revenge me, Revenge thy country!"  Brest Federe Officers,

galloping in red coats, are shot as Swiss.  Lo you, the Carrousel has burst

into flame!--Paris Pandemonium!  Nay the poor City, as we said, is in

fever-fit and convulsion; such crisis has lasted for the space of some half

hour.



But what is this that, with Legislative Insignia, ventures through the

hubbub and death-hail, from the back-entrance of the Manege?  Towards the

Tuileries and Swiss:  written Order from his Majesty to cease firing!  O ye

hapless Swiss, why was there no order not to begin it?  Gladly would the

Swiss cease firing:  but who will bid mad Insurrection cease firing?  To

Insurrection you cannot speak; neither can it, hydra-headed, hear.  The

dead and dying, by the hundred, lie all around; are borne bleeding through

the streets, towards help; the sight of them, like a torch of the Furies,

kindling Madness.  Patriot Paris roars; as the bear bereaved of her whelps. 

On, ye Patriots:  vengeance! victory or death!  There are men seen, who

rush on, armed only with walking-sticks.  (Hist. Parl. ubi supra.  Rapport

du Captaine des Canonniers, Rapport du Commandant, &c. (Ibid. xvii. 300-

18).)  Terror and Fury rule the hour.



The Swiss, pressed on from without, paralyzed from within, have ceased to

shoot; but not to be shot.  What shall they do?  Desperate is the moment. 

Shelter or instant death:  yet How?  Where?  One party flies out by the Rue

de l'Echelle; is destroyed utterly, 'en entier.'  A second, by the other

side, throws itself into the Garden; 'hurrying across a keen fusillade:'

rushes suppliant into the National Assembly; finds pity and refuge in the

back benches there.  The third, and largest, darts out in column, three

hundred strong, towards the Champs Elysees:  Ah, could we but reach

Courbevoye, where other Swiss are!  Wo! see, in such fusillade the column

'soon breaks itself by diversity of opinion,' into distracted segments,

this way and that;--to escape in holes, to die fighting from street to

street.  The firing and murdering will not cease; not yet for long.  The

red Porters of Hotels are shot at, be they Suisse by nature, or Suisse only

in name.  The very Firemen, who pump and labour on that smoking Carrousel,

are shot at; why should the Carrousel not burn?  Some Swiss take refuge in

private houses; find that mercy too does still dwell in the heart of man. 

The brave Marseillese are merciful, late so wroth; and labour to save. 

Journalist Gorsas pleads hard with enfuriated groups.  Clemence, the Wine-

merchant, stumbles forward to the Bar of the Assembly, a rescued Swiss in

his hand; tells passionately how he rescued him with pain and peril, how he

will henceforth support him, being childless himself; and falls a swoon

round the poor Swiss's neck:  amid plaudits.  But the most are butchered,

and even mangled.  Fifty (some say Fourscore) were marched as prisoners, by

National Guards, to the Hotel-de-Ville:  the ferocious people bursts

through on them, in the Place de Greve; massacres them to the last man.  'O

Peuple, envy of the universe!'  Peuple, in mad Gaelic effervescence!



Surely few things in the history of carnage are painfuller.  What

ineffaceable red streak, flickering so sad in the memory, is that, of this

poor column of red Swiss 'breaking itself in the confusion of opinions;'

dispersing, into blackness and death!  Honour to you, brave men; honourable

pity, through long times!  Not martyrs were ye; and yet almost more.  He

was no King of yours, this Louis; and he forsook you like a King of shreds

and patches; ye were but sold to him for some poor sixpence a-day; yet

would ye work for your wages, keep your plighted word.  The work now was to

die; and ye did it.  Honour to you, O Kinsmen; and may the old Deutsch

Biederheit and Tapferkeit, and Valour which is Worth and Truth be they

Swiss, be they Saxon, fail in no age!  Not bastards; true-born were these

men; sons of the men of Sempach, of Murten, who knelt, but not to thee, O

Burgundy!--Let the traveller, as he passes through Lucerne, turn aside to

look a little at their monumental Lion; not for Thorwaldsen's sake alone. 

Hewn out of living rock, the Figure rests there, by the still Lake-waters,

in lullaby of distant-tinkling rance-des-vaches, the granite Mountains

dumbly keeping watch all round; and, though inanimate, speaks. 







Chapter 2.6.VIII.



Constitution burst in Pieces.



Thus is the Tenth of August won and lost.  Patriotism reckons its slain by

thousand on thousand, so deadly was the Swiss fire from these windows; but

will finally reduce them to some Twelve hundred.  No child's play was it;--

nor is it!  Till two in the afternoon the massacring, the breaking and the

burning has not ended; nor the loose Bedlam shut itself again.



How deluges of frantic Sansculottism roared through all passages of this

Tuileries, ruthless in vengeance, how the Valets were butchered, hewn down;

and Dame Campan saw the Marseilles sabre flash over her head, but the

Blackbrowed said, "Va-t-en, Get thee gone," and flung her from him

unstruck:  (Campan, ii. c. 21.)  how in the cellars wine-bottles were

broken, wine-butts were staved in and drunk; and, upwards to the very

garrets, all windows tumbled out their precious royal furnitures; and, with

gold mirrors, velvet curtains, down of ript feather-beds, and dead bodies

of men, the Tuileries was like no Garden of the Earth:--all this let him

who has a taste for it see amply in Mercier, in acrid Montgaillard, or

Beaulieu of the Deux Amis.  A hundred and eighty bodies of Swiss lie piled

there; naked, unremoved till the second day.  Patriotism has torn their red

coats into snips; and marches with them at the Pike's point:  the ghastly

bare corpses lie there, under the sun and under the stars; the curious of

both sexes crowding to look.  Which let not us do.  Above a hundred carts

heaped with Dead fare towards the Cemetery of Sainte-Madeleine; bewailed,

bewept; for all had kindred, all had mothers, if not here, then there.  It

is one of those Carnage-fields, such as you read of by the name 'Glorious

Victory,' brought home in this case to one's own door.



But the blackbrowed Marseillese have struck down the Tyrant of the Chateau. 

He is struck down; low, and hardly to rise.  What a moment for an august

Legislative was that when the Hereditary Representative entered, under such

circumstances; and the Grenadier, carrying the little Prince Royal out of

the Press, set him down on the Assembly-table!  A moment,--which one had to

smooth off with oratory; waiting what the next would bring!  Louis said few

words:  "He was come hither to prevent a great crime; he believed himself

safer nowhere than here.'  President Vergniaud answered briefly, in vague

oratory as we say, about "defence of Constituted Authorities," about dying

at our post.  (Moniteur, Seance du 10 Aout 1792.)  And so King Louis sat

him down; first here, then there; for a difficulty arose, the Constitution

not permitting us to debate while the King is present:  finally he settles

himself with his Family in the 'Loge of the Logographe' in the Reporter's-

Box of a Journalist:  which is beyond the enchanted Constitutional Circuit,

separated from it by a rail.  To such Lodge of the Logographe, measuring

some ten feet square, with a small closet at the entrance of it behind, is

the King of broad France now limited:  here can he and his sit pent, under

the eyes of the world, or retire into their closet at intervals; for the

space of sixteen hours.  Such quiet peculiar moment has the Legislative

lived to see.



But also what a moment was that other, few minutes later, when the three

Marseillese cannon went off, and the Swiss rolling-fire and universal

thunder, like the Crack of Doom, began to rattle!  Honourable Members start

to their feet; stray bullets singing epicedium even here, shivering in with

window-glass and jingle.  "No, this is our post; let us die here!"  They

sit therefore, like stone Legislators.  But may not the Lodge of the

Logographe be forced from behind?  Tear down the railing that divides it

from the enchanted Constitutional Circuit!  Ushers tear and tug; his

Majesty himself aiding from within:  the railing gives way; Majesty and

Legislative are united in place, unknown Destiny hovering over both.



Rattle, and again rattle, went the thunder; one breathless wide-eyed

messenger rushing in after another:  King's orders to the Swiss went out. 

It was a fearful thunder; but, as we know, it ended.  Breathless

messengers, fugitive Swiss, denunciatory Patriots, trepidation; finally

tripudiation!--Before four o'clock much has come and gone.



The New Municipals have come and gone; with Three Flags, Liberte, Egalite,

Patrie, and the clang of vivats.  Vergniaud, he who as President few hours

ago talked of Dying for Constituted Authorities, has moved, as Committee-

Reporter, that the Hereditary Representative be suspended; that a NATIONAL

CONVENTION do forthwith assemble to say what further!  An able Report: 

which the President must have had ready in his pocket?  A President, in

such cases, must have much ready, and yet not ready; and Janus-like look

before and after.



King Louis listens to all; retires about midnight 'to three little rooms on

the upper floor;' till the Luxembourg be prepared for him, and 'the

safeguard of the Nation.'  Safer if Brunswick were once here!  Or, alas,

not so safe?  Ye hapless discrowned heads!  Crowds came, next morning, to

catch a climpse of them, in their three upper rooms.  Montgaillard says the

august Captives wore an air of cheerfulness, even of gaiety; that the Queen

and Princess Lamballe, who had joined her over night, looked out of the

open window, 'shook powder from their hair on the people below, and

laughed.'  (Montgaillard. ii. 135-167.)  He is an acrid distorted man.



For the rest, one may guess that the Legislative, above all that the New

Municipality continues busy.  Messengers, Municipal or Legislative, and

swift despatches rush off to all corners of France; full of triumph,

blended with indignant wail, for Twelve hundred have fallen.  France sends

up its blended shout responsive; the Tenth of August shall be as the

Fourteenth of July, only bloodier and greater.  The Court has conspired? 

Poor Court:  the Court has been vanquished; and will have both the scath to

bear and the scorn.  How the Statues of Kings do now all fall!  Bronze

Henri himself, though he wore a cockade once, jingles down from the Pont

Neuf, where Patrie floats in Danger.  Much more does Louis Fourteenth, from

the Place Vendome, jingle down, and even breaks in falling.  The curious

can remark, written on his horse's shoe:  '12 Aout 1692;' a Century and a

Day.



The Tenth of August was Friday.  The week is not done, when our old Patriot

Ministry is recalled, what of it can be got:  strict Roland, Genevese

Claviere; add heavy Monge the Mathematician, once a stone-hewer; and, for

Minister of Justice,--Danton 'led hither,' as himself says, in one of his

gigantic figures, 'through the breach of Patriot cannon!'  These, under

Legislative Committees, must rule the wreck as they can:  confusedly

enough; with an old Legislative waterlogged, with a New Municipality so

brisk.  But National Convention will get itself together; and then! 

Without delay, however, let a New Jury-Court and Criminal Tribunal be set

up in Paris, to try the crimes and conspiracies of the Tenth.  High Court

of Orleans is distant, slow:  the blood of the Twelve hundred Patriots,

whatever become of other blood, shall be inquired after.  Tremble, ye

Criminals and Conspirators; the Minister of Justice is Danton!  Robespierre

too, after the victory, sits in the New Municipality; insurrectionary

'improvised Municipality,' which calls itself Council General of the

Commune.



For three days now, Louis and his Family have heard the Legislative Debates

in the Lodge of the Logographe; and retired nightly to their small upper

rooms.  The Luxembourg and safeguard of the Nation could not be got ready: 

nay, it seems the Luxembourg has too many cellars and issues; no

Municipality can undertake to watch it.  The compact Prison of the Temple,

not so elegant indeed, were much safer.  To the Temple, therefore!  On

Monday, 13th day of August 1792, in Mayor Petion's carriage, Louis and his

sad suspended Household, fare thither; all Paris out to look at them.  As

they pass through the Place Vendome Louis Fourteenth's Statue lies broken

on the ground.  Petion is afraid the Queen's looks may be thought scornful,

and produce provocation; she casts down her eyes, and does not look at all.

The 'press is prodigious,' but quiet:  here and there, it shouts Vive la

Nation; but for most part gazes in silence.  French Royalty vanishes within

the gates of the Temple:  these old peaked Towers, like peaked Extinguisher

or Bonsoir, do cover it up;--from which same Towers, poor Jacques Molay and

his Templars were burnt out, by French Royalty, five centuries since.  Such

are the turns of Fate below.  Foreign Ambassadors, English Lord Gower have

all demanded passports; are driving indignantly towards their respective

homes.



So, then, the Constitution is over?  For ever and a day!  Gone is that

wonder of the Universe; First biennial Parliament, waterlogged, waits only

till the Convention come; and will then sink to endless depths.



One can guess the silent rage of Old-Constituents, Constitution-builders,

extinct Feuillants, men who thought the Constitution would march! 

Lafayette rises to the altitude of the situation; at the head of his Army. 

Legislative Commissioners are posting towards him and it, on the Northern

Frontier, to congratulate and perorate:  he orders the Municipality of

Sedan to arrest these Commissioners, and keep them strictly in ward as

Rebels, till he say further.  The Sedan Municipals obey.



The Sedan Municipals obey:  but the Soldiers of the Lafayette Army?  The

Soldiers of the Lafayette Army have, as all Soldiers have, a kind of dim

feeling that they themselves are Sansculottes in buff belts; that the

victory of the Tenth of August is also a victory for them.  They will not

rise and follow Lafayette to Paris; they will rise and send him thither! 

On the 18th, which is but next Saturday, Lafayette, with some two or three

indignant Staff-officers, one of whom is Old-Constituent Alexandre de

Lameth, having first put his Lines in what order he could,--rides swiftly

over the Marches, towards Holland.  Rides, alas, swiftly into the claws of

Austrians!  He, long-wavering, trembling on the verge of the horizon, has

set, in Olmutz Dungeons; this History knows him no more.  Adieu, thou Hero

of two worlds; thinnest, but compact honour-worthy man!  Through long rough

night of captivity, through other tumults, triumphs and changes, thou wilt

swing well, 'fast-anchored to the Washington Formula;' and be the Hero and

Perfect-character, were it only of one idea.  The Sedan Municipals repent

and protest; the Soldiers shout Vive la Nation.  Dumouriez Polymetis, from

his Camp at Maulde, sees himself made Commander in Chief.



And, O Brunswick! what sort of 'military execution' will Paris merit now?

Forward, ye well-drilled exterminatory men; with your artillery-waggons,

and camp kettles jingling.  Forward, tall chivalrous King of Prussia;

fanfaronading Emigrants and war-god Broglie, 'for some consolation to

mankind,' which verily is not without need of some. 







END OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 
