





THE FRENCH REVOLUTION A HISTORY



By   THOMAS CARLYLE





VOLUME I.--THE BASTILLE





BOOK 1.I.



DEATH OF LOUIS XV.





Chapter 1.1.I.



Louis the Well-Beloved.



President Henault, remarking on royal Surnames of Honour how difficult it

often is to ascertain not only why, but even when, they were conferred,

takes occasion in his sleek official way, to make a philosophical

reflection.  'The Surname of Bien-aime (Well-beloved),' says he, 'which

Louis XV. bears, will not leave posterity in the same doubt.  This Prince,

in the year 1744, while hastening from one end of his kingdom to the other,

and suspending his conquests in Flanders that he might fly to the

assistance of Alsace, was arrested at Metz by a malady which threatened to

cut short his days.  At the news of this, Paris, all in terror, seemed a

city taken by storm:  the churches resounded with supplications and groans;

the prayers of priests and people were every moment interrupted by their

sobs:  and it was from an interest so dear and tender that this Surname of

Bien-aime fashioned itself, a title higher still than all the rest which

this great Prince has earned.'  (Abrege Chronologique de l'Histoire de

France (Paris, 1775), p. 701.)



So stands it written; in lasting memorial of that year 1744.  Thirty other

years have come and gone; and 'this great Prince' again lies sick; but in

how altered circumstances now!  Churches resound not with excessive

groanings; Paris is stoically calm:  sobs interrupt no prayers, for indeed

none are offered; except Priests' Litanies, read or chanted at fixed money-

rate per hour, which are not liable to interruption.  The shepherd of the

people has been carried home from Little Trianon, heavy of heart, and been

put to bed in his own Chateau of Versailles:  the flock knows it, and heeds

it not.  At most, in the immeasurable tide of French Speech (which ceases

not day after day, and only ebbs towards the short hours of night), may

this of the royal sickness emerge from time to time as an article of news. 

Bets are doubtless depending; nay, some people 'express themselves loudly

in the streets.'  (Memoires de M. le Baron Besenval (Paris, 1805), ii. 59-

90.)  But for the rest, on green field and steepled city, the May sun

shines out, the May evening fades; and men ply their useful or useless

business as if no Louis lay in danger.



Dame Dubarry, indeed, might pray, if she had a talent for it; Duke

d'Aiguillon too, Maupeou and the Parlement Maupeou:  these, as they sit in

their high places, with France harnessed under their feet, know well on

what basis they continue there.  Look to it, D'Aiguillon; sharply as thou

didst, from the Mill of St. Cast, on Quiberon and the invading English;

thou, 'covered if not with glory yet with meal!'  Fortune was ever

accounted inconstant:  and each dog has but his day.



Forlorn enough languished Duke d'Aiguillon, some years ago; covered, as we

said, with meal; nay with worse.  For La Chalotais, the Breton

Parlementeer, accused him not only of poltroonery and tyranny, but even of

concussion (official plunder of money); which accusations it was easier to

get 'quashed' by backstairs Influences than to get answered:  neither could

the thoughts, or even the tongues, of men be tied.  Thus, under disastrous

eclipse, had this grand-nephew of the great Richelieu to glide about;

unworshipped by the world; resolute Choiseul, the abrupt proud man,

disdaining him, or even forgetting him.  Little prospect but to glide into

Gascony, to rebuild Chateaus there, (Arthur Young, Travels during the years

1787-88-89 (Bury St. Edmunds, 1792), i. 44.) and die inglorious killing

game!  However, in the year 1770, a certain young soldier, Dumouriez by

name, returning from Corsica, could see 'with sorrow, at Compiegne, the old

King of France, on foot, with doffed hat, in sight of his army, at the side

of a magnificent phaeton, doing homage the--Dubarry.'  (La Vie et les

Memoires du General Dumouriez (Paris, 1822), i. 141.)



Much lay therein!  Thereby, for one thing, could D'Aiguillon postpone the

rebuilding of his Chateau, and rebuild his fortunes first.  For stout

Choiseul would discern in the Dubarry nothing but a wonderfully dizened

Scarlet-woman; and go on his way as if she were not.  Intolerable:  the

source of sighs, tears, of pettings and pouting; which would not end till

'France' (La France, as she named her royal valet) finally mustered heart

to see Choiseul; and with that 'quivering in the chin (tremblement du

menton natural in such cases) (Besenval, Memoires, ii. 21.) faltered out a

dismissal:  dismissal of his last substantial man, but pacification of his

scarlet-woman.  Thus D'Aiguillon rose again, and culminated.  And with him

there rose Maupeou, the banisher of Parlements; who plants you a refractory

President 'at Croe in Combrailles on the top of steep rocks, inaccessible

except by litters,' there to consider himself.  Likewise there rose Abbe

Terray, dissolute Financier, paying eightpence in the shilling,--so that

wits exclaim in some press at the playhouse, "Where is Abbe Terray, that he

might reduce us to two-thirds!"  And so have these individuals (verily by

black-art) built them a Domdaniel, or enchanted Dubarrydom; call it an

Armida-Palace, where they dwell pleasantly; Chancellor Maupeou 'playing

blind-man's-buff' with the scarlet Enchantress; or gallantly presenting her

with dwarf Negroes;--and a Most Christian King has unspeakable peace within

doors, whatever he may have without.  "My Chancellor is a scoundrel; but I

cannot do without him."  (Dulaure, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1824), vii.

328.)



Beautiful Armida-Palace, where the inmates live enchanted lives; lapped in

soft music of adulation; waited on by the splendours of the world;--which

nevertheless hangs wondrously as by a single hair.  Should the Most

Christian King die; or even get seriously afraid of dying!  For, alas, had

not the fair haughty Chateauroux to fly, with wet cheeks and flaming heart,

from that Fever-scene at Metz; driven forth by sour shavelings?  She hardly

returned, when fever and shavelings were both swept into the background. 

Pompadour too, when Damiens wounded Royalty 'slightly, under the fifth

rib,' and our drive to Trianon went off futile, in shrieks and madly shaken

torches,--had to pack, and be in readiness:  yet did not go, the wound not

proving poisoned.  For his Majesty has religious faith; believes, at least

in a Devil.  And now a third peril; and who knows what may be in it!  For

the Doctors look grave; ask privily, If his Majesty had not the small-pox

long ago?--and doubt it may have been a false kind.  Yes, Maupeou, pucker

those sinister brows of thine, and peer out on it with thy malign rat-eyes:

it is a questionable case.  Sure only that man is mortal; that with the

life of one mortal snaps irrevocably the wonderfulest talisman, and all

Dubarrydom rushes off, with tumult, into infinite Space; and ye, as

subterranean Apparitions are wont, vanish utterly,--leaving only a smell of

sulphur!



These, and what holds of these may pray,--to Beelzebub, or whoever will

hear them.  But from the rest of France there comes, as was said, no

prayer; or one of an opposite character, 'expressed openly in the streets.' 

Chateau or Hotel, were an enlightened Philosophism scrutinises many things,

is not given to prayer:  neither are Rossbach victories, Terray Finances,

nor, say only 'sixty thousand Lettres de Cachet' (which is Maupeou's

share), persuasives towards that.  O Henault!  Prayers?  From a France

smitten (by black-art) with plague after plague, and lying now in shame and

pain, with a Harlot's foot on its neck, what prayer can come?  Those lank

scarecrows, that prowl hunger-stricken through all highways and byways of

French Existence, will they pray?  The dull millions that, in the workshop

or furrowfield, grind fore-done at the wheel of Labour, like haltered gin-

horses, if blind so much the quieter?  Or they that in the Bicetre

Hospital, 'eight to a bed,' lie waiting their manumission?  Dim are those

heads of theirs, dull stagnant those hearts:  to them the great Sovereign

is known mainly as the great Regrater of Bread.  If they hear of his

sickness, they will answer with a dull Tant pis pour lui; or with the

question, Will he die?



Yes, will he die? that is now, for all France, the grand question, and

hope; whereby alone the King's sickness has still some interest.







Chapter 1.1.II.



Realised Ideals.



Such a changed France have we; and a changed Louis.  Changed, truly; and

further than thou yet seest!--To the eye of History many things, in that

sick-room of Louis, are now visible, which to the Courtiers there present

were invisible.  For indeed it is well said, 'in every object there is

inexhaustible meaning; the eye sees in it what the eye brings means of

seeing.'  To Newton and to Newton's Dog Diamond, what a different pair of

Universes; while the painting on the optical retina of both was, most

likely, the same!  Let the Reader here, in this sick-room of Louis,

endeavour to look with the mind too.



Time was when men could (so to speak) of a given man, by nourishing and

decorating him with fit appliances, to the due pitch, make themselves a

King, almost as the Bees do; and what was still more to the purpose,

loyally obey him when made.  The man so nourished and decorated,

thenceforth named royal, does verily bear rule; and is said, and even

thought, to be, for example, 'prosecuting conquests in Flanders,' when he

lets himself like luggage be carried thither:  and no light luggage;

covering miles of road.  For he has his unblushing Chateauroux, with her

band-boxes and rouge-pots, at his side; so that, at every new station, a

wooden gallery must be run up between their lodgings.  He has not only his

Maison-Bouche, and Valetaille without end, but his very Troop of Players,

with their pasteboard coulisses, thunder-barrels, their kettles, fiddles,

stage-wardrobes, portable larders (and chaffering and quarrelling enough);

all mounted in wagons, tumbrils, second-hand chaises,--sufficient not to

conquer Flanders, but the patience of the world.  With such a flood of loud

jingling appurtenances does he lumber along, prosecuting his conquests in

Flanders; wonderful to behold.  So nevertheless it was and had been:  to

some solitary thinker it might seem strange; but even to him inevitable,

not unnatural.



For ours is a most fictile world; and man is the most fingent plastic of

creatures.  A world not fixable; not fathomable!  An unfathomable Somewhat,

which is Not we; which we can work with, and live amidst,--and model,

miraculously in our miraculous Being, and name World.--But if the very

Rocks and Rivers (as Metaphysic teaches) are, in strict language, made by

those outward Senses of ours, how much more, by the Inward Sense, are all

Phenomena of the spiritual kind:  Dignities, Authorities, Holies, Unholies!

Which inward sense, moreover is not permanent like the outward ones, but

forever growing and changing.  Does not the Black African take of Sticks

and Old Clothes (say, exported Monmouth-Street cast-clothes) what will

suffice, and of these, cunningly combining them, fabricate for himself an

Eidolon (Idol, or Thing Seen), and name it Mumbo-Jumbo; which he can

thenceforth pray to, with upturned awestruck eye, not without hope?  The

white European mocks; but ought rather to consider; and see whether he, at

home, could not do the like a little more wisely.



So it was, we say, in those conquests of Flanders, thirty years ago:  but

so it no longer is.  Alas, much more lies sick than poor Louis:  not the

French King only, but the French Kingship; this too, after long rough tear

and wear, is breaking down.  The world is all so changed; so much that

seemed vigorous has sunk decrepit, so much that was not is beginning to

be!--Borne over the Atlantic, to the closing ear of Louis, King by the

Grace of God, what sounds are these; muffled ominous, new in our centuries?

Boston Harbour is black with unexpected Tea:  behold a Pennsylvanian

Congress gather; and ere long, on Bunker Hill, DEMOCRACY announcing, in

rifle-volleys death-winged, under her Star Banner, to the tune of Yankee-

doodle-doo, that she is born, and, whirlwind-like, will envelope the whole

world!



Sovereigns die and Sovereignties:  how all dies, and is for a Time only; is

a 'Time-phantasm, yet reckons itself real!'  The Merovingian Kings, slowly

wending on their bullock-carts through the streets of Paris, with their

long hair flowing, have all wended slowly on,--into Eternity.  Charlemagne

sleeps at Salzburg, with truncheon grounded; only Fable expecting that he

will awaken.  Charles the Hammer, Pepin Bow-legged, where now is their eye

of menace, their voice of command?  Rollo and his shaggy Northmen cover not

the Seine with ships; but have sailed off on a longer voyage.  The hair of

Towhead (Tete d'etoupes) now needs no combing; Iron-cutter (Taillefer)

cannot cut a cobweb; shrill Fredegonda, shrill Brunhilda have had out their

hot life-scold, and lie silent, their hot life-frenzy cooled.  Neither from

that black Tower de Nesle descends now darkling the doomed gallant, in his

sack, to the Seine waters; plunging into Night:  for Dame de Nesle how

cares not for this world's gallantry, heeds not this world's scandal; Dame

de Nesle is herself gone into Night.  They are all gone; sunk,--down, down,

with the tumult they made; and the rolling and the trampling of ever new

generations passes over them, and they hear it not any more forever.



And yet withal has there not been realised somewhat?  Consider (to go no

further) these strong Stone-edifices, and what they hold!  Mud-Town of the

Borderers (Lutetia Parisiorum or Barisiorum) has paved itself, has spread

over all the Seine Islands, and far and wide on each bank, and become City

of Paris, sometimes boasting to be 'Athens of Europe,' and even 'Capital of

the Universe.'  Stone towers frown aloft; long-lasting, grim with a

thousand years.  Cathedrals are there, and a Creed (or memory of a Creed)

in them; Palaces, and a State and Law.  Thou seest the Smoke-vapour;

unextinguished Breath as of a thing living.  Labour's thousand hammers ring

on her anvils:  also a more miraculous Labour works noiselessly, not with

the Hand but with the Thought.  How have cunning workmen in all crafts,

with their cunning head and right-hand, tamed the Four Elements to be their

ministers; yoking the winds to their Sea-chariot, making the very Stars

their Nautical Timepiece;--and written and collected a Bibliotheque du Roi;

among whose Books is the Hebrew Book!  A wondrous race of creatures:  these

have been realised, and what of Skill is in these:  call not the Past Time,

with all its confused wretchednesses, a lost one.



Observe, however, that of man's whole terrestrial possessions and

attainments, unspeakably the noblest are his Symbols, divine or divine-

seeming; under which he marches and fights, with victorious assurance, in

this life-battle:  what we can call his Realised Ideals.  Of which realised

ideals, omitting the rest, consider only these two:  his Church, or

spiritual Guidance; his Kingship, or temporal one.  The Church:  what a

word was there; richer than Golconda and the treasures of the world!  In

the heart of the remotest mountains rises the little Kirk; the Dead all

slumbering round it, under their white memorial-stones, 'in hope of a happy

resurrection:'--dull wert thou, O Reader, if never in any hour (say of

moaning midnight, when such Kirk hung spectral in the sky, and Being was as

if swallowed up of Darkness) it spoke to thee--things unspeakable, that

went into thy soul's soul.  Strong was he that had a Church, what we can

call a Church:  he stood thereby, though 'in the centre of Immensities, in

the conflux of Eternities,' yet manlike towards God and man; the vague

shoreless Universe had become for him a firm city, and dwelling which he

knew.  Such virtue was in Belief; in these words, well spoken:  I believe.

Well might men prize their Credo, and raise stateliest Temples for it, and

reverend Hierarchies, and give it the tithe of their substance; it was

worth living for and dying for.



Neither was that an inconsiderable moment when wild armed men first raised

their Strongest aloft on the buckler-throne, and with clanging armour and

hearts, said solemnly:  Be thou our Acknowledged Strongest!  In such

Acknowledged Strongest (well named King, Kon-ning, Can-ning, or Man that

was Able) what a Symbol shone now for them,--significant with the destinies

of the world!  A Symbol of true Guidance in return for loving Obedience;

properly, if he knew it, the prime want of man.  A Symbol which might be

called sacred; for is there not, in reverence for what is better than we,

an indestructible sacredness?  On which ground, too, it was well said there

lay in the Acknowledged Strongest a divine right; as surely there might in

the Strongest, whether Acknowledged or not,--considering who made him

strong.  And so, in the midst of confusions and unutterable incongruities

(as all growth is confused), did this of Royalty, with Loyalty environing

it, spring up; and grow mysteriously, subduing and assimilating (for a

principle of Life was in it); till it also had grown world-great, and was

among the main Facts of our modern existence.  Such a Fact, that Louis

XIV., for example, could answer the expostulatory Magistrate with his

"L'Etat c'est moi (The State?  I am the State);" and be replied to by

silence and abashed looks.  So far had accident and forethought; had your

Louis Elevenths, with the leaden Virgin in their hatband, and torture-

wheels and conical oubliettes (man-eating!) under their feet; your Henri

Fourths, with their prophesied social millennium, 'when every peasant

should have his fowl in the pot;' and on the whole, the fertility of this

most fertile Existence (named of Good and Evil),--brought it, in the matter

of the Kingship.  Wondrous!  Concerning which may we not again say, that in

the huge mass of Evil, as it rolls and swells, there is ever some Good

working imprisoned; working towards deliverance and triumph?



How such Ideals do realise themselves; and grow, wondrously, from amid the

incongruous ever-fluctuating chaos of the Actual:  this is what World-

History, if it teach any thing, has to teach us, How they grow; and, after

long stormy growth, bloom out mature, supreme; then quickly (for the

blossom is brief) fall into decay; sorrowfully dwindle; and crumble down,

or rush down, noisily or noiselessly disappearing.  The blossom is so

brief; as of some centennial Cactus-flower, which after a century of

waiting shines out for hours!  Thus from the day when rough Clovis, in the

Champ de Mars, in sight of his whole army, had to cleave retributively the

head of that rough Frank, with sudden battleaxe, and the fierce words, "It

was thus thou clavest the vase" (St. Remi's and mine) "at Soissons,"

forward to Louis the Grand and his L'Etat c'est moi, we count some twelve

hundred years:  and now this the very next Louis is dying, and so much

dying with him!--Nay, thus too, if Catholicism, with and against Feudalism

(but not against Nature and her bounty), gave us English a Shakspeare and

Era of Shakspeare, and so produced a blossom of Catholicism--it was not

till Catholicism itself, so far as Law could abolish it, had been abolished

here.



But of those decadent ages in which no Ideal either grows or blossoms? 

When Belief and Loyalty have passed away, and only the cant and false echo

of them remains; and all Solemnity has become Pageantry; and the Creed of

persons in authority has become one of two things:  an Imbecility or a

Macchiavelism?  Alas, of these ages World-History can take no notice; they

have to become compressed more and more, and finally suppressed in the

Annals of Mankind; blotted out as spurious,--which indeed they are. 

Hapless ages:  wherein, if ever in any, it is an unhappiness to be born. 

To be born, and to learn only, by every tradition and example, that God's

Universe is Belial's and a Lie; and 'the Supreme Quack' the hierarch of

men!  In which mournfulest faith, nevertheless, do we not see whole

generations (two, and sometimes even three successively) live, what they

call living; and vanish,--without chance of reappearance?



In such a decadent age, or one fast verging that way, had our poor Louis

been born.  Grant also that if the French Kingship had not, by course of

Nature, long to live, he of all men was the man to accelerate Nature.  The

Blossom of French Royalty, cactus-like, has accordingly made an astonishing

progress.  In those Metz days, it was still standing with all its petals,

though bedimmed by Orleans Regents and Roue Ministers and Cardinals; but

now, in 1774, we behold it bald, and the virtue nigh gone out of it.



Disastrous indeed does it look with those same 'realised ideals,' one and

all!  The Church, which in its palmy season, seven hundred years ago, could

make an Emperor wait barefoot, in penance-shift; three days, in the snow,

has for centuries seen itself decaying; reduced even to forget old purposes

and enmities, and join interest with the Kingship:  on this younger

strength it would fain stay its decrepitude; and these two will henceforth

stand and fall together.  Alas, the Sorbonne still sits there, in its old

mansion; but mumbles only jargon of dotage, and no longer leads the

consciences of men:  not the Sorbonne; it is Encyclopedies, Philosophie,

and who knows what nameless innumerable multitude of ready Writers, profane

Singers, Romancers, Players, Disputators, and Pamphleteers, that now form

the Spiritual Guidance of the world.  The world's Practical Guidance too is

lost, or has glided into the same miscellaneous hands.  Who is it that the

King (Able-man, named also Roi, Rex, or Director) now guides?  His own

huntsmen and prickers:  when there is to be no hunt, it is well said, 'Le

Roi ne fera rien (To-day his Majesty will do nothing).  (Memoires sur la

Vie privee de Marie Antoinette, par Madame Campan (Paris, 1826), i. 12). 

He lives and lingers there, because he is living there, and none has yet

laid hands on him.



The nobles, in like manner, have nearly ceased either to guide or misguide;

and are now, as their master is, little more than ornamental figures.  It

is long since they have done with butchering one another or their king: 

the Workers, protected, encouraged by Majesty, have ages ago built walled

towns, and there ply their crafts; will permit no Robber Baron to 'live by

the saddle,' but maintain a gallows to prevent it.  Ever since that period

of the Fronde, the Noble has changed his fighting sword into a court

rapier, and now loyally attends his king as ministering satellite; divides

the spoil, not now by violence and murder, but by soliciting and finesse. 

These men call themselves supports of the throne, singular gilt-pasteboard

caryatides in that singular edifice!  For the rest, their privileges every

way are now much curtailed.  That law authorizing a Seigneur, as he

returned from hunting, to kill not more than two Serfs, and refresh his

feet in their warm blood and bowels, has fallen into perfect desuetude,--

and even into incredibility; for if Deputy Lapoule can believe in it, and

call for the abrogation of it, so cannot we.  (Histoire de la Revolution

Francaise, par Deux Amis de la Liberte (Paris, 1793), ii. 212.)  No

Charolois, for these last fifty years, though never so fond of shooting,

has been in use to bring down slaters and plumbers, and see them roll from

their roofs; (Lacretelle, Histoire de France pendant le 18me Siecle (Paris,

1819) i. 271.) but contents himself with partridges and grouse.  Close-

viewed, their industry and function is that of dressing gracefully and

eating sumptuously.  As for their debauchery and depravity, it is perhaps

unexampled since the era of Tiberius and Commodus.  Nevertheless, one has

still partly a feeling with the lady Marechale:  "Depend upon it, Sir, God

thinks twice before damning a man of that quality."  (Dulaure, vii. 261.) 

These people, of old, surely had virtues, uses; or they could not have been

there.  Nay, one virtue they are still required to have (for mortal man

cannot live without a conscience):  the virtue of perfect readiness to

fight duels.



Such are the shepherds of the people:  and now how fares it with the flock?

With the flock, as is inevitable, it fares ill, and ever worse.  They are

not tended, they are only regularly shorn.  They are sent for, to do

statute-labour, to pay statute-taxes; to fatten battle-fields (named 'Bed

of honour') with their bodies, in quarrels which are not theirs; their hand

and toil is in every possession of man; but for themselves they have little

or no possession.  Untaught, uncomforted, unfed; to pine dully in thick

obscuration, in squalid destitution and obstruction:  this is the lot of

the millions; peuple taillable et corveable a merci et misericorde.  In

Brittany they once rose in revolt at the first introduction of Pendulum

Clocks; thinking it had something to do with the Gabelle.  Paris requires

to be cleared out periodically by the Police; and the horde of hunger-

stricken vagabonds to be sent wandering again over space--for a time. 

'During one such periodical clearance,' says Lacretelle, 'in May, 1750, the

Police had presumed withal to carry off some reputable people's children,

in the hope of extorting ransoms for them.  The mothers fill the public

places with cries of despair; crowds gather, get excited:  so many women in

destraction run about exaggerating the alarm:  an absurd and horrid fable

arises among the people; it is said that the doctors have ordered a Great

Person to take baths of young human blood for the restoration of his own,

all spoiled by debaucheries.  Some of the rioters,' adds Lacretelle, quite

coolly, 'were hanged on the following days:'  the Police went on. 

(Lacretelle, iii. 175.)  O ye poor naked wretches! and this, then, is your

inarticulate cry to Heaven, as of a dumb tortured animal, crying from

uttermost depths of pain and debasement?  Do these azure skies, like a dead

crystalline vault, only reverberate the echo of it on you?  Respond to it

only by 'hanging on the following days?'--Not so:  not forever!  Ye are

heard in Heaven.  And the answer too will come,--in a horror of great

darkness, and shakings of the world, and a cup of trembling which all the

nations shall drink.



Remark, meanwhile, how from amid the wrecks and dust of this universal

Decay new Powers are fashioning themselves, adapted to the new time and its

destinies.  Besides the old Noblesse, originally of Fighters, there is a

new recognised Noblesse of Lawyers; whose gala-day and proud battle-day

even now is.  An unrecognised Noblesse of Commerce; powerful enough, with

money in its pocket.  Lastly, powerfulest of all, least recognised of all,

a Noblesse of Literature; without steel on their thigh, without gold in

their purse, but with the 'grand thaumaturgic faculty of Thought' in their

head.  French Philosophism has arisen; in which little word how much do we

include!  Here, indeed, lies properly the cardinal symptom of the whole

wide-spread malady.  Faith is gone out; Scepticism is come in.  Evil

abounds and accumulates:  no man has Faith to withstand it, to amend it, to

begin by amending himself; it must even go on accumulating.  While hollow

langour and vacuity is the lot of the Upper, and want and stagnation of the

Lower, and universal misery is very certain, what other thing is certain? 

That a Lie cannot be believed!  Philosophism knows only this:  her other

belief is mainly that, in spiritual supersensual matters no Belief is

possible.  Unhappy!  Nay, as yet the Contradiction of a Lie is some kind of

Belief; but the Lie with its Contradiction once swept away, what will

remain?  The five unsatiated Senses will remain, the sixth insatiable Sense

(of vanity); the whole daemonic nature of man will remain,--hurled forth to

rage blindly without rule or rein; savage itself, yet with all the tools

and weapons of civilisation; a spectacle new in History.



In such a France, as in a Powder-tower, where fire unquenched and now

unquenchable is smoking and smouldering all round, has Louis XV. lain down

to die.  With Pompadourism and Dubarryism, his Fleur-de-lis has been

shamefully struck down in all lands and on all seas; Poverty invades even

the Royal Exchequer, and Tax-farming can squeeze out no more; there is a

quarrel of twenty-five years' standing with the Parlement; everywhere Want,

Dishonesty, Unbelief, and hotbrained Sciolists for state-physicians:  it is

a portentous hour.



Such things can the eye of History see in this sick-room of King Louis,

which were invisible to the Courtiers there.  It is twenty years, gone

Christmas-day, since Lord Chesterfield, summing up what he had noted of

this same France, wrote, and sent off by post, the following words, that

have become memorable:  'In short, all the symptoms which I have ever met

with in History, previous to great Changes and Revolutions in government,

now exist and daily increase in France.'  (Chesterfield's Letters: 

December 25th, 1753.)







Chapter 1.1.III.



Viaticum.



For the present, however, the grand question with the Governors of France

is:  Shall extreme unction, or other ghostly viaticum (to Louis, not to

France), be administered?



It is a deep question.  For, if administered, if so much as spoken of, must

not, on the very threshold of the business, Witch Dubarry vanish; hardly to

return should Louis even recover?  With her vanishes Duke d'Aiguillon and

Company, and all their Armida-Palace, as was said; Chaos swallows the whole

again, and there is left nothing but a smell of brimstone.  But then, on

the other hand, what will the Dauphinists and Choiseulists say?  Nay what

may the royal martyr himself say, should he happen to get deadly worse,

without getting delirious?  For the present, he still kisses the Dubarry

hand; so we, from the ante-room, can note:  but afterwards?  Doctors'

bulletins may run as they are ordered, but it is 'confluent small-pox,'--of

which, as is whispered too, the Gatekeepers's once so buxom Daughter lies

ill:  and Louis XV. is not a man to be trifled with in his viaticum.  Was

he not wont to catechise his very girls in the Parc-aux-cerfs, and pray

with and for them, that they might preserve their--orthodoxy?  (Dulaure,

viii. (217), Besenval, &c.)  A strange fact, not an unexampled one; for

there is no animal so strange as man.



For the moment, indeed, it were all well, could Archbishop Beaumont but be

prevailed upon--to wink with one eye!  Alas, Beaumont would himself so fain

do it:  for, singular to tell, the Church too, and whole posthumous hope of

Jesuitism, now hangs by the apron of this same unmentionable woman.  But

then 'the force of public opinion'?  Rigorous Christophe de Beaumont, who

has spent his life in persecuting hysterical Jansenists and incredulous

Non-confessors; or even their dead bodies, if no better might be,--how

shall he now open Heaven's gate, and give Absolution with the corpus

delicti still under his nose?  Our Grand-Almoner Roche-Aymon, for his part,

will not higgle with a royal sinner about turning of the key:  but there

are other Churchmen; there is a King's Confessor, foolish Abbe Moudon; and

Fanaticism and Decency are not yet extinct.  On the whole, what is to be

done?  The doors can be well watched; the Medical Bulletin adjusted; and

much, as usual, be hoped for from time and chance.



The doors are well watched, no improper figure can enter.  Indeed, few wish

to enter; for the putrid infection reaches even to the Oeil-de-Boeuf; so

that 'more than fifty fall sick, and ten die.'  Mesdames the Princesses

alone wait at the loathsome sick-bed; impelled by filial piety.  The three

Princesses, Graille, Chiffe, Coche (Rag, Snip, Pig, as he was wont to name

them), are assiduous there; when all have fled.  The fourth Princess Loque

(Dud), as we guess, is already in the Nunnery, and can only give her

orisons.  Poor Graille and Sisterhood, they have never known a Father: 

such is the hard bargain Grandeur must make.  Scarcely at the Debotter

(when Royalty took off its boots) could they snatch up their 'enormous

hoops, gird the long train round their waists, huddle on their black cloaks

of taffeta up to the very chin;' and so, in fit appearance of full dress,

'every evening at six,' walk majestically in; receive their royal kiss on

the brow; and then walk majestically out again, to embroidery, small-

scandal, prayers, and vacancy.  If Majesty came some morning, with coffee

of its own making, and swallowed it with them hastily while the dogs were

uncoupling for the hunt, it was received as a grace of Heaven.  (Campan, i.

11-36.)  Poor withered ancient women! in the wild tossings that yet await

your fragile existence, before it be crushed and broken; as ye fly through

hostile countries, over tempestuous seas, are almost taken by the Turks;

and wholly, in the Sansculottic Earthquake, know not your right hand from

your left, be this always an assured place in your remembrance: for the act

was good and loving!  To us also it is a little sunny spot, in that dismal

howling waste, where we hardly find another.



Meanwhile, what shall an impartial prudent Courtier do?  In these delicate

circumstances, while not only death or life, but even sacrament or no

sacrament, is a question, the skilfulest may falter.  Few are so happy as

the Duke d'Orleans and the Prince de Conde; who can themselves, with

volatile salts, attend the King's ante-chamber; and, at the same time, send

their brave sons (Duke de Chartres, Egalite that is to be; Duke de Bourbon,

one day Conde too, and famous among Dotards) to wait upon the Dauphin. 

With another few, it is a resolution taken; jacta est alea.  Old

Richelieu,--when Beaumont, driven by public opinion, is at last for

entering the sick-room,--will twitch him by the rochet, into a recess; and

there, with his old dissipated mastiff-face, and the oiliest vehemence, be

seen pleading (and even, as we judge by Beaumont's change of colour,

prevailing) 'that the King be not killed by a proposition in Divinity.' 

Duke de Fronsac, son of Richelieu, can follow his father:  when the Cure of

Versailles whimpers something about sacraments, he will threaten to 'throw

him out of the window if he mention such a thing.'



Happy these, we may say; but to the rest that hover between two opinions,

is it not trying?  He who would understand to what a pass Catholicism, and

much else, had now got; and how the symbols of the Holiest have become

gambling-dice of the Basest,--must read the narrative of those things by

Besenval, and Soulavie, and the other Court Newsmen of the time.  He will

see the Versailles Galaxy all scattered asunder, grouped into new ever-

shifting Constellations.  There are nods and sagacious glances; go-

betweens, silk dowagers mysteriously gliding, with smiles for this

constellation, sighs for that:  there is tremor, of hope or desperation, in

several hearts.  There is the pale grinning Shadow of Death, ceremoniously

ushered along by another grinning Shadow, of Etiquette:  at intervals the

growl of Chapel Organs, like prayer by machinery; proclaiming, as in a kind

of horrid diabolic horse-laughter, Vanity of vanities, all is Vanity!







Chapter 1.1.IV.



Louis the Unforgotten.



Poor Louis!  With these it is a hollow phantasmagory, where like mimes they

mope and mowl, and utter false sounds for hire; but with thee it is

frightful earnest.



Frightful to all men is Death; from of old named King of Terrors.  Our

little compact home of an Existence, where we dwelt complaining, yet as in

a home, is passing, in dark agonies, into an Unknown of Separation,

Foreignness, unconditioned Possibility.  The Heathen Emperor asks of his

soul:  Into what places art thou now departing?  The Catholic King must

answer:  To the Judgment-bar of the Most High God!  Yes, it is a summing-up

of Life; a final settling, and giving-in the 'account of the deeds done in

the body:'  they are done now; and lie there unalterable, and do bear their

fruits, long as Eternity shall last.



Louis XV. had always the kingliest abhorrence of Death.  Unlike that

praying Duke of Orleans, Egalite's grandfather,--for indeed several of them

had a touch of madness,--who honesty believed that there was no Death!  He,

if the Court Newsmen can be believed, started up once on a time, glowing

with sulphurous contempt and indignation on his poor Secretary, who had

stumbled on the words, feu roi d'Espagne (the late King of Spain):  "Feu

roi, Monsieur?"--"Monseigneur," hastily answered the trembling but adroit

man of business, "c'est une titre qu'ils prennent ('tis a title they

take)."  (Besenval, i. 199.)  Louis, we say, was not so happy; but he did

what he could.  He would not suffer Death to be spoken of; avoided the

sight of churchyards, funereal monuments, and whatsoever could bring it to

mind.  It is the resource of the Ostrich; who, hard hunted, sticks his

foolish head in the ground, and would fain forget that his foolish unseeing

body is not unseen too.  Or sometimes, with a spasmodic antagonism,

significant of the same thing, and of more, he would go; or stopping his

court carriages, would send into churchyards, and ask 'how many new graves

there were today,' though it gave his poor Pompadour the disagreeablest

qualms.  We can figure the thought of Louis that day, when, all royally

caparisoned for hunting, he met, at some sudden turning in the Wood of

Senart, a ragged Peasant with a coffin:  "For whom?"--It was for a poor

brother slave, whom Majesty had sometimes noticed slaving in those

quarters.  "What did he die of?"--"Of hunger:"--the King gave his steed the

spur.  (Campan, iii. 39.)



But figure his thought, when Death is now clutching at his own heart-

strings, unlooked for, inexorable!  Yes, poor Louis, Death has found thee.

No palace walls or life-guards, gorgeous tapestries or gilt buckram of

stiffest ceremonial could keep him out; but he is here, here at thy very

life-breath, and will extinguish it.  Thou, whose whole existence hitherto

was a chimera and scenic show, at length becomest a reality:  sumptuous

Versailles bursts asunder, like a dream, into void Immensity; Time is done,

and all the scaffolding of Time falls wrecked with hideous clangour round

thy soul:  the pale Kingdoms yawn open; there must thou enter, naked, all

unking'd, and await what is appointed thee!  Unhappy man, there as thou

turnest, in dull agony, on thy bed of weariness, what a thought is thine! 

Purgatory and Hell-fire, now all-too possible, in the prospect; in the

retrospect,--alas, what thing didst thou do that were not better undone;

what mortal didst thou generously help; what sorrow hadst thou mercy on? 

Do the 'five hundred thousand' ghosts, who sank shamefully on so many

battle-fields from Rossbach to Quebec, that thy Harlot might take revenge

for an epigram,--crowd round thee in this hour?  Thy foul Harem; the curses

of mothers, the tears and infamy of daughters?  Miserable man! thou 'hast

done evil as thou couldst:'  thy whole existence seems one hideous abortion

and mistake of Nature; the use and meaning of thee not yet known.  Wert

thou a fabulous Griffin, devouring the works of men; daily dragging virgins

to thy cave;--clad also in scales that no spear would pierce:  no spear but

Death's?  A Griffin not fabulous but real!  Frightful, O Louis, seem these

moments for thee.--We will pry no further into the horrors of a sinner's

death-bed.



And yet let no meanest man lay flattering unction to his soul.  Louis was a

Ruler; but art not thou also one?  His wide France, look at it from the

Fixed Stars (themselves not yet Infinitude), is no wider than thy narrow

brickfield, where thou too didst faithfully, or didst unfaithfully.  Man,

'Symbol of Eternity imprisoned into 'Time!' it is not thy works, which are

all mortal, infinitely little, and the greatest no greater than the least,

but only the Spirit thou workest in, that can have worth or continuance.



But reflect, in any case, what a life-problem this of poor Louis, when he

rose as Bien-Aime from that Metz sick-bed, really was!  What son of Adam

could have swayed such incoherences into coherence?  Could he?  Blindest

Fortune alone has cast him on the top of it: he swims there; can as little

sway it as the drift-log sways the wind-tossed moon-stirred Atlantic. 

"What have I done to be so loved?" he said then.  He may say now:  What

have I done to be so hated?  Thou hast done nothing, poor Louis!  Thy fault

is properly even this, that thou didst nothing.  What could poor Louis do?

Abdicate, and wash his hands of it,--in favour of the first that would

accept!  Other clear wisdom there was none for him.  As it was, he stood

gazing dubiously, the absurdest mortal extant (a very Solecism Incarnate),

into the absurdest confused world;--wherein at lost nothing seemed so

certain as that he, the incarnate Solecism, had five senses; that were

Flying Tables (Tables Volantes, which vanish through the floor, to come

back reloaded). and a Parc-aux-cerfs.



Whereby at least we have again this historical curiosity:  a human being in

an original position; swimming passively, as on some boundless 'Mother of

Dead Dogs,' towards issues which he partly saw.  For Louis had withal a

kind of insight in him.  So, when a new Minister of Marine, or what else it

might be, came announcing his new era, the Scarlet-woman would hear from

the lips of Majesty at supper:  "He laid out his ware like another;

promised the beautifulest things in the world; not a thing of which will

come:  he does not know this region; he will see."  Or again:  "'Tis the

twentieth time I hear all that; France will never get a Navy, I believe." 

How touching also was this:  "If I were Lieutenant of Police, I would

prohibit those Paris cabriolets."  (Journal de Madame de Hausset, p. 293,

&c.)



Doomed mortal;--for is it not a doom to be Solecism incarnate!  A new Roi

Faineant, King Donothing; but with the strangest new Mayor of the Palace: 

no bow-legged Pepin now, but that same cloud-capt, fire-breathing Spectre

of DEMOCRACY; incalculable, which is enveloping the world!--Was Louis no

wickeder than this or the other private Donothing and Eatall; such as we

often enough see, under the name of Man, and even Man of Pleasure,

cumbering God's diligent Creation, for a time?  Say, wretcheder!  His Life-

solecism was seen and felt of a whole scandalised world; him endless

Oblivion cannot engulf, and swallow to endless depths,--not yet for a

generation or two.



However, be this as it will, we remark, not without interest, that 'on the

evening of the 4th,' Dame Dubarry issues from the sick-room, with

perceptible 'trouble in her visage.'  It is the fourth evening of May, year

of Grace 1774.  Such a whispering in the Oeil-de-Boeuf!  Is he dying then? 

What can be said is, that Dubarry seems making up her packages; she sails

weeping through her gilt boudoirs, as if taking leave.  D'Aiguilon and

Company are near their last card; nevertheless they will not yet throw up

the game.  But as for the sacramental controversy, it is as good as settled

without being mentioned; Louis can send for his Abbe Moudon in the course

of next night, be confessed by him, some say for the space of 'seventeen

minutes,' and demand the sacraments of his own accord.



Nay, already, in the afternoon, behold is not this your Sorceress Dubarry

with the handkerchief at her eyes, mounting D'Aiguillon's chariot; rolling

off in his Duchess's consolatory arms?  She is gone; and her place knows

her no more.  Vanish, false Sorceress; into Space!  Needless to hover at

neighbouring Ruel; for thy day is done.  Shut are the royal palace-gates

for evermore; hardly in coming years shalt thou, under cloud of night,

descend once, in black domino, like a black night-bird, and disturb the

fair Antoinette's music-party in the Park:  all Birds of Paradise flying

from thee, and musical windpipes growing mute.  (Campan, i. 197.)  Thou

unclean, yet unmalignant, not unpitiable thing!  What a course was thine: 

from that first trucklebed (in Joan of Arc's country) where thy mother bore

thee, with tears, to an unnamed father:  forward, through lowest

subterranean depths, and over highest sunlit heights, of Harlotdom and

Rascaldom--to the guillotine-axe, which shears away thy vainly whimpering

head!  Rest there uncursed; only buried and abolished:  what else befitted

thee?



Louis, meanwhile, is in considerable impatience for his sacraments; sends

more than once to the window, to see whether they are not coming.  Be of

comfort, Louis, what comfort thou canst:  they are under way, those

sacraments.  Towards six in the morning, they arrive.  Cardinal Grand-

Almoner Roche-Aymon is here, in pontificals, with his pyxes and his tools;

he approaches the royal pillow; elevates his wafer; mutters or seems to

mutter somewhat;--and so (as the Abbe Georgel, in words that stick to one,

expresses it) has Louis 'made the amende honorable to God;' so does your

Jesuit construe it.--"Wa, Wa," as the wild Clotaire groaned out, when life

was departing, "what great God is this that pulls down the strength of the

strongest kings!"  (Gregorius Turonensis, Histor. lib. iv. cap. 21.)



The amende honorable, what 'legal apology' you will, to God:--but not, if

D'Aiguillon can help it, to man.  Dubarry still hovers in his mansion at

Ruel; and while there is life, there is hope.  Grand-Almoner Roche-Aymon,

accordingly (for he seems to be in the secret), has no sooner seen his

pyxes and gear repacked, then he is stepping majestically forth again, as

if the work were done!  But King's Confessor Abbe Moudon starts forward;

with anxious acidulent face, twitches him by the sleeve; whispers in his

ear.  Whereupon the poor Cardinal must turn round; and declare audibly;

"That his Majesty repents of any subjects of scandal he may have given (a

pu donner); and purposes, by the strength of Heaven assisting him, to avoid

the like--for the future!"  Words listened to by Richelieu with mastiff-

face, growing blacker; answered to, aloud, 'with an epithet,'--which

Besenval will not repeat.  Old Richelieu, conqueror of Minorca, companion

of Flying-Table orgies, perforator of bedroom walls, (Besenval, i. 159-172.

Genlis; Duc de Levis, &c.) is thy day also done?



Alas, the Chapel organs may keep going; the Shrine of Sainte Genevieve be

let down, and pulled up again,--without effect.  In the evening the whole

Court, with Dauphin and Dauphiness, assist at the Chapel:  priests are

hoarse with chanting their 'Prayers of Forty Hours;' and the heaving

bellows blow.  Almost frightful!  For the very heaven blackens; battering

rain-torrents dash, with thunder; almost drowning the organ's voice:  and

electric fire-flashes make the very flambeaux on the altar pale.  So that

the most, as we are told, retired, when it was over, with hurried steps,

'in a state of meditation (recueillement),' and said little or nothing. 

(Weber, Memoires concernant Marie-Antoinette (London, 1809), i. 22.)



So it has lasted for the better half of a fortnight; the Dubarry gone

almost a week.  Besenval says, all the world was getting impatient que cela

finit; that poor Louis would have done with it.  It is now the 10th of May

1774.  He will soon have done now.



This tenth May day falls into the loathsome sick-bed; but dull, unnoticed

there:  for they that look out of the windows are quite darkened; the

cistern-wheel moves discordant on its axis; Life, like a spent steed, is

panting towards the goal.  In their remote apartments, Dauphin and

Dauphiness stand road-ready; all grooms and equerries booted and spurred: 

waiting for some signal to escape the house of pestilence.  (One grudges to

interfere with the beautiful theatrical 'candle,' which Madame Campan (i.

79) has lit on this occasion, and blown out at the moment of death.  What

candles might be lit or blown out, in so large an Establishment as that of

Versailles, no man at such distance would like to affirm:  at the same

time, as it was two o'clock in a May Afternoon, and these royal Stables

must have been some five or six hundred yards from the royal sick-room, the

'candle' does threaten to go out in spite of us.  It remains burning

indeed--in her fantasy; throwing light on much in those Memoires of hers.)

And, hark! across the Oeil-de-Boeuf, what sound is that; sound 'terrible

and absolutely like thunder'?  It is the rush of the whole Court, rushing

as in wager, to salute the new Sovereigns:  Hail to your Majesties!  The

Dauphin and Dauphiness are King and Queen!  Over-powered with many

emotions, they two fall on their knees together, and, with streaming tears,

exclaim, "O God, guide us, protect us; we are too young to reign!"--Too

young indeed.



Thus, in any case, 'with a sound absolutely like thunder,' has the Horologe

of Time struck, and an old Era passed away.  The Louis that was, lies

forsaken, a mass of abhorred clay; abandoned 'to some poor persons, and

priests of the Chapelle Ardente,'--who make haste to put him 'in two lead

coffins, pouring in abundant spirits of wine.'  The new Louis with his

Court is rolling towards Choisy, through the summer afternoon:  the royal

tears still flow; but a word mispronounced by Monseigneur d'Artois sets

them all laughing, and they weep no more.  Light mortals, how ye walk your

light life-minuet, over bottomless abysses, divided from you by a film!



For the rest, the proper authorities felt that no Funeral could be too

unceremonious.  Besenval himself thinks it was unceremonious enough.  Two

carriages containing two noblemen of the usher species, and a Versailles

clerical person; some score of mounted pages, some fifty palfreniers;

these, with torches, but not so much as in black, start from Versailles on

the second evening with their leaden bier.  At a high trot they start; and

keep up that pace.  For the jibes (brocards) of those Parisians, who stand

planted in two rows, all the way to St. Denis, and 'give vent to their

pleasantry, the characteristic of the nation,' do not tempt one to slacken.

Towards midnight the vaults of St. Denis receive their own; unwept by any

eye of all these; if not by poor Loque his neglected Daughter's, whose

Nunnery is hard by.



Him they crush down, and huddle under-ground, in this impatient way; him

and his era of sin and tyranny and shame; for behold a New Era is come; the

future all the brighter that the past was base.
