





MY BONDAGE  and MY FREEDOM

	By FREDERICK DOUGLASS

	By a principle essential to Christianity, a PERSON is eternally

differenced from a THING; so that the idea of a HUMAN BEING,

necessarily excludes the idea of PROPERTY IN THAT BEING_.

COLERIDGE





Entered according to Act of Congress in 1855 by Frederick

Douglass in the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the

Northern District of New York





TO

HONORABLE GERRIT SMITH,

AS A SLIGHT TOKEN OF

ESTEEM FOR HIS CHARACTER,

ADMIRATION FOR HIS GENIUS AND BENEVOLENCE,

AFFECTION FOR HIS PERSON, AND

GRATITUDE FOR HIS FRIENDSHIP,

AND AS

A Small but most Sincere Acknowledgement of

HIS PRE-EMINENT SERVICES IN BEHALF OF THE RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES

OF AN

AFFLICTED, DESPISED AND DEEPLY OUTRAGED PEOPLE,

BY RANKING SLAVERY WITH PIRACY AND MURDER,

AND BY

DENYING IT EITHER A LEGAL OR CONSTITUTIONAL EXISTENCE,

This Volume is Respectfully Dedicated,

BY HIS FAITHFUL AND FIRMLY ATTACHED FRIEND,

FREDERICK DOUGLAS.

ROCHESTER, N.Y.








EDITOR'S PREFACE





If the volume now presented to the public were a mere work of

ART, the history of its misfortune might be written in two very

simple words--TOO LATE.  The nature and character of slavery have

been subjects of an almost endless variety of artistic

representation; and after the brilliant achievements in that

field, and while those achievements are yet fresh in the memory

of the million, he who would add another to the legion, must

possess the charm of transcendent excellence, or apologize for

something worse than rashness.  The reader is, therefore,

assured, with all due promptitude, that his attention is not

invited to a work of ART, but to a work of FACTS--Facts, terrible

and almost incredible, it may be yet FACTS, nevertheless.



I am authorized to say that there is not a fictitious name nor

place in the whole volume; but that names and places are

literally given, and that every transaction therein described

actually transpired.



Perhaps the best Preface to this volume is furnished in the

following letter of Mr. Douglass, written in answer to my urgent

solicitation for such a work:



                                ROCHESTER, N. Y. July 2, 1855.



DEAR FRIEND:  I have long entertained, as you very well know, a

somewhat positive repugnance to writing or speaking anything for

the public, which could, with any degree of plausibilty, make me

liable to the imputation of seeking personal notoriety, for its

own sake.  Entertaining that feeling very sincerely, and

permitting its control, perhaps, quite unreasonably, I have often

refused to narrate my personal experience in public anti-

slavery meetings, and in sympathizing circles, when urged to do

so by friends, with whose views and wishes, ordinarily, it were a

pleasure to comply.  In my letters and speeches, I have generally

aimed to discuss the question of Slavery in the light of

fundamental principles, and upon facts, notorious and open to

all; making, I trust, no more of the fact of my own former

enslavement, than circumstances seemed absolutely to require.  I

have never placed my opposition to slavery on a basis so narrow

as my own enslavement, but rather upon the indestructible and

unchangeable laws of human nature, every one of which is

perpetually and flagrantly violated by the slave system.  I have

also felt that it was best for those having histories worth the

writing--or supposed to be so--to commit such work to hands other

than their own.  To write of one's self, in such a manner as not

to incur the imputation of weakness, vanity, and egotism, is a

work within the ability of but few; and I have little reason to

believe that I belong to that fortunate few.



These considerations caused me to hesitate, when first you kindly

urged me to prepare for publication a full account of my life as

a slave, and my life as a freeman.



Nevertheless, I see, with you, many reasons for regarding my

autobiography as exceptional in its character, and as being, in

some sense, naturally beyond the reach of those reproaches which

honorable and sensitive minds dislike to incur.  It is not to

illustrate any heroic achievements of a man, but to vindicate a

just and beneficent principle, in its application to the whole

human family, by letting in the light of truth upon a system,

esteemed by some as a blessing, and by others as a curse and a

crime.  I agree with you, that this system is now at the bar of

public opinion--not only of this country, but of the whole

civilized world--for judgment.  Its friends have made for it the

usual plea--"not guilty;" the case must, therefore, proceed.  Any

facts, either from slaves, slaveholders, or by-standers,

calculated to enlighten the public mind, by revealing the true

nature, character, and tendency of the slave system, are in

order, and can scarcely be innocently withheld.



I see, too, that there are special reasons why I should write my

own biography, in preference to employing another to do it.  Not

only is slavery on trial, but unfortunately, the enslaved people

are also on trial.  It is alleged, that they are, naturally,

inferior; that they are _so low_ in the scale of humanity, and so

utterly stupid, that they are unconscious of their wrongs, and do

not apprehend their rights.  Looking, then, at your request, from

this stand-point, and wishing everything of which you think me

capable to go to the benefit of my afflicted people, I part with

my doubts and hesitation, and proceed to furnish you the desired

manuscript; hoping that you may be able to make such arrangements

for its publication as shall be best adapted to accomplish that

good which you so enthusiastically anticipate.


                                        FREDERICK DOUGLASS






There was little necessity for doubt and hesitation on the part

of Mr. Douglass, as to the propriety of his giving to the world a

full account of himself.  A man who was born and brought up in

slavery, a living witness of its horrors; who often himself

experienced its cruelties; and who, despite the depressing

influences surrounding his birth, youth and manhood, has risen,

from a dark and almost absolute obscurity, to the distinguished

position which he now occupies, might very well assume the

existence of a commendable curiosity, on the part of the public,

to know the facts of his remarkable history.

                                                    EDITOR

