






CHAPTER IV - THE TUGGSES AT RAMSGATE







Once upon a time there dwelt, in a narrow street on the Surrey side

of the water, within three minutes' walk of old London Bridge, Mr.

Joseph Tuggs - a little dark-faced man, with shiny hair, twinkling

eyes, short legs, and a body of very considerable thickness,

measuring from the centre button of his waistcoat in front, to the

ornamental buttons of his coat behind.  The figure of the amiable

Mrs. Tuggs, if not perfectly symmetrical, was decidedly

comfortable; and the form of her only daughter, the accomplished

Miss Charlotte Tuggs, was fast ripening into that state of

luxuriant plumpness which had enchanted the eyes, and captivated

the heart, of Mr. Joseph Tuggs in his earlier days.  Mr. Simon

Tuggs, his only son, and Miss Charlotte Tuggs's only brother, was

as differently formed in body, as he was differently constituted in

mind, from the remainder of his family.  There was that elongation

in his thoughtful face, and that tendency to weakness in his

interesting legs, which tell so forcibly of a great mind and

romantic disposition.  The slightest traits of character in such a

being, possess no mean interest to speculative minds.  He usually

appeared in public, in capacious shoes with black cotton stockings;

and was observed to be particularly attached to a black glazed

stock, without tie or ornament of any description.



There is perhaps no profession, however useful; no pursuit, however

meritorious; which can escape the petty attacks of vulgar minds.

Mr. Joseph Tuggs was a grocer.  It might be supposed that a grocer

was beyond the breath of calumny; but no - the neighbours

stigmatised him as a chandler; and the poisonous voice of envy

distinctly asserted that he dispensed tea and coffee by the

quartern, retailed sugar by the ounce, cheese by the slice, tobacco

by the screw, and butter by the pat.  These taunts, however, were

lost upon the Tuggses.  Mr. Tuggs attended to the grocery

department; Mrs. Tuggs to the cheesemongery; and Miss Tuggs to her

education.  Mr. Simon Tuggs kept his father's books, and his own

counsel.



One fine spring afternoon, the latter gentleman was seated on a tub

of weekly Dorset, behind the little red desk with a wooden rail,

which ornamented a corner of the counter; when a stranger

dismounted from a cab, and hastily entered the shop.  He was

habited in black cloth, and bore with him, a green umbrella, and a

blue bag.



'Mr. Tuggs?' said the stranger, inquiringly.



'MY name is Tuggs,' replied Mr. Simon.



'It's the other Mr. Tuggs,' said the stranger, looking towards the

glass door which led into the parlour behind the shop, and on the

inside of which, the round face of Mr. Tuggs, senior, was

distinctly visible, peeping over the curtain.



Mr. Simon gracefully waved his pen, as if in intimation of his wish

that his father would advance.  Mr. Joseph Tuggs, with considerable

celerity, removed his face from the curtain and placed it before

the stranger.



'I come from the Temple,' said the man with the bag.



'From the Temple!' said Mrs. Tuggs, flinging open the door of the

little parlour and disclosing Miss Tuggs in perspective.



'From the Temple!' said Miss Tuggs and Mr. Simon Tuggs at the same

moment.



'From the Temple!' said Mr. Joseph Tuggs, turning as pale as a

Dutch cheese.



'From the Temple,' repeated the man with the bag; 'from Mr.

Cower's, the solicitor's.  Mr. Tuggs, I congratulate you, sir.

Ladies, I wish you joy of your prosperity!  We have been

successful.'  And the man with the bag leisurely divested himself

of his umbrella and glove, as a preliminary to shaking hands with

Mr. Joseph Tuggs.



Now the words 'we have been successful,' had no sooner issued from

the mouth of the man with the bag, than Mr. Simon Tuggs rose from

the tub of weekly Dorset, opened his eyes very wide, gasped for

breath, made figures of eight in the air with his pen, and finally

fell into the arms of his anxious mother, and fainted away without

the slightest ostensible cause or pretence.



'Water!' screamed Mrs. Tuggs.



'Look up, my son,' exclaimed Mr. Tuggs.



'Simon! dear Simon!' shrieked Miss Tuggs.



'I'm better now,' said Mr. Simon Tuggs.  'What! successful!'  And

then, as corroborative evidence of his being better, he fainted

away again, and was borne into the little parlour by the united

efforts of the remainder of the family, and the man with the bag.



To a casual spectator, or to any one unacquainted with the position

of the family, this fainting would have been unaccountable.  To

those who understood the mission of the man with the bag, and were

moreover acquainted with the excitability of the nerves of Mr.

Simon Tuggs, it was quite comprehensible.  A long-pending lawsuit

respecting the validity of a will, had been unexpectedly decided;

and Mr. Joseph Tuggs was the possessor of twenty thousand pounds.



A prolonged consultation took place, that night, in the little

parlour - a consultation that was to settle the future destinies of

the Tuggses.  The shop was shut up, at an unusually early hour; and

many were the unavailing kicks bestowed upon the closed door by

applicants for quarterns of sugar, or half-quarterns of bread, or

penn'orths of pepper, which were to have been 'left till Saturday,'

but which fortune had decreed were to be left alone altogether.



'We must certainly give up business,' said Miss Tuggs.



'Oh, decidedly,' said Mrs. Tuggs.



'Simon shall go to the bar,' said Mr. Joseph Tuggs.



'And I shall always sign myself "Cymon" in future,' said his son.



'And I shall call myself Charlotta,' said Miss Tuggs.



'And you must always call ME "Ma," and father "Pa,"' said Mrs.

Tuggs.



'Yes, and Pa must leave off all his vulgar habits,' interposed Miss

Tuggs.



'I'll take care of all that,' responded Mr. Joseph Tuggs,

complacently.  He was, at that very moment, eating pickled salmon

with a pocket-knife.



'We must leave town immediately,' said Mr. Cymon Tuggs.



Everybody concurred that this was an indispensable preliminary to

being genteel.  The question then arose, Where should they go?



'Gravesend?' mildly suggested Mr. Joseph Tuggs.  The idea was

unanimously scouted.  Gravesend was LOW.



'Margate?' insinuated Mrs. Tuggs.  Worse and worse - nobody there,

but tradespeople.



'Brighton?'  Mr. Cymon Tuggs opposed an insurmountable objection.

All the coaches had been upset, in turn, within the last three

weeks; each coach had averaged two passengers killed, and six

wounded; and, in every case, the newspapers had distinctly

understood that 'no blame whatever was attributable to the

coachman.'



'Ramsgate?' ejaculated Mr. Cymon, thoughtfully.  To be sure; how

stupid they must have been, not to have thought of that before!

Ramsgate was just the place of all others.



Two months after this conversation, the City of London Ramsgate

steamer was running gaily down the river.  Her flag was flying, her

band was playing, her passengers were conversing; everything about

her seemed gay and lively. - No wonder - the Tuggses were on board.



'Charming, ain't it?' said Mr. Joseph Tuggs, in a bottle-green

great-coat, with a velvet collar of the same, and a blue

travelling-cap with a gold band.



'Soul-inspiring,' replied Mr. Cymon Tuggs - he was entered at the

bar.  'Soul-inspiring!'



'Delightful morning, sir!' said a stoutish, military-looking

gentleman in a blue surtout buttoned up to his chin, and white

trousers chained down to the soles of his boots.



Mr. Cymon Tuggs took upon himself the responsibility of answering

the observation.  'Heavenly!' he replied.



'You are an enthusiastic admirer of the beauties of Nature, sir?'

said the military gentleman.



'I am, sir,' replied Mr. Cymon Tuggs.



'Travelled much, sir?' inquired the military gentleman.



'Not much,' replied Mr. Cymon Tuggs.



'You've been on the continent, of course?' inquired the military

gentleman.



'Not exactly,' replied Mr. Cymon Tuggs - in a qualified tone, as if

he wished it to be implied that he had gone half-way and come back

again.



'You of course intend your son to make the grand tour, sir?' said

the military gentleman, addressing Mr. Joseph Tuggs.



As Mr. Joseph Tuggs did not precisely understand what the grand

tour was, or how such an article was manufactured, he replied, 'Of

course.'  Just as he said the word, there came tripping up, from

her seat at the stern of the vessel, a young lady in a puce-

coloured silk cloak, and boots of the same; with long black

ringlets, large black eyes, brief petticoats, and unexceptionable

ankles.



'Walter, my dear,' said the young lady to the military gentleman.



'Yes, Belinda, my love,' responded the military gentleman to the

black-eyed young lady.



'What have you left me alone so long for?' said the young lady.  'I

have been stared out of countenance by those rude young men.'



'What! stared at?' exclaimed the military gentleman, with an

emphasis which made Mr. Cymon Tuggs withdraw his eyes from the

young lady's face with inconceivable rapidity.  'Which young men -

where?' and the military gentleman clenched his fist, and glared

fearfully on the cigar-smokers around.



'Be calm, Walter, I entreat,' said the young lady.



'I won't,' said the military gentleman.



'Do, sir,' interposed Mr. Cymon Tuggs.  'They ain't worth your

notice.'



'No - no - they are not, indeed,' urged the young lady.



'I WILL be calm,' said the military gentleman.  'You speak truly,

sir.  I thank you for a timely remonstrance, which may have spared

me the guilt of manslaughter.'  Calming his wrath, the military

gentleman wrung Mr. Cymon Tuggs by the hand.



'My sister, sir!' said Mr. Cymon Tuggs; seeing that the military

gentleman was casting an admiring look towards Miss Charlotta.



'My wife, ma'am - Mrs. Captain Waters,' said the military

gentleman, presenting the black-eyed young lady.



'My mother, ma'am - Mrs. Tuggs,' said Mr. Cymon.  The military

gentleman and his wife murmured enchanting courtesies; and the

Tuggses looked as unembarrassed as they could.



'Walter, my dear,' said the black-eyed young lady, after they had

sat chatting with the Tuggses some half-hour.



'Yes, my love,' said the military gentleman.



'Don't you think this gentleman (with an inclination of the head

towards Mr. Cymon Tuggs) is very much like the Marquis Carriwini?'



'Lord bless me, very!' said the military gentleman.



'It struck me, the moment I saw him,' said the young lady, gazing

intently, and with a melancholy air, on the scarlet countenance of

Mr. Cymon Tuggs.  Mr. Cymon Tuggs looked at everybody; and finding

that everybody was looking at him, appeared to feel some temporary

difficulty in disposing of his eyesight.



'So exactly the air of the marquis,' said the military gentleman.



'Quite extraordinary!' sighed the military gentleman's lady.



'You don't know the marquis, sir?' inquired the military gentleman.



Mr. Cymon Tuggs stammered a negative.



'If you did,' continued Captain Walter Waters, 'you would feel how

much reason you have to be proud of the resemblance - a most

elegant man, with a most prepossessing appearance.'



'He is - he is indeed!' exclaimed Belinda Waters energetically.  As

her eye caught that of Mr. Cymon Tuggs, she withdrew it from his

features in bashful confusion.



All this was highly gratifying to the feelings of the Tuggses; and

when, in the course of farther conversation, it was discovered that

Miss Charlotta Tuggs was the FAC SIMILE of a titled relative of

Mrs. Belinda Waters, and that Mrs. Tuggs herself was the very

picture of the Dowager Duchess of Dobbleton, their delight in the

acquisition of so genteel and friendly an acquaintance, knew no

bounds.  Even the dignity of Captain Walter Waters relaxed, to that

degree, that he suffered himself to be prevailed upon by Mr. Joseph

Tuggs, to partake of cold pigeon-pie and sherry, on deck; and a

most delightful conversation, aided by these agreeable stimulants,

was prolonged, until they ran alongside Ramsgate Pier.



'Good-bye, dear!' said Mrs. Captain Waters to Miss Charlotta Tuggs,

just before the bustle of landing commenced; 'we shall see you on

the sands in the morning; and, as we are sure to have found

lodgings before then, I hope we shall be inseparables for many

weeks to come.'



'Oh! I hope so,' said Miss Charlotta Tuggs, emphatically.



'Tickets, ladies and gen'lm'n,' said the man on the paddle-box.



'Want a porter, sir?' inquired a dozen men in smock-frocks.



'Now, my dear!' said Captain Waters.



'Good-bye!' said Mrs. Captain Waters - 'good-bye, Mr. Cymon!' and

with a pressure of the hand which threw the amiable young man's

nerves into a state of considerable derangement, Mrs. Captain

Waters disappeared among the crowd.  A pair of puce-coloured boots

were seen ascending the steps, a white handkerchief fluttered, a

black eye gleamed.  The Waterses were gone, and Mr. Cymon Tuggs was

alone in a heartless world.



Silently and abstractedly, did that too sensitive youth follow his

revered parents, and a train of smock-frocks and wheelbarrows,

along the pier, until the bustle of the scene around, recalled him

to himself.  The sun was shining brightly; the sea, dancing to its

own music, rolled merrily in; crowds of people promenaded to and

fro; young ladies tittered; old ladies talked; nursemaids displayed

their charms to the greatest possible advantage; and their little

charges ran up and down, and to and fro, and in and out, under the

feet, and between the legs, of the assembled concourse, in the most

playful and exhilarating manner.  There were old gentlemen, trying

to make out objects through long telescopes; and young ones, making

objects of themselves in open shirt-collars; ladies, carrying about

portable chairs, and portable chairs carrying about invalids;

parties, waiting on the pier for parties who had come by the steam-

boat; and nothing was to be heard but talking, laughing, welcoming,

and merriment.



'Fly, sir?' exclaimed a chorus of fourteen men and six boys, the

moment Mr. Joseph Tuggs, at the head of his little party, set foot

in the street.



'Here's the gen'lm'n at last!' said one, touching his hat with mock

politeness.  'Werry glad to see you, sir, - been a-waitin' for you

these six weeks.  Jump in, if you please, sir!'



'Nice light fly and a fast trotter, sir,' said another:  'fourteen

mile a hour, and surroundin' objects rendered inwisible by ex-treme

welocity!'



'Large fly for your luggage, sir,' cried a third.  'Werry large fly

here, sir - reg'lar bluebottle!'



'Here's YOUR fly, sir!' shouted another aspiring charioteer,

mounting the box, and inducing an old grey horse to indulge in some

imperfect reminiscences of a canter.  'Look at him, sir! - temper

of a lamb and haction of a steam-ingein!'



Resisting even the temptation of securing the services of so

valuable a quadruped as the last named, Mr. Joseph Tuggs beckoned

to the proprietor of a dingy conveyance of a greenish hue, lined

with faded striped calico; and, the luggage and the family having

been deposited therein, the animal in the shafts, after describing

circles in the road for a quarter of an hour, at last consented to

depart in quest of lodgings.



'How many beds have you got?' screamed Mrs. Tuggs out of the fly,

to the woman who opened the door of the first house which displayed

a bill intimating that apartments were to be let within.



'How many did you want, ma'am?' was, of course, the reply.



'Three.'



'Will you step in, ma'am?'  Down got Mrs. Tuggs.  The family were

delighted.  Splendid view of the sea from the front windows  -

charming!  A short pause.  Back came Mrs. Tuggs again. - One

parlour and a mattress.



'Why the devil didn't they say so at first?' inquired Mr. Joseph

Tuggs, rather pettishly.



'Don't know,' said Mrs. Tuggs.



'Wretches!' exclaimed the nervous Cymon.  Another bill - another

stoppage.  Same question - same answer - similar result.



'What do they mean by this?' inquired Mr. Joseph Tuggs, thoroughly

out of temper.



'Don't know,' said the placid Mrs. Tuggs.



'Orvis the vay here, sir,' said the driver, by way of accounting

for the circumstance in a satisfactory manner; and off they went

again, to make fresh inquiries, and encounter fresh

disappointments.



It had grown dusk when the 'fly' - the rate of whose progress

greatly belied its name - after climbing up four or five

perpendicular hills, stopped before the door of a dusty house, with

a bay window, from which you could obtain a beautiful glimpse of

the sea - if you thrust half of your body out of it, at the

imminent peril of falling into the area.  Mrs. Tuggs alighted.  One

ground-floor sitting-room, and three cells with beds in them up-

stairs.  A double-house.  Family on the opposite side.  Five

children milk-and-watering in the parlour, and one little boy,

expelled for bad behaviour, screaming on his back in the passage.



'What's the terms?' said Mrs. Tuggs.  The mistress of the house was

considering the expediency of putting on an extra guinea; so, she

coughed slightly, and affected not to hear the question.



'What's the terms?' said Mrs. Tuggs, in a louder key.



'Five guineas a week, ma'am, WITH attendance,' replied the lodging-

house keeper.  (Attendance means the privilege of ringing the bell

as often as you like, for your own amusement.)



'Rather dear,' said Mrs. Tuggs.  'Oh dear, no, ma'am!' replied the

mistress of the house, with a benign smile of pity at the ignorance

of manners and customs, which the observation betrayed.  'Very

cheap!'



Such an authority was indisputable.  Mrs. Tuggs paid a week's rent

in advance, and took the lodgings for a month.  In an hour's time,

the family were seated at tea in their new abode.



'Capital srimps!' said Mr. Joseph Tuggs.



Mr. Cymon eyed his father with a rebellious scowl, as he

emphatically said 'SHRIMPS.'



'Well, then, shrimps,' said Mr. Joseph Tuggs.  'Srimps or shrimps,

don't much matter.'



There was pity, blended with malignity, in Mr. Cymon's eye, as he

replied, 'Don't matter, father!  What would Captain Waters say, if

he heard such vulgarity?'



'Or what would dear Mrs. Captain Waters say,' added Charlotta, 'if

she saw mother - ma, I mean - eating them whole, heads and all!'



'It won't bear thinking of!' ejaculated Mr. Cymon, with a shudder.

'How different,' he thought, 'from the Dowager Duchess of

Dobbleton!'



'Very pretty woman, Mrs. Captain Waters, is she not, Cymon?'

inquired Miss Charlotta.



A glow of nervous excitement passed over the countenance of Mr.

Cymon Tuggs, as he replied, 'An angel of beauty!'



'Hallo!' said Mr. Joseph Tuggs.  'Hallo, Cymon, my boy, take care.

Married lady, you know;' and he winked one of his twinkling eyes

knowingly.



'Why,' exclaimed Cymon, starting up with an ebullition of fury, as

unexpected as alarming, 'why am I to be reminded of that blight of

my happiness, and ruin of my hopes?  Why am I to be taunted with

the miseries which are heaped upon my head?  Is it not enough to -

to - to - ' and the orator paused; but whether for want of words,

or lack of breath, was never distinctly ascertained.



There was an impressive solemnity in the tone of this address, and

in the air with which the romantic Cymon, at its conclusion, rang

the bell, and demanded a flat candlestick, which effectually

forbade a reply.  He stalked dramatically to bed, and the Tuggses

went to bed too, half an hour afterwards, in a state of

considerable mystification and perplexity.



If the pier had presented a scene of life and bustle to the Tuggses

on their first landing at Ramsgate, it was far surpassed by the

appearance of the sands on the morning after their arrival.  It was

a fine, bright, clear day, with a light breeze from the sea.  There

were the same ladies and gentlemen, the same children, the same

nursemaids, the same telescopes, the same portable chairs.  The

ladies were employed in needlework, or watch-guard making, or

knitting, or reading novels; the gentlemen were reading newspapers

and magazines; the children were digging holes in the sand with

wooden spades, and collecting water therein; the nursemaids, with

their youngest charges in their arms, were running in after the

waves, and then running back with the waves after them; and, now

and then, a little sailing-boat either departed with a gay and

talkative cargo of passengers, or returned with a very silent and

particularly uncomfortable-looking one.



'Well, I never!' exclaimed Mrs. Tuggs, as she and Mr. Joseph Tuggs,

and Miss Charlotta Tuggs, and Mr. Cymon Tuggs, with their eight

feet in a corresponding number of yellow shoes, seated themselves

on four rush-bottomed chairs, which, being placed in a soft part of

the sand, forthwith sunk down some two feet and a half - 'Well, I

never!'



Mr. Cymon, by an exertion of great personal strength, uprooted the

chairs, and removed them further back.



'Why, I'm blessed if there ain't some ladies a-going in!' exclaimed

Mr. Joseph Tuggs, with intense astonishment.



'Lor, pa!' exclaimed Miss Charlotta.



'There IS, my dear,' said Mr. Joseph Tuggs.  And, sure enough, four

young ladies, each furnished with a towel, tripped up the steps of

a bathing-machine.  In went the horse, floundering about in the

water; round turned the machine; down sat the driver; and presently

out burst the young ladies aforesaid, with four distinct splashes.



'Well, that's sing'ler, too!' ejaculated Mr. Joseph Tuggs, after an

awkward pause.  Mr. Cymon coughed slightly.



'Why, here's some gentlemen a-going in on this side!' exclaimed

Mrs. Tuggs, in a tone of horror.



Three machines - three horses - three flounderings - three turnings

round - three splashes - three gentlemen, disporting themselves in

the water like so many dolphins.



'Well, THAT'S sing'ler!' said Mr. Joseph Tuggs again.  Miss

Charlotta coughed this time, and another pause ensued.  It was

agreeably broken.



'How d'ye do, dear?  We have been looking for you, all the

morning,' said a voice to Miss Charlotta Tuggs.  Mrs. Captain

Waters was the owner of it.



'How d'ye do?' said Captain Walter Waters, all suavity; and a most

cordial interchange of greetings ensued.



'Belinda, my love,' said Captain Walter Waters, applying his glass

to his eye, and looking in the direction of the sea.



'Yes, my dear,' replied Mrs. Captain Waters.



'There's Harry Thompson!'



'Where?' said Belinda, applying her glass to her eye.



'Bathing.'



'Lor, so it is!  He don't see us, does he?'



'No, I don't think he does' replied the captain.  'Bless my soul,

how very singular!'



'What?' inquired Belinda.



'There's Mary Golding, too.'



'Lor! - where?'  (Up went the glass again.)



'There!' said the captain, pointing to one of the young ladies

before noticed, who, in her bathing costume, looked as if she was

enveloped in a patent Mackintosh, of scanty dimensions.



'So it is, I declare!' exclaimed Mrs. Captain Waters.  'How very

curious we should see them both!'



'Very,' said the captain, with perfect coolness.



'It's the reg'lar thing here, you see,' whispered Mr. Cymon Tuggs

to his father.



'I see it is,' whispered Mr. Joseph Tuggs in reply.  'Queer, though

- ain't it?'  Mr. Cymon Tuggs nodded assent.



'What do you think of doing with yourself this morning?' inquired

the captain.  'Shall we lunch at Pegwell?'



'I should like that very much indeed,' interposed Mrs. Tuggs.  She

had never heard of Pegwell; but the word 'lunch' had reached her

ears, and it sounded very agreeably.



'How shall we go?' inquired the captain; 'it's too warm to walk.'



'A shay?' suggested Mr. Joseph Tuggs.



'Chaise,' whispered Mr. Cymon.



'I should think one would be enough,' said Mr. Joseph Tuggs aloud,

quite unconscious of the meaning of the correction.  'However, two

shays if you like.'



'I should like a donkey SO much,' said Belinda.



'Oh, so should I!' echoed Charlotta Tuggs.



'Well, we can have a fly,' suggested the captain, 'and you can have

a couple of donkeys.'



A fresh difficulty arose.  Mrs. Captain Waters declared it would be

decidedly improper for two ladies to ride alone.  The remedy was

obvious.  Perhaps young Mr. Tuggs would be gallant enough to

accompany them.



Mr. Cymon Tuggs blushed, smiled, looked vacant, and faintly

protested that he was no horseman.  The objection was at once

overruled.  A fly was speedily found; and three donkeys - which the

proprietor declared on his solemn asseveration to be 'three parts

blood, and the other corn' - were engaged in the service.



'Kim up!' shouted one of the two boys who followed behind, to

propel the donkeys, when Belinda Waters and Charlotta Tuggs had

been hoisted, and pushed, and pulled, into their respective

saddles.



'Hi - hi - hi!' groaned the other boy behind Mr. Cymon Tuggs.  Away

went the donkey, with the stirrups jingling against the heels of

Cymon's boots, and Cymon's boots nearly scraping the ground.



'Way - way!  Wo - o - o -!' cried Mr. Cymon Tuggs as well as he

could, in the midst of the jolting.



'Don't make it gallop!' screamed Mrs. Captain Waters, behind.



'My donkey WILL go into the public-house!' shrieked Miss Tuggs in

the rear.



'Hi - hi - hi!' groaned both the boys together; and on went the

donkeys as if nothing would ever stop them.



Everything has an end, however; even the galloping of donkeys will

cease in time.  The animal which Mr. Cymon Tuggs bestrode, feeling

sundry uncomfortable tugs at the bit, the intent of which he could

by no means divine, abruptly sidled against a brick wall, and

expressed his uneasiness by grinding Mr. Cymon Tuggs's leg on the

rough surface.  Mrs. Captain Waters's donkey, apparently under the

influence of some playfulness of spirit, rushed suddenly, head

first, into a hedge, and declined to come out again:  and the

quadruped on which Miss Tuggs was mounted, expressed his delight at

this humorous proceeding by firmly planting his fore-feet against

the ground, and kicking up his hind-legs in a very agile, but

somewhat alarming manner.



This abrupt termination to the rapidity of the ride, naturally

occasioned some confusion.  Both the ladies indulged in vehement

screaming for several minutes; and Mr. Cymon Tuggs, besides

sustaining intense bodily pain, had the additional mental anguish

of witnessing their distressing situation, without having the power

to rescue them, by reason of his leg being firmly screwed in

between the animal and the wall.  The efforts of the boys, however,

assisted by the ingenious expedient of twisting the tail of the

most rebellious donkey, restored order in a much shorter time than

could have reasonably been expected, and the little party jogged

slowly on together.



'Now let 'em walk,' said Mr. Cymon Tuggs.  'It's cruel to overdrive

'em.'



'Werry well, sir,' replied the boy, with a grin at his companion,

as if he understood Mr. Cymon to mean that the cruelty applied less

to the animals than to their riders.



'What a lovely day, dear!' said Charlotta.



'Charming; enchanting, dear!' responded Mrs. Captain Waters.



'What a beautiful prospect, Mr. Tuggs!'



Cymon looked full in Belinda's face, as he responded - 'Beautiful,

indeed!'  The lady cast down her eyes, and suffered the animal she

was riding to fall a little back.  Cymon Tuggs instinctively did

the same.



There was a brief silence, broken only by a sigh from Mr. Cymon

Tuggs.



'Mr. Cymon,' said the lady suddenly, in a low tone, 'Mr. Cymon - I

am another's.'



Mr. Cymon expressed his perfect concurrence in a statement which it

was impossible to controvert.



'If I had not been - ' resumed Belinda; and there she stopped.



'What - what?' said Mr. Cymon earnestly.  'Do not torture me.  What

would you say?'



'If I had not been' - continued Mrs. Captain Waters - 'if, in

earlier life, it had been my fate to have known, and been beloved

by, a noble youth - a kindred soul - a congenial spirit - one

capable of feeling and appreciating the sentiments which - '



'Heavens! what do I hear?' exclaimed Mr. Cymon Tuggs.  'Is it

possible! can I believe my - Come up!'  (This last unsentimental

parenthesis was addressed to the donkey, who, with his head between

his fore-legs, appeared to be examining the state of his shoes with

great anxiety.)



'Hi - hi - hi,' said the boys behind.  'Come up,' expostulated

Cymon Tuggs again.  'Hi - hi - hi,' repeated the boys.  And whether

it was that the animal felt indignant at the tone of Mr. Tuggs's

command, or felt alarmed by the noise of the deputy proprietor's

boots running behind him; or whether he burned with a noble

emulation to outstrip the other donkeys; certain it is that he no

sooner heard the second series of 'hi - hi's,' than he started

away, with a celerity of pace which jerked Mr. Cymon's hat off,

instantaneously, and carried him to the Pegwell Bay hotel in no

time, where he deposited his rider without giving him the trouble

of dismounting, by sagaciously pitching him over his head, into the

very doorway of the tavern.



Great was the confusion of Mr. Cymon Tuggs, when he was put right

end uppermost, by two waiters; considerable was the alarm of Mrs.

Tuggs in behalf of her son; agonizing were the apprehensions of

Mrs. Captain Waters on his account.  It was speedily discovered,

however, that he had not sustained much more injury than the donkey

- he was grazed, and the animal was grazing - and then it WAS a

delightful party to be sure!  Mr. and Mrs. Tuggs, and the captain,

had ordered lunch in the little garden behind:  - small saucers of

large shrimps, dabs of butter, crusty loaves, and bottled ale.  The

sky was without a cloud; there were flower-pots and turf before

them; the sea, from the foot of the cliff, stretching away as far

as the eye could discern anything at all; vessels in the distance

with sails as white, and as small, as nicely-got-up cambric

handkerchiefs.  The shrimps were delightful, the ale better, and

the captain even more pleasant than either.  Mrs. Captain Waters

was in SUCH spirits after lunch! - chasing, first the captain

across the turf, and among the flower-pots; and then Mr. Cymon

Tuggs; and then Miss Tuggs; and laughing, too, quite boisterously.

But as the captain said, it didn't matter; who knew what they were,

there?  For all the people of the house knew, they might be common

people.  To which Mr. Joseph Tuggs responded, 'To be sure.'  And

then they went down the steep wooden steps a little further on,

which led to the bottom of the cliff; and looked at the crabs, and

the seaweed, and the eels, till it was more than fully time to go

back to Ramsgate again.  Finally, Mr. Cymon Tuggs ascended the

steps last, and Mrs. Captain Waters last but one; and Mr. Cymon

Tuggs discovered that the foot and ankle of Mrs. Captain Waters,

were even more unexceptionable than he had at first supposed.



Taking a donkey towards his ordinary place of residence, is a very

different thing, and a feat much more easily to be accomplished,

than taking him from it.  It requires a great deal of foresight and

presence of mind in the one case, to anticipate the numerous

flights of his discursive imagination; whereas, in the other, all

you have to do, is, to hold on, and place a blind confidence in the

animal.  Mr. Cymon Tuggs adopted the latter expedient on his

return; and his nerves were so little discomposed by the journey,

that he distinctly understood they were all to meet again at the

library in the evening.



The library was crowded.  There were the same ladies, and the same

gentlemen, who had been on the sands in the morning, and on the

pier the day before.  There were young ladies, in maroon-coloured

gowns and black velvet bracelets, dispensing fancy articles in the

shop, and presiding over games of chance in the concert-room.

There were marriageable daughters, and marriage-making mammas,

gaming and promenading, and turning over music, and flirting.

There were some male beaux doing the sentimental in whispers, and

others doing the ferocious in moustache.  There were Mrs. Tuggs in

amber, Miss Tuggs in sky-blue, Mrs. Captain Waters in pink.  There

was Captain Waters in a braided surtout; there was Mr. Cymon Tuggs

in pumps and a gilt waistcoat; there was Mr. Joseph Tuggs in a blue

coat and a shirt-frill.



'Numbers three, eight, and eleven!' cried one of the young ladies

in the maroon-coloured gowns.



'Numbers three, eight, and eleven!' echoed another young lady in

the same uniform.



'Number three's gone,' said the first young lady.  'Numbers eight

and eleven!'



'Numbers eight and eleven!' echoed the second young lady.



'Number eight's gone, Mary Ann,' said the first young lady.



'Number eleven!' screamed the second.



'The numbers are all taken now, ladies, if you please,' said the

first.  The representatives of numbers three, eight, and eleven,

and the rest of the numbers, crowded round the table.



'Will you throw, ma'am?' said the presiding goddess, handing the

dice-box to the eldest daughter of a stout lady, with four girls.



There was a profound silence among the lookers-on.



'Throw, Jane, my dear,' said the stout lady.  An interesting

display of bashfulness - a little blushing in a cambric

handkerchief - a whispering to a younger sister.



'Amelia, my dear, throw for your sister,' said the stout lady; and

then she turned to a walking advertisement of Rowlands' Macassar

Oil, who stood next her, and said, 'Jane is so VERY modest and

retiring; but I can't be angry with her for it.  An artless and

unsophisticated girl is SO truly amiable, that I often wish Amelia

was more like her sister!'



The gentleman with the whiskers whispered his admiring approval.



'Now, my dear!' said the stout lady.  Miss Amelia threw - eight for

her sister, ten for herself.



'Nice figure, Amelia,' whispered the stout lady to a thin youth

beside her.



'Beautiful!'



'And SUCH a spirit!  I am like you in that respect.  I can NOT help

admiring that life and vivacity.  Ah! (a sigh) I wish I could make

poor Jane a little more like my dear Amelia!'



The young gentleman cordially acquiesced in the sentiment; both he,

and the individual first addressed, were perfectly contented.



'Who's this?' inquired Mr. Cymon Tuggs of Mrs. Captain Waters, as a

short female, in a blue velvet hat and feathers, was led into the

orchestra, by a fat man in black tights and cloudy Berlins.



'Mrs. Tippin, of the London theatres,' replied Belinda, referring

to the programme of the concert.



The talented Tippin having condescendingly acknowledged the

clapping of hands, and shouts of 'bravo!' which greeted her

appearance, proceeded to sing the popular cavatina of 'Bid me

discourse,' accompanied on the piano by Mr. Tippin; after which,

Mr. Tippin sang a comic song, accompanied on the piano by Mrs.

Tippin:  the applause consequent upon which, was only to be

exceeded by the enthusiastic approbation bestowed upon an air with

variations on the guitar, by Miss Tippin, accompanied on the chin

by Master Tippin.



Thus passed the evening; thus passed the days and evenings of the

Tuggses, and the Waterses, for six weeks.  Sands in the morning -

donkeys at noon - pier in the afternoon - library at night - and

the same people everywhere.



On that very night six weeks, the moon was shining brightly over

the calm sea, which dashed against the feet of the tall gaunt

cliffs, with just enough noise to lull the old fish to sleep,

without disturbing the young ones, when two figures were

discernible - or would have been, if anybody had looked for them -

seated on one of the wooden benches which are stationed near the

verge of the western cliff.  The moon had climbed higher into the

heavens, by two hours' journeying, since those figures first sat

down - and yet they had moved not.  The crowd of loungers had

thinned and dispersed; the noise of itinerant musicians had died

away; light after light had appeared in the windows of the

different houses in the distance; blockade-man after blockade-man

had passed the spot, wending his way towards his solitary post; and

yet those figures had remained stationary.  Some portions of the

two forms were in deep shadow, but the light of the moon fell

strongly on a puce-coloured boot and a glazed stock.  Mr. Cymon

Tuggs and Mrs. Captain Waters were seated on that bench.  They

spoke not, but were silently gazing on the sea.



'Walter will return to-morrow,' said Mrs. Captain Waters,

mournfully breaking silence.



Mr. Cymon Tuggs sighed like a gust of wind through a forest of

gooseberry bushes, as he replied, 'Alas! he will.'



'Oh, Cymon!' resumed Belinda, 'the chaste delight, the calm

happiness, of this one week of Platonic love, is too much for me!'

Cymon was about to suggest that it was too little for him, but he

stopped himself, and murmured unintelligibly.



'And to think that even this gleam of happiness, innocent as it

is,' exclaimed Belinda, 'is now to be lost for ever!'



'Oh, do not say for ever, Belinda,' exclaimed the excitable Cymon,

as two strongly-defined tears chased each other down his pale face

- it was so long that there was plenty of room for a chase.  'Do

not say for ever!'



'I must,' replied Belinda.



'Why?' urged Cymon, 'oh why?  Such Platonic acquaintance as ours is

so harmless, that even your husband can never object to it.'



'My husband!' exclaimed Belinda.  'You little know him.  Jealous

and revengeful; ferocious in his revenge - a maniac in his

jealousy!  Would you be assassinated before my eyes?'  Mr. Cymon

Tuggs, in a voice broken by emotion, expressed his disinclination

to undergo the process of assassination before the eyes of anybody.



'Then leave me,' said Mrs. Captain Waters.  'Leave me, this night,

for ever.  It is late:  let us return.'



Mr. Cymon Tuggs sadly offered the lady his arm, and escorted her to

her lodgings.  He paused at the door - he felt a Platonic pressure

of his hand.  'Good night,' he said, hesitating.



'Good night,' sobbed the lady.  Mr. Cymon Tuggs paused again.



'Won't you walk in, sir?' said the servant.  Mr. Tuggs hesitated.

Oh, that hesitation!  He DID walk in.



'Good night!' said Mr. Cymon Tuggs again, when he reached the

drawing-room.



'Good night!' replied Belinda; 'and, if at any period of my life, I

- Hush!'  The lady paused and stared with a steady gaze of horror,

on the ashy countenance of Mr. Cymon Tuggs.  There was a double

knock at the street-door.



'It is my husband!' said Belinda, as the captain's voice was heard

below.



'And my family!' added Cymon Tuggs, as the voices of his relatives

floated up the staircase.



'The curtain!  The curtain!' gasped Mrs. Captain Waters, pointing

to the window, before which some chintz hangings were closely

drawn.



'But I have done nothing wrong,' said the hesitating Cymon.



'The curtain!' reiterated the frantic lady:  'you will be

murdered.'  This last appeal to his feelings was irresistible.  The

dismayed Cymon concealed himself behind the curtain with pantomimic

suddenness.



Enter the captain, Joseph Tuggs, Mrs. Tuggs, and Charlotta.



'My dear,' said the captain, 'Lieutenant, Slaughter.'  Two iron-

shod boots and one gruff voice were heard by Mr. Cymon to advance,

and acknowledge the honour of the introduction.  The sabre of the

lieutenant rattled heavily upon the floor, as he seated himself at

the table.  Mr. Cymon's fears almost overcame his reason.



'The brandy, my dear!' said the captain.  Here was a situation!

They were going to make a night of it!  And Mr. Cymon Tuggs was

pent up behind the curtain and afraid to breathe!



'Slaughter,' said the captain, 'a cigar?'



Now, Mr. Cymon Tuggs never could smoke without feeling it

indispensably necessary to retire, immediately, and never could

smell smoke without a strong disposition to cough.  The cigars were

introduced; the captain was a professed smoker; so was the

lieutenant; so was Joseph Tuggs.  The apartment was small, the door

was closed, the smoke powerful:  it hung in heavy wreaths over the

room, and at length found its way behind the curtain.  Cymon Tuggs

held his nose, his mouth, his breath.  It was all of no use - out

came the cough.



'Bless my soul!' said the captain, 'I beg your pardon, Miss Tuggs.

You dislike smoking?'



'Oh, no; I don't indeed,' said Charlotta.



'It makes you cough.'



'Oh dear no.'



'You coughed just now.'



'Me, Captain Waters!  Lor! how can you say so?'



'Somebody coughed,' said the captain.



'I certainly thought so,' said Slaughter.  No; everybody denied it.



'Fancy,' said the captain.



'Must be,' echoed Slaughter.



Cigars resumed - more smoke - another cough - smothered, but

violent.



'Damned odd!' said the captain, staring about him.



'Sing'ler!' ejaculated the unconscious Mr. Joseph Tuggs.



Lieutenant Slaughter looked first at one person mysteriously, then

at another:  then, laid down his cigar, then approached the window

on tiptoe, and pointed with his right thumb over his shoulder, in

the direction of the curtain.



'Slaughter!' ejaculated the captain, rising from table, 'what do

you mean?'



The lieutenant, in reply, drew back the curtain and discovered Mr.

Cymon Tuggs behind it:  pallid with apprehension, and blue with

wanting to cough.



'Aha!' exclaimed the captain, furiously.  'What do I see?

Slaughter, your sabre!'



'Cymon!' screamed the Tuggses.



'Mercy!' said Belinda.



'Platonic!' gasped Cymon.



'Your sabre!' roared the captain:  'Slaughter - unhand me - the

villain's life!'



'Murder!' screamed the Tuggses.



'Hold him fast, sir!' faintly articulated Cymon.



'Water!' exclaimed Joseph Tuggs - and Mr. Cymon Tuggs and all the

ladies forthwith fainted away, and formed a tableau.



Most willingly would we conceal the disastrous termination of the

six weeks' acquaintance.  A troublesome form, and an arbitrary

custom, however, prescribe that a story should have a conclusion,

in addition to a commencement; we have therefore no alternative.

Lieutenant Slaughter brought a message - the captain brought an

action.  Mr. Joseph Tuggs interposed - the lieutenant negotiated.

When Mr. Cymon Tuggs recovered from the nervous disorder into which

misplaced affection, and exciting circumstances, had plunged him,

he found that his family had lost their pleasant acquaintance; that

his father was minus fifteen hundred pounds; and the captain plus

the precise sum.  The money was paid to hush the matter up, but it

got abroad notwithstanding; and there are not wanting some who

affirm that three designing impostors never found more easy dupes,

than did Captain Waters, Mrs. Waters, and Lieutenant Slaughter, in

the Tuggses at Ramsgate.

