




CHAPTER THE SECOND.





'Well!' said little Mrs. Tibbs to herself, as she sat in the front

parlour of the Coram-street mansion one morning, mending a piece of

stair-carpet off the first Landings; - 'Things have not turned out

so badly, either, and if I only get a favourable answer to the

advertisement, we shall be full again.'



Mrs. Tibbs resumed her occupation of making worsted lattice-work in

the carpet, anxiously listening to the twopenny postman, who was

hammering his way down the street, at the rate of a penny a knock.

The house was as quiet as possible.  There was only one low sound

to be heard - it was the unhappy Tibbs cleaning the gentlemen's

boots in the back kitchen, and accompanying himself with a buzzing

noise, in wretched mockery of humming a tune.



The postman drew near the house.  He paused - so did Mrs. Tibbs.  A

knock - a bustle - a letter - post-paid.





'T. I. presents compt. to I. T. and T. I. begs To say that i see

the advertisement And she will Do Herself the pleasure of calling

On you at 12 o'clock to-morrow morning.



'T. I. as To apologise to I. T. for the shortness Of the notice But

i hope it will not unconvenience you.



'I remain yours Truly



'Wednesday evening.'





Little Mrs. Tibbs perused the document, over and over again; and

the more she read it, the more was she confused by the mixture of

the first and third person; the substitution of the 'i' for the 'T.

I.;' and the transition from the 'I.  T.' to the 'You.'  The

writing looked like a skein of thread in a tangle, and the note was

ingeniously folded into a perfect square, with the direction

squeezed up into the right-hand corner, as if it were ashamed of

itself.  The back of the epistle was pleasingly ornamented with a

large red wafer, which, with the addition of divers ink-stains,

bore a marvellous resemblance to a black beetle trodden upon.  One

thing, however, was perfectly clear to the perplexed Mrs. Tibbs.

Somebody was to call at twelve.  The drawing-room was forthwith

dusted for the third time that morning; three or four chairs were

pulled out of their places, and a corresponding number of books

carefully upset, in order that there might be a due absence of

formality.  Down went the piece of stair-carpet before noticed, and

up ran Mrs. Tibbs 'to make herself tidy.'



The clock of New Saint Pancras Church struck twelve, and the

Foundling, with laudable politeness, did the same ten minutes

afterwards, Saint something else struck the quarter, and then there

arrived a single lady with a double knock, in a pelisse the colour

of the interior of a damson pie; a bonnet of the same, with a

regular conservatory of artificial flowers; a white veil, and a

green parasol, with a cobweb border.



The visitor (who was very fat and red-faced) was shown into the

drawing-room; Mrs. Tibbs presented herself, and the negotiation

commenced.



'I called in consequence of an advertisement,' said the stranger,

in a voice as if she had been playing a set of Pan's pipes for a

fortnight without leaving off.



'Yes!' said Mrs. Tibbs, rubbing her hands very slowly, and looking

the applicant full in the face - two things she always did on such

occasions.



'Money isn't no object whatever to me,' said the lady, 'so much as

living in a state of retirement and obtrusion.'



Mrs. Tibbs, as a matter of course, acquiesced in such an

exceedingly natural desire.



'I am constantly attended by a medical man,' resumed the pelisse

wearer; 'I have been a shocking unitarian for some time - I,

indeed, have had very little peace since the death of Mr. Bloss.'



Mrs. Tibbs looked at the relict of the departed Bloss, and thought

he must have had very little peace in his time.  Of course she

could not say so; so she looked very sympathising.



'I shall be a good deal of trouble to you,' said Mrs. Bloss; 'but,

for that trouble I am willing to pay.  I am going through a course

of treatment which renders attention necessary.  I have one mutton-

chop in bed at half-past eight, and another at ten, every morning.'



Mrs. Tibbs, as in duty bound, expressed the pity she felt for

anybody placed in such a distressing situation; and the carnivorous

Mrs. Bloss proceeded to arrange the various preliminaries with

wonderful despatch.  'Now mind,' said that lady, after terms were

arranged; 'I am to have the second-floor front, for my bed-room?'



'Yes, ma'am.'



'And you'll find room for my little servant Agnes?'



'Oh! certainly.'



'And I can have one of the cellars in the area for my bottled

porter.'



'With the greatest pleasure; - James shall get it ready for you by

Saturday.'



'And I'll join the company at the breakfast-table on Sunday

morning,' said Mrs. Bloss.  'I shall get up on purpose.'



'Very well,' returned Mrs. Tibbs, in her most amiable tone; for

satisfactory references had 'been given and required,' and it was

quite certain that the new-comer had plenty of money.  'It's rather

singular,' continued Mrs. Tibbs, with what was meant for a most

bewitching smile, 'that we have a gentleman now with us, who is in

a very delicate state of health - a Mr. Gobler. - His apartment is

the back drawing-room.'



'The next room?' inquired Mrs. Bloss.



'The next room,' repeated the hostess.



'How very promiscuous!' ejaculated the widow.



'He hardly ever gets up,' said Mrs. Tibbs in a whisper.



'Lor!' cried Mrs. Bloss, in an equally low tone.



'And when he is up,' said Mrs. Tibbs, 'we never can persuade him to

go to bed again.'



'Dear me!' said the astonished Mrs. Bloss, drawing her chair nearer

Mrs. Tibbs.  'What is his complaint?'



'Why, the fact is,' replied Mrs. Tibbs, with a most communicative

air, 'he has no stomach whatever.'



'No what?' inquired Mrs. Bloss, with a look of the most

indescribable alarm.



'No stomach,' repeated Mrs. Tibbs, with a shake of the head.



'Lord bless us! what an extraordinary case!' gasped Mrs. Bloss, as

if she understood the communication in its literal sense, and was

astonished at a gentleman without a stomach finding it necessary to

board anywhere.



'When I say he has no stomach,' explained the chatty little Mrs.

Tibbs, 'I mean that his digestion is so much impaired, and his

interior so deranged, that his stomach is not of the least use to

him; - in fact, it's an inconvenience.'



'Never heard such a case in my life!' exclaimed Mrs. Bloss.  'Why,

he's worse than I am.'



'Oh, yes!' replied Mrs. Tibbs; - 'certainly.'  She said this with

great confidence, for the damson pelisse suggested that Mrs. Bloss,

at all events, was not suffering under Mr. Gobler's complaint.



'You have quite incited my curiosity,' said Mrs. Bloss, as she rose

to depart.  'How I long to see him!'



'He generally comes down, once a week,' replied Mrs. Tibbs; 'I dare

say you'll see him on Sunday.'  With this consolatory promise Mrs.

Bloss was obliged to be contented.  She accordingly walked slowly

down the stairs, detailing her complaints all the way; and Mrs.

Tibbs followed her, uttering an exclamation of compassion at every

step.  James (who looked very gritty, for he was cleaning the

knives) fell up the kitchen-stairs, and opened the street-door;

and, after mutual farewells, Mrs. Bloss slowly departed, down the

shady side of the street.



It is almost superfluous to say, that the lady whom we have just

shown out at the street-door (and whom the two female servants are

now inspecting from the second-floor windows) was exceedingly

vulgar, ignorant, and selfish.  Her deceased better-half had been

an eminent cork-cutter, in which capacity he had amassed a decent

fortune.  He had no relative but his nephew, and no friend but his

cook.  The former had the insolence one morning to ask for the loan

of fifteen pounds; and, by way of retaliation, he married the

latter next day; he made a will immediately afterwards, containing

a burst of honest indignation against his nephew (who supported

himself and two sisters on 100L. a year), and a bequest of his

whole property to his wife.  He felt ill after breakfast, and died

after dinner.  There is a mantelpiece-looking tablet in a civic

parish church, setting forth his virtues, and deploring his loss.

He never dishonoured a bill, or gave away a halfpenny.



The relict and sole executrix of this noble-minded man was an odd

mixture of shrewdness and simplicity, liberality and meanness.

Bred up as she had been, she knew no mode of living so agreeable as

a boarding-house:  and having nothing to do, and nothing to wish

for, she naturally imagined she must be ill - an impression which

was most assiduously promoted by her medical attendant, Dr. Wosky,

and her handmaid Agnes:  both of whom, doubtless for good reasons,

encouraged all her extravagant notions.



Since the catastrophe recorded in the last chapter, Mrs. Tibbs had

been very shy of young-lady boarders.  Her present inmates were all

lords of the creation, and she availed herself of the opportunity

of their assemblage at the dinner-table, to announce the expected

arrival of Mrs. Bloss.  The gentlemen received the communication

with stoical indifference, and Mrs. Tibbs devoted all her energies

to prepare for the reception of the valetudinarian.  The second-

floor front was scrubbed, and washed, and flannelled, till the wet

went through to the drawing-room ceiling.  Clean white

counterpanes, and curtains, and napkins, water-bottles as clear as

crystal, blue jugs, and mahogany furniture, added to the splendour,

and increased the comfort, of the apartment.  The warming-pan was

in constant requisition, and a fire lighted in the room every day.

The chattels of Mrs. Bloss were forwarded by instalments.  First,

there came a large hamper of Guinness's stout, and an umbrella;

then, a train of trunks; then, a pair of clogs and a bandbox; then,

an easy chair with an air-cushion; then, a variety of suspicious-

looking packages; and - 'though last not least' - Mrs. Bloss and

Agnes:  the latter in a cherry-coloured merino dress, open-work

stockings, and shoes with sandals:  like a disguised Columbine.



The installation of the Duke of Wellington, as Chancellor of the

University of Oxford, was nothing, in point of bustle and turmoil,

to the installation of Mrs. Bloss in her new quarters.  True, there

was no bright doctor of civil law to deliver a classical address on

the occasion; but there were several other old women present, who

spoke quite as much to the purpose, and understood themselves

equally well.  The chop-eater was so fatigued with the process of

removal that she declined leaving her room until the following

morning; so a mutton-chop, pickle, a pill, a pint bottle of stout,

and other medicines, were carried up-stairs for her consumption.



'Why, what DO you think, ma'am?' inquired the inquisitive Agnes of

her mistress, after they had been in the house some three hours;

'what DO you think, ma'am? the lady of the house is married.'



'Married!' said Mrs. Bloss, taking the pill and a draught of

Guinness - 'married!  Unpossible!'



'She is indeed, ma'am,' returned the Columbine; 'and her husband,

ma'am, lives - he - he - he - lives in the kitchen, ma'am.'



'In the kitchen!'



'Yes, ma'am:  and he - he - he - the housemaid says, he never goes

into the parlour except on Sundays; and that Ms. Tibbs makes him

clean the gentlemen's boots; and that he cleans the windows, too,

sometimes; and that one morning early, when he was in the front

balcony cleaning the drawing-room windows, he called out to a

gentleman on the opposite side of the way, who used to live here -

"Ah!  Mr. Calton, sir, how are you?"'  Here the attendant laughed

till Mrs. Bloss was in serious apprehension of her chuckling

herself into a fit.



'Well, I never!' said Mrs. Bloss.



'Yes.  And please, ma'am, the servants gives him gin-and-water

sometimes; and then he cries, and says he hates his wife and the

boarders, and wants to tickle them.'



'Tickle the boarders!' exclaimed Mrs. Bloss, seriously alarmed.



'No, ma'am, not the boarders, the servants.'



'Oh, is that all!' said Mrs. Bloss, quite satisfied.



'He wanted to kiss me as I came up the kitchen-stairs, just now,'

said Agnes, indignantly; 'but I gave it him - a little wretch!'



This intelligence was but too true.  A long course of snubbing and

neglect; his days spent in the kitchen, and his nights in the turn-

up bedstead, had completely broken the little spirit that the

unfortunate volunteer had ever possessed.  He had no one to whom he

could detail his injuries but the servants, and they were almost of

necessity his chosen confidants.  It is no less strange than true,

however, that the little weaknesses which he had incurred, most

probably during his military career, seemed to increase as his

comforts diminished.  He was actually a sort of journeyman Giovanni

of the basement story.



The next morning, being Sunday, breakfast was laid in the front

parlour at ten o'clock.  Nine was the usual time, but the family

always breakfasted an hour later on sabbath.  Tibbs enrobed himself

in his Sunday costume - a black coat, and exceedingly short, thin

trousers; with a very large white waistcoat, white stockings and

cravat, and Blucher boots - and mounted to the parlour aforesaid.

Nobody had come down, and he amused himself by drinking the

contents of the milkpot with a teaspoon.



A pair of slippers were heard descending the stairs.  Tibbs flew to

a chair; and a stern-looking man, of about fifty, with very little

hair on his head, and a Sunday paper in his hand, entered the room.



'Good morning, Mr. Evenson,' said Tibbs, very humbly, with

something between a nod and a bow.



'How do you do, Mr. Tibbs?' replied he of the slippers, as he sat

himself down, and began to read his paper without saying another

word.



'Is Mr. Wisbottle in town to-day, do you know, sir?' inquired

Tibbs, just for the sake of saying something.



'I should think he was,' replied the stern gentleman.  'He was

whistling "The Light Guitar," in the next room to mine, at five

o'clock this morning.'



'He's very fond of whistling,' said Tibbs, with a slight smirk.



'Yes - I ain't,' was the laconic reply.



Mr. John Evenson was in the receipt of an independent income,

arising chiefly from various houses he owned in the different

suburbs.  He was very morose and discontented.  He was a thorough

radical, and used to attend a great variety of public meetings, for

the express purpose of finding fault with everything that was

proposed.  Mr. Wisbottle, on the other hand, was a high Tory.  He

was a clerk in the Woods and Forests Office, which he considered

rather an aristocratic employment; he knew the peerage by heart,

and, could tell you, off-hand, where any illustrious personage

lived.  He had a good set of teeth, and a capital tailor.  Mr.

Evenson looked on all these qualifications with profound contempt;

and the consequence was that the two were always disputing, much to

the edification of the rest of the house.  It should be added,

that, in addition to his partiality for whistling, Mr. Wisbottle

had a great idea of his singing powers.  There were two other

boarders, besides the gentleman in the back drawing-room - Mr.

Alfred Tomkins and Mr. Frederick O'Bleary.  Mr. Tomkins was a clerk

in a wine-house; he was a connoisseur in paintings, and had a

wonderful eye for the picturesque.  Mr. O'Bleary was an Irishman,

recently imported; he was in a perfectly wild state; and had come

over to England to be an apothecary, a clerk in a government

office, an actor, a reporter, or anything else that turned up - he

was not particular.  He was on familiar terms with two small Irish

members, and got franks for everybody in the house.  He felt

convinced that his intrinsic merits must procure him a high

destiny.  He wore shepherd's-plaid inexpressibles, and used to look

under all the ladies' bonnets as he walked along the streets.  His

manners and appearance reminded one of Orson.



'Here comes Mr. Wisbottle,' said Tibbs; and Mr. Wisbottle forthwith

appeared in blue slippers, and a shawl dressing-gown, whistling 'DI

PIACER.'



'Good morning, sir,' said Tibbs again.  It was almost the only

thing he ever said to anybody



'How are you, Tibbs?' condescendingly replied the amateur; and he

walked to the window, and whistled louder than ever.



'Pretty air, that!' said Evenson, with a snarl, and without taking

his eyes off the paper.



'Glad you like it,' replied Wisbottle, highly gratified.



'Don't you think it would sound better, if you whistled it a little

louder?' inquired the mastiff.



'No; I don't think it would,' rejoined the unconscious Wisbottle.



'I'll tell you what, Wisbottle,' said Evenson, who had been

bottling up his anger for some hours - 'the next time you feel

disposed to whistle "The Light Guitar" at five o'clock in the

morning, I'll trouble you to whistle it with your head out o'

window.  If you don't, I'll learn the triangle - I will, by - '



The entrance of Mrs. Tibbs (with the keys in a little basket)

interrupted the threat, and prevented its conclusion.



Mrs. Tibbs apologised for being down rather late; the bell was

rung; James brought up the urn, and received an unlimited order for

dry toast and bacon.  Tibbs sat down at the bottom of the table,

and began eating water-cresses like a Nebuchadnezzar.  Mr. O'Bleary

appeared, and Mr. Alfred Tomkins.  The compliments of the morning

were exchanged, and the tea was made.



'God bless me!' exclaimed Tomkins, who had been looking out at the

window.  'Here - Wisbottle - pray come here - make haste.'



Mr. Wisbottle started from the table, and every one looked up.



'Do you see,' said the connoisseur, placing Wisbottle in the right

position - 'a little more this way:  there - do you see how

splendidly the light falls upon the left side of that broken

chimney-pot at No. 48?'



'Dear me!  I see,' replied Wisbottle, in a tone of admiration.



'I never saw an object stand out so beautifully against the clear

sky in my life,' ejaculated Alfred.  Everybody (except John

Evenson) echoed the sentiment; for Mr. Tomkins had a great

character for finding out beauties which no one else could discover

- he certainly deserved it.



'I have frequently observed a chimney-pot in College-green, Dublin,

which has a much better effect,' said the patriotic O'Bleary, who

never allowed Ireland to be outdone on any point.



The assertion was received with obvious incredulity, for Mr.

Tomkins declared that no other chimney-pot in the United Kingdom,

broken or unbroken, could be so beautiful as the one at No. 48.



The room-door was suddenly thrown open, and Agnes appeared, leading

in Mrs. Bloss, who was dressed in a geranium-coloured muslin gown,

and displayed a gold watch of huge dimensions; a chain to match;

and a splendid assortment of rings, with enormous stones.  A

general rush was made for a chair, and a regular introduction took

place.  Mr. John Evenson made a slight inclination of the head; Mr.

Frederick O'Bleary, Mr. Alfred Tomkins, and Mr. Wisbottle, bowed

like the mandarins in a grocer's shop; Tibbs rubbed hands, and went

round in circles.  He was observed to close one eye, and to assume

a clock-work sort of expression with the other; this has been

considered as a wink, and it has been reported that Agnes was its

object.  We repel the calumny, and challenge contradiction.



Mrs. Tibbs inquired after Mrs. Bloss's health in a low tone.  Mrs.

Bloss, with a supreme contempt for the memory of Lindley Murray,

answered the various questions in a most satisfactory manner; and a

pause ensued, during which the eatables disappeared with awful

rapidity.



'You must have been very much pleased with the appearance of the

ladies going to the Drawing-room the other day, Mr. O'Bleary?' said

Mrs. Tibbs, hoping to start a topic.



'Yes,' replied Orson, with a mouthful of toast.



'Never saw anything like it before, I suppose?' suggested

Wisbottle.



'No - except the Lord Lieutenant's levees,' replied O'Bleary.



'Are they at all equal to our drawing-rooms?'



'Oh, infinitely superior!'



'Gad!  I don't know,' said the aristocratic Wisbottle, 'the Dowager

Marchioness of Publiccash was most magnificently dressed, and so

was the Baron Slappenbachenhausen.'



'What was he presented on?' inquired Evenson.



'On his arrival in England.'



'I thought so,' growled the radical; 'you never hear of these

fellows being presented on their going away again.  They know

better than that.'



'Unless somebody pervades them with an apintment,' said Mrs. Bloss,

joining in the conversation in a faint voice.



'Well,' said Wisbottle, evading the point, 'it's a splendid sight.'



'And did it never occur to you,' inquired the radical, who never

would be quiet; 'did it never occur to you, that you pay for these

precious ornaments of society?'



'It certainly HAS occurred to me,' said Wisbottle, who thought this

answer was a poser; 'it HAS occurred to me, and I am willing to pay

for them.'



'Well, and it has occurred to me too,' replied John Evenson, 'and I

ain't willing to pay for 'em.  Then why should I? - I say, why

should I?' continued the politician, laying down the paper, and

knocking his knuckles on the table.  'There are two great

principles - demand - '



'A cup of tea if you please, dear,' interrupted Tibbs.



'And supply - '



'May I trouble you to hand this tea to Mr. Tibbs?' said Mrs. Tibbs,

interrupting the argument, and unconsciously illustrating it.



The thread of the orator's discourse was broken.  He drank his tea

and resumed the paper.



'If it's very fine,' said Mr. Alfred Tomkins, addressing the

company in general, 'I shall ride down to Richmond to-day, and come

back by the steamer.  There are some splendid effects of light and

shade on the Thames; the contrast between the blueness of the sky

and the yellow water is frequently exceedingly beautiful.'  Mr.

Wisbottle hummed, 'Flow on, thou shining river.'



'We have some splendid steam-vessels in Ireland,' said O'Bleary.



'Certainly,' said Mrs. Bloss, delighted to find a subject broached

in which she could take part.



'The accommodations are extraordinary,' said O'Bleary.



'Extraordinary indeed,' returned Mrs. Bloss.  'When Mr. Bloss was

alive, he was promiscuously obligated to go to Ireland on business.

I went with him, and raly the manner in which the ladies and

gentlemen were accommodated with berths, is not creditable.'



Tibbs, who had been listening to the dialogue, looked aghast, and

evinced a strong inclination to ask a question, but was checked by

a look from his wife.  Mr. Wisbottle laughed, and said Tomkins had

made a pun; and Tomkins laughed too, and said he had not.



The remainder of the meal passed off as breakfasts usually do.

Conversation flagged, and people played with their teaspoons.  The

gentlemen looked out at the window; walked about the room; and,

when they got near the door, dropped off one by one.  Tibbs retired

to the back parlour by his wife's orders, to check the green-

grocer's weekly account; and ultimately Mrs. Tibbs and Mrs. Bloss

were left alone together.



'Oh dear!' said the latter, 'I feel alarmingly faint; it's very

singular.'  (It certainly was, for she had eaten four pounds of

solids that morning.)  'By-the-bye,' said Mrs. Bloss, 'I have not

seen Mr. What's-his-name yet.'



'Mr. Gobler?' suggested Mrs. Tibbs.



'Yes.'



'Oh!' said Mrs. Tibbs, 'he is a most mysterious person.  He has his

meals regularly sent up-stairs, and sometimes don't leave his room

for weeks together.'



'I haven't seen or heard nothing of him,' repeated Mrs. Bloss.



'I dare say you'll hear him to-night,' replied Mrs. Tibbs; 'he

generally groans a good deal on Sunday evenings.'



'I never felt such an interest in any one in my life,' ejaculated

Mrs. Bloss.  A little double-knock interrupted the conversation;

Dr. Wosky was announced, and duly shown in.  He was a little man

with a red face - dressed of course in black, with a stiff white

neckerchief.  He had a very good practice, and plenty of money,

which he had amassed by invariably humouring the worst fancies of

all the females of all the families he had ever been introduced

into.  Mrs. Tibbs offered to retire, but was entreated to stay.



'Well, my dear ma'am, and how are we?' inquired Wosky, in a

soothing tone.



'Very ill, doctor - very ill,' said Mrs. Bloss, in a whisper



'Ah! we must take care of ourselves; - we must, indeed,' said the

obsequious Wosky, as he felt the pulse of his interesting patient.



'How is our appetite?'



Mrs. Bloss shook her head.



'Our friend requires great care,' said Wosky, appealing to Mrs.

Tibbs, who of course assented.  'I hope, however, with the blessing

of Providence, that we shall be enabled to make her quite stout

again.'  Mrs. Tibbs wondered in her own mind what the patient would

be when she was made quite stout.



'We must take stimulants,' said the cunning Wosky - 'plenty of

nourishment, and, above all, we must keep our nerves quiet; we

positively must not give way to our sensibilities.  We must take

all we can get,' concluded the doctor, as he pocketed his fee, 'and

we must keep quiet.'



'Dear man!' exclaimed Mrs. Bloss, as the doctor stepped into the

carriage.



'Charming creature indeed - quite a lady's man!' said Mrs. Tibbs,

and Dr. Wosky rattled away to make fresh gulls of delicate females,

and pocket fresh fees.



As we had occasion, in a former paper, to describe a dinner at Mrs.

Tibbs's; and as one meal went off very like another on all ordinary

occasions; we will not fatigue our readers by entering into any

other detailed account of the domestic economy of the

establishment.  We will therefore proceed to events, merely

premising that the mysterious tenant of the back drawing-room was a

lazy, selfish hypochondriac; always complaining and never ill.  As

his character in many respects closely assimilated to that of Mrs.

Bloss, a very warm friendship soon sprung up between them.  He was

tall, thin, and pale; he always fancied he had a severe pain

somewhere or other, and his face invariably wore a pinched,

screwed-up expression; he looked, indeed, like a man who had got

his feet in a tub of exceedingly hot water, against his will.



For two or three months after Mrs. Bloss's first appearance in

Coram-street, John Evenson was observed to become, every day, more

sarcastic and more ill-natured; and there was a degree of

additional importance in his manner, which clearly showed that he

fancied he had discovered something, which he only wanted a proper

opportunity of divulging.  He found it at last.



One evening, the different inmates of the house were assembled in

the drawing-room engaged in their ordinary occupations.  Mr. Gobler

and Mrs. Bloss were sitting at a small card-table near the centre

window, playing cribbage; Mr. Wisbottle was describing semicircles

on the music-stool, turning over the leaves of a book on the piano,

and humming most melodiously; Alfred Tomkins was sitting at the

round table, with his elbows duly squared, making a pencil sketch

of a head considerably larger than his own; O'Bleary was reading

Horace, and trying to look as if he understood it; and John Evenson

had drawn his chair close to Mrs. Tibbs's work-table, and was

talking to her very earnestly in a low tone.



'I can assure you, Mrs. Tibbs,' said the radical, laying his

forefinger on the muslin she was at work on; 'I can assure you,

Mrs. Tibbs, that nothing but the interest I take in your welfare

would induce me to make this communication.  I repeat, I fear

Wisbottle is endeavouring to gain the affections of that young

woman, Agnes, and that he is in the habit of meeting her in the

store-room on the first floor, over the leads.  From my bedroom I

distinctly heard voices there, last night.  I opened my door

immediately, and crept very softly on to the landing; there I saw

Mr. Tibbs, who, it seems, had been disturbed also. - Bless me, Mrs.

Tibbs, you change colour!'



'No, no - it's nothing,' returned Mrs. T. in a hurried manner;

'it's only the heat of the room.'



'A flush!' ejaculated Mrs. Bloss from the card-table; 'that's good

for four.'



'If I thought it was Mr. Wisbottle,' said Mrs. Tibbs, after a

pause, 'he should leave this house instantly.'



'Go!' said Mrs. Bloss again.



'And if I thought,' continued the hostess with a most threatening

air, 'if I thought he was assisted by Mr. Tibbs - '



'One for his nob!' said Gobler.



'Oh,' said Evenson, in a most soothing tone - he liked to make

mischief - 'I should hope Mr. Tibbs was not in any way implicated.

He always appeared to me very harmless.'



'I have generally found him so,' sobbed poor little Mrs. Tibbs;

crying like a watering-pot.



'Hush! hush! pray - Mrs. Tibbs - consider - we shall be observed -

pray, don't!' said John Evenson, fearing his whole plan would be

interrupted.  'We will set the matter at rest with the utmost care,

and I shall be most happy to assist you in doing so.'  Mrs. Tibbs

murmured her thanks.



'When you think every one has retired to rest to-night,' said

Evenson very pompously, 'if you'll meet me without a light, just

outside my bedroom door, by the staircase window, I think we can

ascertain who the parties really are, and you will afterwards be

enabled to proceed as you think proper.'



Mrs. Tibbs was easily persuaded; her curiosity was excited, her

jealousy was roused, and the arrangement was forthwith made.  She

resumed her work, and John Evenson walked up and down the room with

his hands in his pockets, looking as if nothing had happened.  The

game of cribbage was over, and conversation began again.



'Well, Mr. O'Bleary,' said the humming-top, turning round on his

pivot, and facing the company, 'what did you think of Vauxhall the

other night?'



'Oh, it's very fair,' replied Orson, who had been enthusiastically

delighted with the whole exhibition.



'Never saw anything like that Captain Ross's set-out - eh?'



'No,' returned the patriot, with his usual reservation - 'except in

Dublin.'



'I saw the Count de Canky and Captain Fitzthompson in the Gardens,'

said Wisbottle; 'they appeared much delighted.'



'Then it MUST be beautiful,' snarled Evenson.



'I think the white bears is partickerlerly well done,' suggested

Mrs. Bloss.  'In their shaggy white coats, they look just like

Polar bears - don't you think they do, Mr. Evenson?'



'I think they look a great deal more like omnibus cads on all

fours,' replied the discontented one.



'Upon the whole, I should have liked our evening very well,' gasped

Gobler; 'only I caught a desperate cold which increased my pain

dreadfully!  I was obliged to have several shower-baths, before I

could leave my room.'



'Capital things those shower-baths!' ejaculated Wisbottle.



'Excellent!' said Tomkins.



'Delightful!' chimed in O'Bleary.  (He had once seen one, outside a

tinman's.)



'Disgusting machines!' rejoined Evenson, who extended his dislike

to almost every created object, masculine, feminine, or neuter.



'Disgusting, Mr. Evenson!' said Gobler, in a tone of strong

indignation. - 'Disgusting!  Look at their utility - consider how

many lives they have saved by promoting perspiration.'



'Promoting perspiration, indeed,' growled John Evenson, stopping

short in his walk across the large squares in the pattern of the

carpet - 'I was ass enough to be persuaded some time ago to have

one in my bedroom.  'Gad, I was in it once, and it effectually

cured ME, for the mere sight of it threw me into a profuse

perspiration for six months afterwards.'



A titter followed this announcement, and before it had subsided

James brought up 'the tray,' containing the remains of a leg of

lamb which had made its DEBUT at dinner; bread; cheese; an atom of

butter in a forest of parsley; one pickled walnut and the third of

another; and so forth.  The boy disappeared, and returned again

with another tray, containing glasses and jugs of hot and cold

water.  The gentlemen brought in their spirit-bottles; the

housemaid placed divers plated bedroom candlesticks under the card-

table; and the servants retired for the night.



Chairs were drawn round the table, and the conversation proceeded

in the customary manner.  John Evenson, who never ate supper,

lolled on the sofa, and amused himself by contradicting everybody.

O'Bleary ate as much as he could conveniently carry, and Mrs. Tibbs

felt a due degree of indignation thereat; Mr. Gobler and Mrs. Bloss

conversed most affectionately on the subject of pill-taking, and

other innocent amusements; and Tomkins and Wisbottle 'got into an

argument;' that is to say, they both talked very loudly and

vehemently, each flattering himself that he had got some advantage

about something, and neither of them having more than a very

indistinct idea of what they were talking about.  An hour or two

passed away; and the boarders and the plated candlesticks retired

in pairs to their respective bedrooms.  John Evenson pulled off his

boots, locked his door, and determined to sit up until Mr. Gobler

had retired.  He always sat in the drawing-room an hour after

everybody else had left it, taking medicine, and groaning.



Great Coram-street was hushed into a state of profound repose:  it

was nearly two o'clock.  A hackney-coach now and then rumbled

slowly by; and occasionally some stray lawyer's clerk, on his way

home to Somers-town, struck his iron heel on the top of the coal-

cellar with a noise resembling the click of a smoke-Jack.  A low,

monotonous, gushing sound was heard, which added considerably to

the romantic dreariness of the scene.  It was the water 'coming in'

at number eleven.



'He must be asleep by this time,' said John Evenson to himself,

after waiting with exemplary patience for nearly an hour after Mr.

Gobler had left the drawing-room.  He listened for a few moments;

the house was perfectly quiet; he extinguished his rushlight, and

opened his bedroom door.  The staircase was so dark that it was

impossible to see anything.



'S-s-s!' whispered the mischief-maker, making a noise like the

first indication a catherine-wheel gives of the probability of its

going off.



'Hush!' whispered somebody else.



'Is that you, Mrs. Tibbs?'



'Yes, sir.'



'Where?'



'Here;' and the misty outline of Mrs. Tibbs appeared at the

staircase window, like the ghost of Queen Anne in the tent scene in

Richard.



'This way, Mrs. Tibbs,' whispered the delighted busybody:  'give me

your hand - there!  Whoever these people are, they are in the

store-room now, for I have been looking down from my window, and I

could see that they accidentally upset their candlestick, and are

now in darkness.  You have no shoes on, have you?'



'No,' said little Mrs. Tibbs, who could hardly speak for trembling.



'Well; I have taken my boots off, so we can go down, close to the

store-room door, and listen over the banisters;' and down-stairs

they both crept accordingly, every board creaking like a patent

mangle on a Saturday afternoon.



'It's Wisbottle and somebody, I'll swear,' exclaimed the radical in

an energetic whisper, when they had listened for a few moments.



'Hush - pray let's hear what they say!' exclaimed Mrs. Tibbs, the

gratification of whose curiosity was now paramount to every other

consideration.



'Ah! if I could but believe you,' said a female voice coquettishly,

'I'd be bound to settle my missis for life.'



'What does she say?' inquired Mr. Evenson, who was not quite so

well situated as his companion.



'She says she'll settle her missis's life,' replied Mrs. Tibbs.

'The wretch! they're plotting murder.'



'I know you want money,' continued the voice, which belonged to

Agnes; 'and if you'd secure me the five hundred pound, I warrant

she should take fire soon enough.'



'What's that?' inquired Evenson again.  He could just hear enough

to want to hear more.



'I think she says she'll set the house on fire,' replied the

affrighted Mrs. Tibbs.  'But thank God I'm insured in the Phoenix!'



'The moment I have secured your mistress, my dear,' said a man's

voice in a strong Irish brogue, 'you may depend on having the

money.'



'Bless my soul, it's Mr. O'Bleary!' exclaimed Mrs. Tibbs, in a

parenthesis.



'The villain!' said the indignant Mr. Evenson.



'The first thing to be done,' continued the Hibernian, 'is to

poison Mr. Gobler's mind.'



'Oh, certainly,' returned Agnes.



'What's that?' inquired Evenson again, in an agony of curiosity and

a whisper.



'He says she's to mind and poison Mr. Gobler,' replied Mrs. Tibbs,

aghast at this sacrifice of human life.



'And in regard of Mrs. Tibbs,' continued O'Bleary. - Mrs. Tibbs

shuddered.



'Hush!' exclaimed Agnes, in a tone of the greatest alarm, just as

Mrs. Tibbs was on the extreme verge of a fainting fit.  'Hush!'



'Hush!' exclaimed Evenson, at the same moment to Mrs. Tibbs.



'There's somebody coming UP-stairs,' said Agnes to O'Bleary.



'There's somebody coming DOWN-stairs,' whispered Evenson to Mrs.

Tibbs.



'Go into the parlour, sir,' said Agnes to her companion.  'You will

get there, before whoever it is, gets to the top of the kitchen

stairs.'



'The drawing-room, Mrs. Tibbs!' whispered the astonished Evenson to

his equally astonished companion; and for the drawing-room they

both made, plainly hearing the rustling of two persons, one coming

down-stairs, and one coming up.



'What can it be?' exclaimed Mrs. Tibbs.  'It's like a dream.  I

wouldn't be found in this situation for the world!'



'Nor I,' returned Evenson, who could never bear a joke at his own

expense.  'Hush! here they are at the door.'



'What fun!' whispered one of the new-comers. - It was Wisbottle.



'Glorious!' replied his companion, in an equally low tone. - This

was Alfred Tomkins.  'Who would have thought it?'



'I told you so,' said Wisbottle, in a most knowing whisper.  'Lord

bless you, he has paid her most extraordinary attention for the

last two months.  I saw 'em when I was sitting at the piano to-

night.'



'Well, do you know I didn't notice it?' interrupted Tomkins.



'Not notice it!' continued Wisbottle.  'Bless you; I saw him

whispering to her, and she crying; and then I'll swear I heard him

say something about to-night when we were all in bed.'



'They're talking of US!' exclaimed the agonised Mrs. Tibbs, as the

painful suspicion, and a sense of their situation, flashed upon her

mind.



'I know it - I know it,' replied Evenson, with a melancholy

consciousness that there was no mode of escape.



'What's to be done? we cannot both stop here!' ejaculated Mrs.

Tibbs, in a state of partial derangement.



'I'll get up the chimney,' replied Evenson, who really meant what

he said.



'You can't,' said Mrs. Tibbs, in despair.  'You can't -  it's a

register stove.'



'Hush!' repeated John Evenson.



'Hush - hush!' cried somebody down-stairs.



'What a d-d hushing!' said Alfred Tomkins, who began to get rather

bewildered.



'There they are!' exclaimed the sapient Wisbottle, as a rustling

noise was heard in the store-room.



'Hark!' whispered both the young men.



'Hark!' repeated Mrs. Tibbs and Evenson.



'Let me alone, sir,' said a female voice in the store-room.



'Oh, Hagnes!' cried another voice, which clearly belonged to Tibbs,

for nobody else ever owned one like it, 'Oh, Hagnes - lovely

creature!'



'Be quiet, sir!'  (A bounce.)



'Hag - '



'Be quiet, sir - I am ashamed of you.  Think of your wife, Mr.

Tibbs.  Be quiet, sir!'



'My wife!' exclaimed the valorous Tibbs, who was clearly under the

influence of gin-and-water, and a misplaced attachment; 'I ate her!

Oh, Hagnes! when I was in the volunteer corps, in eighteen hundred

and - '



'I declare I'll scream.  Be quiet, sir, will you?'  (Another bounce

and a scuffle.)



'What's that?' exclaimed Tibbs, with a start.



'What's what?' said Agnes, stopping short.



'Why that!'



'Ah! you have done it nicely now, sir,' sobbed the frightened

Agnes, as a tapping was heard at Mrs. Tibbs's bedroom door, which

would have beaten any dozen woodpeckers hollow.



'Mrs. Tibbs!  Mrs. Tibbs!' called out Mrs. Bloss.  'Mrs. Tibbs,

pray get up.'  (Here the imitation of a woodpecker was resumed with

tenfold violence.)



'Oh, dear - dear!' exclaimed the wretched partner of the depraved

Tibbs.  'She's knocking at my door.  We must be discovered!  What

will they think?'



'Mrs. Tibbs!  Mrs. Tibbs!' screamed the woodpecker again.



'What's the matter!' shouted Gobler, bursting out of the back

drawing-room, like the dragon at Astley's.



'Oh, Mr. Gobler!' cried Mrs. Bloss, with a proper approximation to

hysterics; 'I think the house is on fire, or else there's thieves

in it.  I have heard the most dreadful noises!'



'The devil you have!' shouted Gobler again, bouncing back into his

den, in happy imitation of the aforesaid dragon, and returning

immediately with a lighted candle.  'Why, what's this?  Wisbottle!

Tomkins!  O'Bleary!  Agnes!  What the deuce! all up and dressed?'



'Astonishing!' said Mrs. Bloss, who had run down-stairs, and taken

Mr. Gobler's arm.



'Call Mrs. Tibbs directly, somebody,' said Gobler, turning into the

front drawing-room. - 'What!  Mrs. Tibbs and Mr. Evenson!!'



'Mrs. Tibbs and Mr. Evenson!' repeated everybody, as that unhappy

pair were discovered:  Mrs. Tibbs seated in an arm-chair by the

fireplace, and Mr. Evenson standing by her side,



We must leave the scene that ensued to the reader's imagination.

We could tell, how Mrs. Tibbs forthwith fainted away, and how it

required the united strength of Mr. Wisbottle and Mr. Alfred

Tomkins to hold her in her chair; how Mr. Evenson explained, and

how his explanation was evidently disbelieved; how Agnes repelled

the accusations of Mrs. Tibbs by proving that she was negotiating

with Mr. O'Bleary to influence her mistress's affections in his

behalf; and how Mr. Gobler threw a damp counterpane on the hopes of

Mr. O'Bleary by avowing that he (Gobler) had already proposed to,

and been accepted by, Mrs. Bloss; how Agnes was discharged from

that lady's service; how Mr. O'Bleary discharged himself from Mrs.

Tibbs's house, without going through the form of previously

discharging his bill; and how that disappointed young gentleman

rails against England and the English, and vows there is no virtue

or fine feeling extant, 'except in Ireland.'  We repeat that we

COULD tell all this, but we love to exercise our self-denial, and

we therefore prefer leaving it to be imagined.



The lady whom we have hitherto described as Mrs. Bloss, is no more.

Mrs. Gobler exists:  Mrs. Bloss has left us for ever.  In a

secluded retreat in Newington Butts, far, far removed from the

noisy strife of that great boarding-house, the world, the enviable

Gobler and his pleasing wife revel in retirement:  happy in their

complaints, their table, and their medicine, wafted through life by

the grateful prayers of all the purveyors of animal food within

three miles round.



We would willingly stop here, but we have a painful duty imposed

upon us, which we must discharge.  Mr. and Mrs. Tibbs have

separated by mutual consent, Mrs. Tibbs receiving one moiety of

43L.  15S. 10D., which we before stated to be the amount of her

husband's annual income, and Mr. Tibbs the other.  He is spending

the evening of his days in retirement; and he is spending also,

annually, that small but honourable independence.  He resides among

the original settlers at Walworth; and it has been stated, on

unquestionable authority, that the conclusion of the volunteer

story has been heard in a small tavern in that respectable

neighbourhood.



The unfortunate Mrs. Tibbs has determined to dispose of the whole

of her furniture by public auction, and to retire from a residence

in which she has suffered so much.  Mr. Robins has been applied to,

to conduct the sale, and the transcendent abilities of the literary

gentlemen connected with his establishment are now devoted to the

task of drawing up the preliminary advertisement.  It is to

contain, among a variety of brilliant matter, seventy-eight words

in large capitals, and six original quotations in inverted commas.
