





CHAPTER XI - THE BLOOMSBURY CHRISTENING







Mr. Nicodemus Dumps, or, as his acquaintance called him, 'long

Dumps,' was a bachelor, six feet high, and fifty years old:  cross,

cadaverous, odd, and ill-natured.  He was never happy but when he

was miserable; and always miserable when he had the best reason to

be happy.  The only real comfort of his existence was to make

everybody about him wretched - then he might be truly said to enjoy

life.  He was afflicted with a situation in the Bank worth five

hundred a-year, and he rented a 'first-floor furnished,' at

Pentonville, which he originally took because it commanded a dismal

prospect of an adjacent churchyard.  He was familiar with the face

of every tombstone, and the burial service seemed to excite his

strongest sympathy.  His friends said he was surly - he insisted he

was nervous; they thought him a lucky dog, but he protested that he

was 'the most unfortunate man in the world.'  Cold as he was, and

wretched as he declared himself to be, he was not wholly

unsusceptible of attachments.  He revered the memory of Hoyle, as

he was himself an admirable and imperturbable whist-player, and he

chuckled with delight at a fretful and impatient adversary.  He

adored King Herod for his massacre of the innocents; and if he

hated one thing more than another, it was a child.  However, he

could hardly be said to hate anything in particular, because he

disliked everything in general; but perhaps his greatest

antipathies were cabs, old women, doors that would not shut,

musical amateurs, and omnibus cads.  He subscribed to the 'Society

for the Suppression of Vice' for the pleasure of putting a stop to

any harmless amusements; and he contributed largely towards the

support of two itinerant methodist parsons, in the amiable hope

that if circumstances rendered any people happy in this world, they

might perchance be rendered miserable by fears for the next.



Mr. Dumps had a nephew who had been married about a year, and who

was somewhat of a favourite with his uncle, because he was an

admirable subject to exercise his misery-creating powers upon.  Mr.

Charles Kitterbell was a small, sharp, spare man, with a very large

head, and a broad, good-humoured countenance.  He looked like a

faded giant, with the head and face partially restored; and he had

a cast in his eye which rendered it quite impossible for any one

with whom he conversed to know where he was looking.  His eyes

appeared fixed on the wall, and he was staring you out of

countenance; in short, there was no catching his eye, and perhaps

it is a merciful dispensation of Providence that such eyes are not

catching.  In addition to these characteristics, it may be added

that Mr. Charles Kitterbell was one of the most credulous and

matter-of-fact little personages that ever took TO himself a wife,

and FOR himself a house in Great Russell-street, Bedford-square.

(Uncle Dumps always dropped the 'Bedford-square,' and inserted in

lieu thereof the dreadful words 'Tottenham-court-road.')



'No, but, uncle, 'pon my life you must - you must promise to be

godfather,' said Mr. Kitterbell, as he sat in conversation with his

respected relative one morning.



'I cannot, indeed I cannot,' returned Dumps.



'Well, but why not?  Jemima will think it very unkind.  It's very

little trouble.'



'As to the trouble,' rejoined the most unhappy man in existence, 'I

don't mind that; but my nerves are in that state - I cannot go

through the ceremony.  You know I don't like going out. - For God's

sake, Charles, don't fidget with that stool so; you'll drive me

mad.'  Mr. Kitterbell, quite regardless of his uncle's nerves, had

occupied himself for some ten minutes in describing a circle on the

floor with one leg of the office-stool on which he was seated,

keeping the other three up in the air, and holding fast on by the

desk.



'I beg your pardon, uncle,' said Kitterbell, quite abashed,

suddenly releasing his hold of the desk, and bringing the three

wandering legs back to the floor, with a force sufficient to drive

them through it.



'But come, don't refuse.  If it's a boy, you know, we must have two

godfathers.'



'IF it's a boy!' said Dumps; 'why can't you say at once whether it

IS a boy or not?'



'I should be very happy to tell you, but it's impossible I can

undertake to say whether it's a girl or a boy, if the child isn't

born yet.'



'Not born yet!' echoed Dumps, with a gleam of hope lighting up his

lugubrious visage.  'Oh, well, it MAY be a girl, and then you won't

want me; or if it is a boy, it MAY die before it is christened.'



'I hope not,' said the father that expected to be, looking very

grave.



'I hope not,' acquiesced Dumps, evidently pleased with the subject.

He was beginning to get happy.  'I hope not, but distressing cases

frequently occur during the first two or three days of a child's

life; fits, I am told, are exceedingly common, and alarming

convulsions are almost matters of course.'



'Lord, uncle!' ejaculated little Kitterbell, gasping for breath.



'Yes; my landlady was confined - let me see - last Tuesday:  an

uncommonly fine boy.  On the Thursday night the nurse was sitting

with him upon her knee before the fire, and he was as well as

possible.  Suddenly he became black in the face, and alarmingly

spasmodic.  The medical man was instantly sent for, and every

remedy was tried, but - '



'How frightful!' interrupted the horror-stricken Kitterbell.



'The child died, of course.  However, your child MAY not die; and

if it should be a boy, and should LIVE to be christened, why I

suppose I must be one of the sponsors.'  Dumps was evidently good-

natured on the faith of his anticipations.



'Thank you, uncle,' said his agitated nephew, grasping his hand as

warmly as if he had done him some essential service.  'Perhaps I

had better not tell Mrs. K. what you have mentioned.'



'Why, if she's low-spirited, perhaps you had better not mention the

melancholy case to her,' returned Dumps, who of course had invented

the whole story; 'though perhaps it would be but doing your duty as

a husband to prepare her for the WORST.'



A day or two afterwards, as Dumps was perusing a morning paper at

the chop-house which he regularly frequented, the following-

paragraph met his eyes:-





'BIRTHS. - On Saturday, the 18th inst., in Great Russell-street,

the lady of Charles Kitterbell, Esq., of a son.'





'It IS a boy!' he exclaimed, dashing down the paper, to the

astonishment of the waiters.  'It IS a boy!'  But he speedily

regained his composure as his eye rested on a paragraph quoting the

number of infant deaths from the bills of mortality.



Six weeks passed away, and as no communication had been received

from the Kitterbells, Dumps was beginning to flatter himself that

the child was dead, when the following note painfully resolved his

doubts:-





'GREAT RUSSELL-STREET,

MONDAY MORNING.



DEAR UNCLE, - You will be delighted to hear that my dear Jemima has

left her room, and that your future godson is getting on capitally.

He was very thin at first, but he is getting much larger, and nurse

says he is filling out every day.  He cries a good deal, and is a

very singular colour, which made Jemima and me rather

uncomfortable; but as nurse says it's natural, and as of course we

know nothing about these things yet, we are quite satisfied with

what nurse says.  We think he will be a sharp child; and nurse says

she's sure he will, because he never goes to sleep.  You will

readily believe that we are all very happy, only we're a little

worn out for want of rest, as he keeps us awake all night; but this

we must expect, nurse says, for the first six or eight months.  He

has been vaccinated, but in consequence of the operation being

rather awkwardly performed, some small particles of glass were

introduced into the arm with the matter.  Perhaps this may in some

degree account for his being rather fractious; at least, so nurse

says.  We propose to have him christened at twelve o'clock on

Friday, at Saint George's church, in Hart-street, by the name of

Frederick Charles William.  Pray don't be later than a quarter

before twelve.  We shall have a very few friends in the evening,

when of course we shall see you.  I am sorry to say that the dear

boy appears rather restless and uneasy to-day:  the cause, I fear,

is fever.



'Believe me, dear Uncle,

'Yours affectionately,

'CHARLES KITTERBELL.



'P.S. - I open this note to say that we have just discovered the

cause of little Frederick's restlessness.  It is not fever, as I

apprehended, but a small pin, which nurse accidentally stuck in his

leg yesterday evening.  We have taken it out, and he appears more

composed, though he still sobs a good deal.'





It is almost unnecessary to say that the perusal of the above

interesting statement was no great relief to the mind of the

hypochondriacal Dumps.  It was impossible to recede, however, and

so he put the best face - that is to say, an uncommonly miserable

one - upon the matter; and purchased a handsome silver mug for the

infant Kitterbell, upon which he ordered the initials 'F. C. W.

K.,' with the customary untrained grape-vine-looking flourishes,

and a large full stop, to be engraved forthwith.



Monday was a fine day, Tuesday was delightful, Wednesday was equal

to either, and Thursday was finer than ever; four successive fine

days in London!  Hackney-coachmen became revolutionary, and

crossing-sweepers began to doubt the existence of a First Cause.

The MORNING HERALD informed its readers that an old woman in Camden

Town had been heard to say that the fineness of the season was

'unprecedented in the memory of the oldest inhabitant;' and

Islington clerks, with large families and small salaries, left off

their black gaiters, disdained to carry their once green cotton

umbrellas, and walked to town in the conscious pride of white

stockings and cleanly brushed Bluchers.  Dumps beheld all this with

an eye of supreme contempt - his triumph was at hand.  He knew that

if it had been fine for four weeks instead of four days, it would

rain when he went out; he was lugubriously happy in the conviction

that Friday would be a wretched day - and so it was.  'I knew how

it would be,' said Dumps, as he turned round opposite the Mansion-

house at half-past eleven o'clock on the Friday morning.  'I knew

how it would be.  I am concerned, and that's enough;' - and

certainly the appearance of the day was sufficient to depress the

spirits of a much more buoyant-hearted individual than himself.  It

had rained, without a moment's cessation, since eight o'clock;

everybody that passed up Cheapside, and down Cheapside, looked wet,

cold, and dirty.  All sorts of forgotten and long-concealed

umbrellas had been put into requisition.  Cabs whisked about, with

the 'fare' as carefully boxed up behind two glazed calico curtains

as any mysterious picture in any one of Mrs. Radcliffe's castles;

omnibus horses smoked like steam-engines; nobody thought of

'standing up' under doorways or arches; they were painfully

convinced it was a hopeless case; and so everybody went hastily

along, jumbling and jostling, and swearing and perspiring, and

slipping about, like amateur skaters behind wooden chairs on the

Serpentine on a frosty Sunday.



Dumps paused; he could not think of walking, being rather smart for

the christening.  If he took a cab he was sure to be spilt, and a

hackney-coach was too expensive for his economical ideas.  An

omnibus was waiting at the opposite corner - it was a desperate

case - he had never heard of an omnibus upsetting or running away,

and if the cad did knock him down, he could 'pull him up' in

return.



'Now, sir!' cried the young gentleman who officiated as 'cad' to

the 'Lads of the Village,' which was the name of the machine just

noticed.  Dumps crossed.



'This vay, sir!' shouted the driver of the 'Hark-away,' pulling up

his vehicle immediately across the door of the opposition - 'This

vay, sir - he's full.'  Dumps hesitated, whereupon the 'Lads of the

Village' commenced pouring out a torrent of abuse against the

'Hark-away;' but the conductor of the 'Admiral Napier' settled the

contest in a most satisfactory manner, for all parties, by seizing

Dumps round the waist, and thrusting him into the middle of his

vehicle which had just come up and only wanted the sixteenth

inside.



'All right,' said the 'Admiral,' and off the thing thundered, like

a fire-engine at full gallop, with the kidnapped customer inside,

standing in the position of a half doubled-up bootjack, and falling

about with every jerk of the machine, first on the one side, and

then on the other, like a 'Jack-in-the-green,' on May-day, setting

to the lady with a brass ladle.



'For Heaven's sake, where am I to sit?' inquired the miserable man

of an old gentleman, into whose stomach he had just fallen for the

fourth time.



'Anywhere but on my CHEST, sir,' replied the old gentleman in a

surly tone.



'Perhaps the BOX would suit the gentleman better,' suggested a very

damp lawyer's clerk, in a pink shirt, and a smirking countenance.



After a great deal of struggling and falling about, Dumps at last

managed to squeeze himself into a seat, which, in addition to the

slight disadvantage of being between a window that would not shut,

and a door that must be open, placed him in close contact with a

passenger, who had been walking about all the morning without an

umbrella, and who looked as if he had spent the day in a full

water-butt - only wetter.



'Don't bang the door so,' said Dumps to the conductor, as he shut

it after letting out four of the passengers; I am very nervous - it

destroys me.'



'Did any gen'lm'n say anythink?' replied the cad, thrusting in his

head, and trying to look as if he didn't understand the request.



'I told you not to bang the door so!' repeated Dumps, with an

expression of countenance like the knave of clubs, in convulsions.



'Oh! vy, it's rather a sing'ler circumstance about this here door,

sir, that it von't shut without banging,' replied the conductor;

and he opened the door very wide, and shut it again with a terrific

bang, in proof of the assertion.



'I beg your pardon, sir,' said a little prim, wheezing old

gentleman, sitting opposite Dumps, 'I beg your pardon; but have you

ever observed, when you have been in an omnibus on a wet day, that

four people out of five always come in with large cotton umbrellas,

without a handle at the top, or the brass spike at the bottom?'



'Why, sir,' returned Dumps, as he heard the clock strike twelve,

'it never struck me before; but now you mention it, I - Hollo!

hollo!' shouted the persecuted individual, as the omnibus dashed

past Drury-lane, where he had directed to be set down. - 'Where is

the cad?'



'I think he's on the box, sir,' said the young gentleman before

noticed in the pink shirt, which looked like a white one ruled with

red ink.



'I want to be set down!' said Dumps in a faint voice, overcome by

his previous efforts.



'I think these cads want to be SET DOWN,' returned the attorney's

clerk, chuckling at his sally.



'Hollo!' cried Dumps again.



'Hollo!' echoed the passengers.  The omnibus passed St. Giles's

church.



'Hold hard!' said the conductor; 'I'm blowed if we ha'n't forgot

the gen'lm'n as vas to be set down at Doory-lane. - Now, sir, make

haste, if you please,' he added, opening the door, and assisting

Dumps out with as much coolness as if it was 'all right.'  Dumps's

indignation was for once getting the better of his cynical

equanimity.  'Drury-lane!' he gasped, with the voice of a boy in a

cold bath for the first time.



'Doory-lane, sir? - yes, sir, - third turning on the right-hand

side, sir.'



Dumps's passion was paramount:  he clutched his umbrella, and was

striding off with the firm determination of not paying the fare.

The cad, by a remarkable coincidence, happened to entertain a

directly contrary opinion, and Heaven knows how far the altercation

would have proceeded, if it had not been most ably and

satisfactorily brought to a close by the driver.



'Hollo!' said that respectable person, standing up on the box, and

leaning with one hand on the roof of the omnibus.  'Hollo, Tom!

tell the gentleman if so be as he feels aggrieved, we will take him

up to the Edge-er (Edgeware) Road for nothing, and set him down at

Doory-lane when we comes back.  He can't reject that, anyhow.'



The argument was irresistible:  Dumps paid the disputed sixpence,

and in a quarter of an hour was on the staircase of No. 14, Great

Russell-street.



Everything indicated that preparations were making for the

reception of 'a few friends' in the evening.  Two dozen extra

tumblers, and four ditto wine-glasses - looking anything but

transparent, with little bits of straw in them on the slab in the

passage, just arrived.  There was a great smell of nutmeg, port

wine, and almonds, on the staircase; the covers were taken off the

stair-carpet, and the figure of Venus on the first landing looked

as if she were ashamed of the composition-candle in her right hand,

which contrasted beautifully with the lamp-blacked drapery of the

goddess of love.  The female servant (who looked very warm and

bustling) ushered Dumps into a front drawing-room, very prettily

furnished, with a plentiful sprinkling of little baskets, paper

table-mats, china watchmen, pink and gold albums, and rainbow-bound

little books on the different tables.



'Ah, uncle!' said Mr. Kitterbell, 'how d'ye do?  Allow me - Jemima,

my dear - my uncle.  I think you've seen Jemima before, sir?'



'Have had the PLEASURE,' returned big Dumps, his tone and look

making it doubtful whether in his life he had ever experienced the

sensation.



'I'm sure,' said Mrs. Kitterbell, with a languid smile, and a

slight cough.  'I'm sure - hem - any friend - of Charles's - hem -

much less a relation, is - '



'I knew you'd say so, my love,' said little Kitterbell, who, while

he appeared to be gazing on the opposite houses, was looking at his

wife with a most affectionate air:  'Bless you!'  The last two

words were accompanied with a simper, and a squeeze of the hand,

which stirred up all Uncle Dumps's bile.



'Jane, tell nurse to bring down baby,' said Mrs. Kitterbell,

addressing the servant.  Mrs. Kitterbell was a tall, thin young

lady, with very light hair, and a particularly white face - one of

those young women who almost invariably, though one hardly knows

why, recall to one's mind the idea of a cold fillet of veal.  Out

went the servant, and in came the nurse, with a remarkably small

parcel in her arms, packed up in a blue mantle trimmed with white

fur. - This was the baby.



'Now, uncle,' said Mr. Kitterbell, lifting up that part of the

mantle which covered the infant's face, with an air of great

triumph, 'WHO do you think he's like?'



'He! he!  Yes, who?' said Mrs. K., putting her arm through her

husband's, and looking up into Dumps's face with an expression of

as much interest as she was capable of displaying.



'Good God, how small he is!' cried the amiable uncle, starting back

with well-feigned surprise; 'REMARKABLY small indeed.'



'Do you think so?' inquired poor little Kitterbell, rather alarmed.

'He's a monster to what he was - ain't he, nurse?'



'He's a dear,' said the nurse, squeezing the child, and evading the

question - not because she scrupled to disguise the fact, but

because she couldn't afford to throw away the chance of Dumps's

half-crown.



'Well, but who is he like?' inquired little Kitterbell.



Dumps looked at the little pink heap before him, and only thought

at the moment of the best mode of mortifying the youthful parents.



'I really don't know WHO he's like,' he answered, very well knowing

the reply expected of him.



'Don't you think he's like ME?' inquired his nephew with a knowing

air.



'Oh, DECIDEDLY not!' returned Dumps, with an emphasis not to be

misunderstood.  'Decidedly not like you. - Oh, certainly not.'



'Like Jemima?' asked Kitterbell, faintly.



'Oh, dear no; not in the least.  I'm no judge, of course, in such

cases; but I really think he's more like one of those little carved

representations that one sometimes sees blowing a trumpet on a

tombstone!'  The nurse stooped down over the child, and with great

difficulty prevented an explosion of mirth.  Pa and ma looked

almost as miserable as their amiable uncle.



'Well!' said the disappointed little father, 'you'll be better able

to tell what he's like by-and-by.  You shall see him this evening

with his mantle off.'



'Thank you,' said Dumps, feeling particularly grateful.



'Now, my love,' said Kitterbell to his wife, 'it's time we were

off.  We're to meet the other godfather and the godmother at the

church, uncle, - Mr. and Mrs. Wilson from over the way - uncommonly

nice people.  My love, are you well wrapped up?'



'Yes, dear.'



'Are you sure you won't have another shawl?' inquired the anxious

husband.



'No, sweet,' returned the charming mother, accepting Dumps's

proffered arm; and the little party entered the hackney-coach that

was to take them to the church; Dumps amusing Mrs. Kitterbell by

expatiating largely on the danger of measles, thrush, teeth-

cutting, and other interesting diseases to which children are

subject.



The ceremony (which occupied about five minutes) passed off without

anything particular occurring.  The clergyman had to dine some

distance from town, and had two churchings, three christenings, and

a funeral to perform in something less than an hour.  The

godfathers and godmother, therefore, promised to renounce the devil

and all his works - 'and all that sort of thing' - as little

Kitterbell said - 'in less than no time;' and with the exception of

Dumps nearly letting the child fall into the font when he handed it

to the clergyman, the whole affair went off in the usual business-

like and matter-of-course manner, and Dumps re-entered the Bank-

gates at two o'clock with a heavy heart, and the painful conviction

that he was regularly booked for an evening party.



Evening came - and so did Dumps's pumps, black silk stockings, and

white cravat which he had ordered to be forwarded, per boy, from

Pentonville.  The depressed godfather dressed himself at a friend's

counting-house, from whence, with his spirits fifty degrees below

proof, he sallied forth - as the weather had cleared up, and the

evening was tolerably fine - to walk to Great Russell-street.

Slowly he paced up Cheapside, Newgate-street, down Snow-hill, and

up Holborn ditto, looking as grim as the figure-head of a man-of-

war, and finding out fresh causes of misery at every step.  As he

was crossing the corner of Hatton-garden, a man apparently

intoxicated, rushed against him, and would have knocked him down,

had he not been providentially caught by a very genteel young man,

who happened to be close to him at the time.  The shock so

disarranged Dumps's nerves, as well as his dress, that he could

hardly stand.  The gentleman took his arm, and in the kindest

manner walked with him as far as Furnival's Inn.  Dumps, for about

the first time in his life, felt grateful and polite; and he and

the gentlemanly-looking young man parted with mutual expressions of

good will.



'There are at least some well-disposed men in the world,' ruminated

the misanthropical Dumps, as he proceeded towards his destination.



Rat - tat - ta-ra-ra-ra-ra-rat - knocked a hackney-coachman at

Kitterbell's door, in imitation of a gentleman's servant, just as

Dumps reached it; and out came an old lady in a large toque, and an

old gentleman in a blue coat, and three female copies of the old

lady in pink dresses, and shoes to match.



'It's a large party,' sighed the unhappy godfather, wiping the

perspiration from his forehead, and leaning against the area-

railings.  It was some time before the miserable man could muster

up courage to knock at the door, and when he did, the smart

appearance of a neighbouring greengrocer (who had been hired to

wait for seven and sixpence, and whose calves alone were worth

double the money), the lamp in the passage, and the Venus on the

landing, added to the hum of many voices, and the sound of a harp

and two violins, painfully convinced him that his surmises were but

too well founded.



'How are you?' said little Kitterbell, in a greater bustle than

ever, bolting out of the little back parlour with a cork-screw in

his hand, and various particles of sawdust, looking like so many

inverted commas, on his inexpressibles.



'Good God!' said Dumps, turning into the aforesaid parlour to put

his shoes on, which he had brought in his coat-pocket, and still

more appalled by the sight of seven fresh-drawn corks, and a

corresponding number of decanters.  'How many people are there up-

stairs?'



'Oh, not above thirty-five.  We've had the carpet taken up in the

back drawing-room, and the piano and the card-tables are in the

front.  Jemima thought we'd better have a regular sit-down supper

in the front parlour, because of the speechifying, and all that.

But, Lord! uncle, what's the matter?' continued the excited little

man, as Dumps stood with one shoe on, rummaging his pockets with

the most frightful distortion of visage.  'What have you lost?

Your pocket-book?'



'No,' returned Dumps, diving first into one pocket and then into

the other, and speaking in a voice like Desdemona with the pillow

over her mouth.



'Your card-case? snuff-box? the key of your lodgings?' continued

Kitterbell, pouring question on question with the rapidity of

lightning.



'No! no!' ejaculated Dumps, still diving eagerly into his empty

pockets.



'Not - not - the MUG you spoke of this morning?'



'Yes, the MUG!' replied Dumps, sinking into a chair.



'How COULD you have done it?' inquired Kitterbell.  'Are you sure

you brought it out?'



'Yes! yes!  I see it all!' said Dumps, starting up as the idea

flashed across his mind; 'miserable dog that I am - I was born to

suffer.  I see it all:  it was the gentlemanly-looking young man!'



'Mr. Dumps!' shouted the greengrocer in a stentorian voice, as he

ushered the somewhat recovered godfather into the drawing-room half

an hour after the above declaration.  'Mr. Dumps!' - everybody

looked at the door, and in came Dumps, feeling about as much out of

place as a salmon might be supposed to be on a gravel-walk.



'Happy to see you again,' said Mrs. Kitterbell, quite unconscious

of the unfortunate man's confusion and misery; 'you must allow me

to introduce you to a few of our friends:- my mamma, Mr. Dumps - my

papa and sisters.'  Dumps seized the hand of the mother as warmly

as if she was his own parent, bowed TO the young ladies, and

AGAINST a gentleman behind him, and took no notice whatever of the

father, who had been bowing incessantly for three minutes and a

quarter.



'Uncle,' said little Kitterbell, after Dumps had been introduced to

a select dozen or two, 'you must let me lead you to the other end

of the room, to introduce you to my friend Danton.  Such a splendid

fellow! - I'm sure you'll like him - this way,' - Dumps followed as

tractably as a tame bear.



Mr. Danton was a young man of about five-and-twenty, with a

considerable stock of impudence, and a very small share of ideas:

he was a great favourite, especially with young ladies of from

sixteen to twenty-six years of age, both inclusive.  He could

imitate the French-horn to admiration, sang comic songs most

inimitably, and had the most insinuating way of saying impertinent

nothings to his doting female admirers.  He had acquired, somehow

or other, the reputation of being a great wit, and, accordingly,

whenever he opened his mouth, everybody who knew him laughed very

heartily.



The introduction took place in due form.  Mr. Danton bowed, and

twirled a lady's handkerchief, which he held in his hand, in a most

comic way.  Everybody smiled.



'Very warm,' said Dumps, feeling it necessary to say something.



'Yes.  It was warmer yesterday,' returned the brilliant Mr. Danton.

- A general laugh.



'I have great pleasure in congratulating you on your first

appearance in the character of a father, sir,' he continued,

addressing Dumps - 'godfather, I mean.' - The young ladies were

convulsed, and the gentlemen in ecstasies.



A general hum of admiration interrupted the conversation, and

announced the entrance of nurse with the baby.  An universal rush

of the young ladies immediately took place.  (Girls are always SO

fond of babies in company.)



'Oh, you dear!' said one.



'How sweet!' cried another, in a low tone of the most enthusiastic

admiration.



'Heavenly!' added a third.



'Oh! what dear little arms!' said a fourth, holding up an arm and

fist about the size and shape of the leg of a fowl cleanly picked.



'Did you ever!' - said a little coquette with a large bustle, who

looked like a French lithograph, appealing to a gentleman in three

waistcoats - 'Did you ever!'



'Never, in my life,' returned her admirer, pulling up his collar.



'Oh! DO let me take it, nurse,' cried another young lady.  'The

love!'



'Can it open its eyes, nurse?' inquired another, affecting the

utmost innocence. - Suffice it to say, that the single ladies

unanimously voted him an angel, and that the married ones, NEM.

CON., agreed that he was decidedly the finest baby they had ever

beheld - except their own.



The quadrilles were resumed with great spirit.  Mr. Danton was

universally admitted to be beyond himself; several young ladies

enchanted the company and gained admirers by singing 'We met' - 'I

saw her at the Fancy Fair' - and other equally sentimental and

interesting ballads.  'The young men,' as Mrs. Kitterbell said,

'made themselves very agreeable;' the girls did not lose their

opportunity; and the evening promised to go off excellently.  Dumps

didn't mind it:  he had devised a plan for himself - a little bit

of fun in his own way - and he was almost happy!  He played a

rubber and lost every point Mr. Danton said he could not have lost

every point, because he made a point of losing:  everybody laughed

tremendously.  Dumps retorted with a better joke, and nobody

smiled, with the exception of the host, who seemed to consider it

his duty to laugh till he was black in the face, at everything.

There was only one drawback - the musicians did not play with quite

as much spirit as could have been wished.  The cause, however, was

satisfactorily explained; for it appeared, on the testimony of a

gentleman who had come up from Gravesend in the afternoon, that

they had been engaged on board a steamer all day, and had played

almost without cessation all the way to Gravesend, and all the way

back again.



The 'sit-down supper' was excellent; there were four barley-sugar

temples on the table, which would have looked beautiful if they had

not melted away when the supper began; and a water-mill, whose only

fault was that instead of going round, it ran over the table-cloth.

Then there were fowls, and tongue, and trifle, and sweets, and

lobster salad, and potted beef - and everything.  And little

Kitterbell kept calling out for clean plates, and the clean plates

did not come:  and then the gentlemen who wanted the plates said

they didn't mind, they'd take a lady's; and then Mrs. Kitterbell

applauded their gallantry, and the greengrocer ran about till he

thought his seven and sixpence was very hardly earned; and the

young ladies didn't eat much for fear it shouldn't look romantic,

and the married ladies eat as much as possible, for fear they

shouldn't have enough; and a great deal of wine was drunk, and

everybody talked and laughed considerably.



'Hush! hush!' said Mr. Kitterbell, rising and looking very

important.  'My love (this was addressed to his wife at the other

end of the table), take care of Mrs. Maxwell, and your mamma, and

the rest of the married ladies; the gentlemen will persuade the

young ladies to fill their glasses, I am sure.'



'Ladies and gentlemen,' said long Dumps, in a very sepulchral voice

and rueful accent, rising from his chair like the ghost in Don

Juan, 'will you have the kindness to charge your glasses?  I am

desirous of proposing a toast.'



A dead silence ensued, and the glasses were filled - everybody

looked serious.



'Ladies and gentlemen,' slowly continued the ominous Dumps, 'I' -

(here Mr. Danton imitated two notes from the French-horn, in a very

loud key, which electrified the nervous toast-proposer, and

convulsed his audience).



'Order! order!' said little Kitterbell, endeavouring to suppress

his laughter.



'Order!' said the gentlemen.



'Danton, be quiet,' said a particular friend on the opposite side

of the table.



'Ladies and gentlemen,' resumed Dumps, somewhat recovered, and not

much disconcerted, for he was always a pretty good hand at a speech

- 'In accordance with what is, I believe, the established usage on

these occasions, I, as one of the godfathers of Master Frederick

Charles William Kitterbell - (here the speaker's voice faltered,

for he remembered the mug) - venture to rise to propose a toast.  I

need hardly say that it is the health and prosperity of that young

gentleman, the particular event of whose early life we are here met

to celebrate - (applause).  Ladies and gentlemen, it is impossible

to suppose that our friends here, whose sincere well-wishers we all

are, can pass through life without some trials, considerable

suffering, severe affliction, and heavy losses!' - Here the arch-

traitor paused, and slowly drew forth a long, white pocket-

handkerchief - his example was followed by several ladies.  'That

these trials may be long spared them is my most earnest prayer, my

most fervent wish (a distinct sob from the grandmother).  I hope

and trust, ladies and gentlemen, that the infant whose christening

we have this evening met to celebrate, may not be removed from the

arms of his parents by premature decay (several cambrics were in

requisition):  that his young and now APPARENTLY healthy form, may

not be wasted by lingering disease.  (Here Dumps cast a sardonic

glance around, for a great sensation was manifest among the married

ladies.)  You, I am sure, will concur with me in wishing that he

may live to be a comfort and a blessing to his parents.  ("Hear,

hear!" and an audible sob from Mr. Kitterbell.)  But should he not

be what we could wish - should he forget in after times the duty

which he owes to them - should they unhappily experience that

distracting truth, "how sharper than a serpent's tooth it is to

have a thankless child"' - Here Mrs. Kitterbell, with her

handkerchief to her eyes, and accompanied by several ladies, rushed

from the room, and went into violent hysterics in the passage,

leaving her better half in almost as bad a condition, and a general

impression in Dumps's favour; for people like sentiment, after all.



It need hardly be added, that this occurrence quite put a stop to

the harmony of the evening.  Vinegar, hartshorn, and cold water,

were now as much in request as negus, rout-cakes, and BON-BONS had

been a short time before.  Mrs. Kitterbell was immediately conveyed

to her apartment, the musicians were silenced, flirting ceased, and

the company slowly departed.  Dumps left the house at the

commencement of the bustle, and walked home with a light step, and

(for him) a cheerful heart.  His landlady, who slept in the next

room, has offered to make oath that she heard him laugh, in his

peculiar manner, after he had locked his door.  The assertion,

however, is so improbable, and bears on the face of it such strong

evidence of untruth, that it has never obtained credence to this

hour.



The family of Mr. Kitterbell has considerably increased since the

period to which we have referred; he has now two sons and a

daughter; and as he expects, at no distant period, to have another

addition to his blooming progeny, he is anxious to secure an

eligible godfather for the occasion.  He is determined, however, to

impose upon him two conditions.  He must bind himself, by a solemn

obligation, not to make any speech after supper; and it is

indispensable that he should be in no way connected with 'the most

miserable man in the world.'
