






CHAPTER X - A PASSAGE IN THE LIFE OF MR. WATKINS TOTTLE







CHAPTER THE FIRST





Matrimony is proverbially a serious undertaking.  Like an over-

weening predilection for brandy-and-water, it is a misfortune into

which a man easily falls, and from which he finds it remarkably

difficult to extricate himself.  It is of no use telling a man who

is timorous on these points, that it is but one plunge, and all is

over.  They say the same thing at the Old Bailey, and the

unfortunate victims derive as much comfort from the assurance in

the one case as in the other.



Mr. Watkins Tottle was a rather uncommon compound of strong

uxorious inclinations, and an unparalleled degree of anti-connubial

timidity.  He was about fifty years of age; stood four feet six

inches and three-quarters in his socks - for he never stood in

stockings at all - plump, clean, and rosy.  He looked something

like a vignette to one of Richardson's novels, and had a clean-

cravatish formality of manner, and kitchen-pokerness of carriage,

which Sir Charles Grandison himself might have envied.  He lived on

an annuity, which was well adapted to the individual who received

it, in one respect - it was rather small.  He received it in

periodical payments on every alternate Monday; but he ran himself

out, about a day after the expiration of the first week, as

regularly as an eight-day clock; and then, to make the comparison

complete, his landlady wound him up, and he went on with a regular

tick.



Mr. Watkins Tottle had long lived in a state of single blessedness,

as bachelors say, or single cursedness, as spinsters think; but the

idea of matrimony had never ceased to haunt him.  Wrapt in profound

reveries on this never-failing theme, fancy transformed his small

parlour in Cecil-street, Strand, into a neat house in the suburbs;

the half-hundredweight of coals under the kitchen-stairs suddenly

sprang up into three tons of the best Walls-end; his small French

bedstead was converted into a regular matrimonial four-poster; and

in the empty chair on the opposite side of the fireplace,

imagination seated a beautiful young lady, with a very little

independence or will of her own, and a very large independence

under a will of her father's.



'Who's there?' inquired Mr. Watkins Tottle, as a gentle tap at his

room-door disturbed these meditations one evening.



'Tottle, my dear fellow, how DO you do?' said a short elderly

gentleman with a gruffish voice, bursting into the room, and

replying to the question by asking another.



'Told you I should drop in some evening,' said the short gentleman,

as he delivered his hat into Tottle's hand, after a little

struggling and dodging.



'Delighted to see you, I'm sure,' said Mr. Watkins Tottle, wishing

internally that his visitor had 'dropped in' to the Thames at the

bottom of the street, instead of dropping into his parlour.  The

fortnight was nearly up, and Watkins was hard up.



'How is Mrs. Gabriel Parsons?' inquired Tottle.



'Quite well, thank you,' replied Mr. Gabriel Parsons, for that was

the name the short gentleman revelled in.  Here there was a pause;

the short gentleman looked at the left hob of the fireplace; Mr.

Watkins Tottle stared vacancy out of countenance.



'Quite well,' repeated the short gentleman, when five minutes had

expired.  'I may say remarkably well.'  And he rubbed the palms of

his hands as hard as if he were going to strike a light by

friction.



'What will you take?' inquired Tottle, with the desperate

suddenness of a man who knew that unless the visitor took his

leave, he stood very little chance of taking anything else.



'Oh, I don't know - have you any whiskey?'



'Why,' replied Tottle, very slowly, for all this was gaining time,

'I HAD some capital, and remarkably strong whiskey last week; but

it's all gone - and therefore its strength - '



'Is much beyond proof; or, in other words, impossible to be

proved,' said the short gentleman; and he laughed very heartily,

and seemed quite glad the whiskey had been drunk.  Mr. Tottle

smiled - but it was the smile of despair.  When Mr. Gabriel Parsons

had done laughing, he delicately insinuated that, in the absence of

whiskey, he would not be averse to brandy.  And Mr. Watkins Tottle,

lighting a flat candle very ostentatiously; and displaying an

immense key, which belonged to the street-door, but which, for the

sake of appearances, occasionally did duty in an imaginary wine-

cellar; left the room to entreat his landlady to charge their

glasses, and charge them in the bill.  The application was

successful; the spirits were speedily called - not from the vasty

deep, but the adjacent wine-vaults.  The two short gentlemen mixed

their grog; and then sat cosily down before the fire - a pair of

shorts, airing themselves.



'Tottle,' said Mr. Gabriel Parsons, 'you know my way - off-hand,

open, say what I mean, mean what I say, hate reserve, and can't

bear affectation.  One, is a bad domino which only hides what good

people have about 'em, without making the bad look better; and the

other is much about the same thing as pinking a white cotton

stocking to make it look like a silk one.  Now listen to what I'm

going to say.'



Here, the little gentleman paused, and took a long pull at his

brandy-and-water.  Mr. Watkins Tottle took a sip of his, stirred

the fire, and assumed an air of profound attention.



'It's of no use humming and ha'ing about the matter,' resumed the

short gentleman. - 'You want to get married.'



'Why,' replied Mr. Watkins Tottle evasively; for he trembled

violently, and felt a sudden tingling throughout his whole frame;

'why - I should certainly - at least, I THINK I should like - '



'Won't do,' said the short gentleman. - 'Plain and free - or

there's an end of the matter.  Do you want money?'



'You know I do.'



'You admire the sex?'



'I do.'



'And you'd like to be married?'



'Certainly.'



'Then you shall be.  There's an end of that.'  Thus saying, Mr.

Gabriel Parsons took a pinch of snuff, and mixed another glass.



'Let me entreat you to be more explanatory,' said Tottle.  'Really,

as the party principally interested, I cannot consent to be

disposed of, in this way.'



'I'll tell you,' replied Mr. Gabriel Parsons, warming with the

subject, and the brandy-and-water - 'I know a lady - she's stopping

with my wife now - who is just the thing for you.  Well educated;

talks French; plays the piano; knows a good deal about flowers, and

shells, and all that sort of thing; and has five hundred a year,

with an uncontrolled power of disposing of it, by her last will and

testament.'



'I'll pay my addresses to her,' said Mr. Watkins Tottle.  'She

isn't VERY young - is she?'



'Not very; just the thing for you.  I've said that already.'



'What coloured hair has the lady?' inquired Mr. Watkins Tottle.



'Egad, I hardly recollect,' replied Gabriel, with coolness.

'Perhaps I ought to have observed, at first, she wears a front.'



'A what?' ejaculated Tottle.



'One of those things with curls, along here,' said Parsons, drawing

a straight line across his forehead, just over his eyes, in

illustration of his meaning.  'I know the front's black; I can't

speak quite positively about her own hair; because, unless one

walks behind her, and catches a glimpse of it under her bonnet, one

seldom sees it; but I should say that it was RATHER lighter than

the front - a shade of a greyish tinge, perhaps.'



Mr. Watkins Tottle looked as if he had certain misgivings of mind.

Mr. Gabriel Parsons perceived it, and thought it would be safe to

begin the next attack without delay.



'Now, were you ever in love, Tottle?' he inquired.



Mr. Watkins Tottle blushed up to the eyes, and down to the chin,

and exhibited a most extensive combination of colours as he

confessed the soft impeachment.



'I suppose you popped the question, more than once, when you were a

young - I beg your pardon - a younger - man,' said Parsons.



'Never in my life!' replied his friend, apparently indignant at

being suspected of such an act.  'Never!  The fact is, that I

entertain, as you know, peculiar opinions on these subjects.  I am

not afraid of ladies, young or old - far from it; but, I think,

that in compliance with the custom of the present day, they allow

too much freedom of speech and manner to marriageable men.  Now,

the fact is, that anything like this easy freedom I never could

acquire; and as I am always afraid of going too far, I am

generally, I dare say, considered formal and cold.'



'I shouldn't wonder if you were,' replied Parsons, gravely; 'I

shouldn't wonder.  However, you'll be all right in this case; for

the strictness and delicacy of this lady's ideas greatly exceed

your own.  Lord bless you, why, when she came to our house, there

was an old portrait of some man or other, with two large, black,

staring eyes, hanging up in her bedroom; she positively refused to

go to bed there, till it was taken down, considering it decidedly

wrong.'



'I think so, too,' said Mr. Watkins Tottle; 'certainly.'



'And then, the other night - I never laughed so much in my life' -

resumed Mr. Gabriel Parsons; 'I had driven home in an easterly

wind, and caught a devil of a face-ache.  Well; as Fanny - that's

Mrs. Parsons, you know - and this friend of hers, and I, and Frank

Ross, were playing a rubber, I said, jokingly, that when I went to

bed I should wrap my head in Fanny's flannel petticoat.  She

instantly threw up her cards, and left the room.'



'Quite right!' said Mr. Watkins Tottle; 'she could not possibly

have behaved in a more dignified manner.  What did you do?'



'Do? - Frank took dummy; and I won sixpence.'



'But, didn't you apologise for hurting her feelings?'



'Devil a bit.  Next morning at breakfast, we talked it over.  She

contended that any reference to a flannel petticoat was improper; -

men ought not to be supposed to know that such things were.  I

pleaded my coverture; being a married man.'



'And what did the lady say to that?' inquired Tottle, deeply

interested.



'Changed her ground, and said that Frank being a single man, its

impropriety was obvious.'



'Noble-minded creature!' exclaimed the enraptured Tottle.



'Oh! both Fanny and I said, at once, that she was regularly cut out

for you.'



A gleam of placid satisfaction shone on the circular face of Mr.

Watkins Tottle, as he heard the prophecy.



'There's one thing I can't understand,' said Mr. Gabriel Parsons,

as he rose to depart; 'I cannot, for the life and soul of me,

imagine how the deuce you'll ever contrive to come together.  The

lady would certainly go into convulsions if the subject were

mentioned.'  Mr. Gabriel Parsons sat down again, and laughed until

he was weak.  Tottle owed him money, so he had a perfect right to

laugh at Tottle's expense.



Mr. Watkins Tottle feared, in his own mind, that this was another

characteristic which he had in common with this modern Lucretia.

He, however, accepted the invitation to dine with the Parsonses on

the next day but one, with great firmness:  and looked forward to

the introduction, when again left alone, with tolerable composure.



The sun that rose on the next day but one, had never beheld a

sprucer personage on the outside of the Norwood stage, than Mr.

Watkins Tottle; and when the coach drew up before a cardboard-

looking house with disguised chimneys, and a lawn like a large

sheet of green letter-paper, he certainly had never lighted to his

place of destination a gentleman who felt more uncomfortable.



The coach stopped, and Mr. Watkins Tottle jumped - we beg his

pardon - alighted, with great dignity.  'All right!' said he, and

away went the coach up the hill with that beautiful equanimity of

pace for which 'short' stages are generally remarkable.



Mr. Watkins Tottle gave a faltering jerk to the handle of the

garden-gate bell.  He essayed a more energetic tug, and his

previous nervousness was not at all diminished by hearing the bell

ringing like a fire alarum.



'Is Mr. Parsons at home?' inquired Tottle of the man who opened the

gate.  He could hardly hear himself speak, for the bell had not yet

done tolling.



'Here I am,' shouted a voice on the lawn, - and there was Mr.

Gabriel Parsons in a flannel jacket, running backwards and

forwards, from a wicket to two hats piled on each other, and from

the two hats to the wicket, in the most violent manner, while

another gentleman with his coat off was getting down the area of

the house, after a ball.  When the gentleman without the coat had

found it - which he did in less than ten minutes - he ran back to

the hats, and Gabriel Parsons pulled up.  Then, the gentleman

without the coat called out 'play,' very loudly, and bowled.  Then

Mr. Gabriel Parsons knocked the ball several yards, and took

another run.  Then, the other gentleman aimed at the wicket, and

didn't hit it; and Mr. Gabriel Parsons, having finished running on

his own account, laid down the bat and ran after the ball, which

went into a neighbouring field.  They called this cricket.




'Tottle, will you "go in?"' inquired Mr. Gabriel Parsons, as he

approached him, wiping the perspiration off his face.



Mr. Watkins Tottle declined the offer, the bare idea of accepting

which made him even warmer than his friend.



'Then we'll go into the house, as it's past four, and I shall have

to wash my hands before dinner,' said Mr. Gabriel Parsons.  'Here,

I hate ceremony, you know!  Timson, that's Tottle - Tottle, that's

Timson; bred for the church, which I fear will never be bread for

him;' and he chuckled at the old joke.  Mr. Timson bowed

carelessly.  Mr. Watkins Tottle bowed stiffly.  Mr. Gabriel Parsons

led the way to the house.  He was a rich sugar-baker, who mistook

rudeness for honesty, and abrupt bluntness for an open and candid

manner; many besides Gabriel mistake bluntness for sincerity.



Mrs. Gabriel Parsons received the visitors most graciously on the

steps, and preceded them to the drawing-room.  On the sofa, was

seated a lady of very prim appearance, and remarkably inanimate.

She was one of those persons at whose age it is impossible to make

any reasonable guess; her features might have been remarkably

pretty when she was younger, and they might always have presented

the same appearance.  Her complexion - with a slight trace of

powder here and there - was as clear as that of a well-made wax

doll, and her face as expressive.  She was handsomely dressed, and

was winding up a gold watch.



'Miss Lillerton, my dear, this is our friend Mr. Watkins Tottle; a

very old acquaintance I assure you,' said Mrs. Parsons, presenting

the Strephon of Cecil-street, Strand.  The lady rose, and made a

deep courtesy; Mr. Watkins Tottle made a bow.



'Splendid, majestic creature!' thought Tottle.



Mr. Timson advanced, and Mr. Watkins Tottle began to hate him.  Men

generally discover a rival, instinctively, and Mr. Watkins Tottle

felt that his hate was deserved.



'May I beg,' said the reverend gentleman, - 'May I beg to call upon

you, Miss Lillerton, for some trifling donation to my soup, coals,

and blanket distribution society?'



'Put my name down, for two sovereigns, if you please,' responded

Miss Lillerton.



'You are truly charitable, madam,' said the Reverend Mr. Timson,

'and we know that charity will cover a multitude of sins.  Let me

beg you to understand that I do not say this from the supposition

that you have many sins which require palliation; believe me when I

say that I never yet met any one who had fewer to atone for, than

Miss Lillerton.'



Something like a bad imitation of animation lighted up the lady's

face, as she acknowledged the compliment.  Watkins Tottle incurred

the sin of wishing that the ashes of the Reverend Charles Timson

were quietly deposited in the churchyard of his curacy, wherever it

might be.



'I'll tell you what,' interrupted Parsons, who had just appeared

with clean hands, and a black coat, 'it's my private opinion,

Timson, that your "distribution society" is rather a humbug.'



'You are so severe,' replied Timson, with a Christian smile:  he

disliked Parsons, but liked his dinners.



'So positively unjust!' said Miss Lillerton.



'Certainly,' observed Tottle.  The lady looked up; her eyes met

those of Mr. Watkins Tottle.  She withdrew them in a sweet

confusion, and Watkins Tottle did the same - the confusion was

mutual.



'Why,' urged Mr. Parsons, pursuing his objections, 'what on earth

is the use of giving a man coals who has nothing to cook, or giving

him blankets when he hasn't a bed, or giving him soup when he

requires substantial food? - "like sending them ruffles when

wanting a shirt."  Why not give 'em a trifle of money, as I do,

when I think they deserve it, and let them purchase what they think

best?  Why? - because your subscribers wouldn't see their names

flourishing in print on the church-door - that's the reason.'



'Really, Mr. Parsons, I hope you don't mean to insinuate that I

wish to see MY name in print, on the church-door,' interrupted Miss

Lillerton.



'I hope not,' said Mr. Watkins Tottle, putting in another word, and

getting another glance.



'Certainly not,' replied Parsons.  'I dare say you wouldn't mind

seeing it in writing, though, in the church register - eh?'



'Register!  What register?' inquired the lady gravely.



'Why, the register of marriages, to be sure,' replied Parsons,

chuckling at the sally, and glancing at Tottle.  Mr. Watkins Tottle

thought he should have fainted for shame, and it is quite

impossible to imagine what effect the joke would have had upon the

lady, if dinner had not been, at that moment, announced.  Mr.

Watkins Tottle, with an unprecedented effort of gallantry, offered

the tip of his little finger; Miss Lillerton accepted it

gracefully, with maiden modesty; and they proceeded in due state to

the dinner-table, where they were soon deposited side by side.  The

room was very snug, the dinner very good, and the little party in

spirits.  The conversation became pretty general, and when Mr.

Watkins Tottle had extracted one or two cold observations from his

neighbour, and had taken wine with her, he began to acquire

confidence rapidly.  The cloth was removed; Mrs. Gabriel Parsons

drank four glasses of port on the plea of being a nurse just then;

and Miss Lillerton took about the same number of sips, on the plea

of not wanting any at all.  At length, the ladies retired, to the

great gratification of Mr. Gabriel Parsons, who had been coughing

and frowning at his wife, for half-an-hour previously - signals

which Mrs. Parsons never happened to observe, until she had been

pressed to take her ordinary quantum, which, to avoid giving

trouble, she generally did at once.



'What do you think of her?' inquired Mr. Gabriel Parsons of Mr.

Watkins Tottle, in an under-tone.



'I dote on her with enthusiasm already!' replied Mr. Watkins

Tottle.



'Gentlemen, pray let us drink "the ladies,"' said the Reverend Mr.

Timson.



'The ladies!' said Mr. Watkins Tottle, emptying his glass.  In the

fulness of his confidence, he felt as if he could make love to a

dozen ladies, off-hand.



'Ah!' said Mr. Gabriel Parsons, 'I remember when I was a young man

- fill your glass, Timson.'



'I have this moment emptied it.'



'Then fill again.'



'I will,' said Timson, suiting the action to the word.



'I remember,' resumed Mr. Gabriel Parsons, 'when I was a younger

man, with what a strange compound of feelings I used to drink that

toast, and how I used to think every woman was an angel.'



'Was that before you were married?' mildly inquired Mr. Watkins

Tottle.



'Oh! certainly,' replied Mr. Gabriel Parsons.  'I have never

thought so since; and a precious milksop I must have been, ever to

have thought so at all.  But, you know, I married Fanny under the

oddest, and most ridiculous circumstances possible.'



'What were they, if one may inquire?' asked Timson, who had heard

the story, on an average, twice a week for the last six months.

Mr. Watkins Tottle listened attentively, in the hope of picking up

some suggestion that might be useful to him in his new undertaking.



'I spent my wedding-night in a back-kitchen chimney,' said Parsons,

by way of a beginning.



'In a back-kitchen chimney!' ejaculated Watkins Tottle.  'How

dreadful!'



'Yes, it wasn't very pleasant,' replied the small host.  'The fact

is, Fanny's father and mother liked me well enough as an

individual, but had a decided objection to my becoming a husband.

You see, I hadn't any money in those days, and they had; and so

they wanted Fanny to pick up somebody else.  However, we managed to

discover the state of each other's affections somehow.  I used to

meet her, at some mutual friends' parties; at first we danced

together, and talked, and flirted, and all that sort of thing;

then, I used to like nothing so well as sitting by her side - we

didn't talk so much then, but I remember I used to have a great

notion of looking at her out of the extreme corner of my left eye -

and then I got very miserable and sentimental, and began to write

verses, and use Macassar oil.  At last I couldn't bear it any

longer, and after I had walked up and down the sunny side of

Oxford-street in tight boots for a week - and a devilish hot summer

it was too - in the hope of meeting her, I sat down and wrote a

letter, and begged her to manage to see me clandestinely, for I

wanted to hear her decision from her own mouth.  I said I had

discovered, to my perfect satisfaction, that I couldn't live

without her, and that if she didn't have me, I had made up my mind

to take prussic acid, or take to drinking, or emigrate, so as to

take myself off in some way or other.  Well, I borrowed a pound,

and bribed the housemaid to give her the note, which she did.'



'And what was the reply?' inquired Timson, who had found, before,

that to encourage the repetition of old stories is to get a general

invitation.



'Oh, the usual one!  Fanny expressed herself very miserable; hinted

at the possibility of an early grave; said that nothing should

induce her to swerve from the duty she owed her parents; implored

me to forget her, and find out somebody more deserving, and all

that sort of thing.  She said she could, on no account, think of

meeting me unknown to her pa and ma; and entreated me, as she

should be in a particular part of Kensington Gardens at eleven

o'clock next morning, not to attempt to meet her there.'



'You didn't go, of course?' said Watkins Tottle.



'Didn't I? - Of course I did.  There she was, with the identical

housemaid in perspective, in order that there might be no

interruption.  We walked about, for a couple of hours; made

ourselves delightfully miserable; and were regularly engaged.

Then, we began to "correspond" - that is to say, we used to

exchange about four letters a day; what we used to say in 'em I

can't imagine.  And I used to have an interview, in the kitchen, or

the cellar, or some such place, every evening.  Well, things went

on in this way for some time; and we got fonder of each other every

day.  At last, as our love was raised to such a pitch, and as my

salary had been raised too, shortly before, we determined on a

secret marriage.  Fanny arranged to sleep at a friend's, on the

previous night; we were to be married early in the morning; and

then we were to return to her home and be pathetic.  She was to

fall at the old gentleman's feet, and bathe his boots with her

tears; and I was to hug the old lady and call her "mother," and use

my pocket-handkerchief as much as possible.  Married we were, the

next morning; two girls-friends of Fanny's - acting as bridesmaids;

and a man, who was hired for five shillings and a pint of porter,

officiating as father.  Now, the old lady unfortunately put off her

return from Ramsgate, where she had been paying a visit, until the

next morning; and as we placed great reliance on her, we agreed to

postpone our confession for four-and-twenty hours.  My newly-made

wife returned home, and I spent my wedding-day in strolling about

Hampstead-heath, and execrating my father-in-law.  Of course, I

went to comfort my dear little wife at night, as much as I could,

with the assurance that our troubles would soon be over.  I opened

the garden-gate, of which I had a key, and was shown by the servant

to our old place of meeting - a back kitchen, with a stone-floor

and a dresser:  upon which, in the absence of chairs, we used to

sit and make love.'



'Make love upon a kitchen-dresser!' interrupted Mr. Watkins Tottle,

whose ideas of decorum were greatly outraged.



'Ah!  On a kitchen-dresser!' replied Parsons.  'And let me tell

you, old fellow, that, if you were really over head-and-ears in

love, and had no other place to make love in, you'd be devilish

glad to avail yourself of such an opportunity.  However, let me

see; - where was I?'



'On the dresser,' suggested Timson.



'Oh - ah!  Well, here I found poor Fanny, quite disconsolate and

uncomfortable.  The old boy had been very cross all day, which made

her feel still more lonely; and she was quite out of spirits.  So,

I put a good face on the matter, and laughed it off, and said we

should enjoy the pleasures of a matrimonial life more by contrast;

and, at length, poor Fanny brightened up a little.  I stopped

there, till about eleven o'clock, and, just as I was taking my

leave for the fourteenth time, the girl came running down the

stairs, without her shoes, in a great fright, to tell us that the

old villain - Heaven forgive me for calling him so, for he is dead

and gone now! - prompted I suppose by the prince of darkness, was

coming down, to draw his own beer for supper - a thing he had not

done before, for six months, to my certain knowledge; for the cask

stood in that very back kitchen.  If he discovered me there,

explanation would have been out of the question; for he was so

outrageously violent, when at all excited, that he never would have

listened to me.  There was only one thing to be done.  The chimney

was a very wide one; it had been originally built for an oven; went

up perpendicularly for a few feet, and then shot backward and

formed a sort of small cavern.  My hopes and fortune - the means of

our joint existence almost - were at stake.  I scrambled in like a

squirrel; coiled myself up in this recess; and, as Fanny and the

girl replaced the deal chimney-board, I could see the light of the

candle which my unconscious father-in-law carried in his hand.  I

heard him draw the beer; and I never heard beer run so slowly.  He

was just leaving the kitchen, and I was preparing to descend, when

down came the infernal chimney-board with a tremendous crash.  He

stopped and put down the candle and the jug of beer on the dresser;

he was a nervous old fellow, and any unexpected noise annoyed him.

He coolly observed that the fire-place was never used, and sending

the frightened servant into the next kitchen for a hammer and

nails, actually nailed up the board, and locked the door on the

outside.  So, there was I, on my wedding-night, in the light

kerseymere trousers, fancy waistcoat, and blue coat, that I had

been married in in the morning, in a back-kitchen chimney, the

bottom of which was nailed up, and the top of which had been

formerly raised some fifteen feet, to prevent the smoke from

annoying the neighbours.  And there,' added Mr. Gabriel Parsons, as

he passed the bottle, 'there I remained till half-past seven the

next morning, when the housemaid's sweetheart, who was a carpenter,

unshelled me.  The old dog had nailed me up so securely, that, to

this very hour, I firmly believe that no one but a carpenter could

ever have got me out.'



'And what did Mrs. Parsons's father say, when he found you were

married?' inquired Watkins Tottle, who, although he never saw a

joke, was not satisfied until he heard a story to the very end.



'Why, the affair of the chimney so tickled his fancy, that he

pardoned us off-hand, and allowed us something to live on till he

went the way of all flesh.  I spent the next night in his second-

floor front, much more comfortably than I had spent the preceding

one; for, as you will probably guess - '



'Please, sir, missis has made tea,' said a middle-aged female

servant, bobbing into the room.



'That's the very housemaid that figures in my story,' said Mr.

Gabriel Parsons.  'She went into Fanny's service when we were first

married, and has been with us ever since; but I don't think she has

felt one atom of respect for me since the morning she saw me

released, when she went into violent hysterics, to which she has

been subject ever since.  Now, shall we join the ladies?'



'If you please,' said Mr. Watkins Tottle.



'By all means,' added the obsequious Mr. Timson; and the trio made

for the drawing-room accordingly.



Tea being concluded, and the toast and cups having been duly

handed, and occasionally upset, by Mr. Watkins Tottle, a rubber was

proposed.  They cut for partners - Mr. and Mrs. Parsons; and Mr.

Watkins Tottle and Miss Lillerton.  Mr. Timson having conscientious

scruples on the subject of card-playing, drank brandy-and-water,

and kept up a running spar with Mr. Watkins Tottle.  The evening

went off well; Mr. Watkins Tottle was in high spirits, having some

reason to be gratified with his reception by Miss Lillerton; and

before he left, a small party was made up to visit the Beulah Spa

on the following Saturday.



'It's all right, I think,' said Mr. Gabriel Parsons to Mr. Watkins

Tottle as he opened the garden gate for him.



'I hope so,' he replied, squeezing his friend's hand.



'You'll be down by the first coach on Saturday,' said Mr. Gabriel

Parsons.



'Certainly,' replied Mr. Watkins Tottle.  'Undoubtedly.'



But fortune had decreed that Mr. Watkins Tottle should not be down

by the first coach on Saturday.  His adventures on that day,

however, and the success of his wooing, are subjects for another

chapter.
