






CHAPTER XII - THE DRUNKARD'S DEATH







We will be bold to say, that there is scarcely a man in the

constant habit of walking, day after day, through any of the

crowded thoroughfares of London, who cannot recollect among the

people whom he 'knows by sight,' to use a familiar phrase, some

being of abject and wretched appearance whom he remembers to have

seen in a very different condition, whom he has observed sinking

lower and lower, by almost imperceptible degrees, and the

shabbiness and utter destitution of whose appearance, at last,

strike forcibly and painfully upon him, as he passes by.  Is there

any man who has mixed much with society, or whose avocations have

caused him to mingle, at one time or other, with a great number of

people, who cannot call to mind the time when some shabby,

miserable wretch, in rags and filth, who shuffles past him now in

all the squalor of disease and poverty, with a respectable

tradesman, or clerk, or a man following some thriving pursuit, with

good prospects, and decent means? - or cannot any of our readers

call to mind from among the list of their QUONDAM acquaintance,

some fallen and degraded man, who lingers about the pavement in

hungry misery - from whom every one turns coldly away, and who

preserves himself from sheer starvation, nobody knows how?  Alas!

such cases are of too frequent occurrence to be rare items in any

man's experience; and but too often arise from one cause -

drunkenness - that fierce rage for the slow, sure poison, that

oversteps every other consideration; that casts aside wife,

children, friends, happiness, and station; and hurries its victims

madly on to degradation and death.



Some of these men have been impelled, by misfortune and misery, to

the vice that has degraded them.  The ruin of worldly expectations,

the death of those they loved, the sorrow that slowly consumes, but

will not break the heart, has driven them wild; and they present

the hideous spectacle of madmen, slowly dying by their own hands.

But by far the greater part have wilfully, and with open eyes,

plunged into the gulf from which the man who once enters it never

rises more, but into which he sinks deeper and deeper down, until

recovery is hopeless.



Such a man as this once stood by the bedside of his dying wife,

while his children knelt around, and mingled loud bursts of grief

with their innocent prayers.  The room was scantily and meanly

furnished; and it needed but a glance at the pale form from which

the light of life was fast passing away, to know that grief, and

want, and anxious care, had been busy at the heart for many a weary

year.  An elderly woman, with her face bathed in tears, was

supporting the head of the dying woman - her daughter - on her arm.

But it was not towards her that the was face turned; it was not her

hand that the cold and trembling fingers clasped; they pressed the

husband's arm; the eyes so soon to be closed in death rested on his

face, and the man shook beneath their gaze.  His dress was slovenly

and disordered, his face inflamed, his eyes bloodshot and heavy.

He had been summoned from some wild debauch to the bed of sorrow

and death.



A shaded lamp by the bed-side cast a dim light on the figures

around, and left the remainder of the room in thick, deep shadow.

The silence of night prevailed without the house, and the stillness

of death was in the chamber.  A watch hung over the mantel-shelf;

its low ticking was the only sound that broke the profound quiet,

but it was a solemn one, for well they knew, who heard it, that

before it had recorded the passing of another hour, it would beat

the knell of a departed spirit.



It is a dreadful thing to wait and watch for the approach of death;

to know that hope is gone, and recovery impossible; and to sit and

count the dreary hours through long, long nights - such nights as

only watchers by the bed of sickness know.  It chills the blood to

hear the dearest secrets of the heart - the pent-up, hidden secrets

of many years - poured forth by the unconscious, helpless being

before you; and to think how little the reserve and cunning of a

whole life will avail, when fever and delirium tear off the mask at

last.  Strange tales have been told in the wanderings of dying men;

tales so full of guilt and crime, that those who stood by the sick

person's couch have fled in horror and affright, lest they should

be scared to madness by what they heard and saw; and many a wretch

has died alone, raving of deeds the very name of which has driven

the boldest man away.



But no such ravings were to be heard at the bed-side by which the

children knelt.  Their half-stifled sobs and moaning alone broke

the silence of the lonely chamber.  And when at last the mother's

grasp relaxed, and, turning one look from the children to the

father, she vainly strove to speak, and fell backward on the

pillow, all was so calm and tranquil that she seemed to sink to

sleep.  They leant over her; they called upon her name, softly at

first, and then in the loud and piercing tones of desperation.  But

there was no reply.  They listened for her breath, but no sound

came.  They felt for the palpitation of the heart, but no faint

throb responded to the touch.  That heart was broken, and she was

dead!



The husband sunk into a chair by the bed-side, and clasped his

hands upon his burning forehead.  He gazed from child to child, but

when a weeping eye met his, he quailed beneath its look.  No word

of comfort was whispered in his ear, no look of kindness lighted on

his face.  All shrunk from and avoided him; and when at last he

staggered from the room, no one sought to follow or console the

widower.



The time had been when many a friend would have crowded round him

in his affliction, and many a heartfelt condolence would have met

him in his grief.  Where were they now?  One by one, friends,

relations, the commonest acquaintance even, had fallen off from and

deserted the drunkard.  His wife alone had clung to him in good and

evil, in sickness and poverty, and how had he rewarded her?  He had

reeled from the tavern to her bed-side in time to see her die.



He rushed from the house, and walked swiftly through the streets.

Remorse, fear, shame, all crowded on his mind.  Stupefied with

drink, and bewildered with the scene he had just witnessed, he re-

entered the tavern he had quitted shortly before.  Glass succeeded

glass.  His blood mounted, and his brain whirled round.  Death!

Every one must die, and why not SHE?  She was too good for him; her

relations had often told him so.  Curses on them!  Had they not

deserted her, and left her to whine away the time at home?  Well -

she was dead, and happy perhaps.  It was better as it was.  Another

glass - one more!  Hurrah!  It was a merry life while it lasted;

and he would make the most of it.



Time went on; the three children who were left to him, grew up, and

were children no longer.  The father remained the same - poorer,

shabbier, and more dissolute-looking, but the same confirmed and

irreclaimable drunkard.  The boys had, long ago, run wild in the

streets, and left him; the girl alone remained, but she worked

hard, and words or blows could always procure him something for the

tavern.  So he went on in the old course, and a merry life he led.



One night, as early as ten o'clock - for the girl had been sick for

many days, and there was, consequently, little to spend at the

public-house - he bent his steps homeward, bethinking himself that

if he would have her able to earn money, it would be as well to

apply to the parish surgeon, or, at all events, to take the trouble

of inquiring what ailed her, which he had not yet thought it worth

while to do.  It was a wet December night; the wind blew piercing

cold, and the rain poured heavily down.  He begged a few halfpence

from a passer-by, and having bought a small loaf (for it was his

interest to keep the girl alive, if he could), he shuffled onwards

as fast as the wind and rain would let him.



At the back of Fleet-street, and lying between it and the water-

side, are several mean and narrow courts, which form a portion of

Whitefriars:  it was to one of these that he directed his steps.



The alley into which he turned, might, for filth and misery, have

competed with the darkest corner of this ancient sanctuary in its

dirtiest and most lawless time.  The houses, varying from two

stories in height to four, were stained with every indescribable

hue that long exposure to the weather, damp, and rottenness can

impart to tenements composed originally of the roughest and

coarsest materials.  The windows were patched with paper, and

stuffed with the foulest rags; the doors were falling from their

hinges; poles with lines on which to dry clothes, projected from

every casement, and sounds of quarrelling or drunkenness issued

from every room.



The solitary oil lamp in the centre of the court had been blown

out, either by the violence of the wind or the act of some

inhabitant who had excellent reasons for objecting to his residence

being rendered too conspicuous; and the only light which fell upon

the broken and uneven pavement, was derived from the miserable

candles that here and there twinkled in the rooms of such of the

more fortunate residents as could afford to indulge in so expensive

a luxury.  A gutter ran down the centre of the alley - all the

sluggish odours of which had been called forth by the rain; and as

the wind whistled through the old houses, the doors and shutters

creaked upon their hinges, and the windows shook in their frames,

with a violence which every moment seemed to threaten the

destruction of the whole place.



The man whom we have followed into this den, walked on in the

darkness, sometimes stumbling into the main gutter, and at others

into some branch repositories of garbage which had been formed by

the rain, until he reached the last house in the court.  The door,

or rather what was left of it, stood ajar, for the convenience of

the numerous lodgers; and he proceeded to grope his way up the old

and broken stair, to the attic story.



He was within a step or two of his room door, when it opened, and a

girl, whose miserable and emaciated appearance was only to be

equalled by that of the candle which she shaded with her hand,

peeped anxiously out.



'Is that you, father?' said the girl.



'Who else should it be?' replied the man gruffly.  'What are you

trembling at?  It's little enough that I've had to drink to-day,

for there's no drink without money, and no money without work.

What the devil's the matter with the girl?'



'I am not well, father - not at all well,' said the girl, bursting

into tears.



'Ah!' replied the man, in the tone of a person who is compelled to

admit a very unpleasant fact, to which he would rather remain

blind, if he could.  'You must get better somehow, for we must have

money.  You must go to the parish doctor, and make him give you

some medicine.  They're paid for it, damn 'em.  What are you

standing before the door for?  Let me come in, can't you?'



'Father,' whispered the girl, shutting the door behind her, and

placing herself before it, 'William has come back.'



'Who!' said the man with a start.



'Hush,' replied the girl, 'William; brother William.'



'And what does he want?' said the man, with an effort at composure

- 'money? meat? drink?  He's come to the wrong shop for that, if he

does.  Give me the candle - give me the candle, fool - I ain't

going to hurt him.'  He snatched the candle from her hand, and

walked into the room.



Sitting on an old box, with his head resting on his hand, and his

eyes fixed on a wretched cinder fire that was smouldering on the

hearth, was a young man of about two-and-twenty, miserably clad in

an old coarse jacket and trousers.  He started up when his father

entered.



'Fasten the door, Mary,' said the young man hastily - 'Fasten the

door.  You look as if you didn't know me, father.  It's long

enough, since you drove me from home; you may well forget me.'



'And what do you want here, now?' said the father, seating himself

on a stool, on the other side of the fireplace.  'What do you want

here, now?'



'Shelter,' replied the son.  'I'm in trouble:  that's enough.  If

I'm caught I shall swing; that's certain.  Caught I shall be,

unless I stop here; that's AS certain.  And there's an end of it.'



'You mean to say, you've been robbing, or murdering, then?' said

the father.



'Yes, I do,' replied the son.  'Does it surprise you, father?'  He

looked steadily in the man's face, but he withdrew his eyes, and

bent them on the ground.



'Where's your brothers?' he said, after a long pause.



'Where they'll never trouble you,' replied his son:  'John's gone

to America, and Henry's dead.'



'Dead!' said the father, with a shudder, which even he could not

express.



'Dead,' replied the young man.  'He died in my arms - shot like a

dog, by a gamekeeper.  He staggered back, I caught him, and his

blood trickled down my hands.  It poured out from his side like

water.  He was weak, and it blinded him, but he threw himself down

on his knees, on the grass, and prayed to God, that if his mother

was in heaven, He would hear her prayers for pardon for her

youngest son.  "I was her favourite boy, Will," he said, "and I am

glad to think, now, that when she was dying, though I was a very

young child then, and my little heart was almost bursting, I knelt

down at the foot of the bed, and thanked God for having made me so

fond of her as to have never once done anything to bring the tears

into her eyes.  O Will, why was she taken away, and father left?"

There's his dying words, father,' said the young man; 'make the

best you can of 'em.  You struck him across the face, in a drunken

fit, the morning we ran away; and here's the end of it.'



The girl wept aloud; and the father, sinking his head upon his

knees, rocked himself to and fro.



'If I am taken,' said the young man, 'I shall be carried back into

the country, and hung for that man's murder.  They cannot trace me

here, without your assistance, father.  For aught I know, you may

give me up to justice; but unless you do, here I stop, until I can

venture to escape abroad.'



For two whole days, all three remained in the wretched room,

without stirring out.  On the third evening, however, the girl was

worse than she had been yet, and the few scraps of food they had

were gone.  It was indispensably necessary that somebody should go

out; and as the girl was too weak and ill, the father went, just at

nightfall.



He got some medicine for the girl, and a trifle in the way of

pecuniary assistance.  On his way back, he earned sixpence by

holding a horse; and he turned homewards with enough money to

supply their most pressing wants for two or three days to come.  He

had to pass the public-house.  He lingered for an instant, walked

past it, turned back again, lingered once more, and finally slunk

in.  Two men whom he had not observed, were on the watch.  They

were on the point of giving up their search in despair, when his

loitering attracted their attention; and when he entered the

public-house, they followed him.



'You'll drink with me, master,' said one of them, proffering him a

glass of liquor.



'And me too,' said the other, replenishing the glass as soon as it

was drained of its contents.



The man thought of his hungry children, and his son's danger.  But

they were nothing to the drunkard.  He DID drink; and his reason

left him.



'A wet night, Warden,' whispered one of the men in his ear, as he

at length turned to go away, after spending in liquor one-half of

the money on which, perhaps, his daughter's life depended.



'The right sort of night for our friends in hiding, Master Warden,'

whispered the other.



'Sit down here,' said the one who had spoken first, drawing him

into a corner.  'We have been looking arter the young un.  We came

to tell him, it's all right now, but we couldn't find him 'cause we

hadn't got the precise direction.  But that ain't strange, for I

don't think he know'd it himself, when he come to London, did he?'



'No, he didn't,' replied the father.



The two men exchanged glances.



'There's a vessel down at the docks, to sail at midnight, when it's

high water,' resumed the first speaker, 'and we'll put him on

board.  His passage is taken in another name, and what's better

than that, it's paid for.  It's lucky we met you.'



'Very,' said the second.



'Capital luck,' said the first, with a wink to his companion.



'Great,' replied the second, with a slight nod of intelligence.



'Another glass here; quick' - said the first speaker.  And in five

minutes more, the father had unconsciously yielded up his own son

into the hangman's hands.



Slowly and heavily the time dragged along, as the brother and

sister, in their miserable hiding-place, listened in anxious

suspense to the slightest sound.  At length, a heavy footstep was

heard upon the stair; it approached nearer; it reached the landing;

and the father staggered into the room.



The girl saw that he was intoxicated, and advanced with the candle

in her hand to meet him; she stopped short, gave a loud scream, and

fell senseless on the ground.  She had caught sight of the shadow

of a man reflected on the floor.  They both rushed in, and in

another instant the young man was a prisoner, and handcuffed.



'Very quietly done,' said one of the men to his companion, 'thanks

to the old man.  Lift up the girl, Tom - come, come, it's no use

crying, young woman.  It's all over now, and can't be helped.'



The young man stooped for an instant over the girl, and then turned

fiercely round upon his father, who had reeled against the wall,

and was gazing on the group with drunken stupidity.



'Listen to me, father,' he said, in a tone that made the drunkard's

flesh creep.  'My brother's blood, and mine, is on your head:  I

never had kind look, or word, or care, from you, and alive or dead,

I never will forgive you.  Die when you will, or how, I will be

with you.  I speak as a dead man now, and I warn you, father, that

as surely as you must one day stand before your Maker, so surely

shall your children be there, hand in hand, to cry for judgment

against you.'  He raised his manacled hands in a threatening

attitude, fixed his eyes on his shrinking parent, and slowly left

the room; and neither father nor sister ever beheld him more, on

this side of the grave.



When the dim and misty light of a winter's morning penetrated into

the narrow court, and struggled through the begrimed window of the

wretched room, Warden awoke from his heavy sleep, and found himself

alone.  He rose, and looked round him; the old flock mattress on

the floor was undisturbed; everything was just as he remembered to

have seen it last:  and there were no signs of any one, save

himself, having occupied the room during the night.  He inquired of

the other lodgers, and of the neighbours; but his daughter had not

been seen or heard of.  He rambled through the streets, and

scrutinised each wretched face among the crowds that thronged them,

with anxious eyes.  But his search was fruitless, and he returned

to his garret when night came on, desolate and weary.



For many days he occupied himself in the same manner, but no trace

of his daughter did he meet with, and no word of her reached his

ears.  At length he gave up the pursuit as hopeless.  He had long

thought of the probability of her leaving him, and endeavouring to

gain her bread in quiet, elsewhere.  She had left him at last to

starve alone.  He ground his teeth, and cursed her!



He begged his bread from door to door.  Every halfpenny he could

wring from the pity or credulity of those to whom he addressed

himself, was spent in the old way.  A year passed over his head;

the roof of a jail was the only one that had sheltered him for many

months.  He slept under archways, and in brickfields - anywhere,

where there was some warmth or shelter from the cold and rain.  But

in the last stage of poverty, disease, and houseless want, he was a

drunkard still.



At last, one bitter night, he sunk down on a door-step faint and

ill.  The premature decay of vice and profligacy had worn him to

the bone.  His cheeks were hollow and livid; his eyes were sunken,

and their sight was dim.  His legs trembled beneath his weight, and

a cold shiver ran through every limb.



And now the long-forgotten scenes of a misspent life crowded thick

and fast upon him.  He thought of the time when he had a home - a

happy, cheerful home - and of those who peopled it, and flocked

about him then, until the forms of his elder children seemed to

rise from the grave, and stand about him - so plain, so clear, and

so distinct they were that he could touch and feel them.  Looks

that he had long forgotten were fixed upon him once more; voices

long since hushed in death sounded in his ears like the music of

village bells.  But it was only for an instant.  The rain beat

heavily upon him; and cold and hunger were gnawing at his heart

again.



He rose, and dragged his feeble limbs a few paces further.  The

street was silent and empty; the few passengers who passed by, at

that late hour, hurried quickly on, and his tremulous voice was

lost in the violence of the storm.  Again that heavy chill struck

through his frame, and his blood seemed to stagnate beneath it.  He

coiled himself up in a projecting doorway, and tried to sleep.



But sleep had fled from his dull and glazed eyes.  His mind

wandered strangely, but he was awake, and conscious.  The well-

known shout of drunken mirth sounded in his ear, the glass was at

his lips, the board was covered with choice rich food - they were

before him:  he could see them all, he had but to reach out his

hand, and take them - and, though the illusion was reality itself,

he knew that he was sitting alone in the deserted street, watching

the rain-drops as they pattered on the stones; that death was

coming upon him by inches - and that there were none to care for or

help him.



Suddenly he started up, in the extremity of terror.  He had heard

his own voice shouting in the night air, he knew not what, or why.

Hark!  A groan! - another!  His senses were leaving him:  half-

formed and incoherent words burst from his lips; and his hands

sought to tear and lacerate his flesh.  He was going mad, and he

shrieked for help till his voice failed him.



He raised his head, and looked up the long dismal street.  He

recollected that outcasts like himself, condemned to wander day and

night in those dreadful streets, had sometimes gone distracted with

their own loneliness.  He remembered to have heard many years

before that a homeless wretch had once been found in a solitary

corner, sharpening a rusty knife to plunge into his own heart,

preferring death to that endless, weary, wandering to and fro.  In

an instant his resolve was taken, his limbs received new life; he

ran quickly from the spot, and paused not for breath until he

reached the river-side.



He crept softly down the steep stone stairs that lead from the

commencement of Waterloo Bridge, down to the water's level.  He

crouched into a corner, and held his breath, as the patrol passed.

Never did prisoner's heart throb with the hope of liberty and life

half so eagerly as did that of the wretched man at the prospect of

death.  The watch passed close to him, but he remained unobserved;

and after waiting till the sound of footsteps had died away in the

distance, he cautiously descended, and stood beneath the gloomy

arch that forms the landing-place from the river.



The tide was in, and the water flowed at his feet.  The rain had

ceased, the wind was lulled, and all was, for the moment, still and

quiet - so quiet, that the slightest sound on the opposite bank,

even the rippling of the water against the barges that were moored

there, was distinctly audible to his ear.  The stream stole

languidly and sluggishly on.  Strange and fantastic forms rose to

the surface, and beckoned him to approach; dark gleaming eyes

peered from the water, and seemed to mock his hesitation, while

hollow murmurs from behind, urged him onwards.  He retreated a few

paces, took a short run, desperate leap, and plunged into the

river.



Not five seconds had passed when he rose to the water's surface -

but what a change had taken place in that short time, in all his

thoughts and feelings!  Life - life in any form, poverty, misery,

starvation - anything but death.  He fought and struggled with the

water that closed over his head, and screamed in agonies of terror.

The curse of his own son rang in his ears.  The shore - but one

foot of dry ground - he could almost touch the step.  One hand's

breadth nearer, and he was saved - but the tide bore him onward,

under the dark arches of the bridge, and he sank to the bottom.



Again he rose, and struggled for life.  For one instant - for one

brief instant - the buildings on the river's banks, the lights on

the bridge through which the current had borne him, the black

water, and the fast-flying clouds, were distinctly visible - once

more he sunk, and once again he rose.  Bright flames of fire shot

up from earth to heaven, and reeled before his eyes, while the

water thundered in his ears, and stunned him with its furious roar.



A week afterwards the body was washed ashore, some miles down the

river, a swollen and disfigured mass.  Unrecognised and unpitied,

it was borne to the grave; and there it has long since mouldered

away!
