








TALES









CHAPTER I - THE BOARDING-HOUSE.







CHAPTER I.





Mrs. Tibbs was, beyond all dispute, the most tidy, fidgety, thrifty

little personage that ever inhaled the smoke of London; and the

house of Mrs. Tibbs was, decidedly, the neatest in all Great Coram-

street.  The area and the area-steps, and the street-door and the

street-door steps, and the brass handle, and the door-plate, and

the knocker, and the fan-light, were all as clean and bright, as

indefatigable white-washing, and hearth-stoning, and scrubbing and

rubbing, could make them.  The wonder was, that the brass door-

plate, with the interesting inscription 'MRS. TIBBS,' had never

caught fire from constant friction, so perseveringly was it

polished.  There were meat-safe-looking blinds in the parlour-

windows, blue and gold curtains in the drawing-room, and spring-

roller blinds, as Mrs. Tibbs was wont in the pride of her heart to

boast, 'all the way up.' The bell-lamp in the passage looked as

clear as a soap-bubble; you could see yourself in all the tables,

and French-polish yourself on any one of the chairs.  The banisters

were bees-waxed; and the very stair-wires made your eyes wink, they

were so glittering.



Mrs. Tibbs was somewhat short of stature, and Mr. Tibbs was by no

means a large man.  He had, moreover, very short legs, but, by way

of indemnification, his face was peculiarly long.  He was to his

wife what the 0 is in 90 - he was of some importance WITH her - he

was nothing without her.  Mrs. Tibbs was always talking.  Mr. Tibbs

rarely spoke; but, if it were at any time possible to put in a

word, when he should have said nothing at all, he had that talent.

Mrs. Tibbs detested long stories, and Mr. Tibbs had one, the

conclusion of which had never been heard by his most intimate

friends.  It always began, 'I recollect when I was in the volunteer

corps, in eighteen hundred and six,' - but, as he spoke very slowly

and softly, and his better half very quickly and loudly, he rarely

got beyond the introductory sentence.  He was a melancholy specimen

of the story-teller.   He was the wandering Jew of Joe Millerism.



Mr. Tibbs enjoyed a small independence from the pension-list -

about 43L. 15S. 10D. a year.  His father, mother, and five

interesting scions from the same stock, drew a like sum from the

revenue of a grateful country, though for what particular service

was never known.  But, as this said independence was not quite

sufficient to furnish two people with ALL the luxuries of this

life, it had occurred to the busy little spouse of Tibbs, that the

best thing she could do with a legacy of 700L., would be to take

and furnish a tolerable house - somewhere in that partially-

explored tract of country which lies between the British Museum,

and a remote village called Somers-town - for the reception of

boarders.  Great Coram-street was the spot pitched upon.  The house

had been furnished accordingly; two female servants and a boy

engaged; and an advertisement inserted in the morning papers,

informing the public that 'Six individuals would meet with all the

comforts of a cheerful musical home in a select private family,

residing within ten minutes' walk of' - everywhere.  Answers out of

number were received, with all sorts of initials; all the letters

of the alphabet seemed to be seized with a sudden wish to go out

boarding and lodging; voluminous was the correspondence between

Mrs. Tibbs and the applicants; and most profound was the secrecy

observed.  'E.' didn't like this; 'I.' couldn't think of putting up

with that; 'I. O. U.' didn't think the terms would suit him; and

'G. R.' had never slept in a French bed.  The result, however, was,

that three gentlemen became inmates of Mrs. Tibbs's house, on terms

which were 'agreeable to all parties.'  In went the advertisement

again, and a lady with her two daughters, proposed to increase -

not their families, but Mrs. Tibbs's.



'Charming woman, that Mrs. Maplesone!' said Mrs. Tibbs, as she and

her spouse were sitting by the fire after breakfast; the gentlemen

having gone out on their several avocations.  'Charming woman,

indeed!' repeated little Mrs. Tibbs, more by way of soliloquy than

anything else, for she never thought of consulting her husband.

'And the two daughters are delightful.  We must have some fish to-

day; they'll join us at dinner for the first time.'



Mr. Tibbs placed the poker at right angles with the fire shovel,

and essayed to speak, but recollected he had nothing to say.



'The young ladies,' continued Mrs. T., 'have kindly volunteered to

bring their own piano.'



Tibbs thought of the volunteer story, but did not venture it.



A bright thought struck him -



'It's very likely - ' said he.



'Pray don't lean your head against the paper,' interrupted Mrs.

Tibbs; 'and don't put your feet on the steel fender; that's worse.'



Tibbs took his head from the paper, and his feet from the fender,

and proceeded.  'It's very likely one of the young ladies may set

her cap at young Mr. Simpson, and you know a marriage - '



'A what!' shrieked Mrs. Tibbs.  Tibbs modestly repeated his former

suggestion.



'I beg you won't mention such a thing,' said Mrs. T.  'A marriage,

indeed to rob me of my boarders - no, not for the world.'



Tibbs thought in his own mind that the event was by no means

unlikely, but, as he never argued with his wife, he put a stop to

the dialogue, by observing it was 'time to go to business.'  He

always went out at ten o'clock in the morning, and returned at five

in the afternoon, with an exceedingly dirty face, and smelling

mouldy.  Nobody knew what he was, or where he went; but Mrs. Tibbs

used to say with an air of great importance, that he was engaged in

the City.



The Miss Maplesones and their accomplished parent arrived in the

course of the afternoon in a hackney-coach, and accompanied by a

most astonishing number of packages.  Trunks, bonnet-boxes, muff-

boxes and parasols, guitar-cases, and parcels of all imaginable

shapes, done up in brown paper, and fastened with pins, filled the

passage.  Then, there was such a running up and down with the

luggage, such scampering for warm water for the ladies to wash in,

and such a bustle, and confusion, and heating of servants, and

curling-irons, as had never been known in Great Coram-street

before.  Little Mrs. Tibbs was quite in her element, bustling

about, talking incessantly, and distributing towels and soap, like

a head nurse in a hospital.  The house was not restored to its

usual state of quiet repose, until the ladies were safely shut up

in their respective bedrooms, engaged in the important occupation

of dressing for dinner.



'Are these gals 'andsome?' inquired Mr. Simpson of Mr. Septimus

Hicks, another of the boarders, as they were amusing themselves in

the drawing-room, before dinner, by lolling on sofas, and

contemplating their pumps.



'Don't know,' replied Mr. Septimus Hicks, who was a tallish, white-

faced young man, with spectacles, and a black ribbon round his neck

instead of a neckerchief - a most interesting person; a poetical

walker of the hospitals, and a 'very talented young man.'  He was

fond of 'lugging' into conversation all sorts of quotations from

Don Juan, without fettering himself by the propriety of their

application; in which particular he was remarkably independent.

The other, Mr. Simpson, was one of those young men, who are in

society what walking gentlemen are on the stage, only infinitely

worse skilled in his vocation than the most indifferent artist.  He

was as empty-headed as the great bell of St. Paul's; always dressed

according to the caricatures published in the monthly fashion; and

spelt Character with a K.



'I saw a devilish number of parcels in the passage when I came

home,' simpered Mr. Simpson.



'Materials for the toilet, no doubt,' rejoined the Don Juan reader.





- 'Much linen, lace, and several pair

Of stockings, slippers, brushes, combs, complete;

With other articles of ladies fair,

To keep them beautiful, or leave them neat.'





'Is that from Milton?' inquired Mr. Simpson.



'No - from Byron,' returned Mr. Hicks, with a look of contempt.  He

was quite sure of his author, because he had never read any other.

'Hush!  Here come the gals,' and they both commenced talking in a

very loud key.



'Mrs. Maplesone and the Miss Maplesones, Mr. Hicks.  Mr. Hicks -

Mrs. Maplesone and the Miss Maplesones,' said Mrs. Tibbs, with a

very red face, for she had been superintending the cooking

operations below stairs, and looked like a wax doll on a sunny day.

'Mr. Simpson, I beg your pardon - Mr. Simpson - Mrs. Maplesone and

the Miss Maplesones' - and VICE VERSA.  The gentlemen immediately

began to slide about with much politeness, and to look as if they

wished their arms had been legs, so little did they know what to do

with them.  The ladies smiled, curtseyed, and glided into chairs,

and dived for dropped pocket-handkerchiefs:  the gentlemen leant

against two of the curtain-pegs; Mrs. Tibbs went through an

admirable bit of serious pantomime with a servant who had come up

to ask some question about the fish-sauce; and then the two young

ladies looked at each other; and everybody else appeared to

discover something very attractive in the pattern of the fender.



'Julia, my love,' said Mrs. Maplesone to her youngest daughter, in

a tone loud enough for the remainder of the company to hear -

'Julia.'



'Yes, Ma.'



'Don't stoop.' - This was said for the purpose of directing general

attention to Miss Julia's figure, which was undeniable.  Everybody

looked at her, accordingly, and there was another pause.



'We had the most uncivil hackney-coachman to-day, you can imagine,'

said Mrs. Maplesone to Mrs. Tibbs, in a confidential tone.



'Dear me!' replied the hostess, with an air of great commiseration.

She couldn't say more, for the servant again appeared at the door,

and commenced telegraphing most earnestly to her 'Missis.'



'I think hackney-coachmen generally ARE uncivil,' said Mr. Hicks in

his most insinuating tone.



'Positively I think they are,' replied Mrs. Maplesone, as if the

idea had never struck her before.



'And cabmen, too,' said Mr. Simpson.  This remark was a failure,

for no one intimated, by word or sign, the slightest knowledge of

the manners and customs of cabmen.



'Robinson, what DO you want?' said Mrs. Tibbs to the servant, who,

by way of making her presence known to her mistress, had been

giving sundry hems and sniffs outside the door during the preceding

five minutes.



'Please, ma'am, master wants his clean things,' replied the

servant, taken off her guard.  The two young men turned their faces

to the window, and 'went off' like a couple of bottles of ginger-

beer; the ladies put their handkerchiefs to their mouths; and

little Mrs. Tibbs bustled out of the room to give Tibbs his clean

linen, - and the servant warning.



Mr. Calton, the remaining boarder, shortly afterwards made his

appearance, and proved a surprising promoter of the conversation.

Mr. Calton was a superannuated beau - an old boy.  He used to say

of himself that although his features were not regularly handsome,

they were striking.  They certainly were.  It was impossible to

look at his face without being reminded of a chubby street-door

knocker, half-lion half-monkey; and the comparison might be

extended to his whole character and conversation.  He had stood

still, while everything else had been moving.  He never originated

a conversation, or started an idea; but if any commonplace topic

were broached, or, to pursue the comparison, if anybody LIFTED HIM

UP, he would hammer away with surprising rapidity.  He had the tic-

douloureux occasionally, and then he might be said to be muffled,

because he did not make quite as much noise as at other times, when

he would go on prosing, rat-tat-tat the same thing over and over

again.  He had never been married; but he was still on the look-out

for a wife with money.  He had a life interest worth about 300L. a

year - he was exceedingly vain, and inordinately selfish.  He had

acquired the reputation of being the very pink of politeness, and

he walked round the park, and up Regent-street, every day.



This respectable personage had made up his mind to render himself

exceedingly agreeable to Mrs. Maplesone - indeed, the desire of

being as amiable as possible extended itself to the whole party;

Mrs. Tibbs having considered it an admirable little bit of

management to represent to the gentlemen that she had SOME reason

to believe the ladies were fortunes, and to hint to the ladies,

that all the gentlemen were 'eligible.'  A little flirtation, she

thought, might keep her house full, without leading to any other

result.



Mrs. Maplesone was an enterprising widow of about fifty:  shrewd,

scheming, and good-looking.  She was amiably anxious on behalf of

her daughters; in proof whereof she used to remark, that she would

have no objection to marry again, if it would benefit her dear

girls - she could have no other motive.  The 'dear girls'

themselves were not at all insensible to the merits of 'a good

establishment.'  One of them was twenty-five; the other, three

years younger.  They had been at different watering-places, for

four seasons; they had gambled at libraries, read books in

balconies, sold at fancy fairs, danced at assemblies, talked

sentiment - in short, they had done all that industrious girls

could do - but, as yet, to no purpose.



'What a magnificent dresser Mr. Simpson is!' whispered Matilda

Maplesone to her sister Julia.



'Splendid!' returned the youngest.  The magnificent individual

alluded to wore a maroon-coloured dress-coat, with a velvet collar

and cuffs of the same tint - very like that which usually invests

the form of the distinguished unknown who condescends to play the

'swell' in the pantomime at 'Richardson's Show.'



'What whiskers!' said Miss Julia.



'Charming!' responded her sister; 'and what hair!'  His hair was

like a wig, and distinguished by that insinuating wave which graces

the shining locks of those CHEF-D'OEUVRES of art surmounting the

waxen images in Bartellot's window in Regent-street; his whiskers

meeting beneath his chin, seemed strings wherewith to tie it on,

ere science had rendered them unnecessary by her patent invisible

springs.



'Dinner's on the table, ma'am, if you please,' said the boy, who

now appeared for the first time, in a revived black coat of his

master's.



'Oh!  Mr. Calton, will you lead Mrs. Maplesone? - Thank you.'  Mr.

Simpson offered his arm to Miss Julia; Mr. Septimus Hicks escorted

the lovely Matilda; and the procession proceeded to the dining-

room.  Mr. Tibbs was introduced, and Mr. Tibbs bobbed up and down

to the three ladies like a figure in a Dutch clock, with a powerful

spring in the middle of his body, and then dived rapidly into his

seat at the bottom of the table, delighted to screen himself behind

a soup-tureen, which he could just see over, and that was all.  The

boarders were seated, a lady and gentleman alternately, like the

layers of bread and meat in a plate of sandwiches; and then Mrs.

Tibbs directed James to take off the covers.  Salmon, lobster-

sauce, giblet-soup, and the usual accompaniments were discovered:

potatoes like petrifactions, and bits of toasted bread, the shape

and size of blank dice.



'Soup for Mrs. Maplesone, my dear,' said the bustling Mrs. Tibbs.

She always called her husband 'my dear' before company.  Tibbs, who

had been eating his bread, and calculating how long it would be

before he should get any fish, helped the soup in a hurry, made a

small island on the table-cloth, and put his glass upon it, to hide

it from his wife.



'Miss Julia, shall I assist you to some fish?'



'If you please - very little - oh! plenty, thank you' (a bit about

the size of a walnut put upon the plate).



'Julia is a VERY little eater,' said Mrs. Maplesone to Mr. Calton.



The knocker gave a single rap.  He was busy eating the fish with

his eyes:  so he only ejaculated, 'Ah!'



'My dear,' said Mrs. Tibbs to her spouse after every one else had

been helped, 'what do YOU take?'  The inquiry was accompanied with

a look intimating that he mustn't say fish, because there was not

much left.  Tibbs thought the frown referred to the island on the

table-cloth; he therefore coolly replied, 'Why - I'll take a little

- fish, I think.'



'Did you say fish, my dear?' (another frown).



'Yes, dear,' replied the villain, with an expression of acute

hunger depicted in his countenance.  The tears almost started to

Mrs. Tibbs's eyes, as she helped her 'wretch of a husband,' as she

inwardly called him, to the last eatable bit of salmon on the dish.



'James, take this to your master, and take away your master's

knife.'  This was deliberate revenge, as Tibbs never could eat fish

without one.  He was, however, constrained to chase small particles

of salmon round and round his plate with a piece of bread and a

fork, the number of successful attempts being about one in

seventeen.



'Take away, James,' said Mrs. Tibbs, as Tibbs swallowed the fourth

mouthful - and away went the plates like lightning.



'I'll take a bit of bread, James,' said the poor 'master of the

house,' more hungry than ever.



'Never mind your master now, James,' said Mrs. Tibbs, 'see about

the meat.'  This was conveyed in the tone in which ladies usually

give admonitions to servants in company, that is to say, a low one;

but which, like a stage whisper, from its peculiar emphasis, is

most distinctly heard by everybody present.



A pause ensued, before the table was replenished - a sort of

parenthesis in which Mr. Simpson, Mr. Calton, and Mr. Hicks,

produced respectively a bottle of sauterne, bucellas, and sherry,

and took wine with everybody - except Tibbs.  No one ever thought

of him.



Between the fish and an intimated sirloin, there was a prolonged

interval.



Here was an opportunity for Mr. Hicks.  He could not resist the

singularly appropriate quotation -





'But beef is rare within these oxless isles;

Goats' flesh there is, no doubt, and kid, and mutton,

And when a holiday upon them smiles,

A joint upon their barbarous spits they put on.'





'Very ungentlemanly behaviour,' thought little Mrs. Tibbs, 'to talk

in that way.'



'Ah,' said Mr. Calton, filling his glass.  'Tom Moore is my poet.'



'And mine,' said Mrs. Maplesone.



'And mine,' said Miss Julia.



'And mine,' added Mr. Simpson.



'Look at his compositions,' resumed the knocker.



'To be sure,' said Simpson, with confidence.



'Look at Don Juan,' replied Mr. Septimus Hicks.



'Julia's letter,' suggested Miss Matilda.



'Can anything be grander than the Fire Worshippers?' inquired Miss

Julia.



'To be sure,' said Simpson.



'Or Paradise and the Peri,' said the old beau.



'Yes; or Paradise and the Peer,' repeated Simpson, who thought he

was getting through it capitally.



'It's all very well,' replied Mr. Septimus Hicks, who, as we have

before hinted, never had read anything but Don Juan.  'Where will

you find anything finer than the description of the siege, at the

commencement of the seventh canto?'



'Talking of a siege,' said Tibbs, with a mouthful of bread - 'when

I was in the volunteer corps, in eighteen hundred and six, our

commanding officer was Sir Charles Rampart; and one day, when we

were exercising on the ground on which the London University now

stands, he says, says he, Tibbs (calling me from the ranks), Tibbs

- '



'Tell your master, James,' interrupted Mrs. Tibbs, in an awfully

distinct tone, 'tell your master if he WON'T carve those fowls, to

send them to me.'  The discomfited volunteer instantly set to work,

and carved the fowls almost as expeditiously as his wife operated

on the haunch of mutton.  Whether he ever finished the story is not

known but, if he did, nobody heard it.



As the ice was now broken, and the new inmates more at home, every

member of the company felt more at ease.  Tibbs himself most

certainly did, because he went to sleep immediately after dinner.

Mr. Hicks and the ladies discoursed most eloquently about poetry,

and the theatres, and Lord Chesterfield's Letters; and Mr. Calton

followed up what everybody said, with continuous double knocks.

Mrs. Tibbs highly approved of every observation that fell from Mrs.

Maplesone; and as Mr. Simpson sat with a smile upon his face and

said 'Yes,' or 'Certainly,' at intervals of about four minutes

each, he received full credit for understanding what was going

forward.  The gentlemen rejoined the ladies in the drawing-room

very shortly after they had left the dining-parlour.  Mrs.

Maplesone and Mr. Calton played cribbage, and the 'young people'

amused themselves with music and conversation.  The Miss Maplesones

sang the most fascinating duets, and accompanied themselves on

guitars, ornamented with bits of ethereal blue ribbon.  Mr. Simpson

put on a pink waistcoat, and said he was in raptures; and Mr. Hicks

felt in the seventh heaven of poetry or the seventh canto of Don

Juan - it was the same thing to him.  Mrs. Tibbs was quite charmed

with the newcomers; and Mr. Tibbs spent the evening in his usual

way - he went to sleep, and woke up, and went to sleep again, and

woke at supper-time.



* * * * *



We are not about to adopt the licence of novel-writers, and to let

'years roll on;' but we will take the liberty of requesting the

reader to suppose that six months have elapsed, since the dinner we

have described, and that Mrs. Tibbs's boarders have, during that

period, sang, and danced, and gone to theatres and exhibitions,

together, as ladies and gentlemen, wherever they board, often do.

And we will beg them, the period we have mentioned having elapsed,

to imagine farther, that Mr. Septimus Hicks received, in his own

bedroom (a front attic), at an early hour one morning, a note from

Mr. Calton, requesting the favour of seeing him, as soon as

convenient to himself, in his (Calton's) dressing-room on the

second-floor back.



'Tell Mr. Calton I'll come down directly,' said Mr. Septimus to the

boy.  'Stop - is Mr. Calton unwell?' inquired this excited walker

of hospitals, as he put on a bed-furniture-looking dressing-gown.



'Not as I knows on, sir,' replied the boy.  ' Please, sir, he

looked rather rum, as it might be.'



'Ah, that's no proof of his being ill,' returned Hicks,

unconsciously.  'Very well:  I'll be down directly.'  Downstairs

ran the boy with the message, and down went the excited Hicks

himself, almost as soon as the message was delivered.  'Tap, tap.'

'Come in.' - Door opens, and discovers Mr. Calton sitting in an

easy chair.  Mutual shakes of the hand exchanged, and Mr. Septimus

Hicks motioned to a seat.  A short pause.  Mr. Hicks coughed, and

Mr. Calton took a pinch of snuff.  It was one of those interviews

where neither party knows what to say.  Mr. Septimus Hicks broke

silence.



'I received a note - ' he said, very tremulously, in a voice like a

Punch with a cold.



'Yes,' returned the other, 'you did.'



'Exactly.'



'Yes.'



Now, although this dialogue must have been satisfactory, both

gentlemen felt there was something more important to be said;

therefore they did as most men in such a situation would have done

- they looked at the table with a determined aspect.  The

conversation had been opened, however, and Mr. Calton had made up

his mind to continue it with a regular double knock.  He always

spoke very pompously.



'Hicks,' said he, 'I have sent for you, in consequence of certain

arrangements which are pending in this house, connected with a

marriage.'



'With a marriage!' gasped Hicks, compared with whose expression of

countenance, Hamlet's, when he sees his father's ghost, is pleasing

and composed.



'With a marriage,' returned the knocker.  'I have sent for you to

prove the great confidence I can repose in you.'



'And will you betray me?' eagerly inquired Hicks, who in his alarm

had even forgotten to quote.



'I betray YOU!  Won't YOU betray ME?'



'Never:  no one shall know, to my dying day, that you had a hand in

the business,' responded the agitated Hicks, with an inflamed

countenance, and his hair standing on end as if he were on the

stool of an electrifying machine in full operation.



'People must know that, some time or other - within a year, I

imagine,' said Mr. Calton, with an air of great self-complacency.

'We MAY have a family.'



'WE! - That won't affect you, surely?'



'The devil it won't!'



'No! how can it?' said the bewildered Hicks.  Calton was too much

inwrapped in the contemplation of his happiness to see the

equivoque between Hicks and himself; and threw himself back in his

chair.  'Oh, Matilda!' sighed the antique beau, in a lack-a-

daisical voice, and applying his right hand a little to the left of

the fourth button of his waistcoat, counting from the bottom.  'Oh,

Matilda!'



'What Matilda?' inquired Hicks, starting up.



'Matilda Maplesone,' responded the other, doing the same.



'I marry her to-morrow morning,' said Hicks.



'It's false,' rejoined his companion:  'I marry her!'



'You marry her?'



'I marry her!'



'You marry Matilda Maplesone?'



'Matilda Maplesone.'



'MISS Maplesone marry YOU?'



'Miss Maplesone!  No; Mrs. Maplesone.'



'Good Heaven!' said Hicks, falling into his chair:  'You marry the

mother, and I the daughter!'



'Most extraordinary circumstance!' replied Mr. Calton, 'and rather

inconvenient too; for the fact is, that owing to Matilda's wishing

to keep her intention secret from her daughters until the ceremony

had taken place, she doesn't like applying to any of her friends to

give her away.  I entertain an objection to making the affair known

to my acquaintance just now; and the consequence is, that I sent to

you to know whether you'd oblige me by acting as father.'



'I should have been most happy, I assure you,' said Hicks, in a

tone of condolence; 'but, you see, I shall be acting as bridegroom.

One character is frequently a consequence of the other; but it is

not usual to act in both at the same time.  There's Simpson - I

have no doubt he'll do it for you.'



'I don't like to ask him,' replied Calton, 'he's such a donkey.'



Mr. Septimus Hicks looked up at the ceiling, and down at the floor;

at last an idea struck him.  'Let the man of the house, Tibbs, be

the father,' he suggested; and then he quoted, as peculiarly

applicable to Tibbs and the pair -





'Oh Powers of Heaven! what dark eyes meets she there?

'Tis - 'tis her father's - fixed upon the pair.'





'The idea has struck me already,' said Mr. Calton:  'but, you see,

Matilda, for what reason I know not, is very anxious that Mrs.

Tibbs should know nothing about it, till it's all over.  It's a

natural delicacy, after all, you know.'



'He's the best-natured little man in existence, if you manage him

properly,' said Mr. Septimus Hicks.  'Tell him not to mention it to

his wife, and assure him she won't mind it, and he'll do it

directly.  My marriage is to be a secret one, on account of the

mother and MY father; therefore he must be enjoined to secrecy.'



A small double knock, like a presumptuous single one, was that

instant heard at the street-door.  It was Tibbs; it could be no one

else; for no one else occupied five minutes in rubbing his shoes.

He had been out to pay the baker's bill.



'Mr. Tibbs,' called Mr. Calton in a very bland tone, looking over

the banisters.



'Sir!' replied he of the dirty face.



'Will you have the kindness to step up-stairs for a moment?'



'Certainly, sir,' said Tibbs, delighted to be taken notice of.  The

bedroom-door was carefully closed, and Tibbs, having put his hat on

the floor (as most timid men do), and been accommodated with a

seat, looked as astounded as if he were suddenly summoned before

the familiars of the Inquisition.



'A rather unpleasant occurrence, Mr. Tibbs,' said Calton, in a very

portentous manner, 'obliges me to consult you, and to beg you will

not communicate what I am about to say, to your wife.'



Tibbs acquiesced, wondering in his own mind what the deuce the

other could have done, and imagining that at least he must have

broken the best decanters.



Mr. Calton resumed; 'I am placed, Mr. Tibbs, in rather an

unpleasant situation.'



Tibbs looked at Mr. Septimus Hicks, as if he thought Mr. H.'s being

in the immediate vicinity of his fellow-boarder might constitute

the unpleasantness of his situation; but as he did not exactly know

what to say, he merely ejaculated the monosyllable 'Lor!'



'Now,' continued the knocker, 'let me beg you will exhibit no

manifestations of surprise, which may be overheard by the

domestics, when I tell you - command your feelings of astonishment

- that two inmates of this house intend to be married to-morrow

morning.'  And he drew back his chair, several feet, to perceive

the effect of the unlooked-for announcement.



If Tibbs had rushed from the room, staggered down-stairs, and

fainted in the passage - if he had instantaneously jumped out of

the window into the mews behind the house, in an agony of surprise

- his behaviour would have been much less inexplicable to Mr.

Calton than it was, when he put his hands into his inexpressible-

pockets, and said with a half-chuckle, 'Just so.'



'You are not surprised, Mr. Tibbs?' inquired Mr. Calton.



'Bless you, no, sir,' returned Tibbs; 'after all, its very natural.

When two young people get together, you know - '



'Certainly, certainly,' said Calton, with an indescribable air of

self-satisfaction.



'You don't think it's at all an out-of-the-way affair then?' asked

Mr. Septimus Hicks, who had watched the countenance of Tibbs in

mute astonishment.



'No, sir,' replied Tibbs; 'I was just the same at his age.'  He

actually smiled when he said this.



'How devilish well I must carry my years!' thought the delighted

old beau, knowing he was at least ten years older than Tibbs at

that moment.



'Well, then, to come to the point at once,' he continued, 'I have

to ask you whether you will object to act as father on the

occasion?'



'Certainly not,' replied Tibbs; still without evincing an atom of

surprise.



'You will not?'



'Decidedly not,' reiterated Tibbs, still as calm as a pot of porter

with the head off.



Mr. Calton seized the hand of the petticoat-governed little man,

and vowed eternal friendship from that hour.  Hicks, who was all

admiration and surprise, did the same.



'Now, confess,' asked Mr. Calton of Tibbs, as he picked up his hat,

'were you not a little surprised?'



'I b'lieve you!' replied that illustrious person, holding up one

hand; 'I b'lieve you!  When I first heard of it.'



'So sudden,' said Septimus Hicks.



'So strange to ask ME, you know,' said Tibbs.



'So odd altogether!' said the superannuated love-maker; and then

all three laughed.



'I say,' said Tibbs, shutting the door which he had previously

opened, and giving full vent to a hitherto corked-up giggle, 'what

bothers me is, what WILL his father say?'



Mr. Septimus Hicks looked at Mr. Calton.



'Yes; but the best of it is,' said the latter, giggling in his

turn, 'I haven't got a father - he! he! he!'



'You haven't got a father.  No; but HE has,' said Tibbs.



'WHO has?' inquired Septimus Hicks.



'Why, HIM.'



'Him, who?  Do you know my secret?  Do you mean me?'



'You!  No; you know who I mean,' returned Tibbs with a knowing

wink.



'For Heaven's sake, whom do you mean?' inquired Mr. Calton, who,

like Septimus Hicks, was all but out of his senses at the strange

confusion.



'Why Mr. Simpson, of course,' replied Tibbs; 'who else could I

mean?'



'I see it all,' said the Byron-quoter; 'Simpson marries Julia

Maplesone to-morrow morning!'



'Undoubtedly,' replied Tibbs, thoroughly satisfied, 'of course he

does.'



It would require the pencil of Hogarth to illustrate - our feeble

pen is inadequate to describe - the expression which the

countenances of Mr. Calton and Mr. Septimus Hicks respectively

assumed, at this unexpected announcement.  Equally impossible is it

to describe, although perhaps it is easier for our lady readers to

imagine, what arts the three ladies could have used, so completely

to entangle their separate partners.  Whatever they were, however,

they were successful.  The mother was perfectly aware of the

intended marriage of both daughters; and the young ladies were

equally acquainted with the intention of their estimable parent.

They agreed, however, that it would have a much better appearance

if each feigned ignorance of the other's engagement; and it was

equally desirable that all the marriages should take place on the

same day, to prevent the discovery of one clandestine alliance,

operating prejudicially on the others.  Hence, the mystification of

Mr. Calton and Mr. Septimus Hicks, and the pre-engagement of the

unwary Tibbs.



On the following morning, Mr. Septimus Hicks was united to Miss

Matilda Maplesone.  Mr. Simpson also entered into a 'holy alliance'

with Miss Julia; Tibbs acting as father, 'his first appearance in

that character.'  Mr. Calton, not being quite so eager as the two

young men, was rather struck by the double discovery; and as he had

found some difficulty in getting any one to give the lady away, it

occurred to him that the best mode of obviating the inconvenience

would be not to take her at all.  The lady, however, 'appealed,' as

her counsel said on the trial of the cause, MAPLESONE v. CALTON,

for a breach of promise, 'with a broken heart, to the outraged laws

of her country.'  She recovered damages to the amount of 1,000L.

which the unfortunate knocker was compelled to pay.  Mr. Septimus

Hicks having walked the hospitals, took it into his head to walk

off altogether.  His injured wife is at present residing with her

mother at Boulogne.  Mr. Simpson, having the misfortune to lose his

wife six weeks after marriage (by her eloping with an officer

during his temporary sojourn in the Fleet Prison, in consequence of

his inability to discharge her little mantua-maker's bill), and

being disinherited by his father, who died soon afterwards, was

fortunate enough to obtain a permanent engagement at a fashionable

haircutter's; hairdressing being a science to which he had

frequently directed his attention.  In this situation he had

necessarily many opportunities of making himself acquainted with

the habits, and style of thinking, of the exclusive portion of the

nobility of this kingdom.  To this fortunate circumstance are we

indebted for the production of those brilliant efforts of genius,

his fashionable novels, which so long as good taste, unsullied by

exaggeration, cant, and quackery, continues to exist, cannot fail

to instruct and amuse the thinking portion of the community.



It only remains to add, that this complication of disorders

completely deprived poor Mrs. Tibbs of all her inmates, except the

one whom she could have best spared - her husband.  That wretched

little man returned home, on the day of the wedding, in a state of

partial intoxication; and, under the influence of wine, excitement,

and despair, actually dared to brave the anger of his wife.  Since

that ill-fated hour he has constantly taken his meals in the

kitchen, to which apartment, it is understood, his witticisms will

be in future confined:  a turn-up bedstead having been conveyed

there by Mrs. Tibbs's order for his exclusive accommodation.  It is

possible that he will be enabled to finish, in that seclusion, his

story of the volunteers.



The advertisement has again appeared in the morning papers.

Results must be reserved for another chapter.
