





CHAPTER VII - THE STEAM EXCURSION







Mr. Percy Noakes was a law student, inhabiting a set of chambers on

the fourth floor, in one of those houses in Gray's-inn-square which

command an extensive view of the gardens, and their usual adjuncts

- flaunting nursery-maids, and town-made children, with

parenthetical legs.  Mr. Percy Noakes was what is generally termed

- 'a devilish good fellow.'  He had a large circle of acquaintance,

and seldom dined at his own expense.  He used to talk politics to

papas, flatter the vanity of mammas, do the amiable to their

daughters, make pleasure engagements with their sons, and romp with

the younger branches.  Like those paragons of perfection,

advertising footmen out of place, he was always 'willing to make

himself generally useful.'  If any old lady, whose son was in

India, gave a ball, Mr. Percy Noakes was master of the ceremonies;

if any young lady made a stolen match, Mr. Percy Noakes gave her

away; if a juvenile wife presented her husband with a blooming

cherub, Mr. Percy Noakes was either godfather, or deputy-godfather;

and if any member of a friend's family died, Mr. Percy Noakes was

invariably to be seen in the second mourning coach, with a white

handkerchief to his eyes, sobbing - to use his own appropriate and

expressive description - 'like winkin'!'



It may readily be imagined that these numerous avocations were

rather calculated to interfere with Mr. Percy Noakes's professional

studies.  Mr. Percy Noakes was perfectly aware of the fact, and

had, therefore, after mature reflection, made up his mind not to

study at all - a laudable determination, to which he adhered in the

most praiseworthy manner.  His sitting-room presented a strange

chaos of dress-gloves, boxing-gloves, caricatures, albums,

invitation-cards, foils, cricket-bats, cardboard drawings, paste,

gum, and fifty other miscellaneous articles, heaped together in the

strangest confusion.  He was always making something for somebody,

or planning some party of pleasure, which was his great FORTE.  He

invariably spoke with astonishing rapidity; was smart, spoffish,

and eight-and-twenty.



'Splendid idea, 'pon my life!' soliloquised Mr. Percy Noakes, over

his morning coffee, as his mind reverted to a suggestion which had

been thrown out on the previous night, by a lady at whose house he

had spent the evening.  'Glorious idea! - Mrs. Stubbs.'



'Yes, sir,' replied a dirty old woman with an inflamed countenance,

emerging from the bedroom, with a barrel of dirt and cinders. -

This was the laundress.  'Did you call, sir?'



'Oh!  Mrs. Stubbs, I'm going out.  If that tailor should call

again, you'd better say - you'd better say I'm out of town, and

shan't be back for a fortnight; and if that bootmaker should come,

tell him I've lost his address, or I'd have sent him that little

amount.  Mind he writes it down; and if Mr. Hardy should call - you

know Mr. Hardy?'



'The funny gentleman, sir?'



'Ah! the funny gentleman.  If Mr. Hardy should call, say I've gone

to Mrs. Taunton's about that water-party.'



'Yes, sir.'



'And if any fellow calls, and says he's come about a steamer, tell

him to be here at five o'clock this afternoon, Mrs. Stubbs.'



'Very well, sir.'



Mr. Percy Noakes brushed his hat, whisked the crumbs off his

inexpressibles with a silk handkerchief, gave the ends of his hair

a persuasive roll round his forefinger, and sallied forth for Mrs.

Taunton's domicile in Great Marlborough-street, where she and her

daughters occupied the upper part of a house.  She was a good-

looking widow of fifty, with the form of a giantess and the mind of

a child.  The pursuit of pleasure, and some means of killing time,

were the sole end of her existence.  She doted on her daughters,

who were as frivolous as herself.



A general exclamation of satisfaction hailed the arrival of Mr.

Percy Noakes, who went through the ordinary salutations, and threw

himself into an easy chair near the ladies' work-table, with the

ease of a regularly established friend of the family.  Mrs. Taunton

was busily engaged in planting immense bright bows on every part of

a smart cap on which it was possible to stick one; Miss Emily

Taunton was making a watch-guard; Miss Sophia was at the piano,

practising a new song - poetry by the young officer, or the police-

officer, or the custom-house officer, or some other interesting

amateur.



'You good creature!' said Mrs. Taunton, addressing the gallant

Percy.  'You really are a good soul!  You've come about the water-

party, I know.'



'I should rather suspect I had,' replied Mr. Noakes, triumphantly.

'Now, come here, girls, and I'll tell you all about it.'  Miss

Emily and Miss Sophia advanced to the table.



'Now,' continued Mr. Percy Noakes, 'it seems to me that the best

way will be, to have a committee of ten, to make all the

arrangements, and manage the whole set-out.  Then, I propose that

the expenses shall be paid by these ten fellows jointly.'



'Excellent, indeed!' said Mrs. Taunton, who highly approved of this

part of the arrangements.



'Then, my plan is, that each of these ten fellows shall have the

power of asking five people.  There must be a meeting of the

committee, at my chambers, to make all the arrangements, and these

people shall be then named; every member of the committee shall

have the power of black-balling any one who is proposed; and one

black ball shall exclude that person.  This will ensure our having

a pleasant party, you know.'



'What a manager you are!' interrupted Mrs. Taunton again.



'Charming!' said the lovely Emily.



'I never did!' ejaculated Sophia.



'Yes, I think it'll do,' replied Mr. Percy Noakes, who was now

quite in his element.  'I think it'll do.  Then you know we shall

go down to the Nore, and back, and have a regular capital cold

dinner laid out in the cabin before we start, so that everything

may be ready without any confusion; and we shall have the lunch

laid out, on deck, in those little tea-garden-looking concerns by

the paddle-boxes - I don't know what you call 'em.  Then, we shall

hire a steamer expressly for our party, and a band, and have the

deck chalked, and we shall be able to dance quadrilles all day; and

then, whoever we know that's musical, you know, why they'll make

themselves useful and agreeable; and - and - upon the whole, I

really hope we shall have a glorious day, you know!'



The announcement of these arrangements was received with the utmost

enthusiasm.  Mrs. Taunton, Emily, and Sophia, were loud in their

praises.



'Well, but tell me, Percy,' said Mrs. Taunton, 'who are the ten

gentlemen to be?'



'Oh!  I know plenty of fellows who'll be delighted with the

scheme,' replied Mr. Percy Noakes; 'of course we shall have - '



'Mr. Hardy!' interrupted the servant, announcing a visitor.  Miss

Sophia and Miss Emily hastily assumed the most interesting

attitudes that could be adopted on so short a notice.



'How are you?' said a stout gentleman of about forty, pausing at

the door in the attitude of an awkward harlequin.  This was Mr.

Hardy, whom we have before described, on the authority of Mrs.

Stubbs, as 'the funny gentleman.'  He was an Astley-Cooperish Joe

Miller - a practical joker, immensely popular with married ladies,

and a general favourite with young men.  He was always engaged in

some pleasure excursion or other, and delighted in getting somebody

into a scrape on such occasions.  He could sing comic songs,

imitate hackney-coachmen and fowls, play airs on his chin, and

execute concertos on the Jews'-harp.  He always eat and drank most

immoderately, and was the bosom friend of Mr. Percy Noakes.  He had

a red face, a somewhat husky voice, and a tremendous laugh.



'How ARE you?' said this worthy, laughing, as if it were the finest

joke in the world to make a morning call, and shaking hands with

the ladies with as much vehemence as if their arms had been so many

pump-handles.



'You're just the very man I wanted,' said Mr. Percy Noakes, who

proceeded to explain the cause of his being in requisition.



'Ha! ha! ha!' shouted Hardy, after hearing the statement, and

receiving a detailed account of the proposed excursion.  'Oh,

capital! glorious!  What a day it will be! what fun! - But, I say,

when are you going to begin making the arrangements?'



'No time like the present - at once, if you please.'



'Oh, charming!' cried the ladies.  'Pray, do!'



Writing materials were laid before Mr. Percy Noakes, and the names

of the different members of the committee were agreed on, after as

much discussion between him and Mr. Hardy as if the fate of nations

had depended on their appointment.  It was then agreed that a

meeting should take place at Mr. Percy Noakes's chambers on the

ensuing Wednesday evening at eight o'clock, and the visitors

departed.



Wednesday evening arrived; eight o'clock came, and eight members of

the committee were punctual in their attendance.  Mr. Loggins, the

solicitor, of Boswell-court, sent an excuse, and Mr. Samuel Briggs,

the ditto of Furnival's Inn, sent his brother:  much to his (the

brother's) satisfaction, and greatly to the discomfiture of Mr.

Percy Noakes.  Between the Briggses and the Tauntons there existed

a degree of implacable hatred, quite unprecedented.  The animosity

between the Montagues and Capulets, was nothing to that which

prevailed between these two illustrious houses.  Mrs. Briggs was a

widow, with three daughters and two sons; Mr. Samuel, the eldest,

was an attorney, and Mr. Alexander, the youngest, was under

articles to his brother.  They resided in Portland-street, Oxford-

street, and moved in the same orbit as the Tauntons - hence their

mutual dislike.  If the Miss Briggses appeared in smart bonnets,

the Miss Tauntons eclipsed them with smarter.  If Mrs. Taunton

appeared in a cap of all the hues of the rainbow, Mrs. Briggs

forthwith mounted a toque, with all the patterns of the

kaleidoscope.  If Miss Sophia Taunton learnt a new song, two of the

Miss Briggses came out with a new duet.  The Tauntons had once

gained a temporary triumph with the assistance of a harp, but the

Briggses brought three guitars into the field, and effectually

routed the enemy.  There was no end to the rivalry between them.



Now, as Mr. Samuel Briggs was a mere machine, a sort of self-acting

legal walking-stick; and as the party was known to have originated,

however remotely, with Mrs. Taunton, the female branches of the

Briggs family had arranged that Mr. Alexander should attend,

instead of his brother; and as the said Mr. Alexander was

deservedly celebrated for possessing all the pertinacity of a

bankruptcy-court attorney, combined with the obstinacy of that

useful animal which browses on the thistle, he required but little

tuition.  He was especially enjoined to make himself as

disagreeable as possible; and, above all, to black-ball the

Tauntons at every hazard.



The proceedings of the evening were opened by Mr. Percy Noakes.

After successfully urging on the gentlemen present the propriety of

their mixing some brandy-and-water, he briefly stated the object of

the meeting, and concluded by observing that the first step must be

the selection of a chairman, necessarily possessing some arbitrary

- he trusted not unconstitutional - powers, to whom the personal

direction of the whole of the arrangements (subject to the approval

of the committee) should be confided.  A pale young gentleman, in a

green stock and spectacles of the same, a member of the honourable

society of the Inner Temple, immediately rose for the purpose of

proposing Mr. Percy Noakes.  He had known him long, and this he

would say, that a more honourable, a more excellent, or a better-

hearted fellow, never existed. - (Hear, hear!)  The young

gentleman, who was a member of a debating society, took this

opportunity of entering into an examination of the state of the

English law, from the days of William the Conqueror down to the

present period; he briefly adverted to the code established by the

ancient Druids; slightly glanced at the principles laid down by the

Athenian law-givers; and concluded with a most glowing eulogium on

pic-nics and constitutional rights.



Mr. Alexander Briggs opposed the motion.  He had the highest esteem

for Mr. Percy Noakes as an individual, but he did consider that he

ought not to be intrusted with these immense powers - (oh, oh!) -

He believed that in the proposed capacity Mr. Percy Noakes would

not act fairly, impartially, or honourably; but he begged it to be

distinctly understood, that he said this, without the slightest

personal disrespect.  Mr. Hardy defended his honourable friend, in

a voice rendered partially unintelligible by emotion and brandy-

and-water.  The proposition was put to the vote, and there

appearing to be only one dissentient voice, Mr. Percy Noakes was

declared duly elected, and took the chair accordingly.



The business of the meeting now proceeded with rapidity.  The

chairman delivered in his estimate of the probable expense of the

excursion, and every one present subscribed his portion thereof.

The question was put that 'The Endeavour' be hired for the

occasion; Mr. Alexander Briggs moved as an amendment, that the word

'Fly' be substituted for the word 'Endeavour'; but after some

debate consented to withdraw his opposition.  The important

ceremony of balloting then commenced.  A tea-caddy was placed on a

table in a dark corner of the apartment, and every one was provided

with two backgammon men, one black and one white.



The chairman with great solemnity then read the following list of

the guests whom he proposed to introduce:- Mrs. Taunton and two

daughters, Mr. Wizzle, Mr. Simson.  The names were respectively

balloted for, and Mrs. Taunton and her daughters were declared to

be black-balled.  Mr. Percy Noakes and Mr. Hardy exchanged glances.



'Is your list prepared, Mr. Briggs?' inquired the chairman.



'It is,' replied Alexander, delivering in the following:- 'Mrs.

Briggs and three daughters, Mr. Samuel Briggs.'  The previous

ceremony was repeated, and Mrs. Briggs and three daughters were

declared to be black-balled.  Mr. Alexander Briggs looked rather

foolish, and the remainder of the company appeared somewhat

overawed by the mysterious nature of the proceedings.



The balloting proceeded; but, one little circumstance which Mr.

Percy Noakes had not originally foreseen, prevented the system from

working quite as well as he had anticipated.  Everybody was black-

balled.  Mr. Alexander Briggs, by way of retaliation, exercised his

power of exclusion in every instance, and the result was, that

after three hours had been consumed in hard balloting, the names of

only three gentlemen were found to have been agreed to.  In this

dilemma what was to be done? either the whole plan must fall to the

ground, or a compromise must be effected.  The latter alternative

was preferable; and Mr. Percy Noakes therefore proposed that the

form of balloting should be dispensed with, and that every

gentleman should merely be required to state whom he intended to

bring.  The proposal was acceded to; the Tauntons and the Briggses

were reinstated; and the party was formed.



The next Wednesday was fixed for the eventful day, and it was

unanimously resolved that every member of the committee should wear

a piece of blue sarsenet ribbon round his left arm.  It appeared

from the statement of Mr. Percy Noakes, that the boat belonged to

the General Steam Navigation Company, and was then lying off the

Custom-house; and, as he proposed that the dinner and wines should

be provided by an eminent city purveyor, it was arranged that Mr.

Percy Noakes should be on board by seven o'clock to superintend the

arrangements, and that the remaining members of the committee,

together with the company generally, should be expected to join her

by nine o'clock.  More brandy-and-water was despatched; several

speeches were made by the different law students present; thanks

were voted to the chairman; and the meeting separated.



The weather had been beautiful up to this period, and beautiful it

continued to be.  Sunday passed over, and Mr. Percy Noakes became

unusually fidgety - rushing, constantly, to and from the Steam

Packet Wharf, to the astonishment of the clerks, and the great

emolument of the Holborn cabmen.  Tuesday arrived, and the anxiety

of Mr. Percy Noakes knew no bounds.  He was every instant running

to the window, to look out for clouds; and Mr. Hardy astonished the

whole square by practising a new comic song for the occasion, in

the chairman's chambers.



Uneasy were the slumbers of Mr. Percy Noakes that night; he tossed

and tumbled about, and had confused dreams of steamers starting

off, and gigantic clocks with the hands pointing to a quarter-past

nine, and the ugly face of Mr. Alexander Briggs looking over the

boat's side, and grinning, as if in derision of his fruitless

attempts to move.  He made a violent effort to get on board, and

awoke.  The bright sun was shining cheerfully into the bedroom, and

Mr. Percy Noakes started up for his watch, in the dreadful

expectation of finding his worst dreams realised.



It was just five o'clock.  He calculated the time - he should be a

good half-hour dressing himself; and as it was a lovely morning,

and the tide would be then running down, he would walk leisurely to

Strand-lane, and have a boat to the Custom-house.



He dressed himself, took a hasty apology for a breakfast, and

sallied forth.  The streets looked as lonely and deserted as if

they had been crowded, overnight, for the last time.  Here and

there, an early apprentice, with quenched-looking sleepy eyes, was

taking down the shutters of a shop; and a policeman or milkwoman

might occasionally be seen pacing slowly along; but the servants

had not yet begun to clean the doors, or light the kitchen fires,

and London looked the picture of desolation.  At the corner of a

by-street, near Temple-bar, was stationed a 'street-breakfast.'

The coffee was boiling over a charcoal fire, and large slices of

bread and butter were piled one upon the other, like deals in a

timber-yard.  The company were seated on a form, which, with a view

both to security and comfort, was placed against a neighbouring

wall.  Two young men, whose uproarious mirth and disordered dress

bespoke the conviviality of the preceding evening, were treating

three 'ladies' and an Irish labourer.  A little sweep was standing

at a short distance, casting a longing eye at the tempting

delicacies; and a policeman was watching the group from the

opposite side of the street.  The wan looks and gaudy finery of the

thinly-clad women contrasted as strangely with the gay sunlight, as

did their forced merriment with the boisterous hilarity of the two

young men, who, now and then, varied their amusements by

'bonneting' the proprietor of this itinerant coffee-house.



Mr. Percy Noakes walked briskly by, and when he turned down Strand-

lane, and caught a glimpse of the glistening water, he thought he

had never felt so important or so happy in his life.



'Boat, sir?' cried one of the three watermen who were mopping out

their boats, and all whistling.  'Boat, sir?'



'No,' replied Mr. Percy Noakes, rather sharply; for the inquiry was

not made in a manner at all suitable to his dignity.



'Would you prefer a wessel, sir?' inquired another, to the infinite

delight of the 'Jack-in-the-water.'



Mr. Percy Noakes replied with a look of supreme contempt.



'Did you want to be put on board a steamer, sir?' inquired an old

fireman-waterman, very confidentially.  He was dressed in a faded

red suit, just the colour of the cover of a very old Court-guide.



'Yes, make haste - the Endeavour - off the Custom-house.'



'Endeavour!' cried the man who had convulsed the 'Jack' before.

'Vy, I see the Endeavour go up half an hour ago.'



'So did I,' said another; 'and I should think she'd gone down by

this time, for she's a precious sight too full of ladies and

gen'lemen.'



Mr. Percy Noakes affected to disregard these representations, and

stepped into the boat, which the old man, by dint of scrambling,

and shoving, and grating, had brought up to the causeway.  'Shove

her off!' cried Mr. Percy Noakes, and away the boat glided down the

river; Mr. Percy Noakes seated on the recently mopped seat, and the

watermen at the stairs offering to bet him any reasonable sum that

he'd never reach the 'Custum-us.'



'Here she is, by Jove!' said the delighted Percy, as they ran

alongside the Endeavour.



'Hold hard!' cried the steward over the side, and Mr. Percy Noakes

jumped on board.



'Hope you will find everything as you wished, sir.  She looks

uncommon well this morning.'



'She does, indeed,' replied the manager, in a state of ecstasy

which it is impossible to describe.  The deck was scrubbed, and the

seats were scrubbed, and there was a bench for the band, and a

place for dancing, and a pile of camp-stools, and an awning; and

then Mr. Percy Noakes bustled down below, and there were the

pastrycook's men, and the steward's wife, laying out the dinner on

two tables the whole length of the cabin; and then Mr. Percy Noakes

took off his coat and rushed backwards and forwards, doing nothing,

but quite convinced he was assisting everybody; and the steward's

wife laughed till she cried, and Mr. Percy Noakes panted with the

violence of his exertions.  And then the bell at London-bridge

wharf rang; and a Margate boat was just starting; and a Gravesend

boat was just starting, and people shouted, and porters ran down

the steps with luggage that would crush any men but porters; and

sloping boards, with bits of wood nailed on them, were placed

between the outside boat and the inside boat; and the passengers

ran along them, and looked like so many fowls coming out of an

area; and then, the bell ceased, and the boards were taken away,

and the boats started, and the whole scene was one of the most

delightful bustle and confusion.



The time wore on; half-past eight o'clock arrived; the pastry-

cook's men went ashore; the dinner was completely laid out; and Mr.

Percy Noakes locked the principal cabin, and put the key in his

pocket, in order that it might be suddenly disclosed, in all its

magnificence, to the eyes of the astonished company.  The band came

on board, and so did the wine.



Ten minutes to nine, and the committee embarked in a body.  There

was Mr. Hardy, in a blue jacket and waistcoat, white trousers, silk

stockings, and pumps - in full aquatic costume, with a straw hat on

his head, and an immense telescope under his arm; and there was the

young gentleman with the green spectacles, in nankeen

inexplicables, with a ditto waistcoat and bright buttons, like the

pictures of Paul - not the saint, but he of Virginia notoriety.

The remainder of the committee, dressed in white hats, light

jackets, waistcoats, and trousers, looked something between waiters

and West India planters.



Nine o'clock struck, and the company arrived in shoals.  Mr. Samuel

Briggs, Mrs. Briggs, and the Misses Briggs, made their appearance

in a smart private wherry.  The three guitars, in their respective

dark green cases, were carefully stowed away in the bottom of the

boat, accompanied by two immense portfolios of music, which it

would take at least a week's incessant playing to get through.  The

Tauntons arrived at the same moment with more music, and a lion - a

gentleman with a bass voice and an incipient red moustache.  The

colours of the Taunton party were pink; those of the Briggses a

light blue.  The Tauntons had artificial flowers in their bonnets;

here the Briggses gained a decided advantage - they wore feathers.



'How d'ye do, dear?' said the Misses Briggs to the Misses Taunton.

(The word 'dear' among girls is frequently synonymous with

'wretch.')



'Quite well, thank you, dear,' replied the Misses Taunton to the

Misses Briggs; and then, there was such a kissing, and

congratulating, and shaking of hands, as might have induced one to

suppose that the two families were the best friends in the world,

instead of each wishing the other overboard, as they most sincerely

did.



Mr. Percy Noakes received the visitors, and bowed to the strange

gentleman, as if he should like to know who he was.  This was just

what Mrs. Taunton wanted.  Here was an opportunity to astonish the

Briggses.



'Oh!  I beg your pardon,' said the general of the Taunton party,

with a careless air. - 'Captain Helves - Mr. Percy Noakes - Mrs.

Briggs - Captain Helves.'



Mr. Percy Noakes bowed very low; the gallant captain did the same

with all due ferocity, and the Briggses were clearly overcome.



'Our friend, Mr. Wizzle, being unfortunately prevented from

coming,' resumed Mrs. Taunton, 'I did myself the pleasure of

bringing the captain, whose musical talents I knew would be a great

acquisition.'



'In the name of the committee I have to thank you for doing so, and

to offer you welcome, sir,' replied Percy.  (Here the scraping was

renewed.)  'But pray be seated - won't you walk aft?  Captain, will

you conduct Miss Taunton? - Miss Briggs, will you allow me?'



'Where could they have picked up that military man?' inquired Mrs.

Briggs of Miss Kate Briggs, as they followed the little party.



'I can't imagine,' replied Miss Kate, bursting with vexation; for

the very fierce air with which the gallant captain regarded the

company, had impressed her with a high sense of his importance.



Boat after boat came alongside, and guest after guest arrived.  The

invites had been excellently arranged:  Mr. Percy Noakes having

considered it as important that the number of young men should

exactly tally with that of the young ladies, as that the quantity

of knives on board should be in precise proportion to the forks.



'Now, is every one on board?' inquired Mr. Percy Noakes.  The

committee (who, with their bits of blue ribbon, looked as if they

were all going to be bled) bustled about to ascertain the fact, and

reported that they might safely start.



'Go on!' cried the master of the boat from the top of one of the

paddle-boxes.



'Go on!' echoed the boy, who was stationed over the hatchway to

pass the directions down to the engineer; and away went the vessel

with that agreeable noise which is peculiar to steamers, and which

is composed of a mixture of creaking, gushing, clanging, and

snorting.



'Hoi-oi-oi-oi-oi-oi-o-i-i-i!' shouted half-a-dozen voices from a

boat, a quarter of a mile astern.



'Ease her!' cried the captain:  'do these people belong to us,

sir?'



'Noakes,' exclaimed Hardy, who had been looking at every object far

and near, through the large telescope, 'it's the Fleetwoods and the

Wakefields - and two children with them, by Jove!'



'What a shame to bring children!' said everybody; 'how very

inconsiderate!'



'I say, it would be a good joke to pretend not to see 'em, wouldn't

it?' suggested Hardy, to the immense delight of the company

generally.  A council of war was hastily held, and it was resolved

that the newcomers should be taken on board, on Mr. Hardy solemnly

pledging himself to tease the children during the whole of the day.



'Stop her!' cried the captain.



'Stop her!' repeated the boy; whizz went the steam, and all the

young ladies, as in duty bound, screamed in concert.  They were

only appeased by the assurance of the martial Helves, that the

escape of steam consequent on stopping a vessel was seldom attended

with any great loss of human life.



Two men ran to the side; and after some shouting, and swearing, and

angling for the wherry with a boat-hook, Mr. Fleetwood, and Mrs.

Fleetwood, and Master Fleetwood, and Mr. Wakefield, and Mrs.

Wakefield, and Miss Wakefield, were safely deposited on the deck.

The girl was about six years old, the boy about four; the former

was dressed in a white frock with a pink sash and dog's-eared-

looking little spencer:  a straw bonnet and green veil, six inches

by three and a half; the latter, was attired for the occasion in a

nankeen frock, between the bottom of which, and the top of his

plaid socks, a considerable portion of two small mottled legs was

discernible.  He had a light blue cap with a gold band and tassel

on his head, and a damp piece of gingerbread in his hand, with

which he had slightly embossed his countenance.



The boat once more started off; the band played 'Off she goes:' the

major part of the company conversed cheerfully in groups; and the

old gentlemen walked up and down the deck in pairs, as

perseveringly and gravely as if they were doing a match against

time for an immense stake.  They ran briskly down the Pool; the

gentlemen pointed out the Docks, the Thames Police-office, and

other elegant public edifices; and the young ladies exhibited a

proper display of horror at the appearance of the coal-whippers and

ballast-heavers.  Mr. Hardy told stories to the married ladies, at

which they laughed very much in their pocket-handkerchiefs, and hit

him on the knuckles with their fans, declaring him to be 'a naughty

man - a shocking creature' - and so forth; and Captain Helves gave

slight descriptions of battles and duels, with a most bloodthirsty

air, which made him the admiration of the women, and the envy of

the men.  Quadrilling commenced; Captain Helves danced one set with

Miss Emily Taunton, and another set with Miss Sophia Taunton.  Mrs.

Taunton was in ecstasies.  The victory appeared to be complete; but

alas! the inconstancy of man!  Having performed this necessary

duty, he attached himself solely to Miss Julia Briggs, with whom he

danced no less than three sets consecutively, and from whose side

he evinced no intention of stirring for the remainder of the day.



Mr. Hardy, having played one or two very brilliant fantasias on the

Jews'-harp, and having frequently repeated the exquisitely amusing

joke of slily chalking a large cross on the back of some member of

the committee, Mr. Percy Noakes expressed his hope that some of

their musical friends would oblige the company by a display of

their abilities.



'Perhaps,' he said in a very insinuating manner, 'Captain Helves

will oblige us?'  Mrs. Taunton's countenance lighted up, for the

captain only sang duets, and couldn't sing them with anybody but

one of her daughters.



'Really,' said that warlike individual, 'I should be very happy,

'but - '



'Oh! pray do,' cried all the young ladies.



'Miss Emily, have you any objection to join in a duet?'



'Oh! not the slightest,' returned the young lady, in a tone which

clearly showed she had the greatest possible objection.



'Shall I accompany you, dear?' inquired one of the Miss Briggses,

with the bland intention of spoiling the effect.



'Very much obliged to you, Miss Briggs,' sharply retorted Mrs.

Taunton, who saw through the manoeuvre; 'my daughters always sing

without accompaniments.'



'And without voices,' tittered Mrs. Briggs, in a low tone.



'Perhaps,' said Mrs. Taunton, reddening, for she guessed the tenor

of the observation, though she had not heard it clearly - 'Perhaps

it would be as well for some people, if their voices were not quite

so audible as they are to other people.'



'And, perhaps, if gentlemen who are kidnapped to pay attention to

some persons' daughters, had not sufficient discernment to pay

attention to other persons' daughters,' returned Mrs. Briggs, 'some

persons would not be so ready to display that ill-temper which,

thank God, distinguishes them from other persons.'



'Persons!' ejaculated Mrs. Taunton.



'Persons,' replied Mrs. Briggs.



'Insolence!'



'Creature!'



'Hush! hush!' interrupted Mr. Percy Noakes, who was one of the very

few by whom this dialogue had been overheard.  'Hush! - pray,

silence for the duet.'



After a great deal of preparatory crowing and humming, the captain

began the following duet from the opera of 'Paul and Virginia,' in

that grunting tone in which a man gets down, Heaven knows where,

without the remotest chance of ever getting up again.  This, in

private circles, is frequently designated 'a bass voice.'





'See (sung the captain) from o-ce-an ri-sing

Bright flames the or-b of d-ay.

From yon gro-ove, the varied so-ongs - '





Here, the singer was interrupted by varied cries of the most

dreadful description, proceeding from some grove in the immediate

vicinity of the starboard paddle-box.



'My child!' screamed Mrs. Fleetwood.  'My child! it is his voice -

I know it.'



Mr. Fleetwood, accompanied by several gentlemen, here rushed to the

quarter from whence the noise proceeded, and an exclamation of

horror burst from the company; the general impression being, that

the little innocent had either got his head in the water, or his

legs in the machinery.



'What is the matter?' shouted the agonised father, as he returned

with the child in his arms.



'Oh! oh! oh!' screamed the small sufferer again.



'What is the matter, dear?' inquired the father once more - hastily

stripping off the nankeen frock, for the purpose of ascertaining

whether the child had one bone which was not smashed to pieces.



'Oh! oh! - I'm so frightened!'



'What at, dear? - what at?' said the mother, soothing the sweet

infant.



'Oh! he's been making such dreadful faces at me,' cried the boy,

relapsing into convulsions at the bare recollection.



'He! - who?' cried everybody, crowding round him.



'Oh! - him!' replied the child, pointing at Hardy, who affected to

be the most concerned of the whole group.



The real state of the case at once flashed upon the minds of all

present, with the exception of the Fleetwoods and the Wakefields.

The facetious Hardy, in fulfilment of his promise, had watched the

child to a remote part of the vessel, and, suddenly appearing

before him with the most awful contortions of visage, had produced

his paroxysm of terror.  Of course, he now observed that it was

hardly necessary for him to deny the accusation; and the

unfortunate little victim was accordingly led below, after

receiving sundry thumps on the head from both his parents, for

having the wickedness to tell a story.



This little interruption having been adjusted, the captain resumed,

and Miss Emily chimed in, in due course.  The duet was loudly

applauded, and, certainly, the perfect independence of the parties

deserved great commendation.  Miss Emily sung her part, without the

slightest reference to the captain; and the captain sang so loud,

that he had not the slightest idea what was being done by his

partner.  After having gone through the last few eighteen or

nineteen bars by himself, therefore, he acknowledged the plaudits

of the circle with that air of self-denial which men usually assume

when they think they have done something to astonish the company.



'Now,' said Mr. Percy Noakes, who had just ascended from the fore-

cabin, where he had been busily engaged in decanting the wine, 'if

the Misses Briggs will oblige us with something before dinner, I am

sure we shall be very much delighted.'



One of those hums of admiration followed the suggestion, which one

frequently hears in society, when nobody has the most distant

notion what he is expressing his approval of.  The three Misses

Briggs looked modestly at their mamma, and the mamma looked

approvingly at her daughters, and Mrs. Taunton looked scornfully at

all of them.  The Misses Briggs asked for their guitars, and

several gentlemen seriously damaged the cases in their anxiety to

present them.  Then, there was a very interesting production of

three little keys for the aforesaid cases, and a melodramatic

expression of horror at finding a string broken; and a vast deal of

screwing and tightening, and winding, and tuning, during which Mrs.

Briggs expatiated to those near her on the immense difficulty of

playing a guitar, and hinted at the wondrous proficiency of her

daughters in that mystic art.  Mrs. Taunton whispered to a

neighbour that it was 'quite sickening!' and the Misses Taunton

looked as if they knew how to play, but disdained to do it.



At length, the Misses Briggs began in real earnest.  It was a new

Spanish composition, for three voices and three guitars.  The

effect was electrical.  All eyes were turned upon the captain, who

was reported to have once passed through Spain with his regiment,

and who must be well acquainted with the national music.  He was in

raptures.  This was sufficient; the trio was encored; the applause

was universal; and never had the Tauntons suffered such a complete

defeat.



'Bravo! bravo!' ejaculated the captain; - 'bravo!'



'Pretty! isn't it, sir?' inquired Mr. Samuel Briggs, with the air

of a self-satisfied showman.  By-the-bye, these were the first

words he had been heard to utter since he left Boswell-court the

evening before.



'De-lightful!' returned the captain, with a flourish, and a

military cough; - 'de-lightful!'



'Sweet instrument!' said an old gentleman with a bald head, who had

been trying all the morning to look through a telescope, inside the

glass of which Mr. Hardy had fixed a large black wafer.



'Did you ever hear a Portuguese tambourine?' inquired that jocular

individual.



'Did YOU ever hear a tom-tom, sir?' sternly inquired the captain,

who lost no opportunity of showing off his travels, real or

pretended.



'A what?' asked Hardy, rather taken aback.



'A tom-tom.'



'Never!'



'Nor a gum-gum?'



'Never!'



'What IS a gum-gum?' eagerly inquired several young ladies.



'When I was in the East Indies,' replied the captain - (here was a

discovery - he had been in the East Indies!) - 'when I was in the

East Indies, I was once stopping a few thousand miles up the

country, on a visit at the house of a very particular friend of

mine, Ram Chowdar Doss Azuph Al Bowlar - a devilish pleasant

fellow.  As we were enjoying our hookahs, one evening, in the cool

verandah in front of his villa, we were rather surprised by the

sudden appearance of thirty-four of his Kit-ma-gars (for he had

rather a large establishment there), accompanied by an equal number

of Con-su-mars, approaching the house with a threatening aspect,

and beating a tom-tom.  The Ram started up - '



'Who?' inquired the bald gentleman, intensely interested.



'The Ram - Ram Chowdar - '



'Oh!' said the old gentleman, 'beg your pardon; pray go on.'



' - Started up and drew a pistol.  "Helves," said he, "my boy," -

he always called me, my boy - "Helves," said he, "do you hear that

tom-tom?"  "I do," said I.  His countenance, which before was pale,

assumed a most frightful appearance; his whole visage was

distorted, and his frame shaken by violent emotions.  "Do you see

that gum-gum?" said he.  "No," said I, staring about me.  "You

don't?" said he.  "No, I'll be damned if I do," said I; "and what's

more, I don't know what a gum-gum is," said I.  I really thought

the Ram would have dropped.  He drew me aside, and with an

expression of agony I shall never forget, said in a low whisper - '



'Dinner's on the table, ladies,' interrupted the steward's wife.



'Will you allow me?' said the captain, immediately suiting the

action to the word, and escorting Miss Julia Briggs to the cabin,

with as much ease as if he had finished the story.



'What an extraordinary circumstance!' ejaculated the same old

gentleman, preserving his listening attitude.



'What a traveller!' said the young ladies.



'What a singular name!' exclaimed the gentlemen, rather confused by

the coolness of the whole affair.



'I wish he had finished the story,' said an old lady.  'I wonder

what a gum-gum really is?'



'By Jove!' exclaimed Hardy, who until now had been lost in utter

amazement, 'I don't know what it may be in India, but in England I

think a gum-gum has very much the same meaning as a hum-bug.'



'How illiberal! how envious!' cried everybody, as they made for the

cabin, fully impressed with a belief in the captain's amazing

adventures.  Helves was the sole lion for the remainder of the day

- impudence and the marvellous are pretty sure passports to any

society.



The party had by this time reached their destination, and put about

on their return home.  The wind, which had been with them the whole

day, was now directly in their teeth; the weather had become

gradually more and more overcast; and the sky, water, and shore,

were all of that dull, heavy, uniform lead-colour, which house-

painters daub in the first instance over a street-door which is

gradually approaching a state of convalescence.  It had been

'spitting' with rain for the last half-hour, and now began to pour

in good earnest.  The wind was freshening very fast, and the

waterman at the wheel had unequivocally expressed his opinion that

there would shortly be a squall.  A slight emotion on the part of

the vessel, now and then, seemed to suggest the possibility of its

pitching to a very uncomfortable extent in the event of its blowing

harder; and every timber began to creak, as if the boat were an

overladen clothes-basket.  Sea-sickness, however, is like a belief

in ghosts - every one entertains some misgivings on the subject,

but few will acknowledge any.  The majority of the company,

therefore, endeavoured to look peculiarly happy, feeling all the

while especially miserable.



'Don't it rain?' inquired the old gentleman before noticed, when,

by dint of squeezing and jamming, they were all seated at table.



'I think it does - a little,' replied Mr. Percy Noakes, who could

hardly hear himself speak, in consequence of the pattering on the

deck.



'Don't it blow?' inquired some one else.



'No, I don't think it does,' responded Hardy, sincerely wishing

that he could persuade himself that it did not; for he sat near the

door, and was almost blown off his seat.



'It'll soon clear up,' said Mr. Percy Noakes, in a cheerful tone.



'Oh, certainly!' ejaculated the committee generally.



'No doubt of it!' said the remainder of the company, whose

attention was now pretty well engrossed by the serious business of

eating, carving, taking wine, and so forth.



The throbbing motion of the engine was but too perceptible.  There

was a large, substantial, cold boiled leg of mutton, at the bottom

of the table, shaking like blancmange; a previously hearty sirloin

of beef looked as if it had been suddenly seized with the palsy;

and some tongues, which were placed on dishes rather too large for

them, went through the most surprising evolutions; darting from

side to side, and from end to end, like a fly in an inverted wine-

glass.  Then, the sweets shook and trembled, till it was quite

impossible to help them, and people gave up the attempt in despair;

and the pigeon-pies looked as if the birds, whose legs were stuck

outside, were trying to get them in.  The table vibrated and

started like a feverish pulse, and the very legs were convulsed -

everything was shaking and jarring.  The beams in the roof of the

cabin seemed as if they were put there for the sole purpose of

giving people head-aches, and several elderly gentlemen became ill-

tempered in consequence.  As fast as the steward put the fire-irons

up, they WOULD fall down again; and the more the ladies and

gentlemen tried to sit comfortably on their seats, the more the

seats seemed to slide away from the ladies and gentlemen.  Several

ominous demands were made for small glasses of brandy; the

countenances of the company gradually underwent most extraordinary

changes; one gentleman was observed suddenly to rush from table

without the slightest ostensible reason, and dart up the steps with

incredible swiftness:  thereby greatly damaging both himself and

the steward, who happened to be coming down at the same moment.



The cloth was removed; the dessert was laid on the table; and the

glasses were filled.  The motion of the boat increased; several

members of the party began to feel rather vague and misty, and

looked as if they had only just got up.  The young gentleman with

the spectacles, who had been in a fluctuating state for some time -

at one moment bright, and at another dismal, like a revolving light

on the sea-coast - rashly announced his wish to propose a toast.

After several ineffectual attempts to preserve his perpendicular,

the young gentleman, having managed to hook himself to the centre

leg of the table with his left hand, proceeded as follows:



'Ladies and gentlemen.  A gentleman is among us - I may say a

stranger - (here some painful thought seemed to strike the orator;

he paused, and looked extremely odd) - whose talents, whose

travels, whose cheerfulness - '



'I beg your pardon, Edkins,' hastily interrupted Mr. Percy Noakes,

- 'Hardy, what's the matter?'



'Nothing,' replied the 'funny gentleman,' who had just life enough

left to utter two consecutive syllables.



'Will you have some brandy?'



'No!' replied Hardy in a tone of great indignation, and looking as

comfortable as Temple-bar in a Scotch mist; 'what should I want

brandy for?'



'Will you go on deck?'



'No, I will NOT.'  This was said with a most determined air, and in

a voice which might have been taken for an imitation of anything;

it was quite as much like a guinea-pig as a bassoon.



'I beg your pardon, Edkins,' said the courteous Percy; 'I thought

our friend was ill.  Pray go on.'



A pause.



'Pray go on.'



'Mr. Edkins IS gone,' cried somebody.



'I beg your pardon, sir,' said the steward, running up to Mr. Percy

Noakes, 'I beg your pardon, sir, but the gentleman as just went on

deck - him with the green spectacles - is uncommon bad, to be sure;

and the young man as played the wiolin says, that unless he has

some brandy he can't answer for the consequences.  He says he has a

wife and two children, whose werry subsistence depends on his

breaking a wessel, and he expects to do so every moment.  The

flageolet's been werry ill, but he's better, only he's in a

dreadful prusperation.'



All disguise was now useless; the company staggered on deck; the

gentlemen tried to see nothing but the clouds; and the ladies,

muffled up in such shawls and cloaks as they had brought with them,

lay about on the seats, and under the seats, in the most wretched

condition.  Never was such a blowing, and raining, and pitching,

and tossing, endured by any pleasure party before.  Several

remonstrances were sent down below, on the subject of Master

Fleetwood, but they were totally unheeded in consequence of the

indisposition of his natural protectors.  That interesting child

screamed at the top of his voice, until he had no voice left to

scream with; and then, Miss Wakefield began, and screamed for the

remainder of the passage.



Mr. Hardy was observed, some hours afterwards, in an attitude which

induced his friends to suppose that he was busily engaged in

contemplating the beauties of the deep; they only regretted that

his taste for the picturesque should lead him to remain so long in

a position, very injurious at all times, but especially so, to an

individual labouring under a tendency of blood to the head.



The party arrived off the Custom-house at about two o'clock on the

Thursday morning dispirited and worn out.  The Tauntons were too

ill to quarrel with the Briggses, and the Briggses were too

wretched to annoy the Tauntons.  One of the guitar-cases was lost

on its passage to a hackney-coach, and Mrs. Briggs has not scrupled

to state that the Tauntons bribed a porter to throw it down an

area.  Mr. Alexander Briggs opposes vote by ballot - he says from

personal experience of its inefficacy; and Mr. Samuel Briggs,

whenever he is asked to express his sentiments on the point, says

he has no opinion on that or any other subject.



Mr. Edkins - the young gentleman in the green spectacles - makes a

speech on every occasion on which a speech can possibly be made:

the eloquence of which can only be equalled by its length.  In the

event of his not being previously appointed to a judgeship, it is

probable that he will practise as a barrister in the New Central

Criminal Court.



Captain Helves continued his attention to Miss Julia Briggs, whom

he might possibly have espoused, if it had not unfortunately

happened that Mr. Samuel arrested him, in the way of business,

pursuant to instructions received from Messrs.  Scroggins and

Payne, whose town-debts the gallant captain had condescended to

collect, but whose accounts, with the indiscretion sometimes

peculiar to military minds, he had omitted to keep with that dull

accuracy which custom has rendered necessary.  Mrs. Taunton

complains that she has been much deceived in him.  He introduced

himself to the family on board a Gravesend steam-packet, and

certainly, therefore, ought to have proved respectable.



Mr. Percy Noakes is as light-hearted and careless as ever.

