




CHAPTER XI.

TOM SAWYER DISCOVERS THE MURDERERS



WELL, that was a hard month on us all. Poor

Benny, she kept up the best she could, and me

and Tom tried to keep things cheerful there at the

house, but it kind of went for nothing, as you may say.

It was the same up at the jail. We went up every day

to see the old people, but it was awful dreary, because

the old man warn't sleeping much, and was walking in

his sleep considerable and so he got to looking fagged

and miserable, and his mind got shaky, and we all got

afraid his troubles would break him down and kill him.

And whenever we tried to persuade him to feel cheer-

fuler, he only shook his head and said if we only

knowed what it was to carry around a murderer's load

in your heart we wouldn't talk that way. Tom and all

of us kept telling him it WASN'T murder, but just acci-

dental killing! but it never made any difference -- it was

murder, and he wouldn't have it any other way. He

actu'ly begun to come out plain and square towards

trial time and acknowledge that he TRIED to kill the man.

Why, that was awful, you know. It made things seem

fifty times as dreadful, and there warn't no more com-

fort for Aunt Sally and Benny. But he promised he

wouldn't say a word about his murder when others

was around, and we was glad of that.



Tom Sawyer racked the head off of himself all that

month trying to plan some way out for Uncle Silas, and

many's the night he kept me up 'most all night with

this kind of tiresome work, but he couldn't seem to get

on the right track no way. As for me, I reckoned a

body might as well give it up, it all looked so blue and

I was so downhearted; but he wouldn't. He stuck to

the business right along, and went on planning and

thinking and ransacking his head.



So at last the trial come on, towards the middle of

October, and we was all in the court. The place was

jammed, of course. Poor old Uncle Silas, he looked

more like a dead person than a live one, his eyes was so

hollow and he looked so thin and so mournful. Benny

she set on one side of him and Aunt Sally on the other,

and they had veils on, and was full of trouble. But

Tom he set by our lawyer, and had his finger in every-

wheres, of course. The lawyer let him, and the judge

let him. He 'most took the business out of the law-

yer's hands sometimes; which was well enough, be-

cause that was only a mud-turtle of a back-settlement

lawyer and didn't know enough to come in when it

rains, as the saying is.



They swore in the jury, and then the lawyer for the

prostitution got up and begun. He made a terrible

speech against the old man, that made him moan and

groan, and made Benny and Aunt Sally cry. The way

HE told about the murder kind of knocked us all stupid

it was so different from the old man's tale. He said

he was going to prove that Uncle Silas was SEEN to

kill Jubiter Dunlap by two good witnesses, and done it

deliberate, and SAID he was going to kill him the very

minute he hit him with the club; and they seen him hide

Jubiter in the bushes, and they seen that Jubiter was

stone-dead. And said Uncle Silas come later and

lugged Jubiter down into the tobacker field, and two

men seen him do it. And said Uncle Silas turned out,

away in the night, and buried Jubiter, and a man seen

him at it.



I says to myself, poor old Uncle Silas has been lying

about it because he reckoned nobody seen him and he

couldn't bear to break Aunt Sally's heart and Benny's;

and right he was: as for me, I would 'a' lied the

same way, and so would anybody that had any feeling,

to save them such misery and sorrow which THEY warn't

no ways responsible for. Well, it made our lawyer

look pretty sick; and it knocked Tom silly, too, for a

little spell, but then he braced up and let on that he

warn't worried -- but I knowed he WAS, all the same.

And the people -- my, but it made a stir amongst

them!



And when that lawyer was done telling the jury what

he was going to prove, he set down and begun to work

his witnesses.



First, he called a lot of them to show that there was

bad blood betwixt Uncle Silas and the diseased; and

they told how they had heard Uncle Silas threaten the

diseased, at one time and another, and how it got

worse and worse and everybody was talking about it,

and how diseased got afraid of his life, and told two or

three of them he was certain Uncle Silas would up and

kill him some time or another.



Tom and our lawyer asked them some questions;

but it warn't no use, they stuck to what they said.



Next, they called up Lem Beebe, and he took the

stand. It come into my mind, then, how Lem and Jim

Lane had come along talking, that time, about borrow-

ing a dog or something from Jubiter Dunlap; and that

brought up the blackberries and the lantern; and that

brought up Bill and Jack Withers, and how they passed

by, talking about a nigger stealing Uncle Silas's corn;

and that fetched up our old ghost that come along

about the same time and scared us so -- and here HE

was too, and a privileged character, on accounts of his

being deef and dumb and a stranger, and they had fixed

him a chair inside the railing, where he could cross his

legs and be comfortable, whilst the other people was all

in a jam so they couldn't hardly breathe. So it all

come back to me just the way it was that day; and it

made me mournful to think how pleasant it was up to

then, and how miserable ever since.



  LEM BEEBE, sworn, said -- "I was a-coming along, 

  that day, second of September, and Jim Lane was with

  me, and it was towards sundown, and we heard loud

  talk, like quarrelling, and we was very close, only

  the hazel bushes between (that's along the fence);

  and we heard a voice say, 'I've told you more'n once

  I'd kill you,' and knowed it was this prisoner's

  voice; and then we see a club come up above the

  bushes and down out of sight again. and heard a

  smashing thump and then a groan or two: and then we

  crope soft to where we could see, and there laid

  Jupiter Dunlap dead, and this prisoner standing over

  him with the club; and the next he hauled the dead

  man into a clump of bushes and hid him, and then we

  stooped low, to be cut of sight, and got away."



Well, it was awful. It kind of froze everybody's

blood to hear it, and the house was 'most as still whilst

he was telling it as if there warn't nobody in it. And

when he was done, you could hear them gasp and sigh,

all over the house, and look at one another the same

as to say, "Ain't it perfectly terrible -- ain't it awful!"



Now happened a thing that astonished me. All the

time the first witnesses was proving the bad blood and

the threats and all that, Tom Sawyer was alive and lay-

ing for them; and the minute they was through, he

went for them, and done his level best to catch them in

lies and spile their testimony. But now, how different.

When Lem first begun to talk, and never said anything

about speaking to Jubiter or trying to borrow a dog

off of him, he was all alive and laying for Lem, and you

could see he was getting ready to cross-question him to

death pretty soon, and then I judged him and me would

go on the stand by and by and tell what we heard him

and Jim Lane say. But the next time I looked at Tom

I got the cold shivers. Why, he was in the brownest

study you ever see -- miles and miles away. He warn't

hearing a word Lem Beebe was saying; and when he

got through he was still in that brown-study, just the

same. Our lawyer joggled him, and then he looked up

startled, and says, "Take the witness if you want him.

Lemme alone -- I want to think."



Well, that beat me. I couldn't understand it. And

Benny and her mother -- oh, they looked sick, they

was so troubled. They shoved their veils to one side

and tried to get his eye, but it warn't any use, and I

couldn't get his eye either. So the mud-turtle he

tackled the witness, but it didn't amount to nothing;

and he made a mess of it.



Then they called up Jim Lane, and he told the very

same story over again, exact. Tom never listened to

this one at all, but set there thinking and thinking, miles

and miles away. So the mud-turtle went in alone

again and come out just as flat as he done before. The

lawyer for the prostitution looked very comfortable,

but the judge looked disgusted. You see, Tom was

just the same as a regular lawyer, nearly, because it

was Arkansaw law for a prisoner to choose anybody he

wanted to help his lawyer, and Tom had had Uncle

Silas shove him into the case, and now he was botching

it and you could see the judge didn't like it much.

All that the mud-turtle got out of Lem and Jim was

this: he asked them:



"Why didn't you go and tell what you saw?"



"We was afraid we would get mixed up in it our-

selves. And we was just starting down the river

a-hunting for all the week besides; but as soon as we

come back we found out they'd been searching for the

body, so then we went and told Brace Dunlap all

about it."



"When was that?"



"Saturday night, September 9th."



The judge he spoke up and says:



"Mr. Sheriff, arrest these two witnesses on suspicions

of being accessionary after the fact to the murder."



The lawyer for the prostitution jumps up all excited,

and says:



"Your honor! I protest against this extraordi --"



"Set down!" says the judge, pulling his bowie and

laying it on his pulpit. "I beg you to respect the

Court."



So he done it. Then he called Bill Withers.



  BILL WITHERS, sworn, said: "I was coming along

  about sundown, Saturday, September 2d, by the

  prisoner's field, and my brother Jack was with me

  and we seen a man toting off something heavy on

  his back and allowed it was a nigger stealing

  corn; we couldn't see distinct; next we made out

  that it was one man carrying another; and the way

  it hung, so kind of limp, we judged it was

  somebody that was drunk; and by the man's walk we

  said it was Parson Silas, and we judged he had

  found Sam Cooper drunk in the road, which he was

  always trying to reform him, and was toting him

  out of danger."



It made the people shiver to think of poor old Uncle

Silas toting off the diseased down to the place in his

tobacker field where the dog dug up the body, but

there warn't much sympathy around amongst the faces,

and I heard one cuss say "'Tis the coldest blooded

work I ever struck, lugging a murdered man around

like that, and going to bury him like a animal, and him

a preacher at that."



Tom he went on thinking, and never took no notice;

so our lawyer took the witness and done the best he

could, and it was plenty poor enough.



Then Jack Withers he come on the stand and told the

same tale, just like Bill done.



And after him comes Brace Dunlap, and he was look-

ing very mournful, and most crying; and there was a

rustle and a stir all around, and everybody got ready to

listen, and lost of the women folks said, "Poor cretur,

poor cretur," and you could see a many of them wip-

ing their eyes.



  BRACE DUNLAP, sworn, said: "I was in considerable

  trouble a long time about my poor brother, but I

  reckoned things warn't near so bad as he made out,

  and I couldn't make myself believe anybody would

  have the heart to hurt a poor harmless cretur like

  that" -- [by jings, I was sure I seen Tom give a

  kind of a faint little start, and then look

  disappointed again] -- "and you know I COULDN'T

  think a preacher would hurt him -- it warn't natural

  to think such an onlikely thing -- so I never paid

  much attention, and now I sha'n't ever, ever

  forgive myself; for if I had a done different, my

  poor brother would be with me this day, and not

  laying yonder murdered, and him so harmless." He

  kind of broke down there and choked up, and waited

  to get his voice; and people all around said the

  most pitiful things, and women cried; and it was

  very still in there, and solemn, and old Uncle Silas,

  poor thing, he give a groan right out so everybody

  heard him. Then Brace he went on, "Saturday,

  September 2d, he didn't come home to supper. 

  By-and-by I got a little uneasy, and one of my

  niggers went over to this prisoner's place, but come

  back and said he warn't there. So I got uneasier

  and uneasier, and couldn't rest. I went to bed, but

  I couldn't sleep; and turned out, away late in the

  night, and went wandering over to this prisoner's

  place and all around about there a good while, hoping

  I would run across my poor brother, and never

  knowing he was out of his troubles and gone to a

  better shore --" So he broke down and choked up again,

  and most all the women was crying now. Pretty soon

  he got another start and says: "But it warn't no use;

  so at last I went home and tried to get some sleep,

  but couldn't. Well, in a day or two everybody was

  uneasy, and they got to talking about this prisoner's

  threats, and took to the idea, which I didn't take

  no stock in, that my brother was murdered so they

  hunted around and tried to find his body, but

  couldn't and give it up. And so I reckoned he was

  gone off somers to have a little peace, and would

  come back to us when his troubles was kind of healed.

  But late Saturday night, the 9th, Lem Beebe and

  Jim Lane come to my house and told me all -- told me

  the whole awful 'sassination, and my heart was

  broke. And THEN I remembered something that hadn't

  took no hold of me at the time, because reports said

  this prisoner had took to walking in his sleep and

  doing all kind of things of no consequence, not

  knowing what he was about. I will tell you what that

  thing was that come back into my memory. Away late

  that awful Saturday night when I was wandering

  around about this prisoner's place, grieving and

  troubled, I was down by the corner of the tobacker-

  field and I heard a sound like digging in a gritty

  soil; and I crope nearer and peeped through the

  vines that hung on the rail fence and seen this

  prisoner SHOVELING -- shoveling with a long-handled

  shovel -- heaving earth into a big hole that was

  most filled up; his back was to me, but it was

  bright moonlight and I knowed him by his old green

  baize work-gown with a splattery white patch in

  the middle of the back like somebody had hit him

  with a snowball. HE WAS BURYING THE MAN HE'D MURDERED!"



And he slumped down in his chair crying and sob-

bing, and 'most everybody in the house busted out

wailing, and crying, and saying, "Oh, it's awful --

awful -- horrible! and there was a most tremendous ex-

citement, and you couldn't hear yourself think; and

right in the midst of it up jumps old Uncle Silas, white

as a sheet, and sings out:



"IT'S TRUE, EVERY WORD -- I MURDERED HIM IN COLD

BLOOD!"



By Jackson, it petrified them! People rose up wild

all over the house, straining and staring for a better look

at him, and the judge was hammering with his mallet

and the sheriff yelling "Order -- order in the court --

order!"



And all the while the old man stood there a-quaking

and his eyes a-burning, and not looking at his wife and

daughter, which was clinging to him and begging him

to keep still, but pawing them off with his hands and

saying he WOULD clear his black soul from crime, he

WOULD heave off this load that was more than he could

bear, and he WOULDN'T bear it another hour! And

then he raged right along with his awful tale, every-

body a-staring and gasping, judge, jury, lawyers, and

everybody, and Benny and Aunt Sally crying their

hearts out. And by George, Tom Sawyer never

looked at him once! Never once -- just set there

gazing with all his eyes at something else, I couldn't

tell what. And so the old man raged right along,

pouring his words out like a stream of fire:



"I killed him! I am guilty! But I never had the

notion in my life to hurt him or harm him, spite of all

them lies about my threatening him, till the very

minute I raised the club -- then my heart went cold! --

then the pity all went out of it, and I struck to kill! In

that one moment all my wrongs come into my mind;

all the insults that that man and the scoundrel his

brother, there, had put upon me, and how they laid in

together to ruin me with the people, and take away

my good name, and DRIVE me to some deed that would

destroy me and my family that hadn't ever done THEM

no harm, so help me God! And they done it in a mean

revenge -- for why? Because my innocent pure girl

here at my side wouldn't marry that rich, insolent,

ignorant coward, Brace Dunlap, who's been sniveling

here over a brother he never cared a brass farthing

for -- "[I see Tom give a jump and look glad THIS time,

to a dead certainty]" -- and in that moment I've told

you about, I forgot my God and remembered only my

heart's bitterness, God forgive me, and I struck to kill.

In one second I was miserably sorry -- oh, filled with

remorse; but I thought of my poor family, and I MUST

hide what I'd done for their sakes; and I did hide that

corpse in the bushes; and presently I carried it to the

tobacker field; and in the deep night I went with my

shovel and buried it where --"



Up jumps Tom and shouts:



"NOW, I've got it!" and waves his hand, oh, ever

so fine and starchy, towards the old man, and says:



"Set down! A murder WAS done, but you never

had no hand in it!"



Well, sir, you could a heard a pin drop. And the

old man he sunk down kind of bewildered in his seat

and Aunt Sally and Benny didn't know it, because they

was so astonished and staring at Tom with their

mouths open and not knowing what they was about.

And the whole house the same. I never seen people

look so helpless and tangled up, and I hain't ever seen

eyes bug out and gaze without a blink the way theirn

did. Tom says, perfectly ca'm:



"Your honor, may I speak?"



"For God's sake, yes -- go on!" says the judge, so

astonished and mixed up he didn't know what he was

about hardly.



Then Tom he stood there and waited a second or two

-- that was for to work up an "effect," as he calls it

-- then he started in just as ca'm as ever, and says:



"For about two weeks now there's been a little bill

sticking on the front of this courthouse offering two

thousand dollars reward for a couple of big di'monds

-- stole at St. Louis. Them di'monds is worth twelve

thousand dollars. But never mind about that till I get

to it. Now about this murder. I will tell you all

about it -- how it happened -- who done it -- every

DEtail."



You could see everybody nestle now, and begin to

listen for all they was worth.



"This man here, Brace Dunlap, that's been sniveling

so about his dead brother that YOU know he never

cared a straw for, wanted to marry that young girl

there, and she wouldn't have him. So he told Uncle

Silas he would make him sorry. Uncle Silas knowed

how powerful he was, and how little chance he had

against such a man, and he was scared and worried, and

done everything he could think of to smooth him over

and get him to be good to him: he even took his no-

account brother Jubiter on the farm and give him wages

and stinted his own family to pay them; and Jubiter

done everything his brother could contrive to insult

Uncle Silas, and fret and worry him, and try to drive

Uncle Silas into doing him a hurt, so as to injure Uncle

Silas with the people. And it done it. Everybody

turned against him and said the meanest kind of things

about him, and it graduly broke his heart -- yes, and

he was so worried and distressed that often he warn't

hardly in his right mind.



"Well, on that Saturday that we've had so much

trouble about, two of these witnesses here, Lem Beebe

and Jim Lane, come along by where Uncle Silas and

Jubiter Dunlap was at work -- and that much of what

they've said is true, the rest is lies. They didn't hear

Uncle Silas say he would kill Jubiter; they didn't hear

no blow struck; they didn't see no dead man, and they

didn't see Uncle Silas hide anything in the bushes.

Look at them now -- how they set there, wishing they

hadn't been so handy with their tongues; anyway,

they'll wish it before I get done.



"That same Saturday evening Bill and Jack Withers

DID see one man lugging off another one. That much

of what they said is true, and the rest is lies. First off

they thought it was a nigger stealing Uncle Silas's corn

-- you notice it makes them look silly, now, to find out

somebody overheard them say that. That's because

they found out by and by who it was that was doing

the lugging, and THEY know best why they swore here

that they took it for Uncle Silas by the gait -- which it

WASN'T, and they knowed it when they swore to that lie.



"A man out in the moonlight DID see a murdered

person put under ground in the tobacker field -- but it

wasn't Uncle Silas that done the burying. He was in

his bed at that very time.



"Now, then, before I go on, I want to ask you if

you've ever noticed this: that people, when they're

thinking deep, or when they're worried, are most always

doing something with their hands, and they don't know

it, and don't notice what it is their hands are doing.

some stroke their chins; some stroke their noses; some

stroke up UNDER their chin with their hand; some twirl

a chain, some fumble a button, then there's some that

draws a figure or a letter with their finger on their

cheek, or under their chin or on their under lip. That's

MY way. When I'm restless, or worried, or thinking

hard, I draw capital V's on my cheek or on my under

lip or under my chin, and never anything BUT capital

V's -- and half the time I don't notice it and don't

know I'm doing it."



That was odd. That is just what I do; only I make

an O. And I could see people nodding to one another,

same as they do when they mean "THAT's so."



"Now, then, I'll go on. That same Saturday -- no,

it was the night before -- there was a steamboat laying

at Flagler's Landing, forty miles above here, and it

was raining and storming like the nation. And there

was a thief aboard, and he had them two big di'monds

that's advertised out here on this courthouse door;

and he slipped ashore with his hand-bag and struck

out into the dark and the storm, and he was a-hoping

he could get to this town all right and be safe. But he

had two pals aboard the boat, hiding, and he knowed

they was going to kill him the first chance they got and

take the di'monds; because all three stole them, and

then this fellow he got hold of them and skipped.



"Well, he hadn't been gone more'n ten minutes be-

fore his pals found it out, and they jumped ashore and

lit out after him. Prob'ly they burnt matches and

found his tracks. Anyway, they dogged along after

him all day Saturday and kept out of his sight; and

towards sundown he come to the bunch of sycamores

down by Uncle Silas's field, and he went in there to

get a disguise out of his hand-bag and put it on before

he showed himself here in the town -- and mind you he

done that just a little after the time that Uncle Silas was

hitting Jubiter Dunlap over the head with a club -- for

he DID hit him.



"But the minute the pals see that thief slide into the

bunch of sycamores, they jumped out of the bushes

and slid in after him.



"They fell on him and clubbed him to death.



"Yes, for all he screamed and howled so, they never

had no mercy on him, but clubbed him to death. And

two men that was running along the road heard him

yelling that way, and they made a rush into the syca-   i

more bunch -- which was where they was bound for,

anyway -- and when the pals saw them they lit out and

the two new men after them a-chasing them as tight as

they could go. But only a minute or two -- then these

two new men slipped back very quiet into the syca-

mores.



"THEN what did they do? I will tell you what they

done. They found where the thief had got his disguise

out of his carpet-sack to put on; so one of them strips

and puts on that disguise."



Tom waited a little here, for some more "effect" --

then he says, very deliberate:



"The man that put on that dead man's disguise was

-- JUBITER DUNLAP!"



"Great Scott!" everybody shouted, all over the

house, and old Uncle Silas he looked perfectly

astonished.



"Yes, it was Jubiter Dunlap. Not dead, you see.

Then they pulled off the dead man's boots and put

Jubiter Dunlap's old ragged shoes on the corpse and put

the corpse's boots on Jubiter Dunlap. Then Jubiter

Dunlap stayed where he was, and the other man lugged

the dead body off in the twilight; and after midnight

he went to Uncle Silas's house, and took his old green

work-robe off of the peg where it always hangs in the

passage betwixt the house and the kitchen and put it on,

and stole the long-handled shovel and went off down

into the tobacker field and buried the murdered man."



He stopped, and stood half a minute. Then --



"And who do you reckon the murdered man WAS?

It was -- JAKE Dunlap, the long-lost burglar!"



"Great Scott!"



"And the man that buried him was -- BRACE Dunlap,

his brother!"



"Great Scott!"



"And who do you reckon is this mowing idiot here

that's letting on all these weeks to be a deef and dumb

stranger? It's -- JUBITER Dunlap!"



My land, they all busted out in a howl, and you

never see the like of that excitement since the day you

was born. And Tom he made a jump for Jubiter and

snaked off his goggles and his false whiskers, and there

was the murdered man, sure enough, just as alive as

anybody! And Aunt Sally and Benny they went to

hugging and crying and kissing and smothering old

Uncle Silas to that degree he was more muddled and

confused and mushed up in his mind than he ever was

before, and that is saying considerable. And next,

people begun to yell:



"Tom Sawyer! Tom Sawyer! Shut up every-

body, and let him go on! Go on, Tom Sawyer!"



Which made him feel uncommon bully, for it was

nuts for Tom Sawyer to be a public character that-

away, and a hero, as he calls it. So when it was all

quiet, he says:



"There ain't much left, only this. When that man

there, Bruce Dunlap, had most worried the life and

sense out of Uncle Silas till at last he plumb lost his

mind and hit this other blatherskite, his brother, with a

club, I reckon he seen his chance. Jubiter broke for

the woods to hide, and I reckon the game was for him

to slide out, in the night, and leave the country.

Then Brace would make everybody believe Uncle Silas

killed him and hid his body somers; and that would

ruin Uncle Silas and drive HIM out of the country --

hang him, maybe; I dunno. But when they found

their dead brother in the sycamores without knowing

him, because he was so battered up, they see they had

a better thing; disguise BOTH and bury Jake and dig

him up presently all dressed up in Jubiter's clothes,

and hire Jim Lane and Bill Withers and the others to

swear to some handy lies -- which they done. And

there they set, now, and I told them they would be

looking sick before I got done, and that is the way

they're looking now.



"Well, me and Huck Finn here, we come down on

the boat with the thieves, and the dead one told us all

about the di'monds, and said the others would murder

him if they got the chance; and we was going to help

him all we could. We was bound for the sycamores

when we heard them killing him in there; but we was

in there in the early morning after the storm and

allowed nobody hadn't been killed, after all. And

when we see Jubiter Dunlap here spreading around in

the very same disguise Jake told us HE was going to

wear, we thought it was Jake his own self -- and he was

goo-gooing deef and dumb, and THAT was according to

agreement.



"Well, me and Huck went on hunting for the corpse

after the others quit, and we found it. And was proud,

too; but Uncle Silas he knocked us crazy by telling us

HE killed the man. So we was mighty sorry we found

the body, and was bound to save Uncle Silas's neck if

we could; and it was going to be tough work, too,

because he wouldn't let us break him out of prison the

way we done with our old nigger Jim.



"I done everything I could the whole month to think

up some way to save Uncle Silas, but I couldn't strike

a thing. So when we come into court to-day I come

empty, and couldn't see no chance anywheres. But

by and by I had a glimpse of something that set me

thinking -- just a little wee glimpse -- only that, and

not enough to make sure; but it set me thinking hard

-- and WATCHING, when I was only letting on to think;

and by and by, sure enough, when Uncle Silas was pil-

ing out that stuff about HIM killing Jubiter Dunlap, I

catched that glimpse again, and this time I jumped up

and shut down the proceedings, because I KNOWED

Jubiter Dunlap was a-setting here before me. I knowed

him by a thing which I seen him do -- and I remem-

bered it. I'd seen him do it when I was here a year

ago."



He stopped then, and studied a minute -- laying for

an "effect" -- I knowed it perfectly well. Then he

turned off like he was going to leave the platform, and

says, kind of lazy and indifferent:



"Well, I believe that is all."



Why, you never heard such a howl! -- and it come

from the whole house:



"What WAS it you seen him do? Stay where you

are, you little devil! You think you are going to

work a body up till his mouth's a-watering and stop

there? What WAS it he done?"



That was it, you see -- he just done it to get an

"effect "; you couldn't 'a' pulled him off of that plat-

form with a yoke of oxen.



"Oh, it wasn't anything much," he says. "I seen

him looking a little excited when he found Uncle Silas

was actuly fixing to hang himself for a murder that

warn't ever done; and he got more and more nervous

and worried, I a-watching him sharp but not seeming

to look at him -- and all of a sudden his hands begun

to work and fidget, and pretty soon his left crept up

and HIS FINGER DRAWED A CROSS ON HIS CHEEK, and then I

HAD him!"



Well, then they ripped and howled and stomped and

clapped their hands till Tom Sawyer was that proud

and happy he didn't know what to do with him-

self.



And then the judge he looked down over his pulpit

and says:



"My boy, did you SEE all the various details of this

strange conspiracy and tragedy that you've been de-

scribing?"



"No, your honor, I didn't see any of them."



"Didn't see any of them! Why, you've told the

whole history straight through, just the same as if

you'd seen it with your eyes. How did you manage

that?"



Tom says, kind of easy and comfortable:



"Oh, just noticing the evidence and piecing this and

that together, your honor; just an ordinary little bit of

detective work; anybody could 'a' done it."



"Nothing of the kind! Not two in a million could

'a' done it. You are a very remarkable boy."



Then they let go and give Tom another smashing

round, and he -- well, he wouldn't 'a' sold out for a

silver mine. Then the judge says:



"But are you certain you've got this curious history

straight?"



"Perfectly, your honor. Here is Brace Dunlap --

let him deny his share of it if he wants to take the

chance; I'll engage to make him wish he hadn't said

anything...... Well, you see HE'S pretty quiet. And

his brother's pretty quiet, and them four witnesses that

lied so and got paid for it, they're pretty quiet. And

as for Uncle Silas, it ain't any use for him to put in

his oar, I wouldn't believe him under oath!"



Well, sir, that fairly made them shout; and even the

judge he let go and laughed. Tom he was just feeling

like a rainbow. When they was done laughing he

looks up at the judge and says:



"Your honor, there's a thief in this house."



"A thief?"



"Yes, sir. And he's got them twelve-thousand-

dollar di'monds on him."



By gracious, but it made a stir! Everybody went

shouting:



"Which is him? which is him? p'int him out!"



And the judge says:



"Point him out, my lad. Sheriff, you will arrest

him. Which one is it?"



Tom says:



"This late dead man here -- Jubiter Dunlap."



Then there was another thundering let-go of astonish-

ment and excitement; but Jubiter, which was astonished

enough before, was just fairly putrified with astonish-

ment this time. And he spoke up, about half crying,

and says:



"Now THAT'S a lie. Your honor, it ain't fair; I'm

plenty bad enough without that. I done the other

things -- Brace he put me up to it, and persuaded me,

and promised he'd make me rich, some day, and I done

it, and I'm sorry I done it, and I wisht I hadn't; but I

hain't stole no di'monds, and I hain't GOT no di'monds;

I wisht I may never stir if it ain't so. The sheriff can

search me and see."



Tom says:



"Your honor, it wasn't right to call him a thief, and

I'll let up on that a little. He did steal the di'monds,

but he didn't know it. He stole them from his brother

Jake when he was laying dead, after Jake had stole them

from the other thieves; but Jubiter didn't know he was

stealing them; and he's been swelling around here with

them a month; yes, sir, twelve thousand dollars' worth

of di'monds on him -- all that riches, and going around

here every day just like a poor man. Yes, your honor,

he's got them on him now."



The judge spoke up and says:



"Search him, sheriff."



Well, sir, the sheriff he ransacked him high and low,

and everywhere: searched his hat, socks, seams, boots,

everything -- and Tom he stood there quiet, laying for

another of them effects of hisn. Finally the sheriff he

give it up, and everybody looked disappointed, and

Jubiter says:



"There, now! what'd I tell you?"



And the judge says:



"It appears you were mistaken this time, my

boy."



Then Tom took an attitude and let on to be studying

with all his might, and scratching his head. Then all

of a sudden he glanced up chipper, and says:



"Oh, now I've got it ! I'd forgot."



Which was a lie, and I knowed it. Then he says:



"Will somebody be good enough to lend me a little

small screwdriver? There was one in your brother's

hand-bag that you smouched, Jubiter. but I reckon

you didn't fetch it with you."



"No, I didn't. I didn't want it, and I give it

away."



"That's because you didn't know what it was

for."



Jubiter had his boots on again, by now, and when

the thing Tom wanted was passed over the people's

heads till it got to him, he says to Jubiter:



"Put up your foot on this chair." And he kneeled

down and begun to unscrew the heel-plate, everybody

watching; and when he got that big di'mond out of

that boot-heel and held it up and let it flash and blaze

and squirt sunlight everwhichaway, it just took every-

body's breath; and Jubiter he looked so sick and sorry

you never see the like of it. And when Tom held up

the other di'mond he looked sorrier than ever. Land!

he was thinking how he would 'a' skipped out and been

rich and independent in a foreign land if he'd only had

the luck to guess what the screwdriver was in the

carpet-bag for.



Well, it was a most exciting time, take it all around,

and Tom got cords of glory. The judge took the

di'monds, and stood up in his pulpit, and cleared his

throat, and shoved his spectacles back on his head, and

says:



"I'll keep them and notify the owners; and when

they send for them it will be a real pleasure to me to

hand you the two thousand dollars, for you've earned

the money -- yes, and you've earned the deepest and

most sincerest thanks of this community besides, for

lifting a wronged and innocent family out of ruin and

shame, and saving a good and honorable man from a

felon's death, and for exposing to infamy and the pun-

ishment of the law a cruel and odious scoundrel and his


miserable creatures!"



Well, sir, if there'd been a brass band to bust out

some music, then, it would 'a' been just the perfectest

thing I ever see, and Tom Sawyer he said the same.



Then the sheriff he nabbed Brace Dunlap and his

crowd, and by and by next month the judge had them

up for trial and jailed the whole lot. And everybody

crowded back to Uncle Silas's little old church, and was

ever so loving and kind to him and the family and

couldn't do enough for them; and Uncle Silas he

preached them the blamedest jumbledest idiotic sermons

you ever struck, and would tangle you up so you

couldn't find your way home in daylight; but the peo-

ple never let on but what they thought it was the clear-

est and brightest and elegantest sermons that ever was;

and they would set there and cry, for love and pity;

but, by George, they give me the jim-jams and the fan-

tods and caked up what brains I had, and turned them

solid; but by and by they loved the old man's intellects

back into him again, and he was as sound in his skull as

ever he was, which ain't no flattery, I reckon. And

so the whole family was as happy as birds, and nobody

could be gratefuler and lovinger than what they was to

Tom Sawyer; and the same to me, though I hadn't

done nothing. And when the two thousand dollars

come, Tom give half of it to me, and never told any-

body so, which didn't surprise me, because I knowed

him.



END 
