





CHAPTER VIII.

TALKING WITH THE GHOST



IT warn't very cheerful at breakfast. Aunt Sally she

looked old and tired and let the children snarl and

fuss at one another and didn't seem to notice it was

going on, which wasn't her usual style; me and Tom

had a plenty to think about without talking; Benny she

looked like she hadn't had much sleep, and whenever

she'd lift her head a little and steal a look towards her

father you could see there was tears in her eyes; and

as for the old man, his things stayed on his plate and

got cold without him knowing they was there, I reckon,

for he was thinking and thinking all the time, and never

said a word and never et a bite.



By and by when it was stillest, that nigger's head

was poked in at the door again, and he said his Marse

Brace was getting powerful uneasy about Marse Jubiter,

which hadn't come home yet, and would Marse Silas

please --



He was looking at Uncle Silas, and he stopped there,

like the rest of his words was froze; for Uncle Silas he

rose up shaky and steadied himself leaning his fingers

on the table, and he was panting, and his eyes was set

on the nigger, and he kept swallowing, and put his

other hand up to his throat a couple of times, and at

last he got his words started, and says:



"Does he -- does he -- think -- WHAT does he think!

Tell him -- tell him --" Then he sunk down in his

chair limp and weak, and says, so as you could hardly

hear him: "Go away -- go away!"



The nigger looked scared and cleared out, and we

all felt -- well, I don't know how we felt, but it was

awful, with the old man panting there, and his eyes set

and looking like a person that was dying. None of us

could budge; but Benny she slid around soft, with her

tears running down, and stood by his side, and nestled

his old gray head up against her and begun to stroke it

and pet it with her hands, and nodded to us to go

away, and we done it, going out very quiet, like the

dead was there.



Me and Tom struck out for the woods mighty

solemn, and saying how different it was now to what it

was last summer when we was here and everything was

so peaceful and happy and everybody thought so much

of Uncle Silas, and he was so cheerful and simple-

hearted and pudd'n-headed and good -- and now look

at him. If he hadn't lost his mind he wasn't muck

short of it. That was what we allowed.



It was a most lovely day now, and bright and sun.

shiny; and the further and further we went over the

hills towards the prairie the lovelier and lovelier the

trees and flowers got to be and the more it seemed

strange and somehow wrong that there had to be

trouble in such a world as this. And then all of a

sudden I catched my breath and grabbed Tom's arm, and

all my livers and lungs and things fell down into my legs.



"There it is!" I says. We jumped back behind a

bush shivering, and Tom says:



"'Sh! -- don't make a noise."



It was setting on a log right in the edge of a little

prairie, thinking. I tried to get Tom to come away,

but he wouldn't, and I dasn't budge by myself. He

said we mightn't ever get another chance to see one,

and he was going to look his fill at this one if he died

for it. So I looked too, though it give me the fan-

tods to do it. Tom he HAD to talk, but he talked low.

He says:



"Poor Jakey, it's got all its things on, just as he

said he would. NOW you see what we wasn't certain

about -- its hair. It's not long now the way it was:

it's got it cropped close to its head, the way he said he

would. Huck, I never see anything look any more

naturaler than what It does."



"Nor I neither," I says; "I'd recognize it any-

wheres."



"So would I. It looks perfectly solid and genu-

wyne, just the way it done before it died."



So we kept a-gazing. Pretty soon Tom says:



"Huck, there's something mighty curious about this

one, don't you know? IT oughtn't to be going around

in the daytime."



"That's so, Tom -- I never heard the like of it

before."



"No, sir, they don't ever come out only at night --

and then not till after twelve. There's something

wrong about this one, now you mark my words. I

don't believe it's got any right to be around in the

daytime. But don't it look natural! Jake was going

to play deef and dumb here, so the neighbors wouldn't

know his voice. Do you reckon it would do that if we

was to holler at it?"



"Lordy, Tom, don't talk so! If you was to holler

at it I'd die in my tracks."



"Don't you worry, I ain't going to holler at it.

Look, Huck, it's a-scratching its head -- don't you see?"



"Well, what of it?"



"Why, this. What's the sense of it scratching its

head? There ain't anything there to itch; its head is

made out of fog or something like that, and can't itch.

A fog can't itch; any fool knows that."



"Well, then, if it don't itch and can't itch, what in

the nation is it scratching it for? Ain't it just habit,

don't you reckon?"



"No, sir, I don't. I ain't a bit satisfied about the

way this one acts. I've a blame good notion it's a

bogus one -- I have, as sure as I'm a-sitting here.

Because, if it -- Huck!"



"Well, what's the matter now?"



"YOU CAN'T SEE THE BUSHES THROUGH IT!"



"Why, Tom, it's so, sure! It's as solid as a cow.

I sort of begin to think --"



"Huck, it's biting off a chaw of tobacker! By

George, THEY don't chaw -- they hain't got anything to

chaw WITH. Huck!"



"I'm a-listening."



"It ain't a ghost at all. It's Jake Dunlap his own

self!"



"Oh your granny!" I says.



"Huck Finn, did we find any corpse in the syca-

mores?"



"No."



"Or any sign of one?"



"No."



"Mighty good reason. Hadn't ever been any corpse

there."



"Why, Tom, you know we heard --"



"Yes, we didJ-- heard a howl or two. Does that

prove anybody was killed? Course it don't. And we

seen four men run, then this one come walking out and

we took it for a ghost. No more ghost than you are.

It was Jake Dunlap his own self, and it's Jake Dunlap

now. He's been and got his hair cropped, the way he

said he would, and he's playing himself for a stranger,

just the same as he said he would. Ghost? Hum! --

he's as sound as a nut."



Then I see it all, and how we had took too much for

granted. I was powerful glad he didn't get killed, and

so was Tom, and we wondered which he would like the

best -- for us to never let on to know him, or how?

Tom reckoned the best way would be to go and ask

him. So he started; but I kept a little behind, because

I didn't know but it might be a ghost, after all. When

Tom got to where he was, he says:



"Me and Huck's mighty glad to see you again,

and you needn't be afeared we'll tell. And if you

think it'll be safer for you if we don't let on to know

you when we run across you, say the word and you'll

see you can depend on us, and would ruther cut our

hands off than get you into the least little bit of

danger."



First off he looked surprised to see us, and not very

glad, either; but as Tom went on he looked pleasanter,

and when he was done he smiled, and nodded his head

several times, and made signs with his hands, and says:



"Goo-goo -- goo-goo," the way deef and dummies

does.



Just then we see some of Steve Nickerson's people

coming that lived t'other side of the prairie, so Tom

says:



"You do it elegant; I never see anybody do it

better. You're right; play it on us, too; play it on

us same as the others; it'll keep you in practice and

prevent you making blunders. We'll keep away from

you and let on we don't know you, but any time we

can be any help, you just let us know."



Then we loafed along past the Nickersons, and of

course they asked if that was the new stranger yonder,

and where'd he come from, and what was his name,

and which communion was he, Babtis' or Methodis',

and which politics, Whig or Democrat, and how long

is he staying, and all them other questions that humans

always asks when a stranger comes, and animals does,

too. But Tom said he warn't able to make anything

out of deef and dumb signs, and the same with goo-

gooing. Then we watched them go and bullyrag Jake;

because we was pretty uneasy for him. Tom said it

would take him days to get so he wouldn't forget he

was a deef and dummy sometimes, and speak out be-

fore he thought. When we had watched long enough

to see that Jake was getting along all right and working

his signs very good, we loafed along again, allowing to

strike the schoolhouse about recess time, which was a

three-mile tramp.



I was so disappointed not to hear Jake tell about the

row in the sycamores, and how near he come to get-

ting killed, that I couldn't seem to get over it, and

Tom he felt the same, but said if we was in Jake's fix

we would want to go careful and keep still and not take

any chances.



The boys and girls was all glad to see us again, and

we had a real good time all through recess. Coming

to school the Henderson boys had come across the new

deef and dummy and told the rest; so all the scholars

was chuck full of him and couldn't talk about anything

else, and was in a sweat to get a sight of him because

they hadn't ever seen a deef and dummy in their lives,

and it made a powerful excitement.



Tom said it was tough to have to keep mum now;

said we would be heroes if we could come out and tell

all we knowed; but after all, it was still more heroic to

keep mum, there warn't two boys in a million could do

it. That was Tom Sawyer's idea about it, and

reckoned there warn't anybody could better it.
