




CHAPTER II.

JAKE DUNLAP



WE had powerful good luck; because we got a

chance in a stern-wheeler from away North which

was bound for one of them bayous or one-horse rivers

away down Louisiana way, and so we could go all the

way down the Upper Mississippi and all the way down

the Lower Mississippi to that farm in Arkansaw with-

out having to change steamboats at St. Louis; not so

very much short of a thousand miles at one pull.



A pretty lonesome boat; there warn't but few

passengers, and all old folks, that set around, wide

apart, dozing, and was very quiet. We was four days

getting out of the "upper river," because we got

aground so much. But it warn't dull -- couldn't be

for boys that was traveling, of course.



From the very start me and Tom allowed that there

was somebody sick in the stateroom next to ourn, be-

cause the meals was always toted in there by the wait-

ers. By and by we asked about it -- Tom did and

the waiter said it was a man, but he didn't look sick.



"Well, but AIN'T he sick?"



"I don't know; maybe he is, but 'pears to me he's

just letting on."



"What makes you think that?"



"Because if he was sick he would pull his clothes off

SOME time or other -- don't you reckon he would?

Well, this one don't. At least he don't ever pull off

his boots, anyway."



"The mischief he don't! Not even when he goes

to bed?"



"No."



It was always nuts for Tom Sawyer -- a mystery was.

If you'd lay out a mystery and a pie before me and

him, you wouldn't have to say take your choice; it

was a thing that would regulate itself. Because in my

nature I have always run to pie, whilst in his nature he

has always run to mystery. People are made different.

And it is the best way. Tom says to the waiter:



"What's the man's name?"



"Phillips."



"Where'd he come aboard?"



"I think he got aboard at Elexandria, up on the

Iowa line."



"What do you reckon he's a-playing?"



"I hain't any notion -- I never thought of it."



I says to myself, here's another one that runs to pie.



"Anything peculiar about him? -- the way he acts or

talks?"



"No -- nothing, except he seems so scary, and

keeps his doors locked night and day both, and when

you knock he won't let you in till he opens the door a

crack and sees who it is."



"By jimminy, it's int'resting! I'd like to get a

look at him. Say -- the next time you're going in

there, don't you reckon you could spread the door

and --"



"No, indeedy! He's always behind it. He would

block that game."



Tom studied over it, and then he says:



"Looky here. You lend me your apern and let me

take him his breakfast in the morning. I'll give you a

quarter."



The boy was plenty willing enough, if the head

steward wouldn't mind. Tom says that's all right, he

reckoned he could fix it with the head steward; and he

done it. He fixed it so as we could both go in with

aperns on and toting vittles.



He didn't sleep much, he was in such a sweat to get

in there and find out the mystery about Phillips; and

moreover he done a lot of guessing about it all night,

which warn't no use, for if you are going to find out

the facts of a thing, what's the sense in guessing out

what ain't the facts and wasting ammunition? I

didn't lose no sleep. I wouldn't give a dern to know

what's the matter of Phillips, I says to myself.



Well, in the morning we put on the aperns and got a

couple of trays of truck, and Tom he knocked on the

door. The man opened it a crack, and then he let us in

and shut it quick. By Jackson, when we got a sight of

him, we 'most dropped the trays! and Tom says:



"Why, Jubiter Dunlap, where'd YOU come from?"



Well, the man was astonished, of course; and first

off he looked like he didn't know whether to be scared,

or glad, or both, or which, but finally he settled down

to being glad; and then his color come back, though at

first his face had turned pretty white. So we got to

talking together while he et his breakfast. And he

says:



"But I aint Jubiter Dunlap. I'd just as soon tell

you who I am, though, if you'll swear to keep mum,

for I ain't no Phillips, either."



Tom says:



"We'll keep mum, but there ain't any need to tell

who you are if you ain't Jubiter Dunlap."



"Why?"



"Because if you ain't him you're t'other twin, Jake.

You're the spit'n image of Jubiter."



"Well, I'm Jake. But looky here, how do you

come to know us Dunlaps?"



Tom told about the adventures we'd had down there

at his uncle Silas's last summer, and when he see that

there warn't anything about his folks -- or him either,

for that matter -- that we didn't know, he opened out

and talked perfectly free and candid. He never made

any bones about his own case; said he'd been a hard

lot, was a hard lot yet, and reckoned he'd be a hard lot

plumb to the end. He said of course it was a danger-

ous life, and --



He give a kind of gasp, and set his head like a person

that's listening. We didn't say anything, and so it

was very still for a second or so, and there warn't no

sounds but the screaking of the woodwork and the chug-

chugging of the machinery down below.



Then we got him comfortable again, telling him about

his people, and how Brace's wife had been dead three

years, and Brace wanted to marry Benny and she shook

him, and Jubiter was working for Uncle Silas, and him

and Uncle Silas quarreling all the time -- and then he

let go and laughed.



"Land!" he says, "it's like old times to hear all

this tittle-tattle, and does me good. It's been seven

years and more since I heard any. How do they talk

about me these days?"



"Who?"



"The farmers -- and the family."



"Why, they don't talk about you at all -- at least

only just a mention, once in a long time."



"The nation!" he says, surprised; "why is that?"



"Because they think you are dead long ago."



"No! Are you speaking true? -- honor bright,

now." He jumped up, excited.



"Honor bright. There ain't anybody thinks you are

alive."



"Then I'm saved, I'm saved, sure! I'll go home.

They'll hide me and save my life. You keep mum.

Swear you'll keep mum -- swear you'll never, never tell

on me. Oh, boys, be good to a poor devil that's being

hunted day and night, and dasn't show his face! I've

never done you any harm; I'll never do you any, as

God is in the heavens; swear you'll be good to me

and help me save my life."



We'd a swore it if he'd been a dog; and so we done

it. Well, he couldn't love us enough for it or be grate-

ful enough, poor cuss; it was all he could do to keep

from hugging us.



We talked along, and he got out a little hand-bag

and begun to open it, and told us to turn our backs.

We done it, and when he told us to turn again he was

perfectly different to what he was before. He had on

blue goggles and the naturalest-looking long brown

whiskers and mustashes you ever see. His own

mother wouldn't 'a' knowed him. He asked us if he

looked like his brother Jubiter, now.



"No," Tom said; "there ain't anything left that's

like him except the long hair."



"All right, I'll get that cropped close to my head be-

fore I get there; then him and Brace will keep my

secret, and I'll live with them as being a stranger, and

the neighbors won't ever guess me out. What do you

think?"



Tom he studied awhile, then he says:



"Well, of course me and Huck are going to keep

mum there, but if you don't keep mum yourself there's

going to be a little bit of a risk -- it ain't much, maybe,

but it's a little. I mean, if you talk, won't people

notice that your voice is just like Jubiter's; and

mightn't it make them think of the twin they reckoned

was dead, but maybe after all was hid all this time

under another name?"



"By George," he says, "you're a sharp one!

You're perfectly right. I've got to play deef and

dumb when there's a neighbor around. If I'd a struck

for home and forgot that little detail -- However, I

wasn't striking for home. I was breaking for any

place where I could get away from these fellows that

are after me; then I was going to put on this disguise

and get some different clothes, and --"



He jumped for the outside door and laid his ear

against it and listened, pale and kind of panting.

Presently he whispers:



"Sounded like cocking a gun! Lord, what a life to

lead!"



Then he sunk down in a chair all limp and sick like,

and wiped the sweat off of his face.

