




CHAPTER III.

A DIAMOND ROBBERY



FROM that time out, we was with him 'most all the

time, and one or t'other of us slept in his upper

berth. He said he had been so lonesome, and it was

such a comfort to him to have company, and somebody

to talk to in his troubles. We was in a sweat to find

out what his secret was, but Tom said the best way was

not to seem anxious, then likely he would drop into it

himself in one of his talks, but if we got to asking

questions he would get suspicious and shet up his shell.

It turned out just so. It warn't no trouble to see that

he WANTED to talk about it, but always along at first he

would scare away from it when he got on the very edge

of it, and go to talking about something else. The

way it come about was this: He got to asking us,

kind of indifferent like, about the passengers down on

deck. We told him about them. But he warn't satis-

fied; we warn't particular enough. He told us to de-

scribe them better. Tom done it. At last, when Tom

was describing one of the roughest and raggedest ones,

he gave a shiver and a gasp and says:



"Oh, lordy, that's one of them! They're aboard

sure -- I just knowed it. I sort of hoped I had got

away, but I never believed it. Go on."



Presently when Tom was describing another mangy,

rough deck passenger, he give that shiver again and

says:



"That's him! -- that's the other one. If it would

only come a good black stormy night and I could get

ashore. You see, they've got spies on me. They've

got a right to come up and buy drinks at the bar

yonder forrard, and they take that chance to bribe

somebody to keep watch on me -- porter or boots or

somebody. If I was to slip ashore without anybody

seeing me, they would know it inside of an hour."



So then he got to wandering along, and pretty soon,

sure enough, he was telling! He was poking along

through his ups and downs, and when he come to that

place he went right along. He says:



"It was a confidence game. We played it on a julery-

shop in St. Louis. What we was after was a couple of

noble big di'monds as big as hazel-nuts, which every-

body was running to see. We was dressed up fine, and

we played it on them in broad daylight. We ordered

the di'monds sent to the hotel for us to see if we

wanted to buy, and when we was examining them we

had paste counterfeits all ready, and THEM was the things

that went back to the shop when we said the water

wasn't quite fine enough for twelve thousand dollars."



"TwelveQthousandQdollars!" Tom says. "Was

they really worth all that money, do you reckon?"



"Every cent of it."



"And you fellows got away with them?"



"As easy as nothing. I don't reckon the julery

people know they've been robbed yet. But it wouldn't

be good sense to stay around St. Louis, of course, so

we considered where we'd go. One was for going one

way, one another, so we throwed up, heads or tails,

and the Upper Mississippi won. We done up the

di'monds in a paper and put our names on it and put

it in the keep of the hotel clerk, and told him not to

ever let either of us have it again without the others was

on hand to see it done; then we went down town, each

by his own self -- because I reckon maybe we all had

the same notion. I don't know for certain, but I

reckon maybe we had."



"What notion?" Tom says.



"To rob the others."



"What -- one take everything, after all of you had

helped to get it?"



"Cert'nly."



It disgusted Tom Sawyer, and he said it was the

orneriest, low-downest thing he ever heard of. But

Jake Dunlap said it warn't unusual in the profession.

Said when a person was in that line of business he'd

got to look out for his own intrust, there warn't no-

body else going to do it for him. And then he went

on. He says:



"You see, the trouble was, you couldn't divide up

two di'monds amongst three. If there'd been three --

But never mind about that, there warn't three. I

loafed along the back streets studying and studying.

And I says to myself, I'll hog them di'monds the first

chance I get, and I'll have a disguise all ready, and I'll

give the boys the slip, and when I'm safe away I'll put

it on, and then let them find me if they can. So I got

the false whiskers and the goggles and this countrified

suit of clothes, and fetched them along back in a hand-

bag; and when I was passing a shop where they sell all

sorts of things, I got a glimpse of one of my pals

through the window. It was Bud Dixon. I was glad,

you bet. I says to myself, I'll see what he buys. So

I kept shady, and watched. Now what do you reckon

it was he bought?"



"Whiskers?" said I.



"No."



"Goggles?"



"No."



"Oh, keep still, Huck Finn, can't you, you're only

just hendering all you can. What WAS it he bought,

Jake?"



"You'd never guess in the world. It was only just

a screwdriver -- just a wee little bit of a screwdriver."



"Well, I declare! What did he want with that?"



"That's what I thought. It was curious. It clean

stumped me. I says to myself, what can he want with

that thing? Well, when he come out I stood back out

of sight, and then tracked him to a second-hand slop-

shop and see him buy a red flannel shirt and some old

ragged clothes -- just the ones he's got on now, as

you've described. Then I went down to the wharf and

hid my things aboard the up-river boat that we had

picked out, and then started back and had another

streak of luck. I seen our other pal lay in HIS stock

of old rusty second-handers. We got the di'monds

and went aboard the boat.



"But now we was up a stump, for we couldn't go

to bed. We had to set up and watch one another.

Pity, that was; pity to put that kind of a strain on us,

because there was bad blood between us from a

couple of weeks back, and we was only friends in the

way of business. Bad anyway, seeing there was only

two di'monds betwixt three men. First we had supper,

and then tramped up and down the deck together

smoking till most midnight; then we went and set

down in my stateroom and locked the doors and looked

in the piece of paper to see if the di'monds was all

right, then laid it on the lower berth right in full sight;

and there we set, and set, and by-and-by it got to be

dreadful hard to keep awake. At last Bud Dixon he

dropped off. As soon as he was snoring a good regular

gait that was likely to last, and had his chin on his

breast and looked permanent, Hal Clayton nodded

towards the di'monds and then towards the outside

door, and I understood. I reached and got the paper,

and then we stood up and waited perfectly still; Bud

never stirred; I turned the key of the outside door

very soft and slow, then turned the knob the same

way, and we went tiptoeing out onto the guard, and

shut the door very soft and gentle.



"There warn't nobody stirring anywhere, and the

boat was slipping along, swift and steady, through the

big water in the smoky moonlight. We never said a

word, but went straight up onto the hurricane-deck and

plumb back aft, and set down on the end of the sky-

light. Both of us knowed what that meant, without

having to explain to one another. Bud Dixon would

wake up and miss the swag, and would come straight

for us, for he ain't afeard of anything or anybody, that

man ain't. He would come, and we would heave him

overboard, or get killed trying. It made me shiver,

because I ain't as brave as some people, but if I

showed the white feather -- well, I knowed better than

do that. I kind of hoped the boat would land somers,

and we could skip ashore and not have to run the risk

of this row, I was so scared of Bud Dixon, but she

was an upper-river tub and there warn't no real chance

of that.



"Well, the time strung along and along, and that

fellow never come! Why, it strung along till dawn

begun to break, and still he never come. 'Thunder,' I

says, 'what do you make out of this? -- ain't it sus-

picious?' 'Land!' Hal says, 'do you reckon he's

playing us? -- open the paper!' I done it, and by

gracious there warn't anything in it but a couple of

little pieces of loaf-sugar! THAT'S the reason he could

set there and snooze all night so comfortable. Smart?

Well, I reckon! He had had them two papers all fixed

and ready, and he had put one of them in place of

t'other right under our noses.



"We felt pretty cheap. But the thing to do, straight

off, was to make a plan; and we done it. We would

do up the paper again, just as it was, and slip in, very

elaborate and soft, and lay it on the bunk again, and

let on WE didn't know about any trick, and hadn't any

idea he was a-laughing at us behind them bogus snores

of his'n; and we would stick by him, and the first

night we was ashore we would get him drunk and

search him, and get the di'monds; and DO for him,

too, if it warn't too risky. If we got the swag, we'd

GOT to do for him, or he would hunt us down and do for

us, sure. But I didn't have no real hope. I knowed

we could get him drunk -- he was always ready for

that -- but what's the good of it? You might search

him a year and never find --



"Well, right there I catched my breath and broke

off my thought! For an idea went ripping through my

head that tore my brains to rags -- and land, but I felt

gay and good! You see, I had had my boots off, to

unswell my feet, and just then I took up one of them

to put it on, and I catched a glimpse of the heel-

bottom, and it just took my breath away. You re-

member about that puzzlesome little screwdriver?"



"You bet I do," says Tom, all excited.



"Well, when I catched that glimpse of that boot

heel, the idea that went smashing through my head

was, I know where he's hid the di'monds! You look

at this boot heel, now. See, it's bottomed with a steel

plate, and the plate is fastened on with little screws.

Now there wasn't a screw about that feller anywhere

but in his boot heels; so, if he needed a screwdriver,

I reckoned I knowed why."



"Huck, ain't it bully!" says Tom.



"Well, I got my boots on, and we went down and

slipped in and laid the paper of sugar on the berth,

and sat down soft and sheepish and went to listening to

Bud Dixon snore. Hal Clayton dropped off pretty

soon, but I didn't; I wasn't ever so wide awake in my

life. I was spying out from under the shade of my

hat brim, searching the floor for leather. It took me a

long time, and I begun to think maybe my guess was

wrong, but at last I struck it. It laid over by the

bulkhead, and was nearly the color of the carpet. It

was a little round plug about as thick as the end of your

little finger, and I says to myself there's a di'mond in

the nest you've come from. Before long I spied out

the plug's mate .



"Think of the smartness and coolness of that

blatherskite! He put up that scheme on us and

reasoned out what we would do, and we went ahead

and done it perfectly exact, like a couple of pudd'n-

heads. He set there and took his own time to un-

screw his heelplates and cut out his plugs and stick in

the di'monds and screw on his plates again . He

allowed we would steal the bogus swag and wait all

night for him to come up and get drownded, and by

George it's just what we done! I think it was power-

ful smart."



"You bet your life it was!" says Tom, just full of

admiration.
