




CHAPTER V.

A TRAGEDY IN THE: WOODS



WE didn't get done tinkering the machinery till away

late in the afternoon, and so it was so close to

sundown when we got home that we never stopped on

our road, but made a break for the sycamores as tight

as we could go, to tell Jake what the delay was, and

have him wait till we could go to Brace's and find out

how things was there. It was getting pretty dim by the

time we turned the corner of the woods, sweating and

panting with that long run, and see the sycamores thirty

yards ahead of us; and just then we see a couple of

men run into the bunch and heard two or three terrible

screams for help. "Poor Jake is killed, sure," we

says. We was scared through and through, and broke

for the tobacker field and hid there, trembling so our

clothes would hardly stay on; and just as we skipped

in there, a couple of men went tearing by, and into the

bunch they went, and in a second out jumps four men

and took out up the road as tight as they could go,

two chasing two.



We laid down, kind of weak and sick, and listened

for more sounds, but didn't hear none for a good while

but just our hearts. We was thinking of that awful

thing laying yonder in the sycamores, and it seemed

like being that close to a ghost, and it give me the cold

shudders. The moon come a-swelling up out of the

ground, now, powerful big and round and bright, be-

hind a comb of trees, like a face looking through prison

bars, and the black shadders and white places begun to

creep around, and it was miserable quiet and still and

night-breezy and graveyardy and scary. All of a sud-

den Tom whispers:



"Look! -- what's that?"



"Don't!" I says. "Don't take a person by sur-

prise that way. I'm 'most ready to die, anyway, with-

out you doing that."



"Look, I tell you. It's something coming out of

the sycamores."



"Don't, Tom!"



"It's terrible tall!"



"Oh, lordy-lordy! let's --"



"Keep still -- it's a-coming this way."



He was so excited he could hardly get breath enough

to whisper. I had to look. I couldn't help it. So

now we was both on our knees with our chins on a

fence rail and gazing -- yes, and gasping too. It was

coming down the road -- coming in the shadder of the

trees, and you couldn't see it good; not till it was

pretty close to us; then it stepped into a bright splotch

of moonlight and we sunk right down in our tracks --

it was Jake Dunlap's ghost! That was what we said

to ourselves.



We couldn't stir for a minute or two; then it was

gone We talked about it in low voices. Tom

says:



"They're mostly dim and smoky, or like they're

made out of fog, but this one wasn't."



"No," I says; "I seen the goggles and the whiskers

perfectly plain."



"Yes, and the very colors in them loud countrified

Sunday clothes -- plaid breeches, green and black --"



"Cotton velvet westcot, fire-red and yaller squares --"



"Leather straps to the bottoms of the breeches legs

and one of them hanging unbottoned --"



"Yes, and that hat --"



"What a hat for a ghost to wear!"



You see it was the first season anybody wore that

kind -- a black sitff-brim stove-pipe, very high, and

not smooth, with a round top -- just like a sugar-loaf.



"Did you notice if its hair was the same, Huck?"



"No -- seems to me I did, then again it seems to me

I didn't."



"I didn't either; but it had its bag along, I noticed

that."



"So did I. How can there be a ghost-bag, Tom?"



"Sho! I wouldn't be as ignorant as that if I was

you, Huck Finn. Whatever a ghost has, turns to ghost-

stuff. They've got to have their things, like anybody

else. You see, yourself, that its clothes was turned to

ghost-stuff. Well, then, what's to hender its bag from

turning, too? Of course it done it."



That was reasonable. I couldn't find no fault with

it. Bill Withers and his brother Jack come along by,

talking, and Jack says:



"What do you reckon he was toting?"



"I dunno; but it was pretty heavy."



"Yes, all he could lug. Nigger stealing corn from

old Parson Silas, I judged."



"So did I. And so I allowed I wouldn't let on to

see him."



"That's me, too."



Then they both laughed, and went on out of hearing.

It showed how unpopular old Uncle Silas had got to be

now. They wouldn't 'a' let a nigger steal anybody

else's corn and never done anything to him.



We heard some more voices mumbling along towards

us and getting louder, and sometimes a cackle of a

laugh. It was Lem Beebe and Jim Lane. Jim Lane

says:



"Who? -- Jubiter Dunlap?"



"Yes."



"Oh, I don't know. I reckon so. I seen him spad-

ing up some ground along about an hour ago, just be-

fore sundown -- him and the parson. Said he guessed

he wouldn't go to-night, but we could have his dog if

we wanted him."



"Too tired, I reckon."



"Yes -- works so hard!"



"Oh, you bet!"



They cackled at that, and went on by. Tom said we

better jump out and tag along after them, because they

was going our way and it wouldn't be comfortable to

run across the ghost all by ourselves. So we done it,

and got home all right.



That night was the second of September -- a Satur-

day. I sha'n't ever forget it. You'll see why, pretty

soon .
