





CHAPTER IV.

THE THREE SLEEPERS



WELL, all day we went through the humbug of

watching one another, and it was pretty sickly

business for two of us and hard to act out, I can tell

you. About night we landed at one of them little

Missouri towns high up toward Iowa, and had supper

at the tavern, and got a room upstairs with a cot and a

double bed in it, but I dumped my bag under a deal

table in the dark hall while we was moving along it to

bed, single file, me last, and the landlord in the lead

with a tallow candle. We had up a lot of whisky, and

went to playing high-low-jack for dimes, and as soon

as the whisky begun to take hold of Bud we stopped

drinking, but we didn't let him stop. We loaded him

till he fell out of his chair and laid there snoring.



"We was ready for business now. I said we better

pull our boots off, and his'n too, and not make any

noise, then we could pull him and haul him around and

ransack him without any trouble. So we done it. I

set my boots and Bud's side by side, where they'd be

handy. Then we stripped him and searched his seams

and his pockets and his socks and the inside of his

boots, and everything, and searched his bundle. Never

found any di'monds. We found the screwdriver, and

Hal says, 'What do you reckon he wanted with that?'

I said I didn't know; but when he wasn't looking I

hooked it. At last Hal he looked beat and discour-

aged, and said we'd got to give it up. That was what

I was waiting for. I says:



"'There's one place we hain't searched.'



"'What place is that?' he says.



"'His stomach.'



"'By gracious, I never thought of that! NOW we're

on the homestretch, to a dead moral certainty. How'll

we manage?'



"'Well,' I says, 'just stay by him till I turn out and

hunt up a drug store, and I reckon I'll fetch something

that'll make them di'monds tired of the company

they're keeping.'



"He said that's the ticket, and with him looking

straight at me I slid myself into Bud's boots instead of

my own, and he never noticed. They was just a shade

large for me, but that was considerable better than be-

ing too small. I got my bag as I went a-groping

through the hall, and in about a minute I was out the

back way and stretching up the river road at a five-mile

gait.



"And not feeling so very bad, neither -- walking on

di'monds don't have no such effect. When I had gone

fifteen minutes I says to myself, there's more'n a mile

behind me, and everything quiet. Another five minutes

and I says there's considerable more land behind me

now, and there's a man back there that's begun to

wonder what's the trouble. Another five and I says to

myself he's getting real uneasy -- he's walking the floor

now. Another five, and I says to myself, there's two

mile and a half behind me, and he's AWFUL uneasy -- be-

ginning to cuss, I reckon. Pretty soon I says to my-

self, forty minutes gone -- he KNOWS there's something

up! Fifty minutes -- the truth's a-busting on him

now! he is reckoning I found the di'monds whilst we

was searching, and shoved them in my pocket and never

let on -- yes, and he's starting out to hunt for me.

He'll hunt for new tracks in the dust, and they'll as

likely send him down the river as up.



"Just then I see a man coming down on a mule, and

before I thought I jumped into the bush. It was

stupid! When he got abreast he stopped and waited

a little for me to come out; then he rode on again.

But I didn't feel gay any more. I says to myself I've

botched my chances by that; I surely have, if he meets

up with Hal Clayton.



"Well, about three in the morning I fetched Elex-

andria and see this stern-wheeler laying there, and was

very glad, because I felt perfectly safe, now, you know.

It was just daybreak. I went aboard and got this state-

room and put on these clothes and went up in the pilot-

house -- to watch, though I didn't reckon there was

any need of it. I set there and played with my

di'monds and waited and waited for the boat to start,

but she didn't. You see, they was mending her

machinery, but I didn't know anything about it, not

being very much used to steamboats.



"Well, to cut the tale short, we never left there till

plumb noon; and long before that I was hid in this

stateroom; for before breakfast I see a man coming,

away off, that had a gait like Hal Clayton's, and it

made me just sick. I says to myself, if he finds out

I'm aboard this boat, he's got me like a rat in a trap.

All he's got to do is to have me watched, and wait --

wait till I slip ashore, thinking he is a thousand miles

away, then slip after me and dog me to a good place

and make me give up the di'monds, and then he'll --

oh, I know what he'll do! Ain't it awful -- awful!

And now to think the OTHER one's aboard, too! Oh,

ain't it hard luck, boys -- ain't it hard! But you'll help

save me, WON'T you? -- oh, boys, be good to a poor

devil that's being hunted to death, and save me -- I'll

worship the very ground you walk on!"



We turned in and soothed him down and told him

we would plan for him and help him, and he needn't

be so afeard; and so by and by he got to feeling kind

of comfortable again, and unscrewed his heelplates and

held up his di'monds this way and that, admiring them

and loving them; and when the light struck into them

they WAS beautiful, sure; why, they seemed to kind of

bust, and snap fire out all around. But all the same I

judged he was a fool. If I had been him I would a

handed the di'monds to them pals and got them to go

ashore and leave me alone. But he was made differ-

ent. He said it was a whole fortune and he couldn't

bear the idea.



Twice we stopped to fix the machinery and laid a

good while, once in the night; but it wasn't dark

enough, and he was afeard to skip. But the third

time we had to fix it there was a better chance. We

laid up at a country woodyard about forty mile above

Uncle Silas's place a little after one at night, and it was

thickening up and going to storm. So Jake he laid for

a chance to slide. We begun to take in wood. Pretty

soon the rain come a-drenching down, and the wind

blowed hard. Of course every boat-hand fixed a

gunny sack and put it on like a bonnet, the way they

do when they are toting wood, and we got one for

Jake, and he slipped down aft with his hand-bag and

come tramping forrard just like the rest, and walked

ashore with them, and when we see him pass out of the

light of the torch-basket and get swallowed up in the

dark, we got our breath again and just felt grateful and

splendid. But it wasn't for long. Somebody told, I

reckon; for in about eight or ten minutes them two

pals come tearing forrard as tight as they could jump

and darted ashore and was gone. We waited plumb

till dawn for them to come back, and kept hoping they

would, but they never did. We was awful sorry and

low-spirited. All the hope we had was that Jake had

got such a start that they couldn't get on his track, and

he would get to his brother's and hide there and be

safe.



He was going to take the river road, and told us to

find out if Brace and Jubiter was to home and no

strangers there, and then slip out about sundown and

tell him. Said he would wait for us in a little bunch of

sycamores right back of Tom's uncle Silas's tobacker

field on the river road, a lonesome place.



We set and talked a long time about his chances, and

Tom said he was all right if the pals struck up the

river instead of down, but it wasn't likely, because

maybe they knowed where he was from; more likely

they would go right, and dog him all day, him not

suspecting, and kill him when it come dark, and take

the boots. So we was pretty sorrowful.
