





CHAPTER VI.

PLANS TO SECURE THE DIAMONDS



WE tramped along behind Jim and Lem till we come

to the back stile where old Jim's cabin was that

he was captivated in, the time we set him free, and here

come the dogs piling around us to say howdy, and

there was the lights of the house, too; so we warn't

afeard any more, and was going to climb over, but

Tom says:



"Hold on; set down here a minute. By George!"



"What's the matter?" says I.



"Matter enough!" he says. "Wasn't you expect-

ing we would be the first to tell the family who it is

that's been killed yonder in the sycamores, and all

about them rapscallions that done it, and about the

di'monds they've smouched off of the corpse, and paint

it up fine, and have the glory of being the ones that

knows a lot more about it than anybody else?"



"Why, of course. It wouldn't be you, Tom Sawyer,

if you was to let such a chance go by. I reckon it

ain't going to suffer none for lack of paint," I says,

"when you start in to scollop the facts."



"Well, now," he says, perfectly ca'm, "what would

you say if I was to tell you I ain't going to start in at

all?"



I was astonished to hear him talk so. I says:



"I'd say it's a lie. You ain't in earnest, Tom

Sawyer?"



"You'll soon see. Was the ghost barefooted?"



"No, it wasn't. What of it?"



"You wait -- I'll show you what. Did it have its

boots on?"



"Yes. I seen them plain."



"Swear it?"



"Yes, I swear it."



"So do I. Now do you know what that means?"



"No. What does it mean?"



"Means that them thieves DIDN'T GET THE DI'MONDS."



"Jimminy! What makes you think that?"



"I don't only think it, I know it. Didn't the

breeches and goggles and whiskers and hand-bag and

every blessed thing turn to ghost-stuff? Everything it

had on turned, didn't it? It shows that the reason its

boots turned too was because it still had them on after

it started to go ha'nting around, and if that ain't proof

that them blatherskites didn't get the boots, I'd like to

know what you'd CALL proof."



Think of that now. I never see such a head as that

boy had. Why, I had eyes and I could see things, but

they never meant nothing to me. But Tom Sawyer

was different. When Tom Sawyer seen a thing it just

got up on its hind legs and TALKED to him -- told him

everything it knowed. I never see such a head.



"Tom Sawyer," I says, "I'll say it again as I've

said it a many a time before: I ain't fitten to black

your boots. But that's all right -- that's neither here

nor there. God Almighty made us all, and some He

gives eyes that's blind, and some He gives eyes that

can see, and I reckon it ain't none of our lookout what

He done it for; it's all right, or He'd 'a' fixed it some

other way. Go on -- I see plenty plain enough, now,

that them thieves didn't get way with the di'monds.

Why didn't they, do you reckon?"



"Because they got chased away by them other two

men before they could pull the boots off of the corpse."



"That's so! I see it now. But looky here, Tom,

why ain't we to go and tell about it?"



"Oh, shucks, Huck Finn, can't you see? Look at

it. What's a-going to happen? There's going to be

an inquest in the morning. Them two men will tell

how they heard the yells and rushed there just in time

to not save the stranger. Then the jury'll twaddle

and twaddle and twaddle, and finally they'll fetch in a

verdict that he got shot or stuck or busted over the

head with something, and come to his death by the in-

spiration of God. And after they've buried him they'll

auction off his things for to pay the expenses, and

then's OUR chance."

"How, Tom?"



"Buy the boots for two dollars!"



Well, it 'most took my breath.



"My land! Why, Tom, WE'LL get the di'monds!"



"You bet. Some day there'll be a big reward

offered for them -- a thousand dollars, sure. That's

our money! Now we'll trot in and see the folks.

And mind you we don't know anything about any

murder, or any di'monds, or any thieves -- don't you

forget that."



I had to sigh a little over the way he had got it fixed.

I'd 'a' SOLD them di'monds -- yes, sir -- for twelve

thousand dollars; but I didn't say anything. It

wouldn't done any good. I says:



"But what are we going to tell your aunt Sally has

made us so long getting down here from the village,

Tom?"



"Oh, I'll leave that to you," he says. "I reckon

you can explain it somehow."



He was always just that strict and delicate. He

never would tell a lie himself.



We struck across the big yard, noticing this, that,

and t'other thing that was so familiar, and we so glad

to see it again, and when we got to the roofed big

passageway betwixt the double log house and the

kitchen part, there was everything hanging on the wall

just as it used to was, even to Uncle Silas's old faded

green baize working-gown with the hood to it, and rag-

gedy white patch between the shoulders that always

looked like somebody had hit him with a snowball; and

then we lifted the latch and walked in. Aunt Sally she

was just a-ripping and a-tearing around, and the

children was huddled in one corner, and the old man

he was huddled in the other and praying for help in

time of need. She jumped for us with joy and tears

running down her face and give us a whacking box on

the ear, and then hugged us and kissed us and boxed

us again, and just couldn't seem to get enough of it,

she was so glad to see us; and she says:



"Where HAVE you been a-loafing to, you good-for-

nothing trash! I've been that worried about you I

didn't know what to do. Your traps has been here

ever so long, and I've had supper cooked fresh about

four times so as to have it hot and good when you

come, till at last my patience is just plumb wore out,

and I declare I -- I -- why I could skin you alive! You

must be starving, poor things! -- set down, set down,

everybody; don't lose no more time."



It was good to be there again behind all that noble

corn-pone and spareribs, and everything that you could

ever want in this world. Old Uncle Silas he peeled off

one of his bulliest old-time blessings, with as many

layers to it as an onion, and whilst the angels was haul-

ing in the slack of it I was trying to study up what to

say about what kept us so long. When our plates was

all loadened and we'd got a-going, she asked me, and

I says:



"Well, you see, -- er -- Mizzes --"



"Huck Finn! Since when am I Mizzes to you?

Have I ever been stingy of cuffs or kisses for you since

the day you stood in this room and I took you for Tom

Sawyer and blessed God for sending you to me, though

you told me four thousand lies and I believed every

one of them like a simpleton? Call me Aunt Sally --

like you always done."



So I done it. And I says:



"Well, me and Tom allowed we would come along

afoot and take a smell of the woods, and we run across

Lem Beebe and Jim Lane, and they asked us to go with

them blackberrying to-night, and said they could bor-

row Jubiter Dunlap's dog, because he had told them

just that minute --"



"Where did they see him?" says the old man; and

when I looked up to see how HE come to take an intrust

in a little thing like that, his eyes was just burning into

me, he was that eager. It surprised me so it kind of

throwed me off, but I pulled myself together again and

says:



"It was when he was spading up some ground along

with you, towards sundown or along there."



He only said, "Um," in a kind of a disappointed

way, and didn't take no more intrust. So I went on.

I says:



"Well, then, as I was a-saying --"



"That'll do, you needn't go no furder." It was

Aunt Sally. She was boring right into me with her

eyes, and very indignant. "Huck Finn," she says,

"how'd them men come to talk about going a-black-

berrying in September -- in THIS region?"



I see I had slipped up, and I couldn't say a word.

She waited, still a-gazing at me, then she says:



"And how'd they come to strike that idiot idea of

going a-blackberrying in the night?"



"Well, m'm, they -- er -- they told us they had a

lantern, and --"



"Oh, SHET up -- do! Looky here; what was they

going to do with a dog? -- hunt blackberries with it?"



"I think, m'm, they --"



"Now, Tom Sawyer, what kind of a lie are you fix-

ing YOUR mouth to contribit to this mess of rubbage?

Speak out -- and I warn you before you begin, that

I don't believe a word of it. You and Huck's been up

to something you no business to -- I know it perfectly

well; I know you, BOTH of you. Now you explain that

dog, and them blackberries, and the lantern, and the

rest of that rot -- and mind you talk as straight as a

string -- do you hear?"



Tom he looked considerable hurt, and says, very

dignified:



"It is a pity if Huck is to be talked to that way, just

for making a little bit of a mistake that anybody could

make."



"What mistake has he made?"



"Why, only the mistake of saying blackberries when

of course he meant strawberries."



"Tom Sawyer, I lay if you aggravate me a little

more, I'll --"



"Aunt Sally, without knowing it -- and of course

without intending it -- you are in the wrong. If you'd

'a' studied natural history the way you ought, you

would know that all over the world except just here in

Arkansaw they ALWAYS hunt strawberries with a dog --

and a lantern --"



But she busted in on him there and just piled into

him and snowed him under. She was so mad she

couldn't get the words out fast enough, and she gushed

them out in one everlasting freshet. That was what

Tom Sawyer was after. He allowed to work her up

and get her started and then leave her alone and let her

burn herself out. Then she would be so aggravated

with that subject that she wouldn't say another word

about it, nor let anybody else. Well, it happened just

so. When she was tuckered out and had to hold up,

he says, quite ca'm:



"And yet, all the same, Aunt Sally --"



"Shet up!" she says, "I don't want to hear

another word out of you."



So we was perfectly safe, then, and didn't have no

more trouble about that delay. Tom done it elegant.
