





CHAPTER IX.

FINDING OF JUBITER DUNLAP



IN the next two or three days Dummy he got to be

powerful popular. He went associating around with

the neighbors, and they made much of him, and was

proud to have such a rattling curiosity among them.

They had him to breakfast, they had him to dinner,

they had him to supper; they kept him loaded up

with hog and hominy, and warn't ever tired staring at

him and wondering over him, and wishing they knowed

more about him, he was so uncommon and romantic.

His signs warn't no good; people couldn't under-

stand them and he prob'ly couldn't himself, but he

done a sight of goo-gooing, and so everybody was sat-

isfied, and admired to hear him go it. He toted a

piece of slate around, and a pencil; and people wrote

questions on it and he wrote answers; but there warn't

anybody could read his writing but Brace Dunlap.

Brace said he couldn't read it very good, but he could

manage to dig out the meaning most of the time. He

said Dummy said he belonged away off somers and

used to be well off, but got busted by swindlers which

he had trusted, and was poor now, and hadn't any way

to make a living.



Everybody praised Brace Dunlap for being so good

to that stranger. He let him have a little log-cabin all

to himself, and had his niggers take care of it, and fetch

him all the vittles he wanted.



Dummy was at our house some, because old Uncle

Silas was so afflicted himself, these days, that anybody

else that was afflicted was a comfort to him. Me and

Tom didn't let on that we had knowed him before, and

he didn't let on that he had knowed us before. The

family talked their troubles out before him the same as

if he wasn't there, but we reckoned it wasn't any harm

for him to hear what they said. Generly he didn't

seem to notice, but sometimes he did.



Well, two or three days went along, and everybody

got to getting uneasy about Jubiter Dunlap. Every-

body was asking everybody if they had any idea what

had become of him. No, they hadn't, they said: and

they shook their heads and said there was something

powerful strange about it. Another and another day

went by; then there was a report got around that praps

he was murdered. You bet it made a big stir! Every-

body's tongue was clacking away after that. Saturday

two or three gangs turned out and hunted the woods to

see if they could run across his remainders. Me and

Tom helped, and it was noble good times and exciting.

Tom he was so brimful of it he couldn't eat nor rest.

He said if we could find that corpse we would be

celebrated, and more talked about than if we got

drownded.



The others got tired and give it up; but not Tom

Sawyer -- that warn't his style. Saturday night he

didn't sleep any, hardly, trying to think up a plan;

and towards daylight in the morning he struck it. He

snaked me out of bed and was all excited, and says:



"Quick, Huck, snatch on your clothes -- I've got

it! Bloodhound!"



In two minutes we was tearing up the river road in

the dark towards the village. Old Jeff Hooker had a

bloodhound, and Tom was going to borrow him. I

says:



"The trail's too old, Tom -- and besides, it's rained,

you know."



"It don't make any difference, Huck. If the body's

hid in the woods anywhere around the hound will find

it. If he's been murdered and buried, they wouldn't

bury him deep, it ain't likely, and if the dog goes over

the spot he'll scent him, sure. Huck, we're going to

be celebrated, sure as you're born!"



He was just a-blazing; and whenever he got afire he

was most likely to get afire all over. That was the way

this time. In two minutes he had got it all ciphered

out, and wasn't only just going to find the corpse --

no, he was going to get on the track of that murderer

and hunt HIM down, too; and not only that, but he

was going to stick to him till --



"Well," I says, "you better find the corpse first; I

reckon that's a-plenty for to-day. For all we know,

there AIN'T any corpse and nobody hain't been mur-

dered. That cuss could 'a' gone off somers and not

been killed at all."



That graveled him, and he says:



"Huck Finn, I never see such a person as you to

want to spoil everything. As long as YOU can't see

anything hopeful in a thing, you won't let anybody

else. What good can it do you to throw cold water on

that corpse and get up that selfish theory that there

ain't been any murder? None in the world. I don't

see how you can act so. I wouldn't treat you like

that, and you know it. Here we've got a noble good

opportunity to make a ruputation, and --"



"Oh, go ahead," I says. "I'm sorry, and I take it

all back. I didn't mean nothing. Fix it any way

you want it. HE ain't any consequence to me. If

he's killed, I'm as glad of it as you are; and if he --"



"I never said anything about being glad; I only --"



"Well, then, I'm as SORRY as you are. Any way

you druther have it, that is the way I druther have it.

He --"



"There ain't any druthers ABOUT it, Huck Finn; no-

body said anything about druthers. And as for --"



He forgot he was talking, and went tramping along,

studying. He begun to get excited again, and pretty

soon he says:



"Huck, it'll be the bulliest thing that ever happened

if we find the body after everybody else has quit look-

ing, and then go ahead and hunt up the murderer. It

won't only be an honor to us, but it'll be an honor to

Uncle Silas because it was us that done it. It'll set

him up again, you see if it don't."



But Old Jeff Hooker he throwed cold water on the

whole business when we got to his blacksmith shop and

told him what we come for.



"You can take the dog," he says, "but you ain't

a-going to find any corpse, because there ain't any

corpse to find. Everybody's quit looking, and they're

right. Soon as they come to think, they knowed there

warn't no corpse. And I'll tell you for why. What

does a person kill another person for, Tom Sawyer? --

answer me that."



"Why, he -- er --"



"Answer up! You ain't no fool. What does he kill

him FOR?"



"Well, sometimes it's for revenge, and --"



"Wait. One thing at a time. Revenge, says you;

and right you are. Now who ever had anything agin

that poor trifling no-account? Who do you reckon

would want to kill HIM? -- that rabbit!"



Tom was stuck. I reckon he hadn't thought of a

person having to have a REASON for killing a person be-

fore, and now he sees it warn't likely anybody would

have that much of a grudge against a lamb like Jubiter

Dunlap. The blacksmith says, by and by:



"The revenge idea won't work, you see. Well,

then, what's next? Robbery? B'gosh, that must 'a'

been it, Tom! Yes, sirree, I reckon we've struck it

this time. Some feller wanted his gallus-buckles, and

so he --"



But it was so funny he busted out laughing, and just

went on laughing and laughing and laughing till he was

'most dead, and Tom looked so put out and cheap that

I knowed he was ashamed he had come, and he wished

he hadn't. But old Hooker never let up on him. He

raked up everything a person ever could want to kill

another person about, and any fool could see they

didn't any of them fit this case, and he just made no

end of fun of the whole business and of the people

that had been hunting the body; and he said:



"If they'd had any sense they'd 'a' knowed the lazy

cuss slid out because he wanted a loafing spell after all

this work. He'll come pottering back in a couple of

weeks, and then how'll you fellers feel? But, laws

bless you, take the dog, and go and hunt his re-

mainders. Do, Tom."



Then he busted out, and had another of them forty-

rod laughs of hisn. Tom couldn't back down after all

this, so he said, "All right, unchain him;" and the

blacksmith done it, and we started home and left that

old man laughing yet.



It was a lovely dog. There ain't any dog that's got

a lovelier disposition than a bloodhound, and this one

knowed us and liked us. He capered and raced

around ever so friendly, and powerful glad to be free

and have a holiday; but Tom was so cut up he couldn't

take any intrust in him, and said he wished he'd stopped

and thought a minute before he ever started on such a

fool errand. He said old Jeff Hooker would tell every-

body, and we'd never hear the last of it.



So we loafed along home down the back lanes, feel-

ing pretty glum and not talking. When we was pass-

ing the far corner of our tobacker field we heard the

dog set up a long howl in there, and we went to the

place and he was scratching the ground with all his

might, and every now and then canting up his head

sideways and fetching another howl.



It was a long square, the shape of a grave; the rain

had made it sink down and show the shape. The

minute we come and stood there we looked at one

another and never said a word. When the dog had

dug down only a few inches he grabbed something and

pulled it up, and it was an arm and a sleeve. Tom

kind of gasped out, and says:



"Come away, Huck -- it's found."



I just felt awful. We struck for the road and

fetched the first men that come along. They got a

spade at the crib and dug out the body, and you never

see such an excitement. You couldn't make anything

out of the face, but you didn't need to. Everybody

said:



"Poor Jubiter; it's his clothes, to the last rag!"



Some rushed off to spread the news and tell the

justice of the peace and have an inquest, and me and

Tom lit out for the house. Tom was all afire and 'most

out of breath when we come tearing in where Uncle

Silas and Aunt Sally and Benny was. Tom sung

out:



"Me and Huck's found Jubiter Dunlap's corpse all

by ourselves with a bloodhound, after everybody else

had quit hunting and given it up; and if it hadn't a

been for us it never WOULD 'a' been found; and he WAS

murdered too -- they done it with a club or something

like that; and I'm going to start in and find the mur-

derer, next, and I bet I'll do it!"



Aunt Sally and Benny sprung up pale and astonished,

but Uncle Silas fell right forward out of his chair on to

the floor and groans out:



"Oh, my God, you've found him NOW!"

