







THE BIBLE IN SPAIN 


	by GEORGE BORROW









AUTHOR'S PREFACE




It is very seldom that the preface of a work is read;

indeed, of late years, most books have been sent into the world

without any.  I deem it, however, advisable to write a preface,

and to this I humbly call the attention of the courteous

reader, as its perusal will not a little tend to the proper

understanding and appreciation of these volumes.



The work now offered to the public, and which is styled

THE BIBLE IN SPAIN, consists of a narrative of what occurred to

me during a residence in that country, to which I was sent by

the Bible Society, as its agent for the purpose of printing and

circulating the Scriptures.  It comprehends, however, certain

journeys and adventures in Portugal, and leaves me at last in

"the land of the Corahai," to which region, after having

undergone considerable buffeting in Spain, I found it expedient

to retire for a season.



It is very probable that had I visited Spain from mere

curiosity, or with a view of passing a year or two agreeably, I

should never have attempted to give any detailed account of my

proceedings, or of what I heard and saw.  I am no tourist, no

writer of books of travels; but I went there on a somewhat

remarkable errand, which necessarily led me into strange

situations and positions, involved me in difficulties and

perplexities, and brought me into contact with people of all

descriptions and grades; so that, upon the whole, I flatter

myself that a narrative of such a pilgrimage may not be wholly

uninteresting to the public, more especially as the subject is

not trite; for though various books have been published about

Spain, I believe that the present is the only one in existence

which treats of missionary labour in that country.



Many things, it is true, will be found in the following

volume which have little connexion with religion or religious

enterprise; I offer, however, no apology for introducing them.

I was, as I may say, from first to last adrift in Spain, the

land of old renown, the land of wonder and mystery, with better

opportunities of becoming acquainted with its strange secrets

and peculiarities than perhaps ever yet were afforded to any

individual, certainly to a foreigner; and if in many instances

I have introduced scenes and characters perhaps unprecedented

in a work of this description, I have only to observe, that,

during my sojourn in Spain, I was so unavoidably mixed up with

such, that I could scarcely have given a faithful narrative of

what befell me had I not brought them forward in the manner

which I have done.



It is worthy of remark that, called suddenly and

unexpectedly "to undertake the adventure of Spain," I was not

altogether unprepared for such an enterprise.  In the daydreams

of my boyhood, Spain always bore a considerable share, and I

took a particular interest in her, without any presentiment

that I should at a future time be called upon to take a part,

however humble, in her strange dramas; which interest, at a

very early period, led me to acquire her noble language, and to

make myself acquainted with her literature (scarcely worthy of

the language), her history and traditions; so that when I

entered Spain for the first time I felt more at home than I

should otherwise have done.



In Spain I passed five years, which, if not the most

eventful, were, I have no hesitation in saying, the most happy

years of my existence.  Of Spain, at the present time, now that

the daydream has vanished, never, alas! to return, I entertain

the warmest admiration: she is the most magnificent country in

the world, probably the most fertile, and certainly with the

finest climate.  Whether her children are worthy of their

mother, is another question, which I shall not attempt to

answer; but content myself with observing, that, amongst much

that is lamentable and reprehensible, I have found much that is

noble and to be admired; much stern heroic virtue; much savage

and horrible crime; of low vulgar vice very little, at least

amongst the great body of the Spanish nation, with which my

mission lay; for it will be as well here to observe, that I

advance no claim to an intimate acquaintance with the Spanish

nobility, from whom I kept as remote as circumstances would

permit me; EN REVANCHE, however, I have had the honour to live

on familiar terms with the peasants, shepherds, and muleteers

of Spain, whose bread and bacalao I have eaten; who always

treated me with kindness and courtesy, and to whom I have not

unfrequently been indebted for shelter and protection.





"The generous bearing of Francisco Gonzales, and the high

deeds of Ruy Diaz the Cid, are still sung amongst the

fastnesses of the Sierra Morena." (1)



(1) "Om Frands Gonzales, og Rodrik Cid.

End siunges i Sierra Murene!"

KRONIKE RIIM.  By Severin Grundtvig.  Copenhagen, 1829.





I believe that no stronger argument can be brought

forward in proof of the natural vigour and resources of Spain,

and the sterling character of her population, than the fact

that, at the present day, she is still a powerful and


unexhausted country, and her children still, to a certain

extent, a high-minded and great people.  Yes, notwithstanding

the misrule of the brutal and sensual Austrian, the doting

Bourbon, and, above all, the spiritual tyranny of the court of

Rome, Spain can still maintain her own, fight her own combat,

and Spaniards are not yet fanatic slaves and crouching beggars.

This is saying much, very much: she has undergone far more than

Naples had ever to bear, and yet the fate of Naples has not

been hers.  There is still valour in Astruria; generosity in

Aragon; probity in Old Castile; and the peasant women of La

Mancha can still afford to place a silver fork and a snowy

napkin beside the plate of their guest.  Yes, in spite of

Austrian, Bourbon, and Rome, there is still a wide gulf between

Spain and Naples.



Strange as it may sound, Spain is not a fanatic country.

I know something about her, and declare that she is not, nor

has ever been; Spain never changes.  It is true that, for

nearly two centuries, she was the she-butcher, LA VERDUGA, of

malignant Rome; the chosen instrument for carrying into effect

the atrocious projects of that power; yet fanaticism was not

the spring which impelled her to the work of butchery; another

feeling, in her the predominant one, was worked upon - her

fatal pride.  It was by humouring her pride that she was

induced to waste her precious blood and treasure in the Low

Country wars, to launch the Armada, and to many other equally

insane actions.  Love of Rome had ever slight influence over

her policy; but flattered by the title of Gonfaloniera of the

Vicar of Jesus, and eager to prove herself not unworthy of the

same, she shut her eyes and rushed upon her own destruction

with the cry of "Charge, Spain."



But the arms of Spain became powerless abroad, and she

retired within herself.  She ceased to be the tool of the

vengeance and cruelty of Rome.  She was not cast aside,

however.  No! though she could no longer wield the sword with

success against the Lutherans, she might still be turned to

some account.  She had still gold and silver, and she was still

the land of the vine and olive.  Ceasing to be the butcher, she

became the banker of Rome; and the poor Spaniards, who always

esteem it a privilege to pay another person's reckoning, were

for a long time happy in being permitted to minister to the

grasping cupidity of Rome, who during the last century,

probably extracted from Spain more treasure than from all the

rest of Christendom.



But wars came into the land.  Napoleon and his fierce

Franks invaded Spain; plunder and devastation ensued, the

effects of which will probably be felt for ages.  Spain could

no longer pay pence to Peter so freely as of yore, and from

that period she became contemptible in the eyes of Rome, who

has no respect for a nation, save so far as it can minister to

her cruelty or avarice.  The Spaniard was still willing to pay,

as far as his means would allow, but he was soon given to

understand that he was a degraded being, - a barbarian; nay, a

beggar.  Now, you may draw the last cuarto from a Spaniard,

provided you will concede to him the title of cavalier, and

rich man, for the old leaven still works as powerfully as in

the time of the first Philip; but you must never hint that he

is poor, or that his blood is inferior to your own.  And the

old peasant, on being informed in what slight estimation he was

held, replied, "If I am a beast, a barbarian, and a beggar

withal, I am sorry for it; but as there is no remedy, I shall

spend these four bushels of barley, which I had reserved to

alleviate the misery of the holy father, in procuring bull

spectacles, and other convenient diversions, for the queen my

wife, and the young princes my children.  Beggar! carajo!  The

water of my village is better than the wine of Rome."



I see that in a late pastoral letter directed to the

Spaniards, the father of Rome complains bitterly of the

treatment which he has received in Spain at the hands of

naughty men.  "My cathedrals are let down," he says, "my

priests are insulted, and the revenues of my bishops are

curtailed."  He consoles himself, however, with the idea that

this is the effect of the malice of a few, and that the

generality of the nation love him, especially the peasantry,

the innocent peasantry, who shed tears when they think of the

sufferings of their pope and their religion.  Undeceive

yourself, Batuschca, undeceive yourself!  Spain was ready to

fight for you so long as she could increase her own glory by

doing so; but she took no pleasure in losing battle after

battle on your account.  She had no objection to pay money into

your coffers in the shape of alms, expecting, however, that the

same would be received with the gratitude and humility which

becomes those who accept charity.  Finding, however, that you

were neither humble nor grateful; suspecting, moreover, that

you held Austria in higher esteem than herself, even as a

banker, she shrugged up her shoulders, and uttered a sentence

somewhat similar to that which I have already put into the

mouth of one of her children, "These four bushels of barley,"

etc.



It is truly surprising what little interest the great

body of the Spanish nation took in the late struggle, and yet

it has been called, by some who ought to know better, a war of

religion and principle.  It was generally supposed that Biscay

was the stronghold of Carlism, and that the inhabitants were

fanatically attached to their religion, which they apprehended

was in danger.  The truth is, that the Basques cared nothing

for Carlos or Rome, and merely took up arms to defend certain

rights and privileges of their own.  For the dwarfish brother

of Ferdinand they always exhibited supreme contempt, which his

character, a compound of imbecility, cowardice, and cruelty,

well merited.  If they made use of his name, it was merely as a

CRI DE GUERRE.  Much the same may be said with respect to his

Spanish partisans, at least those who appeared in the field for

him.  These, however, were of a widely different character from

the Basques, who were brave soldiers and honest men.  The

Spanish armies of Don Carlos were composed entirely of thieves

and assassins, chiefly Valencians and Manchegans, who,

marshalled under two cut-throats, Cabrera and Palillos, took

advantage of the distracted state of the country to plunder and

massacre the honest part of the community.  With respect to the

Queen Regent Christina, of whom the less said the better, the

reins of government fell into her hands on the decease of her

husband, and with them the command of the soldiery.  The

respectable part of the Spanish nation, and more especially the

honourable and toilworn peasantry, loathed and execrated both

factions.  Oft when I was sharing at nightfall the frugal fare

of the villager of Old or New Castile, on hearing the distant

shot of the Christino soldier or Carlist bandit, he would

invoke curses on the heads of the two pretenders, not

forgetting the holy father and the goddess of Rome, Maria

Santissima.  Then, with the tiger energy of the Spaniard when

roused, he would start up and exclaim: "Vamos, Don Jorge, to

the plain, to the plain!  I wish to enlist with you, and to

learn the law of the English.  To the plain, therefore, to the

plain to-morrow, to circulate the gospel of Ingalaterra."



Amongst the peasantry of Spain I found my sturdiest

supporters: and yet the holy father supposes that the Spanish

labourers are friends and lovers of his.  Undeceive yourself,

Batuschca!



But to return to the present work: it is devoted to an

account of what befell me in Spain whilst engaged in

distributing the Scripture.  With respect to my poor labours, I

wish here to observe, that I accomplished but very little, and

that I lay claim to no brilliant successes and triumphs; indeed

I was sent into Spain more to explore the country, and to

ascertain how far the minds of the people were prepared to

receive the truths of Christianity, than for any other object;

I obtained, however, through the assistance of kind friends,

permission from the Spanish government to print an edition of

the sacred volume at Madrid, which I subsequently circulated in

that capital and in the provinces.



During my sojourn in Spain, there were others who wrought

good service in the Gospel cause, and of whose efforts it were

unjust to be silent in a work of this description.  Base is the

heart which would refuse merit its meed, and, however

insignificant may be the value of any eulogium which can flow

from a pen like mine, I cannot refrain from mentioning with

respect and esteem a few names connected with Gospel

enterprise.  A zealous Irish gentleman, of the name of Graydon,

exerted himself with indefatigable diligence in diffusing the

light of Scripture in the province of Catalonia, and along the

southern shores of Spain; whilst two missionaries from

Gibraltar, Messrs. Rule and Lyon, during one entire year,

preached Evangelic truth in a Church at Cadiz.  So much success

attended the efforts of these two last brave disciples of the

immortal Wesley, that there is every reason for supposing that,

had they not been silenced and eventually banished from the

country by the pseudo-liberal faction of the Moderados, not

only Cadiz, but the greater part of Andalusia, would by this

time have confessed the pure doctrines of the Gospel, and have

discarded for ever the last relics of popish superstition.



More immediately connected with the Bible Society and

myself, I am most happy to take this opportunity of speaking of

Luis de Usoz y Rio, the scion of an ancient and honourable

family of Old Castile, my coadjutor whilst editing the Spanish

New Testament at Madrid.  Throughout my residence in Spain, I

experienced every mark of friendship from this gentleman, who,

during the periods of my absence in the provinces, and my

numerous and long journeys, cheerfully supplied my place at

Madrid, and exerted himself to the utmost in forwarding the

views of the Bible Society, influenced by no other motive than

a hope that its efforts would eventually contribute to the

peace, happiness, and civilisation of his native land.



In conclusion, I beg leave to state that I am fully aware

of the various faults and inaccuracies of the present work.  It

is founded on certain journals which I kept during my stay in

Spain, and numerous letters written to my friends in England,

which they had subsequently the kindness to restore: the

greater part, however, consisting of descriptions of scenery,

sketches of character, etc., has been supplied from memory.  In

various instances I have omitted the names of places, which I

have either forgotten, or of whose orthography I am uncertain.

The work, as it at present exists, was written in a solitary

hamlet in a remote part of England, where I had neither books

to consult, nor friends of whose opinion or advice I could

occasionally avail myself, and under all the disadvantages

which arise from enfeebled health; I have, however, on a recent

occasion, experienced too much of the lenity and generosity of

the public, both of Britain and America, to shrink from again

exposing myself to its gaze, and trust that, if in the present

volumes it finds but little to admire, it will give me credit

for good spirit, and for setting down nought in malice.





Nov. 26, 1842.
