






CHAPTER XXV







Villafranca - The Pass - Gallegan Simplicity - The  Frontier Guard -

The Horse-shoe - Gallegan Peculiarities - A Word on Language -

The Courier - Wretched Cabins - Host and Guests - Andalusians.





"Ave Maria," said the woman; "whom have we here?  This is

not Gil the clock-maker."  "Whether it be Gil or Juan," said I,

"we are in need of your hospitality, and can pay for it."  Our

first care was to stable the horses, who were much exhausted.

We then went in search of some accommodation for ourselves.

The house was large and commodious, and having tasted a little

water, I stretched myself on the floor of one of the rooms on

some mattresses which the woman produced, and in less than a

minute was sound asleep.



The sun was shining bright when I awoke.  I walked forth

into the market-place, which was crowded with people, I looked

up, and could see the peaks of tall black mountains peeping

over the tops of the houses.  The town lay in a deep hollow,

and appeared to be surrounded by hills on almost every side.

"QUEL PAYS BARBARE!" said Antonio, who now joined me; "the

farther we go, my master, the wilder everything looks.  I am

half afraid to venture into Galicia; they tell me that to get

to it we must clamber up those hills: the horses will founder."

Leaving the market-place I ascended the wall of the town, and

endeavoured to discover the gate by which we should have

entered the preceding night; but I was not more successful in

the bright sunshine than in the darkness.  The town in the

direction of Astorga appeared to be hermetically sealed.



I was eager to enter Galicia, and finding that the horses

were to a certain extent recovered from the fatigue of the

journey of the preceding day, we again mounted and proceeded on

our way.  Crossing a bridge, we presently found ourselves in a

deep gorge amongst the mountains, down which rushed an

impetuous rivulet, overhung by the high road which leads into

Galicia.  We were in the far-famed pass of Fuencebadon.



It is impossible to describe this pass or the

circumjacent region, which contains some of the most

extraordinary scenery in all Spain; a feeble and imperfect

outline is all that I can hope to effect.  The traveller who

ascends it follows for nearly a league the course of the

torrent, whose banks are in some places precipitous, and in

others slope down to the waters, and are covered with lofty

trees, oaks, poplars, and chestnuts.  Small villages are at

first continually seen, with low walls, and roofs formed of

immense slates, the eaves nearly touching the ground; these

hamlets, however, gradually become less frequent as the path

grows more steep and narrow, until they finally cease at a

short distance before the spot is attained where the rivulet is

abandoned, and is no more seen, though its tributaries may yet

be heard in many a gully, or descried in tiny rills dashing

down the steeps.  Everything here is wild, strange, and

beautiful: the hill up which winds the path towers above on the

right, whilst on the farther side of a profound ravine rises an

immense mountain, to whose extreme altitudes the eye is

scarcely able to attain; but the most singular feature of this

pass are the hanging fields or meadows which cover its sides.

In these, as I passed, the grass was growing luxuriantly, and

in many the mowers were plying their scythes, though it seemed

scarcely possible that their feet could find support on ground

so precipitous: above and below were drift-ways, so small as to

seem threads along the mountain side.  A car, drawn by oxen, is

creeping round yon airy eminence; the nearer wheel is actually

hanging over the horrid descent; giddiness seizes the brain,

and the eye is rapidly withdrawn.  A cloud intervenes, and when

again you turn to watch their progress, the objects of your

anxiety have disappeared.  Still more narrow becomes the path

along which you yourself are toiling, and its turns more

frequent.  You have already come a distance of two leagues, and

still one-third of the ascent remains unsurmounted.  You are

not yet in Galicia; and you still hear Castilian, coarse and

unpolished, it is true, spoken in the miserable cabins placed

in the sequestered nooks which you pass by in your route.



Shortly before we reached the summit of the pass thick

mists began to envelop the tops of the hills, and a drizzling

rain descended.  "These mists," said Antonio, "are what the

Gallegans call bretima; and it is said there is never any lack

of them in their country."  "Have you ever visited the country

before?" I demanded.  "Non, mon maitre; but I have frequently

lived in houses where the domestics were in part Gallegans, on

which account I know not a little of their ways, and even

something of their language."  "Is the opinion which you have

formed of them at all in their favour?" I inquired.  "By no

means, mon maitre; the men in general seem clownish and simple,

yet they are capable of deceiving the most clever filou of

Paris; and as for the women, it is impossible to live in the

same house with them, more especially if they are Camareras,

and wait upon the Senora; they are continually breeding

dissensions and disputes in the house, and telling tales of the

other domestics.  I have already lost two or three excellent

situations in Madrid, solely owing to these Gallegan

chambermaids.  We have now come to the frontier, mon maitre,

for such I conceive this village to be."



We entered the village, which stood on the summit of the

mountain, and as our horses and ourselves were by this time

much fatigued, we looked round for a place in which to obtain

refreshment.  Close by the gate stood a building which, from

the circumstance of a mule or two and a wretched pony standing

before it, we concluded was the posada, as in effect it proved

to be.  We entered: several soldiers were lolling on heaps of

coarse hay, with which the place, which much resembled a

stable, was half filled.  All were exceedingly ill-looking

fellows, and very dirty.  They were conversing with each other

in a strange-sounding dialect, which I supposed to be Gallegan.

Scarcely did they perceive us when two or three of them,

starting from their couch, ran up to Antonio, whom they

welcomed with much affection, calling him COMPANHEIRO.  "How

came you to know these men?" I demanded in French.  "CES

MESSIEURS SONT PRESQUE TOUS DE MA CONNOISSANCE," he replied,

"ET, ENTRE NOUS, CE SONT DES VERITABLES VAURIENS; they are

almost all robbers and assassins.  That fellow, with one eye,

who is the corporal, escaped a little time ago from Madrid,

more than suspected of being concerned in an affair of

poisoning; but he is safe enough here in his own country, and

is placed to guard the frontier, as you see; but we must treat

them civilly, mon maitre; we must give them wine, or they will

be offended.  I know them, mon maitre - I know them.  Here,

hostess, bring an azumbre of wine."



Whilst Antonio was engaged in treating his friends, I led

the horses to the stable; this was through the house, inn, or

whatever it might be called.  The stable was a wretched shed,

in which the horses sank to their fetlocks in mud and puddle.

On inquiring for barley, I was told that I was now in Galicia,

where barley was not used for provender, and was very rare.  I

was offered in lieu of it Indian corn, which, however, the

horses ate without hesitation.  There was no straw to be had;

coarse hay, half green, being the substitute.  By trampling

about in the mud of the stable my horse soon lost a shoe, for

which I searched in vain.  "Is there a blacksmith in the

village?" I demanded of a shock-headed fellow who officiated as

ostler.



OSTLER. - Si, Senhor; but I suppose you have brought

horse-shoes with you, or that large beast of yours cannot be

shod in this village.



MYSELF. - What do you mean?  Is the blacksmith unequal to

his trade?  Cannot he put on a horse-shoe?



OSTLER. - Si, Senhor; he can put on a horse-shoe if you

give it him; but there are no horse-shoes in Galicia, at least

in these parts.



MYSELF. - Is it not customary then to shoe the horses in

Galicia?



OSTLER. - Senhor, there are no horses in Galicia, there

are only ponies; and those who bring horses to Galicia, and

none but madmen ever do, must bring shoes to fit them; only

shoes of ponies are to be found here.



MYSELF. - What do you mean by saying that only madmen

bring horses to Galicia?



OSTLER. - Senhor, no horse can stand the food of Galicia

and the mountains of Galicia long, without falling sick; and

then if he does not die at once, he will cost you in farriers

more than he is worth; besides, a horse is of no use here, and

cannot perform amongst the broken ground the tenth part of the

service which a little pony mare can.  By the by, Senhor, I

perceive that yours is an entire horse; now out of twenty

ponies that you see on the roads of Galicia, nineteen are

mares; the males are sent down into Castile to be sold.

Senhor, your horse will become heated on our roads, and will

catch the bad glanders, for which there is no remedy.  Senhor,

a man must be mad to bring any horse to Galicia, but twice mad

to bring an entero, as you have done.



"A strange country this of Galicia," said I, and went to

consult with Antonio.



It appeared that the information of the ostler was

literally true with regard to the horse-shoe; at least the

blacksmith of the village, to whom we conducted the animal,

confessed his inability to shoe him, having none that would fit

his hoof: he said it was very probable that we should be

obliged to lead the animal to Lugo, which, being a cavalry

station, we might perhaps find there what we wanted.  He added,

however, that the greatest part of the cavalry soldiers were

mounted on the ponies of the country, the mortality amongst the

horses brought from the level ground into Galicia being

frightful.  Lugo was ten leagues distant: there seemed,

however, to be no remedy at hand but patience, and, having

refreshed ourselves, we proceeded, leading our horses by the

bridle.



We were now on level ground, being upon the very top of

one of the highest mountains in Galicia.  This level continued

for about a league, when we began to descend.  Before we had

crossed the plain, which was overgrown with furze and

brushwood, we came suddenly upon half a dozen fellows armed

with muskets and wearing a tattered uniform.  We at first

supposed them to be banditti: they were, however, only a party

of soldiers who had been detached from the station we had just

quitted to escort one of the provincial posts or couriers.

They were clamorous for cigars, but offered us no farther

incivility.  Having no cigars to bestow, I gave them in lieu

thereof a small piece of silver.  Two of the worst looking were

very eager to be permitted to escort us to Nogales, the village

where we proposed to spend the night.  "By no means permit

them, mon maitre," said Antonio, "they are two famous assassins

of my acquaintance; I have known them at Madrid: in the first

ravine they will shoot and plunder us."  I therefore civilly

declined their offer and departed.  "You seem to be acquainted

with all the cut-throats in Galicia," said I to Antonio, as we

descended the hill.



"With respect to those two fellows," he replied, "I knew

them when I lived as cook in the family of General Q-, who is a

Gallegan: they were sworn friends of the repostero.  All the

Gallegans in Madrid know each other, whether high or low makes

no difference; there, at least, they are all good friends, and

assist each other on all imaginable occasions; and if there be

a Gallegan domestic in a house, the kitchen is sure to be

filled with his countrymen, as the cook frequently knows to his

cost, for they generally contrive to eat up any little

perquisites which he may have reserved for himself and family."



Somewhat less than half way down the mountain we reached

a small village.  On observing a blacksmith's shop, we stopped,

in the faint hope of finding a shoe for the horse, who, for

want of one, was rapidly becoming lame.  To our great joy we

found that the smith was in possession of one single horse-

shoe, which some time previously he had found upon the way.

This, after undergoing much hammering and alteration, was

pronounced by the Gallegan vulcan to be capable of serving in

lieu of a better; whereupon we again mounted, and slowly

continued our descent.



Shortly ere sunset we arrived at Nogales, a hamlet

situate in a narrow valley at the foot of the mountain, in

traversing which we had spent the day.  Nothing could be more

picturesque than the appearance of this spot: steep hills,

thickly clad with groves and forests of chestnuts, surrounded

it on every side; the village itself was almost embowered in

trees, and close beside it ran a purling brook.  Here we found

a tolerably large and commodious posada.



I was languid and fatigued, but felt little desire to

sleep.  Antonio cooked our supper, or rather his own, for I had

no appetite.  I sat by the door, gazing on the wood-covered

heights above me, or on the waters of the rivulet, occasionally

listening to the people who lounged about the house, conversing

in the country dialect.  What a strange tongue is the Gallegan,

with its half singing half whining accent, and with its

confused jumble of words from many languages, but chiefly from

the Spanish and Portuguese.  "Can you understand this

conversation?" I demanded of Antonio, who had by this time

rejoined me.  "I cannot, mon maitre," he replied; "I have

acquired at various times a great many words amongst the

Gallegan domestics in the kitchens where I have officiated as

cook, but am quite unable to understand any long conversation.

I have heard the Gallegans say that in no two villages is it

spoken in one and the same manner, and that very frequently

they do not understand each other.  The worst of this language

is, that everybody on first hearing it thinks that nothing is

more easy than to understand it, as words are continually

occurring which he has heard before: but these merely serve to

bewilder and puzzle him, causing him to misunderstand

everything that is said; whereas, if he were totally ignorant

of the tongue, he would occasionally give a shrewd guess at

what was meant, as I myself frequently do when I hear Basque

spoken, though the only word which I know of that language is

JAUNGUICOA."



As the night closed in I retired to bed, where I remained

four or five hours, restless and tossing about; the fever of

Leon still clinging to my system.  It was considerably past

midnight when, just as I was sinking into a slumber, I was

aroused by a confused noise in the village, and the glare of

lights through the lattice of the window of the room where I

lay; presently entered Antonio, half dressed.  "Mon maitre,"

said he, "the grand post from Madrid to Coruna has just arrived

in the village, attended by a considerable escort, and an

immense number of travellers.  The road they say, between here

and Lugo, is infested with robbers and Carlists, who are

committing all kinds of atrocities; let us, therefore, avail

ourselves of the opportunity, and by midday to-morrow we shall

find ourselves safe in Lugo."  On hearing these words, I

instantly sprang out of bed and dressed myself, telling Antonio

to prepare the horses with all speed.



We were soon mounted and in the street, amidst a confused

throng of men and quadrupeds.  The light of a couple of

flambeaux, which were borne before the courier, shone on the

arms of several soldiers, seemingly drawn up on either side of

the road; the darkness, however, prevented me from

distinguishing objects very clearly.  The courier himself was

mounted on a little shaggy pony; before and behind him were two

immense portmanteaux, or leather sacks, the ends of which

nearly touched the ground.  For about a quarter of an hour

there was much hubbub, shouting, and trampling, at the end of

which period the order was given to proceed.  Scarcely had we

left the village when the flambeaux were extinguished, and we

were left in almost total darkness; for some time we were

amongst woods and trees, as was evident from the rustling of

leaves on every side.  My horse was very uneasy and neighed

fearfully, occasionally raising himself bolt upright.  "If your

horse is not more quiet, cavalier, we shall be obliged to shoot

him," said a voice in an Andalusian accent; "he disturbs the

whole cavalcade."  "That would be a pity, sergeant," I replied,

"for he is a Cordovese by the four sides; he is not used to the

ways of this barbarous country."  "Oh, he is a Cordovese," said

the voice, "vaya, I did not know that; I am from Cordova

myself.  Pobrecito! let me pat him - yes, I know by his coat

that he is my countryman - shoot him, indeed! vaya, I would

fain see the Gallegan devil who would dare to harm him.

Barbarous country, IO LO CREO: neither oil nor olives, bread

nor barley.  You have been at Cordova.  Vaya; oblige me,

cavalier, by taking this cigar."



In this manner we proceeded for several hours, up hill

and down dale, but generally at a very slow pace. The soldiers

who escorted us from time to time sang patriotic songs,

breathing love and attachment to the young Queen Isabel, and

detestation of the grim tyrant Carlos.  One of the stanzas

which reached my ears, ran something in the following style:-





"Don Carlos is a hoary churl,

Of cruel heart and cold;

But Isabel's a harmless girl,

Of only six years old."





At last the day began to break, and I found myself amidst

a train of two or three hundred people, some on foot, but the

greater part mounted, either on mules or the pony mares: I

could not distinguish a single horse except my own and

Antonio's.  A few soldiers were thinly scattered along the

road.  The country was hilly, but less mountainous and

picturesque than the one which we had traversed the preceding

day; it was for the most part partitioned into small fields,

which were planted with maize.  At the distance of every two or

three leagues we changed our escort, at some village where was

stationed a detachment.  The villages were mostly an assemblage

of wretched cabins; the roofs were thatched, dank, and moist,

and not unfrequently covered with rank vegetation.  There were

dunghills before the doors, and no lack of pools and puddles.

Immense swine were stalking about, intermingled with naked

children.  The interior of the cabins corresponded with their

external appearance: they were filled with filth and misery.



We reached Lugo about two hours past noon: during the

last two or three leagues, I became so overpowered with

weariness, the result of want of sleep and my late illness,

that I was continually dozing in my saddle, so that I took but

little notice of what was passing.  We put up at a large posada

without the wall of the town, built upon a steep bank, and

commanding an extensive view of the country towards the east.

Shortly after our arrival, the rain began to descend in

torrents, and continued without intermission during the next

two days, which was, however, to me but a slight source of

regret, as I passed the entire time in bed, and I may almost

say in slumber.  On the evening of the third day I arose.



There was much bustle in the house, caused by the arrival

of a family from Coruna; they came in a large jaunting car,

escorted by four carabineers.  The family was rather numerous,

consisting of a father, son, and eleven daughters, the eldest

of whom might be about eighteen.  A shabby-looking fellow,

dressed in a jerkin and wearing a high-crowned hat, attended as

domestic.  They arrived very wet and shivering, and all seemed

very disconsolate, especially the father, who was a well-

looking middle-aged man.  "Can we be accommodated?" he demanded

in a gentle voice of the man of the house; "can we be

accommodated in this fonda?"



"Certainly, your worship," replied the other; "our house

is large.  How many apartments does your worship require for

your family?"



"One will be sufficient," replied the stranger.



The host, who was a gouty personage and leaned upon a

stick, looked for a moment at the traveller, then at every

member of his family, not forgetting the domestic, and, without

any farther comment than a slight shrug, led the way to the

door of an apartment containing two or three flock beds, and

which on my arrival I had objected to as being small, dark, and

incommodious; this he flung open, and demanded whether it would

serve.



"It is rather small," replied the gentleman; "I think,

however, that it will do."



"I am glad of it," replied the host.  "Shall we make any

preparations for the supper of your worship and family?"



"No, I thank you," replied the stranger, "my own domestic

will prepare the slight refreshment we are in need of."



The key was delivered to the domestic, and the whole

family ensconced themselves in their apartment: before,

however, this was effected, the escort were dismissed, the

principal carabineer being presented with a peseta.  The man

stood surveying the gratuity for about half a minute, as it

glittered in the palm of his hand; then with an abrupt VAMOS!

he turned upon his heel, and without a word of salutation to

any person, departed with the men under his command.



"Who can these strangers be?" said I to the host, as we

sat together in a large corridor open on one side, and which

occupied the entire front of the house.



"I know not," he replied, "but by their escort I suppose

they are people holding some official situation.  They are not

of this province, however, and I more than suspect them to be

Andalusians."



In a few minutes the door of the apartment occupied by

the strangers was opened, and the domestic appeared bearing a

cruse in his hand.  "Pray, Senor Patron," demanded he, "where

can I buy some oil?"



"There is oil in the house," replied the host, "if you

want to purchase any; but if, as is probable, you suppose that

we shall gain a cuarto by selling it, you will find some over

the way.  It is as I suspected," continued the host, when the

man had departed on his errand, "they are Andalusians, and are

about to make what they call gaspacho, on which they will all

sup.  Oh, the meanness of these Andalusians! they are come here

to suck the vitals of Galicia, and yet envy the poor innkeeper

the gain of a cuarto in the oil which they require for their

gaspacho.  I tell you one thing, master, when that fellow

returns, and demands bread and garlic to mix with the oil, I

will tell him there is none in the house: as he has bought the

oil abroad, so he may the bread and garlic; aye, and the water

too for that matter."
