





CHAPTER V







The College - The Rector - Shibboleth - National Prejudices -

Youthful Sports - Jews of Lisbon - Bad Faith -

Crime and Superstition - Strange Proposal.





One afternoon Antonio said to me, "It has struck me,

Senhor, that your worship would like to see the college of the

English - ."  "By all means," I replied, "pray conduct me

thither."  So he led me through various streets until we

stopped before the gate of a large building in one of the most

elevated situations in Lisbon; upon our ringing, a kind of

porter presently made his appearance, and demanded our

business.  Antonio explained it to him.  He hesitated for a

moment; but presently, bidding us enter, conducted us to a

large gloomy-looking stone hall, where, begging us to be

seated, he left us.  We were soon joined by a venerable

personage, seemingly about seventy, in a kind of flowing robe

or surplice, with a collegiate cap upon his head.

Notwithstanding his age there was a ruddy tinge upon his

features, which were perfectly English.  Coming slowly up he

addressed me in the English tongue, requesting to know how he

could serve me.  I informed him that I was an English

traveller, and should be happy to be permitted to inspect the

college, provided it were customary to show it to strangers.

He informed me that there could be no objection to accede to my

request, but that I came at rather an unfortunate moment, it

being the hour of refection.  I apologised, and was preparing

to retire, but he begged me to remain, as, in a few minutes,

the refection would be over, when the principals of the college

would do themselves the pleasure of waiting on me.



We sat down on the stone bench, when he commenced

surveying me attentively for some time, and then cast his eyes

on Antonio.  "Whom have we here?" said he to the latter;

"surely your features are not unknown to me."  "Probably not,

your reverence," replied Antonio, getting up and bowing most

profoundly.  "I lived in the family of the Countess -, at

Cintra, when your venerability was her spiritual guide."

"True, true," said the old gentleman, sighing, "I remember you

now.  Ah, Antonio, things are strangely changed since then.  A

new government - a new system - a new religion, I may say."

Then looking again at me, he demanded whither I was journeying?

"I am going to Spain," said I, "and have stopped at Lisbon by

the way."  "Spain, Spain!" said the old man; "surely you have

chosen a strange time to visit Spain; there is much

bloodshedding in Spain at present, and violent wars and

tumults."  "I consider the cause of Don Carlos as already

crushed," I replied; "he has lost the only general capable of

leading his armies to Madrid.  Zumalacarregui, his Cid, has

fallen."  "Do not flatter yourself; I beg your pardon, but do

not think, young man, that the Lord will permit the powers of

darkness to triumph so easily; the cause of Don Carlos is not

lost; its success did not depend on the life of a frail worm

like him whom you have mentioned."  We continued in discourse

some little time, when he arose, saying that by this time he

believed the refection was concluded.



He had scarcely left me five minutes when three

individuals entered the stone hall, and advanced slowly towards

me; - the principals of the college, said I to myself! and so

indeed they were.  The first of these gentlemen, and to whom

the other two appeared to pay considerable deference, was a

thin spare person, somewhat above the middle height; his

complexion was very pale, his features emaciated but fine, his

eyes dark and sparkling; he might be about fifty - the other

two were men in the prime of life.  One was of rather low

stature; his features were dark, and wore that pinched and

mortified expression so frequently to be observed in the

countenance of the English -: the other was a bluff, ruddy, and

rather good-looking young man; all three were dressed alike in

the usual college cap and silk gown.  Coming up, the eldest of

the three took me by the hand and thus addressed me in clear

silvery tones:-



"Welcome, Sir, to our poor house; we are always happy to

see in it a countryman from our beloved native land; it will

afford us extreme satisfaction to show you over it; it is true

that satisfaction is considerably diminished by the reflection

that it possesses nothing worthy of the attention of a

traveller; there is nothing curious pertaining to it save

perhaps its economy, and that as we walk about we will explain

to you.  Permit us, first of all, to introduce ourselves to

you; I am rector of this poor English house of refuge; this

gentleman is our professor of humanity, and this (pointing to

the ruddy personage) is our professor of polite learning,

Hebrew, and Syriac."



MYSELF. - I humbly salute you all; excuse me if I inquire

who was the venerable gentleman who put himself to the

inconvenience of staying with me whilst I was awaiting your

leisure.



RECTOR. - O! a most admirable personage, our almoner, our

chaplain; he came into this country before any of us were born,

and here he has continued ever since.  Now let us ascend that

we may show you our poor house: but how is this, my dear Sir,

how is it that I see you standing uncovered in our cold damp

hall?



MYSELF. - I can easily explain that to you; it is a

custom which has become quite natural to me.  I am just arrived

from Russia, where I have spent some years.  A Russian

invariably takes off his hat whenever he enters beneath a roof,

whether it pertain to hut, shop, or palace.  To omit doing so

would be considered as a mark of brutality and barbarism, and

for the following reason: in every apartment of a Russian house

there is a small picture of the Virgin stuck up in a corner,

just below the ceiling - the hat is taken off out of respect to

her.



Quick glances of intelligence were exchanged by the three

gentlemen.  I had stumbled upon their shibboleth, and

proclaimed myself an Ephraimite, and not of Gilead.  I have no

doubt that up to that moment they had considered me as one of

themselves - a member, and perhaps a priest, of their own

ancient, grand, and imposing religion, for such it is, I must

confess - an error into which it was natural that they should

fall.  What motives could a Protestant have for intruding upon

their privacy?  What interest could he take in inspecting the

economy of their establishment?  So far, however, from relaxing

in their attention after this discovery, their politeness

visibly increased, though, perhaps, a scrutinizing observer

might have detected a shade of less cordiality in their manner.



RECTOR. - Beneath the ceiling in every apartment?  I

think I understood you so.  How delightful - how truly

interesting; a picture of the BLESSED Virgin beneath the

ceiling in every apartment of a Russian house!  Truly, this

intelligence is as unexpected as it is delightful.  I shall

from this moment entertain a much higher opinion of the

Russians than hitherto - most truly an example worthy of

imitation.  I wish sincerely that it was our own practice to

place an IMAGE of the BLESSED Virgin beneath the ceiling in

every corner of our houses.  What say you, our professor of

humanity?  What say you to the information so obligingly

communicated to us by this excellent gentleman?



HUMANITY PROFESSOR. - It is, indeed, most delightful,

most cheering, I may say; but I confess that I was not

altogether unprepared for it.  The adoration of the Blessed

Virgin is becoming every day more extended in countries where

it has hitherto been unknown or forgotten.  Dr. W-, when he

passed through Lisbon, gave me some most interesting details

with respect to the labours of the propaganda in India.  Even

England, our own beloved country. . . .





 My obliging friends showed me all over their "poor

house," it certainly did not appear a very rich one; it was

spacious, and rather dilapidated.  The library was small, and

possessed nothing remarkable; the view, however, from the roof,

over the greater part of Lisbon and the Tagus, was very grand

and noble; but I did not visit this place in the hope of seeing

busts, or books, or fine prospects, - I visited this strange

old house to converse with its inmates, for my favourite, I

might say, my only study, is man.  I found these gentlemen much

what I had anticipated, for this was not the first time that I

had visited an English - establishment in a foreign land.  They

were full of amiability and courtesy to their heretic

countryman, and though the advancement of their religion was

with them an object of paramount importance, I soon found that,

with ludicrous inconsistency, they cherished, to a wonderful

degree, national prejudices almost extinct in the mother land,

even to the disparagement of those of their own darling faith.

I spoke of the English -, of their high respectability, and of

the loyalty which they had uniformly displayed to their

sovereign, though of a different religion, and by whom they had

been not unfrequently subjected to much oppression and

injustice.



RECTOR. - My dear Sir, I am rejoiced to hear you; I see

that you are well acquainted with the great body of those of

our faith in England.  They are as you have well described

them, a most respectable and loyal body; from loyalty, indeed,

they never swerved, and though they have been accused of plots

and conspiracies, it is now well known that such had no real

existence, but were merely calumnies invented by their

religious enemies.  During the civil wars the English -

cheerfully shed their blood and squandered their fortunes in

the cause of the unfortunate martyr, notwithstanding that he

never favoured them, and invariably looked upon them with

suspicion.  At present the English - are the most devoted

subjects to our gracious sovereign.  I should be happy if I

could say as much for our Irish brethren; but their conduct has

been - oh! detestable.  Yet what can you expect?  The true -

blush for them.  A certain person is a disgrace to the church

of which he pretends to be a servant.  Where does he find in

our canons sanction for his proceedings, his undutiful

expressions towards one who is his sovereign by divine right,

and who can do no wrong?  And above all, where does he find

authority for inflaming the passions of a vile mob against a

nation intended by nature and by position to command them?



MYSELF. - I believe there is an Irish college in this

city?



RECTOR. - I believe there is; but it does not flourish,

there are few or no pupils.  Oh!



I looked through a window, at a great height, and saw

about twenty or thirty fine lads sporting in a court below.

"This is as it should be," said I; "those boys will not make

worse priests from a little early devotion to trap-ball and

cudgel playing.  I dislike a staid, serious, puritanic

education, as I firmly believe that it encourages vice and

hypocrisy."



We then went into the Rector's room, where, above a

crucifix, was hanging a small portrait.



MYSELF. - That was a great and portentous man, honest

withal.  I believe the body of which he was the founder, and

which has been so much decried, has effected infinitely more

good than it has caused harm.



RECTOR. - What do I hear?  You an Englishman, and a

Protestant, and yet an admirer of Ignatius Loyola?



MYSELF. - I will say nothing with respect to the doctrine

of the Jesuits, for, as you have observed, I am a Protestant:

but I am ready to assert that there are no people in the world

better qualified, upon the whole, to be intrusted with the

education of youth.  Their moral system and discipline are

truly admirable.  Their pupils, in after life, are seldom

vicious and licentious characters, and are in general men of

learning, science, and possessed of every elegant

accomplishment.  I execrate the conduct of the liberals of

Madrid in murdering last year the helpless fathers, by whose

care and instruction two of the finest minds of Spain have been

evolved - the two ornaments of the liberal cause and modern

literature of Spain, for such are Toreno and Martinez de la

Rosa. . . .



Gathered in small clusters about the pillars at the lower

extremities of the gold and silver streets in Lisbon, may be

observed, about noon in every day, certain strange looking men,

whose appearance is neither Portuguese nor European.  Their

dress generally consists of a red cap, with a blue silken

tassel at the top of it, a blue tunic girded at the waist with

a red sash, and wide linen pantaloons or trousers.  He who

passes by these groups generally hears them conversing in

broken Spanish or Portuguese, and occasionally in a harsh

guttural language, which the oriental traveller knows to be the

Arabic, or a dialect thereof.  These people are the Jews of

Lisbon.  Into the midst of one of these groups I one day

introduced myself, and pronounced a beraka, or blessing.  I

have lived in different parts of the world, much amongst the

Hebrew race, and am well acquainted with their ways and

phraseology.  I was rather anxious to become acquainted with

the state of the Portuguese Jews, and I had now an opportunity.

"The man is a powerful rabbi," said a voice in Arabic; "it

behoves us to treat him kindly."  They welcomed me.  I favoured

their mistake, and in a few days I knew all that related to

them and their traffic in Lisbon.



I found them a vile, infamous rabble, about two hundred

in number.  With a few exceptions, they consist of escapados

from the Barbary shore, from Tetuan, from Tangier, but

principally from Mogadore; fellows who have fled to a foreign

land from the punishment due to their misdeeds.  Their manner

of life in Lisbon is worthy of such a goodly assemblage of AMIS

REUNIS.  The generality of them pretend to work in gold and

silver, and keep small peddling shops; they, however,

principally depend for their livelihood on an extensive traffic

in stolen goods which they carry on.  It is said that there is

honour amongst thieves, but this is certainly not the case with

the Jews of Lisbon, for they are so greedy and avaricious, that

they are constantly quarrelling about their ill-gotten gain,

the result being that they frequently ruin each other.  Their

mutual jealousy is truly extraordinary.  If one, by cheating

and roguery, gains a cruzado in the presence of another, the

latter instantly says I cry halves, and if the first refuse he

is instantly threatened with an information.  The manner in

which they cheat each other has, with all its infamy,

occasionally something extremely droll and ludicrous.  I was

one day in the shop of a Swiri, or Jew of Mogadore, when a Jew

from Gibraltar entered, with a Portuguese female, who held in

her hand a mantle, richly embroidered with gold.



GIBRALTAR JEW (speaking in broken Arabic). - Good-day, O

Swiri; God has favoured me this day; here is a bargain by which

we shall both gain.  I have bought this mantle of the woman

almost for nothing, for it is stolen; but I am poor, as you

know, I have not a cruzado; pay her therefore the price, that

we may then forthwith sell the mantle and divide the gain.



SWIRI. - Willingly, brother of Gibraltar; I will pay the

woman for the mantle; it does not appear a bad one.



Thereupon he flung two cruzados to the woman, who

forthwith left the shop.



GIBRALTAR JEW. - Thanks, brother Swirl, this is very kind

of you; now let us go and sell the mantle, the gold alone is

well worth a moidore; but I am poor and have nothing to eat,

give me, therefore, the half of that sum and keep the mantle; I

shall be content.



SWIRI. - May Allah blot out your name, you thief.  What

mean you by asking me for money?  I bought the mantle of the

woman and paid for it.  I know nothing of you.  Go out of my

doors, dog of a Nazarene, if not I will pay you with a kick.



The dispute was referred to one of the sabios, or

priests; but the sabio, who was also from Mogadore, at once

took the part of the Swiri, and decided that the other should

have nothing.  Whereupon the Gibraltar Jew cursed the sabio,

his father, mother, and all his family.  The sabio replied, "I

put you in ndui," a kind of purgatory or hell.  "I put you in

seven nduis," retorted the incensed Jew, over whom, however,

superstitious fear speedily prevailed; he faltered, became

pale, and dropping his voice, retreated, trembling in every

limb.



The Jews have two synagogues in Lisbon, both are small;

one is, however, tolerably well furnished, it has its reading

desk, and in the middle there is a rather handsome chandelier;

the other is little better than a sty, filthy to a degree,

without ornament of any kind.  The congregation of this last

are thieves to a man; no Jew of the slightest respectability

ever enters it.



How well do superstition and crime go hand in hand.

These wretched beings break the eternal commandments of their

Maker without scruple; but they will not partake of the beast

of the uncloven foot, and the fish which has no scales.  They

pay no regard to the denunciations of holy prophets against the

children of sin, but they quake at the sound of a dark

cabalistic word, pronounced by one perhaps their equal, or

superior, in villainy, as if God would delegate the exercise of

his power to the workers of iniquity.



I was one day sauntering on the Caesodre, when a Jew,

with whom I had previously exchanged a word or two, came up and

addressed me.



JEW. - The blessing of God upon you, brother; I know you

to be a wise and powerful man, and I have conceived much regard

for you; it is on that account that I wish to put you in the

way of gaining much money.  Come with me, and I will conduct

you to a place where there are forty chests of tea.  It is a

sereka (a robbery), and the thieves are willing to dispose of

it for a trifle, for there is search being made, and they are

in much fear.  I can raise one half of what they demand, do you

supply the other, we will then divide it, each shall go his own

way and dispose of his portion.



MYSELF. - Wherefore, O son of Arbat, do you propose this

to me, who am a stranger?  Surely you are mad.  Have you not

your own people about you whom you know, and in whom you can

confide?



JEW. - It is because I know our people here that I do not

confide in them; we are in the galoot of sin.  Were I to

confide in my brethren there would be a dispute, and perhaps

they would rob me, and few of them have any money.  Were I to

apply to the sabio he might consent, but when I ask for my

portion he would put me in ndui!  You I do not fear; you are

good and would do me no harm, unless I attempted to deceive

you, and that I dare not do, for I know you are powerful.  Come

with me, master, for I wish to gain something, that I may

return to Arbat, where I have children . . .



Such are Jews in Lisbon.
