






CHAPTER VII







The Druids' Stone - The Young Spaniard - Ruffianly Soldiers -

Evils of War - Estremoz - The Brawl - Ruined Watch Tower -

Glimpse of Spain - Old Times and New.





After proceeding about a league and a half, a blast came

booming from the north, rolling before it immense clouds of

dust; happily it did not blow in our faces, or it would have

been difficult to proceed, so great was its violence.  We had

left the road in order to take advantage of one of those short

cuts, which, though possible for a horse or a mule, are far too

rough to permit any species of carriage to travel along them.

We were in the midst of sands, brushwood, and huge pieces of

rock, which thickly studded the ground.  These are the stones

which form the sierras of Spain and Portugal; those singular

mountains which rise in naked horridness, like the ribs of some

mighty carcass from which the flesh has been torn.  Many of

these stones, or rocks, grew out of the earth, and many lay on

its surface unattached, perhaps wrested from their bed by the

waters of the deluge.  Whilst toiling along these wild wastes,

I observed, a little way to my left, a pile of stones of rather

a singular appearance, and rode up to it.  It was a druidical

altar, and the most perfect and beautiful one of the kind which

I had ever seen.  It was circular, and consisted of stones

immensely large and heavy at the bottom, which towards the top

became thinner and thinner, having been fashioned by the hand

of art to something of the shape of scollop shells.  These were

surmounted by a very large flat stone, which slanted down

towards the south, where was a door.  Three or four individuals

might have taken shelter within the interior, in which was

growing a small thorn tree.



I gazed with reverence and awe upon the pile where the

first colonies of Europe offered their worship to the unknown

God.  The temples of the mighty and skilful Roman,

comparatively of modern date, have crumbled to dust in its

neighbourhood.  The churches of the Arian Goth, his successor

in power, have sunk beneath the earth, and are not to be found;

and the mosques of the Moor, the conqueror of the Goth, where

and what are they?  Upon the rock, masses of hoary and

vanishing ruin.  Not so the Druids' stone; there it stands on

the hill of winds, as strong and as freshly new as the day,

perhaps thirty centuries back, when it was first raised, by

means which are a mystery.  Earthquakes have heaved it, but its

copestone has not fallen; rain floods have deluged it, but

failed to sweep it from its station; the burning sun has

flashed upon it, but neither split nor crumbled it; and time,

stern old time, has rubbed it with his iron tooth, and with

what effect let those who view it declare.  There it stands,

and he who wishes to study the literature, the learning, and

the history of the ancient Celt and Cymbrian, may gaze on its

broad covering, and glean from that blank stone the whole known

amount.  The Roman has left behind him his deathless writings,

his history, and his songs; the Goth his liturgy, his

traditions, and the germs of noble institutions; the Moor his

chivalry, his discoveries in medicine, and the foundations of

modern commerce; and where is the memorial of the Druidic

races?  Yonder: that pile of eternal stone!



We arrived at Arroyolos about seven at night.  I took

possession of a large two-bedded room, and, as I was preparing

to sit down to supper, the hostess came to inquire whether I

had any objection to receive a young Spaniard for the night.

She said he had just arrived with a train of muleteers, and

that she had no other room in which she could lodge him.  I

replied that I was willing, and in about half an hour he made

his appearance, having first supped with his companions.  He

was a very gentlemanly, good-looking lad of seventeen.  He

addressed me in his native language, and, finding that I

understood him, he commenced talking with astonishing

volubility.  In the space of five minutes he informed me that,

having a desire to see the world, he had run away from his

friends, who were people of opulence at Madrid, and that he did

not intend to return until he had travelled through various

countries.  I told him that if what he said was true, he had

done a very wicked and foolish action; wicked, because he must

have overwhelmed those with grief whom he was bound to honour

and love, and foolish, inasmuch as he was going to expose

himself to inconceivable miseries and hardships, which would

shortly cause him to rue the step he had taken; that he would

be only welcome in foreign countries so long as he had money to

spend, and when he had none, he would be repulsed as a

vagabond, and would perhaps be allowed to perish of hunger.  He

replied that he had a considerable sum of money with him, no

less than a hundred dollars, which would last him a long time,

and that when it was spent he should perhaps be able to obtain

more.  "Your hundred dollars," said I, "will scarcely last you

three months in the country in which you are, even if it be not

stolen from you; and you may as well hope to gather money on

the tops of the mountains as expect to procure more by

honourable means."  But he had not yet sufficiently drank of

the cup of experience to attend much to what I said, and I soon

after changed the subject.  About five next morning he came to

my bedside to take leave, as his muleteers were preparing to

depart.  I gave him the usual Spanish valediction (VAYA USTED

CON DIOS), and saw no more of him.



At nine, after having paid a most exorbitant sum for

slight accommodation, I started from Arroyolos, which is a town

or large village situated on very elevated ground, and

discernible afar off.  It can boast of the remains of a large

ancient and seemingly Moorish castle, which stands on a hill on

the left as you take the road to Estremoz.



About a mile from Arroyolos I overtook a train of carts

escorted by a number of Portuguese soldiers, conveying stores

and ammunition into Spain.  Six or seven of these soldiers

marched a considerable way in front; they were villainous

looking ruffians upon whose livid and ghastly countenances were

written murder, and all the other crimes which the decalogue

forbids.  As I passed by, one of them, with a harsh, croaking

voice, commenced cursing all foreigners.  "There," said he, "is

this Frenchman riding on horseback" (I was on a mule), "with a

man" (the idiot) "to take care of him, and all because he is

rich; whilst I, who am a poor soldier, am obliged to tramp on

foot.  I could find it in my heart to shoot him dead, for in

what respect is he better than I?  But he is a foreigner, and

the devil helps foreigners and hates the Portuguese."  He

continued shouting his remarks until I got about forty yards in

advance, when I commenced laughing; but it would have been more

prudent in me to have held my peace, for the next moment, with

bang - bang, two bullets, well aimed, came whizzing past my

ears.  A small river lay just before me, though the bridge was

a considerable way on my left.  I spurred my animal through it,

closely followed by my terrified guide, and commenced galloping

along a sandy plain on the other side, and so escaped with my

life.



These fellows, with the look of banditti, were in no

respect better; and the traveller who should meet them in a

solitary place would have little reason to bless his good

fortune.  One of the carriers (all of whom were Spaniards from

the neighbourhood of Badajoz, and had been despatched into

Portugal for the purpose of conveying the stores), whom I

afterwards met in the aforesaid town, informed me that the

whole party were equally bad, and that he and his companions

had been plundered by them of various articles, and threatened

with death if they attempted to complain.  How frightful to

figure to oneself an army of such beings in a foreign land,

sent thither either to invade or defend; and yet Spain, at the

time I am writing this, is looking forward to armed assistance

from Portugal.  May the Lord in his mercy grant that the

soldiers who proceed to her assistance may be of a different

stamp: and yet, from the lax state of discipline which exists

in the Portuguese army, in comparison with that of England and

France, I am afraid that the inoffensive population of the

disturbed provinces will say that wolves have been summoned to

chase away foxes from the sheepfold.  O! may I live to see the

day when soldiery will no longer be tolerated in any civilized,

or at least Christian, country!



I pursued my route to Estremoz, passing by Monte Moro

Novo, which is a tall dusky hill, surmounted by an ancient

edifice, probably Moorish.  The country was dreary and

deserted, but offering here and there a valley studded with

cork trees and azinheiras.  After midday the wind, which during

the night and morning had much abated, again blew with such

violence as nearly to deprive me of my senses, though it was

still in our rear.



I was heartily glad when, on ascending a rising ground,

at about four o'clock, I saw Estremoz on its hill at something

less than a league's distance.  Here the view became wildly

interesting; the sun was sinking in the midst of red and stormy

clouds, and its rays were reflected on the dun walls of the

lofty town to which we were wending.  Nor far distant to the

south-west rose Serra Dorso, which I had seen from Evora, and

which is the most beautiful mountain in the Alemtejo.  My idiot

guide turned his uncouth visage towards it, and becoming

suddenly inspired, opened his mouth for the first time during

the day, I might almost say since we had left Aldea Gallega,

and began to tell me what rare hunting was to be obtained in

that mountain.  He likewise described with great minuteness a

wonderful dog, which was kept in the neighbourhood for the

purpose of catching the wolves and wild boars, and for which

the proprietor had refused twenty moidores.



At length we reached Estremoz, and took up our quarters

at the principal inn, which looks upon a large plain or market-

place occupying the centre of the town, and which is so

extensive that I should think ten thousand soldiers at least

might perform their evolutions there with case.



The cold was far too terrible to permit me to remain in

the chamber to which I had been conducted; I therefore went

down to a kind of kitchen on one side of the arched passage,

which led under the house to the yard and stables.  A

tremendous withering blast poured through this passage, like

the water through the flush of a mill.  A large cork tree was

blazing in the kitchen beneath a spacious chimney; and around

it were gathered a noisy crew of peasants and farmers from the

neighbourhood, and three or four Spanish smugglers from the

frontier.  I with difficulty obtained a place amongst them, as

a Portuguese or a Spaniard will seldom make way for a stranger,

till called upon or pushed aside, but prefers gazing upon him

with an expression which seems to say, I know what you want,

but I prefer remaining where I am.



I now first began to observe an alteration in the

language spoken; it had become less sibilant, and more

guttural; and, when addressing each other, the speakers used

the Spanish title of courtesy USTED, or your worthiness,

instead of the Portuguese high flowing VOSSEM SE, or your

lordship.  This is the result of constant communication with

the natives of Spain, who never condescend to speak Portuguese,

even when in Portugal, but persist in the use of their own

beautiful language, which, perhaps, at some future period, the

Portuguese will generally adopt.  This would greatly facilitate

the union of the two countries, hitherto kept asunder by the

natural waywardness of mankind.



I had not been seated long before the blazing pile, when

a fellow, mounted on a fine spirited horse, dashed from the

stables through the passage into the kitchen, where he

commenced displaying his horsemanship, by causing the animal to

wheel about with the velocity of a millstone, to the great

danger of everybody in the apartment.  He then galloped out

upon the plain, and after half an hour's absence returned, and

having placed his horse once more in the stable, came and

seated himself next to me, to whom he commenced talking in a

gibberish of which I understood very little, but which he

intended for French.  He was half intoxicated, and soon became

three parts so, by swallowing glass after glass of aguardiente.

Finding that I made him no answer, he directed his discourse to

one of the contrabandistas, to whom he talked in bad Spanish.

The latter either did not or would not understand him; but at

last, losing patience, called him a drunkard, and told him to

hold his tongue.  The fellow, enraged at this contempt, flung

the glass out of which he was drinking at the Spaniard's head,

who sprang up like a tiger, and unsheathing instantly a snick

and snee knife, made an upward cut at the fellow's cheek, and

would have infallibly laid it open, had I not pulled his arm

down just in time to prevent worse effects than a scratch above

the lower jawbone, which, however, drew blood.



The smuggler's companions interfered, and with much

difficulty led him off to a small apartment in the rear of the

house, where they slept, and kept the furniture of their mules.

The drunkard then commenced singing, or rather yelling, the

Marseillois hymn; and after having annoyed every one for nearly

an hour, was persuaded to mount his horse and depart,

accompanied by one of his neighbours.  He was a pig merchant of

the vicinity, but had formerly been a trooper in the army of

Napoleon, where, I suppose, like the drunken coachman of Evora,

he had picked up his French and his habits of intoxication.



From Estremoz to Elvas the distance is six leagues.  I

started at nine next morning; the first part of the way lay

through an enclosed country, but we soon emerged upon wild

bleak downs, over which the wind, which still pursued us,

howled most mournfully.  We met no one on the route; and the

scene was desolate in the extreme; the heaven was of a dark

grey, through which no glimpse of the sun was to be perceived.

Before us, at a great distance, on an elevated ground, rose a

tower - the only object which broke the monotony of the waste.

In about two hours from the time when we first discovered it,

we reached a fountain, at the foot of the hill on which it

stood; the water, which gushed into a long stone trough, was

beautifully clear and transparent, and we stopped here to water

the animals.



Having dismounted, I left the guide, and proceeded to

ascend the hill on which the tower stood.  Though the ascent

was very gentle I did not accomplish it without difficulty; the

ground was covered with sharp stones, which, in two or three

instances, cut through my boots and wounded my feet; and the

distance was much greater than I had expected.  I at last

arrived at the ruin, for such it was.  I found it had been one

of those watch towers or small fortresses called in Portuguese

ATALAIAS; it was square, and surrounded by a wall, broken down

in many places.  The tower itself had no door, the lower part

being of solid stone work; but on one side were crevices at

intervals between the stones, for the purpose of placing the

feet, and up this rude staircase I climbed to a small

apartment, about five feet square, from which the top had

fallen.  It commanded an extensive view from all sides, and had

evidently been built for the accommodation of those whose

business it was to keep watch on the frontier, and at the

appearance of an enemy to alarm the country by signals -

probably by a fire.  Resolute men might have defended

themselves in this little fastness against many assailants, who

must have been completely exposed to their arrows or musketry

in the ascent.



Being about to leave the place, I heard a strange cry

behind a part of the wall which I had not visited, and

hastening thither, I found a miserable object in rags, seated

upon a stone.  It was a maniac - a man about thirty years of

age, and I believe deaf and dumb; there he sat, gibbering and

mowing, and distorting his wild features into various dreadful

appearances.  There wanted nothing but this object to render

the scene complete; banditti amongst such melancholy desolation

would have been by no means so much in keeping.  But the

maniac, on his stone, in the rear of the wind-beaten ruin,

overlooking the blasted heath, above which scowled the leaden

heaven, presented such a picture of gloom and misery as I

believe neither painter nor poet ever conceived in the saddest

of their musings.  This is not the first instance in which it

has been my lot to verify the wisdom of the saying, that truth

is sometimes wilder than fiction.



I remounted my mule, and proceeded till, on the top of

another hill, my guide suddenly exclaimed, "there is Elvas."  I

looked in the direction in which he pointed, and beheld a town

perched on the top of a lofty hill.  On the other side of a

deep valley towards the left rose another hill, much higher, on

the top of which is the celebrated fort of Elvas, believed to

be the strongest place in Portugal.  Through the opening

between the fort and the town, but in the background and far in

Spain, I discerned the misty sides and cloudy head of a stately

mountain, which I afterwards learned was Albuquerque, one of

the loftiest of Estremadura.



We now got into a cultivated country, and following the

road, which wound amongst hedge-rows, we arrived at a place

where the ground began gradually to shelve down.  Here, on the

right, was the commencement of an aqueduct by means of which

the town on the opposite hill was supplied; it was at this

point scarcely two feet in altitude, but, as we descended, it

became higher and higher, and its proportions more colossal.

Near the bottom of the valley it took a turn to the left,

bestriding the road with one of its arches.  I looked up, after

passing under it; the water must have been flowing near a

hundred feet above my head, and I was filled with wonder at the

immensity of the structure which conveyed it.  There was,

however, one feature which was no slight drawback to its

pretensions to grandeur and magnificence; the water was

supported not by gigantic single arches, like those of the

aqueduct of Lisbon, which stalk over the valley like legs of

Titans, but by three layers of arches, which, like three

distinct aqueducts, rise above each other.  The expense and

labour necessary for the erection of such a structure must have

been enormous; and, when we reflect with what comparative ease

modern art would confer the same advantage, we cannot help

congratulating ourselves that we live in times when it is not

necessary to exhaust the wealth of a province to supply a town

on a hill with one of the first necessaries of existence.

