






CHAPTER LVII







Strange Trio - The Mulatto - The Peace-offering -

Moors of Granada - Vive la Guadeloupo - The Moors -

Pascual Fava - Blind Algerine - The Retreat.





Three men were seated in the wustuddur of Joanna Correa,

when I entered; singular-looking men they all were, though

perhaps three were never gathered together more unlike to each

other in all points.  The first on whom I cast my eye was a man

about sixty, dressed in a grey kerseymere coat with short

lappets, yellow waistcoat, and wide coarse canvas trousers;

upon his head was a very broad dirty straw hat, and in his hand

he held a thick cane with ivory handle; his eyes were bleared

and squinting, his face rubicund, and his nose much carbuncled.

Beside him sat a good-looking black, who perhaps appeared more

negro than he really was, from the circumstance of his being

dressed in spotless white jean - jerkin, waistcoat, and

pantaloons being all of that material: his head gear consisted

of a blue Montero cap.  His eyes sparkled like diamonds, and

there was an indescribable expression of good humour and fun

upon his countenance.  The third man was a Mulatto, and by far

the most remarkable personage of the group: he might be between

thirty and forty; his body was very long, and though uncouthly

put together, exhibited every mark of strength and vigour; it

was cased in a ferioul of red wool, a kind of garment which

descends below the hips.  His long muscular and hairy arms were

naked from the elbow, where the sleeves of the ferioul

terminate; his under limbs were short in comparison with his

body and arms; his legs were bare, but he wore blue kandrisa as

far as the knee; every features of his face was ugly,

exceedingly and bitterly ugly, and one of his eyes was

sightless, being covered with a white film.  By his side on the

ground was a large barrel, seemingly a water-cask, which he

occasionally seized with a finger and thumb, and waved over his

head as if it had been a quart pot.  Such was the trio who now

occupied the wustuddur of Joanna Correa: and I had scarcely

time to remark what I have just recorded, when that good lady

entered from a back court with her handmaid Johar, or the

pearl, an ugly fat Jewish girl with an immense mole on her

cheek.



"QUE DIOS REMATE TU NOMBRE," exclaimed the Mulatto; "may

Allah blot out your name, Joanna, and may he likewise blot out

that of your maid Johar.  It is more than fifteen minutes that

I have been seated here, after having poured out into the

tinaja the water which I brought from the fountain, and during

all that time I have waited in vain for one single word of

civility from yourself or from Johar.  USTED NO TIENE MODO, you

have no manner with you, nor more has Johar.  This is the only

house in Tangier where I am not received with fitting love and

respect, and yet I have done more for you than for any other

person.  Have I not filled your tinaja with water when other

people have gone without a drop?  When even the consul and the

interpreter of the consul had no water to slake their thirst,

have you not had enough to wash your wustuddur?  And what is my

return?  When I arrive in the heat of the day, I have not one

kind word spoken to me, nor so much as a glass of makhiah

offered to me; must I tell you all that I do for you, Joanna?

Truly I must, for you have no manner with you.  Do I not come

every morning just at the third hour; and do I not knock at

your door; and do you not arise and let me in, and then do I

not knead your bread in your presence, whilst you lie in bed,

and because I knead it, is not yours the best bread in Tangier?

For am I not the strongest man in Tangier, and the most noble

also?"  Here he brandished his barrel over his head, and his

face looked almost demoniacal.  "Hear me, Joanna," he

continued, "you know that I am the strongest man in Tangier,

and I tell you again, for the thousandth time, that I am the

most noble.  Who are the consuls?  Who is the Pasha?  They are

pashas and consuls now, but who were their fathers?  I know

not, nor do they.  But do I not know who my fathers were?  Were

they not Moors of Garnata (GRANADA), and is it not on that

account that I am the strongest man in Tangier?  Yes, I am of

the old Moors of Garnata, and my family has lived here, as is

well known, since Garnata was lost to the Nazarenes, and now I

am the only one of my family of the blood of the old Moors in

all this land, and on that account I am of nobler blood than

the sultan, for the sultan is not of the blood of the Moors of

Garnata.  Do you laugh, Joanna?  Does your maid Johar laugh?

Am I not Hammin Widdir, EL HOMBRE MAS VALIDO DE TANGER?  And is

it not true that I am of the blood of the Moors of Garnata?

Deny it, and I will kill you both, you and your maid Johar."



"You have been eating hashish and majoon, Hammin," said

Joanna Correa, "and the Shaitan has entered into you, as he but

too frequently does.  I have been busy, and so has Johar, or we

should have spoken to you before; however, mai doorshee (IT

DOES NOT SIGNIFY), I know how to pacify you now and at all

times, will you take some gin-bitters, or a glass of common

makhiah?"



"May you burst, O Joanna," said the Mulatto, "and may

Johar also burst; I mean, may you both live many years, and

know neither pain nor sorrow.  I will take the gin-bitters, O

Joanna, because they are stronger than the makhiah, which

always appears to me like water; and I like not water, though I

carry it.  Many thanks to you, Joanna, here is health to you,

Joanna, and to this good company."



She had handed him a large tumbler filled to the brim; he

put it to his nostrils, snuffled in the flavour, and then

applying it to his mouth, removed it not whilst one drop of the

fluid remained.  His features gradually relaxed from their

former angry expression, and looking particularly amiable at

Joanna, he at last said:



"I hope that within a little time, O Joanna, you will be

persuaded that I am the strongest man in Tangier, and that I am

sprung from the blood of the Moors of Garnata, as then you will

no longer refuse to take me for a husband, you and your maid

Johar, and to become Moors.  What a glory to you, after having

been married to a Genoui, and given birth to Genouillos, to

receive for a husband a Moor like me, and to bear him children

of the blood of Garnata.  What a glory too for Johar, how much

better than to marry a vile Jew, even like Hayim Ben Atar, or

your cook Sabia, both of whom I could strangle with two

fingers, for am I not Hammin Widdir Moro de Garnata, EL HOMBRE

MAS VALIDO BE TANGER?"  He then shouldered his barrel and

departed.



"Is that Mulatto really what he pretends to be?" said I

to Joanna; "is he a descendant of the Moors of Granada?"



"He always talks about the Moors of Granada when he is

mad with majoon or aguardiente," interrupted, in bad French,

the old man whom I have before described, and in the same

croaking voice which I had heard chanting in the morning.

"Nevertheless it may be true, and if he had not heard something

of the kind from his parents, he would never have imagined such

a thing, for he is too stupid.  As I said before, it is by no

means impossible: many of the families of Granada settled down

here when their town was taken by the Christians, but the

greater part went to Tunis.  When I was there, I lodged in the

house of a Moor who called himself Zegri, and was always

talking of Granada and the things which his forefathers had

done there.  He would moreover sit for hours singing romances

of which I understood not one word, praised be the mother of

God, but which he said all related to his family; there were

hundreds of that name in Tunis, therefore why should not this

Hammin, this drunken water-carrier, be a Moor of Granada also?

He is ugly enough to be emperor of all the Moors.  O the

accursed canaille, I have lived amongst them for my sins these

eight years, at Oran and here.  Monsieur, do you not consider

it to be a hard case for an old man like myself, who am a

Christian, to live amongst a race who know not God, nor Christ,

nor anything holy?"



"What do you mean," said I, "by asserting that the Moors

know not God?  There is no people in the world who entertain

sublimer notions of the uncreated eternal God than the Moors,

and no people have ever shown themselves more zealous for his

honour and glory; their very zeal for the glory of God has been

and is the chief obstacle to their becoming Christians.  They

are afraid of compromising his dignity by supposing that he

ever condescended to become man.  And with respect to Christ,

their ideas even of him are much more just than those of the

Papists, they say he is a mighty prophet, whilst, according to

the others, he is either a piece of bread or a helpless infant.

In many points of religion the Moors are wrong, dreadfully

wrong, but are the Papists less so?  And one of their practices

sets them immeasurably below the Moors in the eyes of any

unprejudiced person: they bow down to idols, Christian idols if

you like, but idols still, things graven of wood and stone and

brass, and from these things, which can neither hear, nor

speak, nor feel, they ask and expect to obtain favours."



"VIVE LA FRANCE, VIVE LA GUADELOUPE," said the black,

with a good French accent.  "In France and in Guadeloupe there

is no superstition, and they pay as much regard to the Bible as

to the Koran; I am now learning to read in order that I may

understand the writings of Voltaire, who, as I am told, has

proved that both the one and the other were written with the

sole intention of deceiving mankind.  O VIVE LA FRANCE! where

will you find such an enlightened country as France; and where

will you find such a plentiful country as France?  Only one in

the world, and that is Guadeloupe.  Is it not so, Monsieur

Pascual?  Were you ever at Marseilles?  AH QUEL BON PAYS EST

CELUI-LA POUR LES VIVRES, POUR LES PETITS POULETS, POUR LES

POULARDES, POUR LES PERDRIX, POUR LES PERDREAUX, POUR LES

ALOUETTES, POUR LES BECASSES, POUR LES BECASSINES, ENFIN, POUR

TOUT."



"Pray, sir, are you a cook?" demanded I.



"MONSIEUR, JE LE SUIS POUR VOUS RENDRE SERVICE, MON NOM

C'EST GERARD, ET J'AI L'HONNEUR D'ETRE CHEF DE CUISINE CHEZ

MONSIEUR LE CONSUL HOLLANDOIS.  A PRESENT JE PRIE PERMISSION DE

VOUS SALUER; IL FAUT QUE J'AILLE A LA MAISON POUR FAIRE LE

DINER DE MON MAITRE."



At four I went to dine with the British consul.  Two

other English gentlemen were present, who had arrived at

Tangier from Gibraltar about ten days previously for a short

excursion, and were now detained longer than they wished by the

Levant wind.  They had already visited the principal towns in

Spain, and proposed spending the winter either at Cadiz or

Seville.  One of them, Mr. -, struck me as being one of the

most remarkable men I had ever conversed with; he travelled not

for diversion nor instigated by curiosity, but merely with the

hope of doing spiritual good, chiefly by conversation.  The

consul soon asked me what I thought of the Moors and their

country.  I told him that what I had hitherto seen of both

highly pleased me.  He said that were I to live amongst them

ten years, as he had done, he believed I should entertain a

very different opinion; that no people in the world were more

false and cruel; that their government was one of the vilest

description, with which it was next to an impossibility for any

foreign power to hold amicable relations, as it invariably

acted with bad faith, and set at nought the most solemn

treaties.  That British property and interests were every day

subjected to ruin and spoliation, and British subjects exposed

to unheard-of vexations, without the slightest hope of redress

being afforded, save recourse was had to force, the only

argument to which the Moors were accessible.  He added, that

towards the end of the preceding year an atrocious murder had

been perpetrated in Tangier: a Genoese family of three

individuals had perished, all of whom were British subjects,

and entitled to the protection of the British flag.  The

murderers were known, and the principal one was even now in

prison for the fact, yet all attempts to bring him to condign

punishment had hitherto proved abortive, as he was a Moor, and

his victims Christians.  Finally he cautioned me, not to take

walks beyond the wall unaccompanied by a soldier, whom he

offered to provide for me should I desire it, as otherwise I

incurred great risk of being ill-treated by the Moors of the

interior whom I might meet, or perhaps murdered, and he

instanced the case of a British officer who not long since had

been murdered on the beach for no other reason than being a

Nazarene, and appearing in a Nazarene dress.  He at length

introduced the subject of the Gospel, and I was pleased to

learn that, during his residence in Tangier, he had distributed

a considerable quantity of Bibles amongst the natives in the

Arabic language, and that many of the learned men, or Talibs,

had read the holy volume with great interest, and that by this

distribution, which, it is true, was effected with much

caution, no angry or unpleasant feeling had been excited.  He

finally asked whether I had come with the intention of

circulating the Scripture amongst the Moors.



I replied that I had no opportunity of doing so, as I had

not one single copy either in the Arable language or character.

That the few Testaments which were in my possession were in the

Spanish language, and were intended for circulation amongst the

Christians of Tangier, to whom they might be serviceable, as

they all understood the language.



It was night, and I was seated in the wustuddur of Joanna

Correa, in company with Pascual Fava the Genoese.  The old

man's favourite subject of discourse appeared to be religion,

and he professed unbounded love for the Saviour, and the

deepest sense of gratitude for his miraculous atonement for the

sins of mankind.  I should have listened to him with pleasure

had he not smelt very strongly of liquor, and by certain

incoherence of language and wildness of manner given

indications of being in some degree the worse for it.  Suddenly

two figures appeared beneath the doorway; one was that of a

bare-headed and bare-legged Moorish boy of about ten years of

age, dressed in a gelaba; he guided by the hand an old man,

whom I at once recognised as one of the Algerines, the good

Moslems of whom the old Mahasni had spoken in terms of praise

in the morning whilst we ascended the street of the Siarrin.

He was very short of stature and dirty in his dress; the lower

part of his face was covered with a stubbly white beard; before

his eyes he wore a large pair of spectacles, from which he

evidently received but little benefit, as he required the

assistance of the guide at every step.  The two advanced a

little way into the wustuddur and there stopped.  Pascual Fava

no sooner beheld them, than assuming a jovial air he started

nimbly up, and leaning on his stick, for he had a bent leg,

limped to a cupboard, out of which he took a bottle and poured

out a glass of wine, singing in the broken kind of Spanish used

by the Moors of the coast:





"Argelino,

Moro fino,

No beber vino,

Ni comer tocino."



(Algerine,

Moor so keen,

No drink wine,

No taste swine.)





He then handed the wine to the old Moor, who drank it

off, and then, led by the boy, made for the door without saying

a word.



"HADE MUSHE HALAL," (that is not lawful,) said I to him

with a loud voice.



"CUL SHEE HALAL," (everything is lawful,) said the old

Moor, turning his sightless and spectacled eyes in the

direction from which my voice reached him.  "Of everything

which God has given, it is lawful for the children of God to

partake."



"Who is that old man?" said I to Pascual Fava, after the

blind and the leader of the blind had departed.  "Who is he!"

said Pascual; "who is he!  He is a merchant now, and keeps a

shop in the Siarrin, but there was a time when no bloodier

pirate sailed out of Algier.  That old blind wretch has cut

more throats than he has hairs in his beard.  Before the French

took the place he was the rais or captain of a frigate, and

many was the poor Sardinian vessel which fell into his hands.

After that affair he fled to Tangier, and it is said that he

brought with him a great part of the booty which he had amassed

in former times.  Many other Algerines came hither also, or to

Tetuan, but he is the strangest guest of them all.  He keeps

occasionally very extraordinary company for a Moor, and is

rather over intimate with the Jews.  Well, that's no business

of mine; only let him look to himself.  If the Moors should

once suspect him, it were all over with him.  Moors and Jews,

Jews and Moors!  Oh my poor sins, my poor sins, that brought me

to live amongst them! -





" `Ave Maris stella,

Dei Mater alma,

Atque semper virgo,

Felix coeli porta!' "





He was proceeding in this manner when I was startled by

the sound of a musket.



"That is the retreat," said Pascual Fava.  "It is fired

every night in the soc at half-past eight, and it is the signal

for suspending all business, and shutting up.  I am now going

to close the doors, and whosoever knocks, I shall not admit

them till I know their voice.  Since the murder of the poor

Genoese last year, we have all been particularly cautious."



Thus had passed Friday, the sacred day of the Moslems,

and the first which I had spent in Tangier.  I observed that

the Moors followed their occupations as if the day had nothing

particular in it.  Between twelve and one, the hour of prayer

in the mosque, the gates of the town were closed, and no one

permitted either to enter or go out.  There is a tradition,

current amongst them, that on this day, and at this hour, their

eternal enemies, the Nazarenes, will arrive to take possession

of their country; on which account they hold themselves

prepared against a surprisal.











End 
