





CHAPTER LI







Cadiz - The Fortifications - The Consul-General -

Characteristic Anecdote - Catalan Steamer - Trafalgar -

Alonzo Guzman - Gibil Muza - Orestes Frigate - The Hostile Lion -

Works of the Creator - Lizard of the Rock - The Concourse -

Queen of the Waters - Broken Prayer.





Cadiz stands, as is well known, upon a long narrow neck

of land stretching out into the ocean, from whose bosom the

town appears to rise, the salt waters laving its walls on all

sides save the east, where a sandy isthmus connects it with the

coast of Spain.  The town, as it exists at the present day, is

of modern construction, and very unlike any other town which is

to be found in the Peninsula, being built with great regularity

and symmetry.  The streets are numerous, and intersect each

other, for the most part, at right angles.  They are very

narrow in comparison to the height of the houses, so that they

are almost impervious to the rays of the sun, except when at

its midday altitude.  The principal street, however, is an

exception, it being of some width.  This street, in which

stands the Bolsa, or exchange, and which contains the houses of

the chief merchants and nobility, is the grand resort of

loungers as well as men of business during the early part of

the day, and in that respect resembles the Puerta del Sol at

Madrid.  It is connected with the great square, which, though

not of very considerable extent, has many pretensions to

magnificence, it being surrounded with large imposing houses,

and planted with fine trees, with marble seats below them for

the accommodation of the public.  There are few public edifices

worthy of much attention: the chief church, indeed, might be

considered a fine monument of labour in some other countries,

but in Spain, the land of noble and gigantic cathedrals, it can

be styled nothing more than a decent place of worship; it is

still in an unfinished state.  There is a public walk or

alameda on the northern ramparts, which is generally thronged

in summer evenings: the green of its trees, when viewed from

the bay, affords an agreeable relief to the eye, dazzled with

the glare of the white buildings, for Cadiz is also a bright

city.  It was once the wealthiest place in all Spain, but its

prosperity has of late years sadly diminished, and its

inhabitants are continually lamenting its ruined trade; on

which account many are daily abandoning it for Seville, where

living at least is cheaper.  There is still, however, much life

and bustle in the streets, which are adorned with many splendid

shops, several of which are in the style of Paris and London.

The present population is said to amount to eighty thousand

souls.



It is not without reason that Cadiz has been called a

strong town: the fortifications on the land side, which were

partly the work of the French during the sway of Napoleon, are

perfectly admirable, and seem impregnable: towards the sea it

is defended as much by nature as by art, water and sunken rocks

being no contemptible bulwarks.  The defences of the town,

however, except the landward ones, afford melancholy proofs of

Spanish apathy and neglect, even when allowance is made for the

present peculiarly unhappy circumstances of the country.

Scarcely a gun, except a few dismounted ones, is to be seen on

the fortifications, which are rapidly falling to decay, so that

this insulated stronghold is at present almost at the mercy of

any foreign nation which, upon any pretence, or none at all,

should seek to tear it from the grasp of its present legitimate

possessors, and convert it into a foreign colony.



A few hours after my arrival, I waited upon Mr. B., the

British consul-general at Cadiz.  His house, which is the

corner one at the entrance of the alameda, commands a noble

prospect of the bay, and is very large and magnificent.  I had

of course long been acquainted with Mr. B. by reputation; I

knew that for several years he had filled, with advantage to

his native country and with honour to himself, the

distinguished and highly responsible situation which he holds

in Spain.  I knew, likewise, that he was a good and pious

Christian, and, moreover, the firm and enlightened friend of

the Bible Society.  Of all this I was aware, but I had never

yet enjoyed the advantage of being personally acquainted with

him.  I saw him now for the first time, and was much struck

with his appearance.  He is a tall, athletic, finely built man,

seemingly about forty-five or fifty; there is much dignity in

his countenance, which is, however, softened by an expression

of good humour truly engaging.  His manner is frank and affable

in the extreme.  I am not going to enter into minute details of

our interview, which was to me a very interesting one.  He knew

already the leading parts of my history since my arrival in

Spain, and made several comments upon it, which displayed his

intimate knowledge of the situation of the country as regards

ecclesiastical matters, and the state of opinion respecting

religious innovation.



I was pleased to find that his ideas in many points

accorded with my own, and we were both decidedly of opinion

that, notwithstanding the great persecution and outcry which

had lately been raised against the Gospel, the battle was by no

means lost, and that the holy cause might yet triumph in Spain,

if zeal united with discretion and Christian humility were

displayed by those called upon to uphold it.



During the greater part of this and the following day, I

was much occupied at the custom-house, endeavouring to obtain

the documents necessary for the exportation of the Testaments.

On the afternoon of Saturday, I dined with Mr. B. and his

family, an interesting group, - his lady, his beautiful

daughters, and his son, a fine intelligent young man.  Early

the next morning, a steamer, the BALEAR, was to quit Cadiz for

Marseilles, touching on the way at Algeciras, Gibraltar, and

various other ports of Spain.  I had engaged my passage on

board her as far as Gibraltar, having nothing farther to detain

me at Cadiz; my business with the custom-house having been

brought at last to a termination, though I believe I should

never have got through it but for the kind assistance of Mr. B.

I quitted this excellent man and my other charming friends at a

late hour with regret.  I believe that I carried with me their

very best wishes; and, in whatever part of the world I, a poor

wanderer in the Gospel's cause, may chance to be, I shall not

unfrequently offer up sincere prayers for their happiness and

well-being.



Before taking leave of Cadiz, I shall relate an anecdote

of the British consul, characteristic of him and the happy

manner in which he contrives to execute the most disagreeable

duties of his situation.  I was in conversation with him in a

parlour of his house, when we were interrupted by the entrance

of two very unexpected visitors: they were the captain of a

Liverpool merchant vessel and one of the crew.  The latter was

a rough sailor, a Welshman, who could only express himself in

very imperfect English.  They looked unutterable dislike and

defiance at each other.  It appeared that the latter had

refused to work, and insisted on leaving the ship, and his

master had in consequence brought him before the consul, in

order that, if he persisted, the consequences might be detailed

to him, which would be the forfeiture of his wages and clothes.

This was done; but the fellow became more and more dogged,

refusing ever to tread the same deck again with his captain,

who, he said, had called him "Greek, lazy lubberly Greek,"

which he would not bear.  The word Greek rankled in the

sailor's mind, and stung him to the very core.  Mr. B., who

seemed to be perfectly acquainted with the character of

Welshmen in general, who are proverbially obstinate when

opposition is offered to them, and who saw at once that the

dispute had arisen on foolish and trivial grounds, now told the

man, with a smile, that he would inform him of a way by which

he might gain the weather-gage of every one of them, consul and

captain and all, and secure his wages and clothes; which was by

merely going on board a brig of war of her Majesty, which was

then lying in the bay.  The fellow said he was aware of this,

and intended to do so.  His grim features, however, instantly

relaxed in some degree, and he looked more humanely upon his

captain.  Mr. B. then, addressing himself to the latter, made

some observations on the impropriety of using the word Greek to

a British sailor; not forgetting, at the same time, to speak of

the absolute necessity of obedience and discipline on board

every ship.  His words produced such an effect, that in a very

little time the sailor held out his hand towards his captain,

and expressed his willingness to go on board with him and

perform his duty, adding, that the captain, upon the whole, was

the best man in the world.  So they departed mutually pleased;

the consul making both of them promise to attend divine service

at his house on the following day.



Sunday morning came, and I was on board the steamer by

six o'clock.  As I ascended the side, the harsh sound of the

Catalan dialect assailed my ears.  In fact, the vessel was

Catalan built, and the captain and crew were of that nation;

the greater part of the passengers already on board, or who

subsequently arrived, appeared to be Catalans, and seemed to

vie with each other in producing disagreeable sounds.  A burly

merchant, however, with a red face, peaked chin, sharp eyes,

and hooked nose, clearly bore off the palm; he conversed with

astonishing eagerness on seemingly the most indifferent

subjects, or rather on no subject at all; his voice would have

sounded exactly like a coffee-mill but for a vile nasal twang:

he poured forth his Catalan incessantly till we arrived at

Gibraltar.  Such people are never sea-sick, though they

frequently produce or aggravate the malady in others.  We did

not get under way until past eight o'clock, for we waited for

the Governor of Algeciras, and started instantly on his coming

on board.  He was a tall, thin, rigid figure of about seventy,

with a long, grave, wrinkled countenance; in a word, the very

image of an old Spanish grandee.  We stood out of the bay,

rounding the lofty lighthouse, which stands on a ledge of

rocks, and then bent our course to the south, in the direction

of the straits.  It was a glorious morning, a blue sunny sky

and blue sunny ocean; or, rather, as my friend Oehlenschlaeger

has observed on a similar occasion, there appeared two skies

and two suns, one above and one below.



Our progress was rather slow, notwithstanding the

fineness of the weather, probably owing to the tide being

against us.  In about two hours we passed the Castle of Santa

Petra, and at noon were in sight of Trafalgar.  The wind now

freshened and was dead ahead; on which account we hugged

closely to the coast, in order to avoid as much as possible the

strong heavy sea which was pouring down from the Straits.  We

passed within a very short distance of the Cape, a bold bluff

foreland, but not of any considerable height.



It is impossible for an Englishman to pass by this place

- the scene of the most celebrated naval action on record -

without emotion.  Here it was that the united navies of France

and Spain were annihilated by a far inferior force; but that

force was British, and was directed by one of the most

remarkable men of the age, and perhaps the greatest hero of any

time.  Huge fragments of wreck still frequently emerge from the

watery gulf whose billows chafe the rocky sides of Trafalgar:

they are relies of the enormous ships which were burnt and sunk

on that terrible day, when the heroic champion of Britain

concluded his work and died.  I never heard but one individual

venture to say a word in disparagement of Nelson's glory: it

was a pert American, who observed, that the British admiral was

much overrated.  "Can that individual be overrated," replied a

stranger, "whose every thought was bent on his country's

honour, who scarcely ever fought without leaving a piece of his

body in the fray, and who, not to speak of minor triumphs, was

victorious in two such actions as Aboukir and Trafalgar?"



We were now soon in sight of the Moorish coast, Cape

Spartel appearing dimly through mist and vapour on our right.

A regular Levanter had now come on, and the vessel pitched and

tossed to a very considerable degree.  Most of the passengers

were sea-sick; the governor, however, and myself held out

manfully: we sat on a bench together, and entered into

conversation respecting the Moors and their country.

Torquemada himself could not have spoken of both with more

abhorrence.  He informed me that he had been frequently in

several of the principal Moorish towns of the coast, which he

described as heaps of ruins: the Moors themselves he called

Caffres and wild beasts.  He observed that he had never been

even at Tangier, where the people were most civilised, without

experiencing some insult, so great was the abhorrence of the

Moors to anything in the shape of a Christian.  He added,

however, that they treated the English with comparative

civility, and that they had a saying among them to the effect

that Englishman and Mahometan were one and the same; he then

looked particularly grave for a moment, and, crossing himself,

was silent.  I guessed what was passing in his mind:





"From heretic boors,

And Turkish Moors,

Star of the sea,

Gentle Marie,

Deliver me!"





At about three we were passing Tarifa, so frequently

mentioned in the history of the Moors and Christians.  Who has

not heard of Alonzo Guzman the faithful, who allowed his only

son to be crucified before the walls of the town rather than

submit to the ignominy of delivering up the keys to the Moorish

monarch, who, with a host which is said to have amounted to

nearly half a million of men, had landed on the shores of

Andalusia, and threatened to bring all Spain once more beneath

the Moslem yoke?  Certainly if there be a land and a spot where

the name of that good patriot is not sometimes mentioned and

sung, that land, that spot is modern Spain and modern Tarifa.

I have heard the ballad of Alonzo Guzman chanted in Danish, by

a hind in the wilds of Jutland; but once speaking of "the

Faithful" to some inhabitants of Tarifa, they replied that they

had never heard of Guzman the faithful of Tarifa, but were

acquainted with Alonzo Guzman, "the one-eyed" (EL TUERTO), and

that he was one of the most villainous arrieros on the Cadiz

road.



The voyage of these narrow seas can scarcely fail to be

interesting to the most apathetic individual, from the nature

of the scenery which presents itself to the eye on either side.

The coasts are exceedingly high and bold, especially that of

Spain, which seems to overthrow the Moorish; but opposite to

Tarifa, the African continent, rounding towards the south-west,

assumes an air of sublimity and grandeur.  A hoary mountain is

seen uplifting its summits above the clouds: it is Mount Abyla,

or as it is called in the Moorish tongue, Gibil Muza, or the

hill of Muza, from the circumstance of its containing the

sepulchre of a prophet of that name.  This is one of the two

excrescences of nature on which the Old World bestowed the

title of the Pillars of Hercules.  Its skirts and sides occupy

the Moorish coast for many leagues in more than one direction,

but the broad aspect of its steep and stupendous front is

turned full towards that part of the European continent where

Gibraltar lies like a huge monster stretching far into the

brine.  Of the two hills or pillars, the most remarkable, when

viewed from afar, is the African one, Gibil Muza.  It is the

tallest and bulkiest, and is visible at a greater distance; but

scan them both from near, and you feel that all your wonder is

engrossed by the European column.  Gibil Muza is an immense

shapeless mass, a wilderness of rocks, with here and there a

few trees and shrubs nodding from the clefts of its precipices;

it is uninhabited, save by wolves, wild swine, and chattering

monkeys, on which last account it is called by the Spaniards,

MONTANA DE LAS MONAS (the hill of the baboons); whilst, on the

contrary, Gibraltar, not to speak of the strange city which

covers part of it, a city inhabited by men of all nations and

tongues, its batteries and excavations, all of them miracles of

art, is the most singular-looking mountain in the world - a

mountain which can neither be described by pen nor pencil, and

at which the eye is never satiated with gazing.



It was near sunset, and we were crossing the bay of

Gibraltar.  We had stopped at Algeciras, on the Spanish side,

for the purpose of landing the old governor and his suite, and

delivering and receiving letters.



Algeciras is an ancient Moorish town, as the name

denotes, which is an Arabic word, and signifies "the place of

the islands."  It is situated at the water's edge, with a lofty

range of mountains in the rear.  It seemed a sad deserted

place, as far as I could judge at the distance of half a mile.

In the harbour, however, lay a Spanish frigate and French war

brig.  As we passed the former, some of the Spaniards on board

our steamer became boastful at the expense of the English.  It

appeared that, a few weeks before, an English vessel, suspected

to be a contraband trader, was seen by this frigate hovering

about a bay on the Andalusian coast, in company with an English

frigate, the ORESTES.  The Spaniard dogged them for some time,

till one morning observing that the ORESTES had disappeared, he

hoisted English colours, and made a signal to the trader to

bear down; the latter, deceived by the British ensign, and

supposing that the Spaniard was the friendly ORESTES, instantly

drew near, was fired at and boarded, and proving in effect to

be a contraband trader, she was carried into port and delivered

over to the Spanish authorities.  In a few days the captain of

the ORESTES hearing of this, and incensed at the unwarrantable

use made of the British flag, sent a boat on board the frigate

demanding that the vessel should be instantly restored, as, if

she was not, he would retake her by force; adding that he had

forty cannons on board.  The captain of the Spanish frigate

returned for answer, that the trader was in the hands of the

officers of the customs, and was no longer at his disposal;

that the captain of the ORESTES however, could do what he

pleased, and that if he had forty guns, he himself had forty-

four; whereupon the ORESTES thought proper to bear away.  Such

at least was the Spanish account as related by the journals.

Observing the Spaniards to be in great glee at the idea of one

of their nation having frightened away the Englishman, I

exclaimed, "Gentlemen, all of you who suppose that an English

sea captain has been deterred from attacking a Spaniard, from

an apprehension of a superior force of four guns, remember, if

you please, the fate of the SANTISSIMA TRINIDAD, and be pleased

also not to forget that we are almost within cannon's sound of

Trafalgar."



It was neat sunset, I repeat, and we were crossing the

bay of Gibraltar.  I stood on the prow of the vessel, with my

eyes intently fixed on the mountain fortress, which, though I

had seen it several times before, filled my mind with

admiration and interest.  Viewed from this situation, it

certainly, if it resembles any animate object in nature, has

something of the appearance of a terrible couchant lion, whose

stupendous head menaces Spain.  Had I been dreaming, I should

almost have concluded it to be the genius of Africa, in the

shape of its most puissant monster, who had bounded over the

sea from the clime of sand and sun, bent on the destruction of

the rival continent, more especially as the hue of its stony

sides, its crest and chine, is tawny even as that of the hide

of the desert king.  A hostile lion has it almost invariably

proved to Spain, at least since it first began to play a part

in history, which was at the time when Tarik seized and

fortified it.  It has for the most part been in the hands of

foreigners: first the swarthy and turbaned Moor possessed it,

and it is now tenanted by a fair-haired race from a distant

isle.  Though a part of Spain, it seems to disavow the

connexion, and at the end of a long narrow sandy isthmus,

almost level with the sea, raising its blasted and

perpendicular brow to denounce the crimes which deform the

history of that fair and majestic land.



It was near sunset, I say it for the third time, and we

were crossing the bay of Gibraltar.  Bay! it seemed no bay, but

an inland sea, surrounded on all sides by enchanted barriers,

so strange, so wonderful was the aspect of its coasts.  Before

us lay the impregnable hill; on our right the African

continent, with its grey Gibil Muza, and the crag of Ceuta, to

which last a solitary bark seemed steering its way; behind us

the town we had just quitted, with its mountain wall; on our

left the coast of Spain.  The surface of the water was

unruffled by a wave, and as we rapidly glided on, the strange

object which we were approaching became momentarily more

distinct and visible.  There, at the base of the mountain, and

covering a small portion of its side, lay the city, with its

ramparts garnished with black guns pointing significantly at

its moles and harbours; above, seemingly on every crag which

could be made available for the purpose of defence or

destruction, peered batteries, pale and sepulchral-looking, as

if ominous of the fate which awaited any intrusive foe; whilst

east and west towards Africa and Spain, on the extreme points,

rose castles, towers, or atalaias which overcrowded the whole,

and all the circumjacent region, whether land or sea.  Mighty

and threatening appeared the fortifications, and doubtless,

viewed in any other situation, would have alone occupied the

mind and engrossed its wonder; but the hill, the wondrous hill,

was everywhere about them, beneath them, or above them,

overpowering their effect as a spectacle.  Who, when he beholds

the enormous elephant, with his brandished trunk, dashing

impetuously to the war, sees the castle which he bears, or

fears the javelins of those whom he carries, however skilful

and warlike they may be?  Never does God appear so great and

powerful as when the works of his hands stand in contrast with

the labours of man.  Survey the Escurial, it is a proud work,

but wonder if you can when you see the mountain mocking it

behind; survey that boast of Moorish kings, survey Granada from

its plain, and wonder if you can, for you see the Alpujarra

mocking it from behind.  O what are the works of man compared

with those of the Lord?  Even as man is compared with his

creator.  Man builds pyramids, and God builds pyramids: the

pyramids of man are heaps of shingles, tiny hillocks on a sandy

plain; the pyramids of the Lord are Andes and Indian hills.

Man builds walls and so does his Master; but the walls of God

are the black precipices of Gibraltar and Horneel, eternal,

indestructible, and not to be scaled; whilst those of man can

be climbed, can be broken by the wave or shattered by the

lightning or the powder blast.  Would man display his power and

grandeur to advantage, let him flee far from the hills; for the

broad pennants of God, even his clouds, float upon the tops of

the hills, and the majesty of God is most manifest among the

hills.  Call Gibraltar the hill of Tarik or Hercules if you

will, but gaze upon it for a moment and you will call it the

hill of God.  Tarik and the old giant may have built upon it;

but not all the dark race of whom Tarik was one, nor all the

giants of old renown of whom the other was one, could have

built up its crags or chiseled the enormous mass to its present

shape.



We dropped anchor not far from the mole.  As we expected

every moment to hear the evening gun, after which no person is

permitted to enter the town, I was in trepidation lest I should

be obliged to pass the night on board the dirty Catalan

steamer, which, as I had no occasion to proceed farther in her,

I was in great haste to quit.  A boat now drew nigh, with two

individuals at the stern, one of whom, standing up, demanded,

in an authoritative voice, the name of the vessel, her

destination and cargo.  Upon being answered, they came on

board.  After some conversation with the captain, they were

about to depart, when I inquired whether I could accompany them

on shore.  The person I addressed was a tall young man, with a

fustian frock coat.  He had a long face, long nose, and wide

mouth, with large restless eyes.  There was a grin on his

countenance which seemed permanent, and had it not been for his

bronzed complexion, I should have declared him to be a cockney,

and nothing else.  He was, however, no such thing, but what is

called a rock lizard, that is, a person born at Gibraltar of

English parents.  Upon hearing my question, which was in

Spanish, he grinned more than ever, and inquired, in a strange

accent, whether I was a son of Gibraltar.  I replied that I had

not that honour, but that I was a British subject.  Whereupon

he said that he should make no difficulty in taking me ashore.

We entered the boat, which was rapidly rowed towards the land

by four Genoese sailors.  My two companions chattered in their

strange Spanish, he of the fustian occasionally turning his

countenance full upon me, the last grin appearing ever more

hideous than the preceding ones.  We soon reached the quay,

where my name was noted down by a person who demanded my

passport, and I was then permitted to advance.



It was now dusk, and I lost no time in crossing the

drawbridge and entering the long low archway which, passing

under the rampart, communicates with the town.  Beneath this

archway paced with measured tread, tall red-coated sentinels

with shouldered guns.  There was no stopping, no sauntering in

these men.  There was no laughter, no exchange of light

conversation with the passers by, but their bearing was that of

British soldiers, conscious of the duties of their station.

What a difference between them and the listless loiterers who

stand at guard at the gate of a Spanish garrisoned town.



I now proceeded up the principal street, which runs with

a gentle ascent along the base of the hill.  Accustomed for

some months past to the melancholy silence of Seville, I was

almost deafened by the noise and bustle which reigned around.

It was Sunday night, and of course no business was going on,

but there were throngs of people passing up and down.  Here was

a military guard proceeding along; here walked a group of

officers, there a knot of soldiers stood talking and laughing.

The greater part of the civilians appeared to be Spaniards, but

there was a large sprinkling of Jews in the dress of those of

Barbary, and here and there a turbaned Moor.  There were gangs

of sailors likewise, Genoese, judging from the patois which

they were speaking, though I occasionally distinguished the

sound of "tou logou sas," by which I knew there were Greeks at

hand, and twice or thrice caught a glimpse of the red cap and

blue silken petticoats of the mariner from the Romaic isles.

On still I hurried, till I arrived at a well known hostelry,

close by a kind of square, in which stands the little exchange

of Gibraltar.  Into this I ran and demanded lodging, receiving

a cheerful welcome from the genius of the place, who stood

behind the bar, and whom I shall perhaps have occasion

subsequently to describe.  All the lower rooms were filled with

men of the rock, burly men in general, with swarthy complexions

and English features, with white hats, white jean jerkins, and

white jean pantaloons.  They were smoking pipes and cigars, and

drinking porter, wine and various other fluids, and conversing

in the rock Spanish, or rock English as the fit took them.

Dense was the smoke of tobacco, and great the din of voices,

and I was glad to hasten up stairs to an unoccupied apartment,

where I was served with some refreshment, of which I stood much

in need.



I was soon disturbed by the sound of martial music close

below my windows.  I went down and stood at the door.  A

military band was marshalled upon the little square before the

exchange.  It was preparing to beat the retreat.  After the

prelude, which was admirably executed, the tall leader gave a

flourish with his stick, and strode forward up the street,

followed by the whole company of noble looking fellows and a

crowd of admiring listeners.  The cymbals clashed, the horns

screamed, and the kettle-drum emitted its deep awful note, till

the old rock echoed again, and the hanging terraces of the town

rang with the stirring noise:





"Dub-a-dub, dub-a-dub - thus go the drums,

Tantara, tantara, the Englishman comes."





O England! long, long may it be ere the sun of thy glory

sink beneath the wave of darkness!  Though gloomy and

portentous clouds are now gathering rapidly around thee, still,

still may it please the Almighty to disperse them, and to grant

thee a futurity longer in duration and still brighter in renown

than thy past!  Or if thy doom be at hand, may that doom be a

noble one, and worthy of her who has been styled the Old Queen

of the waters!  May thou sink, if thou dost sink, amidst blood

and flame, with a mighty noise, causing more than one nation to

participate in thy downfall!  Of all fates, may it please the

Lord to preserve thee from a disgraceful and a slow decay;

becoming, ere extinct, a scorn and a mockery for those selfsame

foes who now, though they envy and abhor thee, still fear thee,

nay, even against their will, honour and respect thee.



Arouse thee, whilst yet there is time, and prepare thee

for the combat of life and death!  Cast from thee the foul

scurf which now encrusts thy robust limbs, which deadens their

force, and makes them heavy and powerless!  Cast from thee thy

false philosophers, who would fain decry what, next to the love

of God, has hitherto been deemed most sacred, the love of the

mother land!  Cast from thee thy false patriots, who, under

the. pretext of redressing the wrongs of the poor and weak,

seek to promote internal discord, so that thou mayest become

only terrible to thyself!  And remove from thee the false

prophets, who have seen vanity and divined lies; who have

daubed thy wall with untempered mortar, that it may fall; who

see visions of peace where there is no peace; who have

strengthened the hands of the wicked, and made the heart of the

righteous sad.  O, do this, and fear not the result, for either

shall thy end be a majestic and an enviable one, or God shall

perpetuate thy reign upon the waters, thou old Queen!



The above was part of a broken prayer for my native land,

which, after my usual thanksgiving, I breathed to the Almighty

ere retiring to rest that Sunday night at Gibraltar.
