






CHAPTER XLV







Return to Spain - Seville - A Hoary Persecutor -

Manchegan Prophetess - Antonio's Dream.





On the 31st of December, 1838, I again visited Spain for

the third time.  After staying a day or two at Cadiz I repaired

to Seville, from which place I proposed starting for Madrid

with the mail post.  Here I tarried about a fortnight, enjoying

the delicious climate of this terrestrial Paradise, and the

balmy breezes of the Andalusian winter, even as I had done two

years previously.  Before leaving Seville, I visited the

bookseller, my correspondent, who informed me that seventy-six

copies of the hundred Testaments entrusted to his care had been

placed in embargo by the government last summer, and that they

were at the present time in the possession of the

ecclesiastical governor, whereupon I determined to visit this

functionary also, with the view of making inquiries concerning

the property.



He lived in a large house in the Pajaria, or straw-

market.  He was a very old man, between seventy and eighty,

and, like the generality of those who wear the sacerdotal habit

in this city, was a fierce persecuting Papist.  I imagine that

he scarcely believed his ears when his two grand-nephews,

beautiful black-haired boys who were playing in the court-yard,

ran to inform him that an Englishman was waiting to speak with

him, as it is probable that I was the first heretic who ever

ventured into his habitation.  I found him in a vaulted room,

seated on a lofty chair, with two sinister-looking secretaries,

also in sacerdotal habits, employed in writing at a table

before him.  He brought powerfully to my mind the grim old

inquisitor who persuaded Philip the Second to slay his own son

as an enemy to the church.



He rose as I entered, and gazed upon me with a

countenance dark with suspicion and dissatisfaction.  He at

last condescended to point me to a sofa, and I proceeded to

state to him my business.  He became much agitated when I

mentioned the Testaments to him; but I no sooner spoke of the

Bible Society and told him who I was, than he could contain

himself no longer: with a stammering tongue, and with eyes

flashing fire like hot coals, he proceeded to rail against the

society and myself, saying that the aims of the first were

atrocious, and that, as to myself, he was surprised that, being

once lodged in the prison of Madrid, I had ever been permitted

to quit it; adding, that it was disgraceful in the government

to allow a person of my character to roam about an innocent and

peaceful country, corrupting the minds of the ignorant and

unsuspicious.  Far from allowing myself to be disconcerted by

his rude behaviour, I replied to him with all possible

politeness, and assured him that in this instance he had no

reason to alarm himself, as my sole motive in claiming the

books in question, was to avail myself of an opportunity which

at present presented itself, of sending them out of the

country, which, indeed, I had been commanded to do by an

official notice.  But nothing would soothe him, and he informed

me that he should not deliver up the books on any condition,

save by a positive order of the government.  As the matter was

by no means an affair of consequence, I thought it wise not to

persist, and also prudent to take my leave before he requested

me.  I was followed even down into the street by his niece and

grand-nephews, who, during the whole of the conversation, had

listened at the door of the apartment and heard every word.



In passing through La Mancha, we staid for four hours at

Manzanares, a large village.  I was standing in the market-

place conversing with a curate, when a frightful ragged object

presented itself; it was a girl about eighteen or nineteen,

perfectly blind, a white film being spread over her huge

staring eyes.  Her countenance was as yellow as that of a

Mulatto.  I thought at first that she was a Gypsy, and

addressing myself to her, inquired in Gitano if she were of

that race; she understood me, but shaking her head, replied,

that she was something better than a Gitana, and could speak

something better than that jargon of witches; whereupon she

commenced asking me several questions in exceedingly good

Latin.  I was of course very much surprised, but summoning all

my Latinity, I called her Manchegan Prophetess, and expressing

my admiration for her learning, begged to be informed by what

means she became possessed of it.  I must here observe that a

crowd instantly gathered around us, who, though they understood

not one word of our discourse, at every sentence of the girl

shouted applause, proud in the possession of a prophetess who

could answer the Englishman.



She informed me that she was born blind, and that a

Jesuit priest had taken compassion on her when she was a child,

and had taught her the holy language, in order that the

attention and hearts of Christians might be more easily turned

towards her.  I soon discovered that he had taught her

something more than Latin, for upon telling her that I was an

Englishman, she said that she had always loved Britain, which

was once the nursery of saints and sages, for example Bede and

Alcuin, Columba and Thomas of Canterbury; but she added those

times had gone by since the re-appearance of Semiramis

(Elizabeth).  Her Latin was truly excellent, and when I, like a

genuine Goth, spoke of Anglia and Terra Vandalica (Andalusia),

she corrected me by saying, that in her language those places

were called Britannia and Terra Betica.  When we had finished

our discourse, a gathering was made for the prophetess, the

very poorest contributing something.



After travelling four days and nights, we arrived at

Madrid, without having experienced the slightest accident,

though it is but just to observe, and always with gratitude to

the Almighty, that the next mail was stopped.  A singular

incident befell me immediately after my arrival; on entering

the arch of the posada called La Reyna, where I intended to put

up, I found myself encircled in a person's arms, and on turning

round in amazement, beheld my Greek servant, Antonio.  He was

haggard and ill-dressed, and his eyes seemed starting from

their sockets.



As soon as we were alone he informed that since my

departure he had undergone great misery and destitution,

having, during the whole period, been unable to find a master

in need of his services, so that he was brought nearly to the

verge of desperation; but that on the night immediately

preceding my arrival he had a dream, in which he saw me,

mounted on a black horse, ride up to the gate of the posada,

and that on that account he had been waiting there during the

greater part of the day.  I do not pretend to offer an opinion

concerning this narrative, which is beyond the reach of my

philosophy, and shall content myself with observing that only

two individuals in Madrid were aware of my arrival in Spain.  I

was very glad to receive him again into my service, as,

notwithstanding his faults, he had in many instances proved of

no slight assistance to me in my wanderings and biblical

labours.



I was soon settled in my former lodgings, when one my

first cares was to pay a visit to Lord Clarendon.  Amongst

other things, he informed me that he had received an official

notice from the government, stating the seizure of the New

Testaments at Ocana, the circumstances relating to which I have

described on a former occasion, and informing him that unless

steps were instantly taken to remove them from the country,

they would be destroyed at Toledo, to which place they had been

conveyed.  I replied that I should give myself no trouble about

the matter; and that if the authorities of Toledo, civil or

ecclesiastic, determined upon burning these books, my only hope

was that they would commit them to the flames with all possible

publicity, as by so doing they would but manifest their own

hellish rancour and their hostility to the word of God.



Being eager to resume my labours, I had no sooner arrived

at Madrid than I wrote to Lopez at Villa Seca, for the purpose

of learning whether he was inclined to cooperate in the work,

as on former occasions.  In reply, he informed me that he was

busily employed in his agricultural pursuits: to supply his

place, however, he sent over an elderly villager, Victoriano

Lopez by name, a distant relation of his own.



What is a missionary in the heart of Spain without a

horse?  Which consideration induced me now to purchase an

Arabian of high caste, which had been brought from Algiers by

an officer of the French legion.  The name of this steed, the

best I believe that ever issued from the desert, was Sidi

Habismilk.

