





CHAPTER II







Boatmen of the Tagus - Dangers of the Stream - Aldea Gallega -

The Hostelry - Robbers - Sabocha - Adventure of a Muleteer -

Estalagem de Ladroes - Don Geronimo - Vendas Novas - Royal Residence -

Swine of the Alemtejo - Monto Moro - Swayne Vonved - Singular Goatherd -

Children of the Fields - Infidels and Sadducees.





On the afternoon of the sixth of December I set out for

Evora, accompanied by my servant.  I had been informed that the

tide would serve for the regular passage-boats, or felouks, as

they are called, at about four o'clock, but on reaching the

side of the Tagus opposite to Aldea Gallega, between which

place and Lisbon the boats ply, I found that the tide would not

permit them to start before eight o'clock.  Had I waited for

them I should have probably landed at Aldea Gallega about

midnight, and I felt little inclination to make my entree in

the Alemtejo at that hour; therefore, as I saw small boats

which can push off at any time lying near in abundance, I

determined upon hiring one of them for the passage, though the

expense would be thus considerably increased.  I soon agreed

with a wild-looking lad, who told me that he was in part owner

of one of the boats, to take me over.  I was not aware of the

danger in crossing the Tagus at its broadest part, which is

opposite Aldea Gallega, at any time, but especially at close of

day in the winter season, or I should certainly not have

ventured.  The lad and his comrade, a miserable looking object,

whose only clothing, notwithstanding the season, was a tattered

jerkin and trousers, rowed until we had advanced about half a

mile from the land; they then set up a large sail, and the lad,

who seemed to direct everything and to be the principal, took

the helm and steered.  The evening was now setting in; the sun

was not far from its bourne in the horizon, the air was very

cold, the wind was rising, and the waves of the noble Tagus

began to be crested with foam.  I told the boy that it was

scarcely possible for the boat to carry so much sail without

upsetting, upon which he laughed, and began to gabble in a most

incoherent manner.  He had the most harsh and rapid

articulation that has ever come under my observation in any

human being; it was the scream of the hyena blended with the

bark of the terrier, though it was by no means an index of his

disposition, which I soon found to be light, merry, and

anything but malevolent, for when I, in order to show him that

I cared little about him, began to hum "EU QUE SOU

CONTRABANDISTA," he laughed heartily and said, clapping me on

the shoulder, that he would not drown us if he could help it.

The other poor fellow seemed by no means averse to go to the

bottom; he sat at the fore part of the boat looking the image

of famine, and only smiled when the waters broke over the

weather side and soaked his scanty habiliments.  In a little

time I had made up my mind that our last hour was come; the

wind was getting higher, the short dangerous waves were more

foamy, the boat was frequently on its beam, and the water came

over the lee side in torrents; but still the wild lad at the

helm held on laughing and chattering, and occasionally yelling

out part of the Miguelite air, "QUANDO EL REY CHEGOU" the

singing of which in Lisbon is imprisonment.



The stream was against us, but the wind was in our

favour, and we sprang along at a wonderful rate, and I saw that

our only chance of escape was in speedily passing the farther

bank of the Tagus where the bight or bay at the extremity of

which stands Aldea Gallega commences, for we should not then

have to battle with the waves of the stream, which the adverse

wind lashed into fury.  It was the will of the Almighty to

permit us speedily to gain this shelter, but not before the

boat was nearly filled with water, and we were all wet to the

skin.  At about seven o'clock in the evening we reached Aldea

Gallega, shivering with cold and in a most deplorable plight.



Aldea Gallega, or the Galician Village (for the two words

are Spanish, and have that signification), it a place

containing, I should think, about four thousand inhabitants.

It was pitchy dark when we landed, but rockets soon began to

fly about in all directions, illuming the air far and wide.  As

we passed along the dirty unpaved street which leads to the

Largo, or square in which the inn is situated, a horrible

uproar of drums and voices assailed our ears.  On inquiring the

cause of all this bustle, I was informed that it was the eve of

the Conception of the Virgin.



As it was not the custom of the people at the inn to

furnish provisions for the guests, I wandered about in search

of food; and at last seeing some soldiers eating and drinking

in a species of wine-house, I went in and asked the people to

let me have some supper, and in a short time they furnished me

with a tolerable meal, for which, however, they charged three

crowns.



Having engaged with a person for mules to carry us to

Evora, which were to be ready at five next morning, I soon

retired to bed, my servant sleeping in the same apartment,

which was the only one in the house vacant.  I closed not my

eyes during the whole night.  Beneath us was a stable, in which

some almocreves, or carriers, slept with their mules; at our

back, in the yard, was a pigsty.  How could I sleep?  The hogs

grunted, the mules screamed, and the almocreves snored most

horribly.  I heard the village clock strike the hours until

midnight, and from midnight till four in the morning, when I

sprang up and began to dress, and despatched my servant to

hasten the man with the mules, for I was heartily tired of the

place and wanted to leave it.  An old man, bony and hale,

accompanied by a barefooted lad, brought the beasts, which were

tolerably good.  He was the proprietor of them, and intended,

with the lad, who was his nephew, to accompany us to Evora.



When we started, the moon was shining brightly, and the

morning was piercingly cold.  We soon entered on a sandy hollow

way, emerging from which we passed by a strange-looking and

large edifice, standing on a high bleak sand-hill on our left.

We were speedily overtaken by five or six men on horseback,

riding at a rapid pace, each with a long gun slung at his

saddle, the muzzle depending about two feet below the horse's

belly.  I inquired of the old man what was the reason of this

warlike array.  He answered, that the roads were very bad

(meaning that they abounded with robbers), and that they went

armed in this manner for their defence; they soon turned off to

the right towards Palmella.



We reached a sandy plain studded with stunted pine; the

road was little more than a footpath, and as we proceeded, the

trees thickened and became a wood, which extended for two

leagues, with clear spaces at intervals, in which herds of

cattle and sheep were feeding; the bells attached to their

necks were ringing lowly and monotonously.  The sun was just

beginning to show itself; but the morning was misty and dreary,

which, together with the aspect of desolation which the country

exhibited, had an unfavourable effect on my spirits.  I got

down and walked, entering into conversation with the old man.

He seemed to have but one theme, "the robbers," and the

atrocities they were in the habit of practising in the very

spots we were passing.  The tales he told were truly horrible,

and to avoid them I mounted again, and rode on considerably in

front.



In about an hour and a half we emerged from the forest,

and entered upon a savage, wild, broken ground, covered with

mato, or brushwood.  The mules stopped to drink at a shallow

pool, and on looking to the right I saw a ruined wall.  This,

the guide informed me, was the remains of Vendas Velhas, or the

Old Inn, formerly the haunt of the celebrated robber Sabocha.

This Sabocha, it seems, had, some sixteen years ago, a band of

about forty ruffians at his command, who infested these wilds,

and supported themselves by plunder.  For a considerable time

Sabocha pursued his atrocious trade unsuspected, and many an

unfortunate traveller was murdered in the dead of night at the

solitary inn by the wood-side, which he kept; indeed, a more

fit situation for plunder and murder I never saw.  The gang

were in the habit of watering their horses at the pool, and

perhaps of washing therein their hands stained with the blood

of their victims; the lieutenant of the troop was the brother

of Sabocha, a fellow of great strength and ferocity,

particularly famous for the skill he possessed in darting a

long knife, with which he was in the habit of transfixing his

opponents.  Sabocha's connection with the gang at length became

known, and he fled, with the greater part of his associates,

across the Tagus to the northern provinces.  Himself and his

brothers eventually lost their lives on the road to Coimbra, in

an engagement with the military.  His house was razed by order

of the government.



The ruins are still frequently visited by banditti, who

eat and drink amidst them, and look out for prey, as the place

commands a view of the road.  The old man assured me, that

about two months previous, on returning to Aldea Gallega with

his mules from accompanying some travellers, he had been

knocked down, stripped naked, and all his money taken from him,

by a fellow whom he believed came from this murderers' nest.

He said that he was an exceedingly powerful young man, with

immense moustaches and whiskers, and was armed with an

espingarda, or musket.  About ten days subsequently he saw the

robber at Vendas Novas, where we should pass the night.  The

fellow on recognising him took him aside, and, with horrid

imprecations, threatened that he should never be permitted to

return home if he attempted to discover him; he therefore held

his peace, as there was little to be gained and everything to

be risked in apprehending him, as he would have been speedily

set at liberty for want of evidence to criminate him, and then

he would not have failed to have had his revenge, or would have

been anticipated therein by his comrades.



I dismounted and went up to the place, and saw the

vestiges of a fire and a broken bottle.  The sons of plunder

had been there very lately.  I left a New Testament and some

tracts amongst the ruins, and hastened away.



The sun had dispelled the mists and was beaming very hot;

we rode on for about an hour, when I heard the neighing of a

horse in our rear, and our guide said there was a party of

horsemen behind; our mules were good, and they did not overtake

us for at least twenty minutes.  The headmost rider was a

gentleman in a fashionable travelling dress; a little way

behind were an officer, two soldiers, and a boy in livery.  I

heard the principal horseman, on overtaking my servant,

inquiring who I was, and whether French or English.  He was

told I was an English gentleman, travelling.  He then asked

whether I understood Portuguese; the man said I understood it,

but he believed that I spoke French and Italian better.  The

gentleman then spurred on his horse and accosted me, not in

Portuguese, nor in French or Italian, but in the purest English

that I ever heard spoken by a foreigner; it had, indeed,

nothing of foreign accent or pronunciation in it; and had I not

known, by the countenance of the speaker, that he was no

Englishman, (for there is a peculiarity in the countenance, as

everybody knows, which, though it cannot be described, is sure

to betray the Englishman), I should have concluded that I was

in company with a countryman.  We continued discoursing until

we arrived at Pegoens.



Pegoens consists of about two or three houses and an inn;

there is likewise a species of barrack, where half a dozen

soldiers are stationed.  In the whole of Portugal there is no

place of worse reputation, and the inn is nick-named ESTALAGEM

DE LADROES, or the hostelry of thieves; for it is there that

the banditti of the wilderness, which extends around it on

every side for leagues, are in the habit of coming and spending

the money, the fruits of their criminal daring; there they

dance and sing, eat fricasseed rabbits and olives, and drink

the muddy but strong wine of the Alemtejo.  An enormous fire,

fed by the trunk of a cork tree, was blazing in a niche on the

left hand on entering the spacious kitchen.  Close by it,

seething, were several large jars, which emitted no

disagreeable odour, and reminded me that I had not broken my

fast, although it was now nearly one o'clock, and I had ridden

five leagues.  Several wild-looking men, who if they were not

banditti might easily be mistaken for such, were seated on logs

about the fire.  I asked them some unimportant questions, to

which they replied with readiness and civility, and one of

them, who said he could read, accepted a tract which I offered

him.



My new friend, who had been bespeaking dinner, or rather

breakfast, now, with great civility, invited me to partake of

it, and at the same time introduced me to the officer who

accompanied him, and who was his brother, and also spoke

English, though not so well as himself.  I found I had become

acquainted with Don Geronimo Joze D'Azveto, secretary to the

government at Evora; his brother belonged to a regiment of

hussars, whose headquarters were at Evora, but which had

outlying parties along the road, - for example, the place where

we were stopping.



Rabbits at Pegoens seem to be a standard article of food,

being produced in abundance on the moors around.  We had one

fried, the gravy of which was delicious, and afterwards a

roasted one, which was brought up on a dish entire; the

hostess, having first washed her hands, proceeded to tear the

animal to pieces, which having accomplished, she poured over

the fragments a sweet sauce.  I ate heartily of both dishes,

particularly of the last; owing, perhaps, to the novel and

curious manner in which it was served up.  Excellent figs, from

the Algarves, and apples concluded our repast, which we ate in

a little side room with a mud floor, which sent such a piercing

chill into my system, as prevented me from deriving that

pleasure from my fare and my agreeable companions that I should

have otherwise experienced.



Don Geronimo had been educated in England, in which

country he passed his boyhood, which in a certain degree

accounted for his proficiency in the English language, the

idiom and pronunciation of which can only be acquired by

residing in the country at that period of one's life.  He had

also fled thither shortly after the usurpation of the throne of

Portugal by Don Miguel, and from thence had departed to the

Brazils, where he had devoted himself to the service of Don

Pedro, and had followed him in the expedition which terminated

in the downfall of the usurper and the establishment of the

constitutional government in Portugal.  Our conversation rolled

chiefly on literary and political subjects, and my acquaintance

with the writings of the most celebrated authors of Portugal

was hailed with surprise and delight; for nothing is more

gratifying to a Portuguese than to observe a foreigner taking

an interest in the literature of his nation, of which, in many

respects, he is justly proud.



At about two o'clock we were once more in the saddle, and

pursued our way in company through a country exactly resembling

that which we had previously been traversing, rugged and

broken, with here and there a clump of pines.  The afternoon

was exceedingly fine, and the bright rays of the sun relieved

the desolation of the scene.  Having advanced about two

leagues, we caught sight of a large edifice towering

majestically in the distance, which I learnt was a royal palace

standing at the farther extremity of Vendas Novas, the village

in which we were to pass the night; it was considerably more

than a league from us, yet, seen through the clear transparent

atmosphere of Portugal it appeared much nearer.



Before reaching it we passed by a stone cross, on the

pedestal of which was an inscription commemorating a horrible

murder of a native of Lisbon, which had occurred on that spot;

it looked ancient, and was covered with moss, and the greater

part of the inscription was illegible, at least it was to me,

who could not bestow much time on its deciphering.  Having

arrived at Vendas Novas, and bespoken supper, my new friend and

myself strolled forth to view the palace; it was built by the

late king of Portugal, and presents little that is remarkable

in its exterior; it is a long edifice with wings, and is only

two stories high, though it can be seen afar off, from being

situated on elevated ground; it has fifteen windows in the

upper, and twelve in the lower story, with a paltry-looking

door, something like that of a barn, to which you ascend by one

single step; the interior corresponds with the exterior,

offering nothing which can gratify curiosity, if we except the

kitchens, which are indeed magnificent, and so large that food

enough might be cooked in them, at one time, to serve as a

repast for all the inhabitants of the Alemtejo.



I passed the night with great comfort in a clean bed,

remote from all those noises so rife in a Portuguese inn, and

the next morning at six we again set out on our journey, which

we hoped to terminate before sunset, as Evora is but ten

leagues from Vendas Novas.  The preceding morning had been

cold, but the present one was far colder, so much so, that just

before sunrise I could no longer support it on horseback, and

therefore dismounting, ran and walked until we reached a few

houses at the termination of these desolate moors.  It was in

one of these houses that the commissioners of Don Pedro and

Miguel met, and it was there agreed that the latter should

resign the crown in favour of Donna Maria, for Evora was the

last stronghold of the usurper, and the moors of the Alemtejo

the last area of the combats which so long agitated unhappy

Portugal.  I therefore gazed on the miserable huts with

considerable interest, and did not fail to scatter in the

neighbourhood several of the precious little tracts with which,

together with a small quantity of Testaments, my carpet bag was

provided.



The country began to improve; the savage heaths were left

behind, and we saw hills and dales, cork trees, and azinheiras,

on the last of which trees grows that kind of sweet acorn

called bolotas, which is pleasant as a chestnut, and which

supplies in winter the principal food on which the numerous

swine of the Alemtejo subsist.  Gallant swine they are, with

short legs and portly bodies of a black or dark red colour; and

for the excellence of their flesh I can vouch, having

frequently luxuriated upon it in the course of my wanderings in

this province; the lombo, or loin, when broiled on the live

embers, is delicious, especially when eaten with olives.



We were now in sight of Monte Moro, which, as the name

denotes, was once a fortress of the Moors; it is a high steep

hill, on the summit and sides of which are ruined walls and

towers; at its western side is a deep ravine or valley, through

which a small stream rushes, traversed by a stone bridge;

farther down there is a ford, over which we passed and ascended

to the town, which, commencing near the northern base, passes

over the lower ridge towards the north-east.  The town is

exceedingly picturesque, and many of the houses are very

ancient, and built in the Moorish fashion.  I wished much to

examine the relics of Moorish sway on the upper part of the

mountain, but time pressed, and the short period of our stay at

this place did not permit me to gratify my inclination.



Monte Moro is the head of a range of hills which cross

this part of the Alemtejo, and from hence they fork east and

south-east, towards the former of which directions lies the

direct road to Elvas, Badajos, and Madrid; and towards the

latter that to Evora.  A beautiful mountain, covered to the top

with cork trees, is the third of the chain which skirts the way

in the direction of Elvas.  It is called Monte Almo; a brook

brawls at its base, and as I passed it the sun was shining

gloriously on the green herbage on which flocks of goats were

feeding, with their bells ringing merrily, so that the TOUT

ENSEMBLE resembled a fairy scene; and that nothing might be

wanted to complete the picture, I here met a man, a goatherd,

beneath an azinheira, whose appearance recalled to my mind the

Brute Carle, mentioned in the Danish ballad of Swayne Vonved:-





"A wild swine on his shoulders he kept,

And upon his bosom a black bear slept;

And about his fingers with hair o'erhung,

 The squirrel sported and weasel clung."





Upon the shoulder of the goatherd was a beast, which he

told me was a lontra, or otter, which he had lately caught in

the neighbouring brook; it had a string round its neck which

was attached to his arm.  At his left side was a bag, from the

top of which peered the heads of two or three singular-looking

animals, and at his right was squatted the sullen cub of a

wolf, which he was endeavouring to tame; his whole appearance

was to the last degree savage and wild.  After a little

conversation such as those who meet on the road frequently

hold, I asked him if he could read, but he made me no answer.

I then inquired if he knew anything of God or Jesus Christ; he

looked me fixedly in the face for a moment, and then turned his

countenance towards the sun, which was beginning to sink in the

west, nodded to it, and then again looked fixedly upon me.  I

believe that I understood the mute reply; which probably was,

that it was God who made that glorious light which illumes and

gladdens all creation; and gratified with that belief, I left

him and hastened after my companions, who were by this time a

considerable way in advance.



I have always found in the disposition of the children of

the fields a more determined tendency to religion and piety

than amongst the inhabitants of towns and cities, and the

reason is obvious, they are less acquainted with the works of

man's hands than with those of God; their occupations, too,

which are simple, and requiring less of ingenuity and skill

than those which engage the attention of the other portion of

their fellow-creatures, are less favourable to the engendering

of self-conceit and sufficiency so utterly at variance with

that lowliness of spirit which constitutes the best foundation

of piety.  The sneerers and scoffers at religion do not spring

from amongst the simple children of nature, but are the

excrescences of overwrought refinement, and though their

baneful influence has indeed penetrated to the country and

corrupted man there, the source and fountainhead was amongst

crowded houses, where nature is scarcely known.  I am not one

of those who look for perfection amongst the rural population

of any country; perfection is not to be found amongst the

children of the fall, wherever their abodes may happen to be;

but, until the heart discredits the existence of a God, there

is still hope for the soul of the possessor, however stained

with crime he may be, for even Simon the magician was

converted; but when the heart is once steeled with infidelity,

infidelity confirmed by carnal wisdom, an exuberance of the

grace of God is required to melt it, which is seldom

manifested; for we read in the blessed book that the Pharisee

and the wizard became receptacles of grace, but where is there

mention made of the conversion of the sneering Sadducee, and is

the modern infidel aught but a Sadducee of later date?



It was dark night before we reached Evora, and having

taken leave of my friends, who kindly requested me to consider

their house my home, I and my servant went to the Largo de San

Francisco, in which the muleteer informed me was the best

hostelry of the town.  We rode into the kitchen, at the extreme

end of which was the stable, as is customary in Portugal.  The

house was kept by an aged gypsy-like female and her daughter, a

fine blooming girl about eighteen years of age.  The house was

large; in the upper storey was a very long room, like a

granary, which extended nearly the whole length of the house;

the farther part was partitioned off and formed a chamber

tolerably comfortable but very cold, and the floor was of

tiles, as was also that of the large room in which the

muleteers were accustomed to sleep on the furniture of the

mules.  After supper I went to bed, and having offered up my

devotions to Him who had protected me through a dangerous

journey, I slept soundly till the morning.
