






CHAPTER XXXVII







Euscarra - Basque not Irish - Sanskrit and Tartar Dialects -

A Vowel Language - Popular Poetry - The Basques - Their Persons -

Basque Women.





I now entered upon the year 1838, perhaps the most

eventful of all those which I passed in Spain.  The despacho

still continued open, with a somewhat increasing sale.  Having

at this time little of particular moment with which to occupy

myself, I committed to the press two works, which for some time

past had been in the course of preparation.  These were the

Gospel of St. Luke in the Spanish Gypsy and the Euscarra

languages.



With respect to the Gypsy Gospel I have little to say,

having already spoken of it in a former work (THE ZINCALI): it

was translated by myself, together with the greater part of the

New Testament, during my long intercourse with the Spanish

Gypsies.  Concerning the Luke in Euscarra, however, it will be

as well to be more particular, and to avail myself of the

present opportunity to say a few words concerning the language

in which it was written, and the people for whom it was

intended.



The Euscarra, then, is the proper term for a certain

speech or language, supposed to have been at one time prevalent

throughout Spain, but which is at present confined to certain

districts, both on the French and Spanish side of the Pyrenees,

which are laved by the waters of the Cantabrian Gulf or Bay of

Biscay.  This language is commonly known as the Basque or

Biscayan, which words are mere modifications of the word

Euscarra, the consonant B having been prefixed for the sake of

euphony.  Much that is vague, erroneous, and hypothetical, has

been said and written concerning this tongue.  The Basques

assert that it was not only the original language of Spain, but

also of the world, and that from it all other languages are

derived; but the Basques are a very ignorant people, and know

nothing of the philosophy of language.  Very little importance,

therefore, need be attached to any opinion of theirs on such a

subject.  A few amongst them, however, who affect some degree

of learning, contend, that it is neither more nor less than a

dialect of the Phoenician, and, that the Basques are the

descendants of a Phoenician colony, established at the foot of

the Pyrenees at a very remote period.  Of this theory, or

rather conjecture, as it is unsubstantiated by the slightest

proof, it is needless to take further notice than to observe

that, provided the Phoenician language, as many of the TRULY

LEARNED have supposed and almost proved, was a dialect of the

Hebrew, or closely allied to it, it were as unreasonable to

suppose that the Basque is derived from it, as that the

Kamschatdale and Cherokee are dialects of the Greek or Latin.



There is, however, another opinion with respect to the

Basque which deserves more especial notice, from the

circumstance of its being extensively entertained amongst the

literati of various countries of Europe, more especially

England.  I allude to the Celtic origin of this tongue, and its

close connexion with the most cultivated of all the Celtic

dialects, the Irish.  People who pretend to be well conversant

with the subject, have even gone so far as to assert, that so

little difference exists between the Basque and Irish tongues,

that individuals of the two nations, when they meet together,

find no difficulty in understanding each other, with no other

means of communication than their respective languages; in a

word, that there is scarcely a greater difference between the

two than between the French and the Spanish Basque.  Such

similarity, however, though so strongly insisted upon, by no

means exists in fact, and perhaps in the whole of Europe it

would be difficult to discover two languages which exhibit

fewer points of mutual resemblance than the Basque and Irish.



The Irish, like most other European languages, is a

dialect of the Sanskrit, a REMOTE one, as may well be supposed.

The corner of the western world in which it is still preserved

being, of all countries in Europe, the most distant from the

proper home of the parent tongue.  It is still, however, a

dialect of that venerable and most original speech, not so

closely resembling it, it is true, as the English, Danish, and

those which belong to what is called the Gothic family, and far

less than those of the Sclavonian; for, the nearer we approach

to the East, in equal degree the assimilation of languages to

this parent stock becomes more clear and distinct; but still a

dialect, agreeing with the Sanskrit in structure, in the

arrangement of words, and in many instances in the words

themselves, which, however modified, may still be recognized as

Sanskrit.  But what is the Basque, and to what family does it

properly pertain?



To two great Asiatic languages, all the dialects spoken

at present in Europe may be traced.  These two, if not now

spoken, still exist in books, and are, moreover, the languages

of two of the principal religions of the East.  I allude to the

Tibetian and Sanskrit - the sacred languages of the followers

of Buddh and Bramah.  These tongues, though they possess many

words in common, which is easily to be accounted for by their

close proximity, are properly distinct, being widely different

in structure.  In what this difference consists, I have neither

time nor inclination to state; suffice it to say that the

Celtic, Gothic, and Sclavonian dialects in Europe belong to the

Sanskrit family, even as in the East the Persian, and to a less

degree the Arabic, Hebrew, etc.; whilst to the Tibetian or

Tartar family in Asia pertain the Mandchou and Mongolian, the

Calmuc and the Turkish of the Caspian Sea; and in Europe, the

Hungarian and the Basque PARTIALLY.



Indeed this latter language is a strange anomaly, so that

upon the whole it is less difficult to say what it is not, than

what it is.  It abounds with Sanskrit words to such a degree

that its surface seems strewn with them.  Yet would it be wrong

to term it a Sanskrit dialect, for in the collocation of these

words the Tartar form is most decidedly observable.  A

considerable proportion of Tartar words is likewise to be found

in this language, though perhaps not in equal number to the

terms derived from the Sanskrit.  Of these Tartar etymons I

shall at present content myself with citing one, though, if

necessary, it were easy to adduce hundreds.  This word is

JAUNA, or as it is pronounced, KHAUNA, a word in constant use

amongst the Basques, and which is the KHAN of the Mongols and

Mandchous, and of the same signification - Lord.



Having closely examined the subject in all its various

bearings, and having weighed what is to be said on one side

against what is to be advanced on the other, I am inclined to

rank the Basque rather amongst the Tartar than the Sanskrit

dialects.  Whoever should have an opportunity of comparing the

enunciation of the Basques and Tartars would, from that alone,

even if he understood them not, come to the conclusion that

their respective languages were formed on the same principles.

In both occur periods seemingly interminable, during which the

voice gradually ascends to a climax, and then gradually sinks

down.



I have spoken of the surprising number of Sanskrit words

contained in the Basque language, specimens of some of which

will be found below.  It is remarkable enough, that in the

greater part of the derivatives from the Sanskrit the Basque

has dropped the initial consonant, so that the word commences

with a vowel.  The Basque, indeed, may be said to be almost a

vowel language; the number of consonants employed being

comparatively few: perhaps eight words out of ten commence and

terminate with a vowel, owing to which it is a language to the

highest degree soft and melodious, far excelling in this

respect any other language in Europe, not even excepting the

Italian.



Here follow a few specimens of Basque words with the

Sanskrit roots in juxtaposition:-





BASQUE.     SANSKRIT.

Ardoa       Sandhana       WINE.

Arratsa     Ratri          NIGHT.

Beguia      Akshi          EYE.

Choria      Chiria         BIRD.

Chacurra    Cucura         DOG.

Erreguina   Rani           QUEEN.

Icusi       Iksha          TO SEE.

Iru         Treya          THREE.

Jan (Khan)  Khana          TO EAT.

Uria        Puri           CITY.

Urruti      Dura           FAR.





Such is the tongue in which I brought out Saint Luke's

Gospel at Madrid.  The translation I procured originally from a

Basque physician of the name of Oteiza.  Previous to being sent

to the press, the version had lain nearly two years in my

possession, during which time, and particularly during my

travels, I lost no opportunity of submitting it to the

inspection of those who were considered competent scholars in

the Euscarra.  It did not entirely please me; but it was in

vain to seek for a better translation.



In my early youth I had obtained a slight acquaintance

with the Euscarra, as it exists in books.  This acquaintance I

considerably increased during my stay in Spain; and by

occasionally mingling with Basques, was enabled to understand

the spoken language to a certain extent, and even to speak it,

but always with considerable hesitation; for to speak Basque,

even tolerably, it is necessary to have lived in the country

from a very early period.  So great are the difficulties

attending it, and so strange are its peculiarities, that it is

very rare to find a foreigner possessed of any considerable

skill in the oral language, and the Spaniards consider the

obstacles so formidable that they have a proverb to the effect

that Satan once lived seven years in Biscay, and then departed,

finding himself unable either to understand or to make himself

understood.



There are few inducements to the study of this language.

In the first place, the acquisition of it is by no means

necessary even to those who reside in the countries where it is

spoken; the Spanish being generally understood throughout the

Basque provinces pertaining to Spain, and the French in those

pertaining to France.



In the second place, neither dialect is in possession of

any peculiar literature capable of repaying the toil of the

student.  There are various books extant both in French and

Spanish Basque, but these consist entirely of Popish devotion,

and are for the most part translations.



It will, perhaps, here be asked whether the Basques do

not possess popular poetry, like most other nations, however

small and inconsiderable.  They have certainly no lack of

songs, ballads, and stanzas, but of a character by no means

entitled to the appellation of poetry.  I have noted down from

recitation a considerable portion of what they call their

poetry, but the only tolerable specimen of verse which I ever

discovered amongst them was the following stanza, which, after

all, is not entitled to very high praise:-





"Ichasoa urac aundi,

Estu ondoric agueri -

Pasaco ninsaqueni andic

Maitea icustea gatic."





I.E. "The waters of the sea are vast, and their bottom

cannot be seen: but over them I will pass, that I may behold my

love."



The Basques are a singing rather than a poetical people.

Notwithstanding the facility with which their tongue lends

itself to the composition of verse, they have never produced

among them a poet with the slightest pretensions to reputation;

but their voices are singularly sweet, and they are known to

excel in musical composition.  It is the opinion of a certain

author, the Abbe D'Ilharce, who has written about them, that

they derived the name CANTABRI, by which they were known to the

Romans, from KHANTOR-BER, signifying sweet singers.  They

possess much music of their own, some of which is said to be

exceedingly ancient.  Of this music specimens were published at

Donostian (San Sebastian) in the year 1826, edited by a certain

Juan Ignacio Iztueta.  These consist of wild and thrilling

marches, to the sound of which it is believed that the ancient

Basques were in the habit of descending from their mountains to

combat with the Romans, and subsequently with the Moors.

Whilst listening to them it is easy to suppose oneself in the

close vicinity of some desperate encounter.  We seem to hear

the charge of cavalry on the sounding plain, the clash of

swords, and the rushing of men down the gorges of hills.  This

music is accompanied with words, but such words!  Nothing can

be imagined more stupid, commonplace, and uninteresting.  So

far from being martial, they relate to every-day incidents and

appear to have no connexion whatever with the music.  They are

evidently of modern date.



In person the Basques are of the middle size, and are

active and athletic.  They are in general of fair complexions

and handsome features, and in appearance bear no slight

resemblance to certain Tartar tribes of the Caucasus.  Their

bravery is unquestionable, and they are considered as the best

soldiery belonging to the Spanish crown: a fact highly

corroborative of the supposition that they are of Tartar

origin, the Tartars being of all races the most warlike, and

amongst whom the most remarkable conquerors have been produced.

They are faithful and honest, and capable of much disinterested

attachment; kind and hospitable to strangers; all of which

points are far from being at variance with the Tartan

character.  But they are somewhat dull, and their capacities

are by no means of a high order, and in these respects they

again resemble the Tartars.



No people on earth are prouder than the Basques, but

theirs is a kind of republican pride.  They have no nobility

amongst them, and no one will acknowledge a superior.  The

poorest carman is as proud as the governor of Tolosa.  "He is

more powerful than I," he will say, "but I am of as good blood;

perhaps hereafter I may become a governor myself."  They abhor

servitude, at least out of their own country; and though

circumstances frequently oblige them to seek masters, it is

very rare to find them filling the places of common domestics;

they are stewards, secretaries, accountants, etc.  True it is,

that it was my own fortune to obtain a Basque domestic; but

then he always treated me more as an equal than a master, would

sit down in my presence, give me his advice unasked, and enter

into conversation with me at all times and occasions.  Did I

check him!  Certainly not!  For in that case he would have left

me, and a more faithful creature I never knew.  His fate was a

mournful one, as will appear in the sequel.



I have said that the Basques abhor servitude, and are

rarely to be found serving as domestics amongst the Spaniards.

I allude, however, merely to the males.  The females, on the

contrary, have no objection whatever to enter houses as

servants.  Women, indeed, amongst the Basques are not looked

upon with all the esteem which they deserve, and are considered

as fitted for little else than to perform menial offices, even

as in the East, where they are viewed in the light of servants

and slaves.  The Basque females differ widely in character from

the men; they are quick and vivacious, and have in general much

more talent.  They are famous for their skill as cooks, and in

most respectable houses of Madrid a Biscayan female may be

found in the kitchen, queen supreme of the culinary department.
