





CHAPTER XXII







Duenas - Children of Egypt - Jockeyism - The Baggage Pony -

The Fall - Palencia - Carlist Priests - The Lookout -

Priestly Sincerity - Leon - Antonio alarmed - Heat and Dust.





After a sojourn of about ten days at Valladolid, we

directed our course towards Leon.  We arrived about noon at

Duenas, a town at the distance of six short leagues from

Valladolid.  It is in every respect a singular place: it stands

on a rising ground, and directly above it towers a steep

conical mountain of calcareous earth, crowned by a ruined

castle.  Around Duenas are seen a multitude of caves scooped in

the high banks and secured with strong doors.  These are

cellars, in which is deposited the wine, of which abundance is

grown in the neighbourhood, and which is chiefly sold to the

Navarrese and the mountaineers of Santander, who arrive in cars

drawn by oxen, and convey it away in large quantities.  We put

up at a mean posada in the suburb for the purpose of refreshing

our horses.  Several cavalry soldiers were quartered there, who

instantly came forth, and began, with the eyes of connoisseurs,

to inspect my Andalusian entero.  "A capital horse that would

be for our troop," said the corporal; "what a chest he has.  By

what right do you travel with that horse, Senor, when so many

are wanted for the Queen's service?  He belongs to the

requiso."  "I travel with him by right of purchase, and being

an Englishman," I replied.  "Oh, your worship is an

Englishman," answered the corporal; "that, indeed, alters the

matter; the English in Spain are allowed to do what they please

with their own, which is more than the Spaniards are.

Cavalier, I have seen your countrymen in the Basque provinces;

Vaya, what riders! what horses!  They do not fight badly

either.  But their chief skill is in riding: I have seen them

dash over barrancos to get at the factious, who thought

themselves quite secure, and then they would fall upon them on

a sudden and kill them to a man.  In truth, your worship, this

is a fine horse, I must look at his teeth."



I looked at the corporal - his nose and eyes were in the

horse's mouth: the rest of the party, who might amount to six

or seven, were not less busily engaged.  One was examining his

forefeet, another his hind; one fellow was pulling at his tail

with all his might, while another pinched the windpipe, for the

purpose of discovering whether the animal was at all touched

there.  At last perceiving that the corporal was about to

remove the saddle that he might examine the back of the animal,

I exclaimed:-



"Stay, ye chabes of Egypt, ye forget that ye are

hundunares, and are no longer paruguing grastes in the chardy."



The corporal at these words turned his face full upon me,

and so did all the rest.  Yes, sure enough, there were the

countenances of Egypt, and the fixed filmy stare of eye.  We

continued looking at each other for a minute at least, when the

corporal, a villainous-looking fellow, at last said, in the

richest gypsy whine imaginable, "the erray know us, the poor

Calore!  And he an Englishman!  Bullati!  I should not have

thought that there was e'er a Busno would know us in these

parts, where Gitanos are never seen.  Yes, your worship is

right; we are all here of the blood of the Calore; we are from

Melegrana (Granada), your worship; they took us from thence and

sent us to the wars.  Your worship is right, the sight of that

horse made us believe we were at home again in the mercado of

Granada; he is a countryman of ours, a real Andalou.  Por dios,

your worship, sell us that horse; we are poor Calore, but we

can buy him."



"You forget that you are soldiers," said I.  "How should

you buy my horse?"



"We are soldiers, your worship," said the corporal, "but

we are still Calore; we buy and sell bestis; the captain of our

troop is in league with us.  We have been to the wars, but not

to fight; we left that to the Busne.  We have kept together,

and like true Calore, have stood back to back.  We have made

money in the wars, your worship.  NO TENGA USTED CUIDAO (be

under no apprehension).  We can buy your horse."



Here he pulled out a purse, which contained at least ten

ounces of gold.



"If I were willing to sell," I replied, "what would you

give me for that horse?"



"Then your worship wishes to sell your horse - that

alters the matter.  We will give ten dollars for your worship's

horse.  He is good for nothing."



"How is this?" said I.  "You this moment told me he was a

fine horse - an Andalusian, and a countryman of yours."



"No, Senor! we did not say that he was an Andalou.  We

said he was an Estremou, and the worst of his kind.  He is

eighteen years old, your worship, short-winded and galled."



"I do not wish to sell my horse," said I; "quite the

contrary; I had rather buy than sell."



"Your worship does not wish to sell your horse," said the

Gypsy.  "Stay, your worship, we will give sixty dollars for

your worship's horse."



"I would not sell him for two hundred and sixty.  Meclis!

Meclis! say no more.  I know your Gypsy tricks.  I will have no

dealings with you."



"Did I not hear your worship say that you wished to buy a

horse?" said the Gypsy.



"I do not want to buy a horse," said I; "if I need any

thing, it is a pony to carry our baggage; but it is getting

late.  Antonio, pay the reckoning."



"Stay, your worship, do not be in a hurry," said the

Gypsy: "I have got the very pony which will suit you."



Without waiting for my answer, he hurried into the

stable, from whence he presently returned, leading an animal by

a halter.  It was a pony of about thirteen hands high, of a

dark red colour; it was very much galled all over, the marks of

ropes and thongs being visible on its hide.  The figure,

however, was good, and there was an extraordinary brightness in

its eye.



"There, your worship," said the Gypsy; "there is the best

pony in all Spain."



"What do you mean by showing me this wretched creature?"

said I.



"This wretched creature," said the Gypsy, "is a better

horse than your Andalou!"



"Perhaps you would not exchange," said I, smiling.



"Senor, what I say is, that he shall run with your

Andalou, and beat him!"



"He looks feeble," said I; "his work is well nigh done."



"Feeble as he is, Senor, you could not manage him; no,

nor any Englishman in Spain."



I looked at the creature again, and was still more struck

with its figure.  I was in need of a pony to relieve

occasionally the horse of Antonio in carrying the baggage which

we had brought from Madrid, and though the condition of this

was wretched, I thought that by kind treatment I might possibly

soon bring him round.



"May I mount this animal?" I demanded.



"He is a baggage pony, Senor, and is ill to mount.  He

will suffer none but myself to mount him, who am his master.

When he once commences running, nothing will stop him but the

sea.  He springs over hills and mountains, and leaves them

behind in a moment.  If you will mount him, Senor, suffer me to

fetch a bridle, for you can never hold him in with the halter."



"This is nonsense," said I.  "You pretend that he is

spirited in order to enhance the price.  I tell you his work is

done."



I took the halter in my hand and mounted.  I was no

sooner on his back than the creature, who had before stood

stone still, without displaying the slightest inclination to

move, and who in fact gave no farther indication of existence

than occasionally rolling his eyes and pricking up an ear,

sprang forward like a racehorse, at a most desperate gallop.  I

had expected that he might kick or fling himself down on the

ground, in order to get rid of his burden, but for this

escapade I was quite unprepared.  I had no difficulty, however,

in keeping on his back, having been accustomed from my

childhood to ride without a saddle.  To stop him, however,

baffled all my endeavours, and I almost began to pay credit to

the words of the Gypsy, who had said that he would run on until

he reached the sea.  I had, however, a strong arm, and I tugged

at the halter until I compelled him to turn slightly his neck,

which from its stiffness might almost have been of wood; he,

however, did not abate his speed for a moment.  On the left

side of the road down which he was dashing was a deep trench,

just where the road took a turn towards the right, and over

this he sprang in a sideward direction; the halter broke with

the effort, the pony shot forward like an arrow, whilst I fell

back into the dust.



"Senor!" said the Gypsy, coming up with the most serious

countenance in the world, "I told you not to mount that animal

unless well bridled and bitted.  He is a baggage pony, and will

suffer none to mount his back, with the exception of myself who

feed him."  (Here he whistled, and the animal, who was scurring

over the field, and occasionally kicking up his heels,

instantly returned with a gentle neigh.)  "Now, your worship,

see how gentle he is.  He is a capital baggage pony, and will

carry all you have over the hills of Galicia."



"What do you ask for him?" said I.



"Senor, as your worship is an Englishman, and a good

ginete, and, moreover, understands the ways of the Calore, and

their tricks and their language also, I will sell him to you a

bargain.  I will take two hundred and sixty dollars for him and

no less."



"That is a large sum," said I.



"No, Senor, not at all, considering that he is a baggage

pony, and belongs to the troop, and is not mine to sell."



Two hours' ride brought us to Palencia, a fine old town,

beautifully situated on the Carrion, and famous for its trade

in wool.  We put up at the best posada which the place

afforded, and I forthwith proceeded to visit one of the

principal merchants of the town, to whom I was recommended by

my banker in Madrid.  I was told, however, that he was taking

his siesta.  "Then I had better take my own," said I, and

returned to the posada.  In the evening I went again, when I

saw him.  He was a short bulky man about thirty, and received

me at first with some degree of bluntness; his manner, however,

presently became more kind, and at last he scarcely appeared to

know how to show me sufficient civility.  His brother had just

arrived from Santander, and to him he introduced me.  This last

was a highly-intelligent person, and had passed many years of

his life in England.  They both insisted upon showing me the

town, and, indeed, led me all over it, and about the

neighbourhood.  I particularly admired the cathedral, a light,

elegant, but ancient Gothic edifice.  Whilst we walked about

the aisles, the evening sun, pouring its mellow rays through

the arched windows, illumined some beautiful paintings of

Murillo, with which the sacred edifice is adorned.  From the

church my friends conducted me to a fulling mill in the

neighbourhood, by a picturesque walk.  There was no lack either

of trees or water, and I remarked, that the environs of

Palencia were amongst the most pleasant places that I had ever

seen.



Tired at last with rambling, we repaired to a coffee-

house, where they regaled me with chocolate and sweet-meats.

Such was their hospitality; and of hospitality of this simple

and agreeable kind there is much in Spain.



On the next day we pursued our journey, a dreary one, for

the most part, over bleak and barren plains, interspersed with

silent and cheerless towns and villages, which stood at the

distance of two or three leagues from each other.  About midday

we obtained a dim and distant view of an immense range of

mountains, which are in fact those which bound Castile on the

north.  The day, however, became dim and obscure, and we

speedily lost sight of them.  A hollow wind now arose and blew

over these desolate plains with violence, wafting clouds of

dust into our faces; the rays of the sun were few, and those

red and angry.  I was tired of my journey, and when about four

we reached -, a large village, half way between Palencia and

Leon, I declared my intention of stopping for the night.  I

scarcely ever saw a more desolate place than this same town or

village of -.  The houses were for the most part large, but the

walls were of mud, like those of barns.  We saw no person in

the long winding street to direct us to the venta, or posada,

till at last, at the farther end of the place, we descried two

black figures standing at a door, of whom, on making inquiry,

we learned that the door at which they stood was that of the

house we were in quest of.  There was something strange in the

appearance of these two beings, who seemed the genii of the

place.  One was a small slim man, about fifty, with sharp, ill-

natured features.  He was dressed in coarse black worsted

stockings, black breeches, and an ample black coat with long

trailing skirts.  I should at once have taken him for an

ecclesiastic, but for his hat, which had nothing clerical about

it, being a pinched diminutive beaver.  His companion was of

low stature, and a much younger man.  He was dressed in similar

fashion, save that he wore a dark blue cloak.  Both carried

walking sticks in their hands, and kept hovering about the

door, now within and now without, occasionally looking up the

road, as if they expected some one.



"Trust me, mon maitre," said Antonio to me, in French,

"those two fellows are Carlist priests, and are awaiting the

arrival of the Pretender.  LES IMBECILES!"



We conducted our horses to the stable, to which we were

shown by the woman of the house.  "Who are those men?" said I

to her.



"The eldest is head curate to our pueblo," said she; "the

other is brother to my husband.  Pobrecito! he was a friar in

our convent before it was shut up and the brethren driven

forth."



We returned to the door.  "I suppose, gentlemen," said

the curate, "that you are Catalans.  Do you bring any news from

that kingdom?"



"Why do you suppose we are Catalans?" I demanded.



"Because I heard you this moment conversing in that

language."



"I bring no news from Catalonia," said I.  "I believe,

however, that the greater part of that principality is in the

hands of the Carlists."



"Ahem, brother Pedro!  This gentleman says that the

greater part of Catalonia is in the hands of the royalists.

Pray, sir, where may Don Carlos be at present with his army?"



"He may be coming down the road this moment," said I,

"for what I know;" and, stepping out, I looked up the way.



The two figures were at my side in a moment; Antonio

followed, and we all four looked intently up the road.



"Do you see anything?" said I at last to Antonio.



"NON, MON MAITRE."



"Do you see anything, sir?" said I to the curate.



"I see nothing," said the curate, stretching out his

neck.



"I see nothing," said Pedro, the ex-friar; "I see nothing

but the dust, which is becoming every moment more blinding."



"I shall go in, then," said I.  "Indeed, it is scarcely

prudent to be standing here looking out for the Pretender:

should the nationals of the town hear of it, they might perhaps

shoot us."



"Ahem," said the curate, following me; "there are no

nationals in this place: I would fain see what inhabitant would

dare become a national.  When the inhabitants of this place

were ordered to take up arms as nationals, they refused to a

man, and on that account we had to pay a mulet; therefore,

friend, you may speak out if you have anything to communicate;

we are all of your opinion here."



"I am of no opinion at all," said I, "save that I want my

supper.  I am neither for Rey nor Roque.  You say that I am a

Catalan, and you know that Catalans think only of their own

affairs."



In the evening I strolled by myself about the village,

which I found still more forlorn and melancholy than it at

first appeared; perhaps, however, it had been a place of

consequence in its time.  In one corner of it I found the ruins

of a large clumsy castle, chiefly built of flint stones: into

these ruins I attempted to penetrate, but the entrance was

secured by a gate.  From the castle I found my way to the

convent, a sad desolate place, formerly the residence of

mendicant brothers of the order of St. Francis.  I was about to

return to the inn, when I heard a loud buzz of voices, and,

following the sound, presently reached a kind of meadow, where,

upon a small knoll, sat a priest in full canonicals, reading in

a loud voice a newspaper, while around him, either erect or

seated on the grass, were assembled about fifty vecinos, for

the most part dressed in long cloaks, amongst whom I discovered

my two friends the curate and friar.  A fine knot of Carlist

quid-nuncs, said I to myself, and turned away to another part

of the meadow, where the cattle of the village were grazing.

The curate, on observing me, detached himself instantly from

the group, and followed.  "I am told you want a pony," said he;

"there now is mine feeding amongst those horses, the best in

all the kingdom of Leon."  He then began with all the

volubility of a chalan to descant on the points of the animal.

Presently the friar joined us, who, observing his opportunity,

pulled me by the sleeve and whispered, "Have nothing to do with

the curate, master, he is the greatest thief in the

neighbourhood; if you want a pony, my brother has a much

better, which he will dispose of cheaper."  "I shall wait till

I arrive at Leon," I exclaimed, and walked away, musing on

priestly friendship and sincerity.



From - to Leon, a distance of eight leagues, the country

rapidly improved: we passed over several small streams, and

occasionally found ourselves amongst meadows in which grass was

growing in the richest luxuriance.  The sun shone out brightly,

and I hailed his reappearance with joy, though the heat of his

beams was oppressive.  On arriving within two leagues of Leon,

we passed numerous cars and waggons, and bands of people with

horses and mules, all hastening to the celebrated fair which is

held in the city on St. John's or Mid-summer day, and which

took place within three days after our arrival.  This fair,

though principally intended for the sale of horses, is

frequented by merchants from many parts of Spain, who attend

with goods of various kinds, and amongst them I remarked many

of the Catalans whom I had previously seen at Medina and

Valladolid.



There is nothing remarkable in Leon, which is an old

gloomy town, with the exception of its cathedral, in many

respects a counterpart of the church of Palencia, exhibiting

the same light and elegant architecture, but, unlike its

beautiful sister, unadorned with splendid paintings.  The

situation of Leon is highly pleasant, in the midst of a

blooming country, abounding with trees, and watered by many

streams, which have their source in the mighty mountains in the

neighbourhood.  It is, however, by no means a healthy place,

especially in summer, when the heats raise noxious exhalations

from the waters, generating many kinds of disorders, especially

fevers.



I had scarcely been at Leon three days when I was seized

with a fever, against which I thought the strength even of my

constitution would have yielded, for it wore me almost to a

skeleton, and when it departed, at the end of about a week,

left me in such a deplorable state of weakness that I was

scarcely able to make the slightest exertion.  I had, however,

previously persuaded a bookseller to undertake the charge of

vending the Testaments, and had published my advertisements as

usual, though without very sanguine hope of success, as Leon is

a place where the inhabitants, with very few exceptions, are

furious Carlists, and ignorant and blinded followers of the old

papal church.  It is, moreover, a bishop's see, which was once

enjoyed by the prime counsellor of Don Carlos, whose fierce and

bigoted spirit still seems to pervade the place.  Scarcely had

the advertisements appeared, when the clergy were in motion.

They went from house to house, banning and cursing, and

denouncing misery to whomsoever should either purchase or read

"the accursed books," which had been sent into the country by

heretics for the purpose of perverting the innocent minds of

the population.  They did more; they commenced a process

against the bookseller in the ecclesiastical court.

Fortunately this court is not at present in the possession of

much authority; and the bookseller, a bold and determined man,

set them at defiance, and went so far as to affix an

advertisement to the gate of the very cathedral.

Notwithstanding the cry raised against the book, several copies

were sold at Leon: two were purchased by ex-friars, and the

same number by parochial priests from neighbouring villages.  I

believe the whole number disposed of during my stay amounted to

fifteen; so that my visit to this dark corner was not

altogether in vain, as the seed of the gospel has been sown,

though sparingly.  But the palpable darkness which envelops

Leon is truly lamentable, and the ignorance of the people is so

great, that printed charms and incantations against Satan and

his host, and against every kind of misfortune, are publicly

sold in the shops, and are in great demand.  Such are the

results of Popery, a delusion which, more than any other, has

tended to debase and brutalize the human mind.



I had scarcely risen from my bed where the fever had cast

me, when I found that Antonio had become alarmed.  He informed

me that he had seen several soldiers in the uniform of Don

Carlos lurking at the door of the posada, and that they had

been making inquiries concerning me.



It was indeed a singular fact connected with Leon, that

upwards of fifty of these fellows, who had on various accounts

left the ranks of the Pretender, were walking about the streets

dressed in his livery, and with all the confidence which the

certainty of protection from the local authorities could afford

them should any one be disposed to interrupt them.



I learned moreover from Antonio, that the person in whose

house we were living was a notorious "alcahuete," or spy to the

robbers in the neighbourhood, and that unless we took our

departure speedily and unexpectedly, we should to a certainty

be plundered on the road.  I did not pay much attention to

these hints, but my desire to quit Leon was great, as I was

convinced that as long as I continued there I should be unable

to regain my health and vigour.



Accordingly, at three in the morning, we departed for

Galicia.  We had scarcely proceeded half a league when we were

overtaken by a thunder-storm of tremendous violence.  We were

at that time in the midst of a wood which extends to some

distance in the direction in which we were going.  The trees

were bowed almost to the ground by the wind or torn up by the

roots, whilst the earth was ploughed up by the lightning, which

burst all around and nearly blinded us.  The spirited

Andalusian on which I rode became furious, and bounded into the

air as if possessed.  Owing to my state of weakness, I had the

greatest difficulty in maintaining my seat, and avoiding a fall

which might have been fatal.  A tremendous discharge of rain

followed the storm, which swelled the brooks and streams and

flooded the surrounding country, causing much damage amongst

the corn.  After riding about five leagues, we began to enter

the mountainous district which surrounds Astorga: the heat now

became almost suffocating; swarms of flies began to make their

appearance, and settling down upon the horses, stung them

almost to madness, whilst the road was very flinty and trying.

It was with great difficulty that we reached Astorga, covered

with mud and dust, our tongues cleaving to our palates with

thirst.

