






CHAPTER XVIII







Departure from Cordova - The Contrabandista - Jewish Cunning -

Arrival at Madrid.



One fine morning, I departed from Cordova, in company

with the Contrabandista; the latter was mounted on a handsome

animal, something between a horse and a pony, which he called a

jaca, of that breed for which Cordova is celebrated.  It was of

a bright bay colour, with a star in its forehead, with strong

but elegant limbs, and a long black tail, which swept the

ground.  The other animal, which was destined to carry me to

Madrid, was not quite so prepossessing in its appearance: in

more than one respect it closely resembled a hog, particularly

in the curving of its back, the shortness of its neck, and the

manner in which it kept its head nearly in contact with the

ground: it had also the tail of a hog, and meandered over the

ground much like one.  Its coat more resembled coarse bristles

than hair, and with respect to size, I have seen many a

Westphalian hog quite as tall.  I was not altogether satisfied

with the idea of exhibiting myself on the back of this most

extraordinary quadruped, and looked wistfully on the

respectable animal on which my guide had thought proper to

place himself; he interpreted my glances, and gave me to

understand that as he was destined to carry the baggage, he was

entitled to the best horse; a plea too well grounded on reason

for me to make any objection to it.



I found the Contrabandista by no means such pleasant

company on the road as I had been led to suppose he would prove

from the representation of my host of Cordova.  Throughout the

day he sat sullen and silent, and rarely replied to my

questions, save by a monosyllable; at night, however, after

having eaten well and drank proportionably at my expense, he

would occasionally become more sociable and communicative.  "I

have given up smuggling," said he, on one of these occasions,

"owing to a trick which was played upon me the last time that I

was at Lisbon: a Jew whom I had been long acquainted with

palmed upon me a false brilliant for a real stone.  He effected

it in the most extraordinary manner, for I am not such a novice

as not to know a true diamond when I see one; but the Jew

appears to have had two, with which he played most adroitly,

keeping the valuable one for which I bargained, and

substituting therefor another which, though an excellent

imitation, was not worth four dollars.  I did not discover the


trick until I was across the border, and upon my hurrying back,

the culprit was not to be found; his priest, however, told me

that he was just dead and buried, which was of course false, as

I saw him laughing in the corners of his eyes.  I renounced the

contraband trade from that moment."



It is not my intention to describe minutely the various

incidents of this journey.  Leaving at our right the mountains

of Jaen, we passed through Andujar and Bailen, and on the third

day reached Carolina, a small but beautiful town on the skirts

of the Sierra Morena, inhabited by the descendants of German

colonists.  Two leagues from this place, we entered the defile

of Despena Perros, which, even in quiet times, has an evil

name, on account of the robberies which are continually being

perpetrated within its recesses, but at the period of which I

am speaking, it was said to be swarming with banditti.  We of

course expected to be robbed, perhaps stripped and otherwise

ill-treated; but Providence here manifested itself.  It

appeared that, the day before our arrival, the banditti of the

pass had committed a dreadful robbery and murder, by which they

gained forty thousand rials.  This booty probably contented

them for a time; certain it is that we were not interrupted: we

did not even see a single individual in the pass, though we

occasionally heard whistles and loud cries.  We entered La

Mancha, where I expected to fall into the hands of Palillos and

Orejita.  Providence again showed itself.  It had been

delicious weather, suddenly the Lord breathed forth a frozen

blast, the severity of which was almost intolerable; no human

beings but ourselves ventured forth.  We traversed snow-covered

plains, and passed through villages and towns to all appearance

deserted.  The robbers kept close in their caves and hovels,

but the cold nearly killed us.  We reached Aranjuez late on

Christmas Day, and I got into the house of an Englishman, where

I swallowed nearly a pint of brandy; it affected me no more

than warm water.



On the following day we arrived at Madrid, where we had

the good fortune to find everything tranquil and quiet.  The

Contrabandista continued with me for two days, at the end of

which time he returned to Cordova upon the uncouth animal on

which I had ridden throughout the journey.  I had myself

purchased the jaca, whose capabilities I had seen on the route,

and which I imagined might prove useful in future journeys.

The Contrabandista was so satisfied with the price which I gave

him for his beast, and the general treatment which he had

experienced at my hands during the time of his attendance upon

me, that he would fain have persuaded me to retain him as a

servant, assuring me that, in the event of my compliance, he

would forget his wife and children and follow me through the

world.  I declined, however, to accede to his request, though I

was in need of a domestic; I therefore sent him back to

Cordova, where, as I subsequently learned, he died suddenly,

about a week after his return.



The manner of his death was singular: one day he took out

his purse, and, after counting his money, said to his wife, "I

have made ninety-five dollars by this journey with the

Englishman and by the sale of the jaca; this I could easily

double by one successful venture in the smuggling lay.  To-

morrow I will depart for Lisbon to buy diamonds.  I wonder if

the beast requires to be shod?"  He then started up and made

for the door, with the intention of going to the stable; ere,

however, his foot had crossed the threshold, he fell dead on

the floor.  Such is the course of the world.  Well said the

wise king: Let no one boast of the morrow.
