






CHAPTER LV







The Mole - The Two Moors - Djmah of Tangier - House of God -

British Consul - Curious Spectacle - The Moorish House -

Joanna Correa - Ave Maria.





So we rode to the Mole and landed.  This Mole consists at

present of nothing more than an immense number of large loose

stones, which run about five hundred yards into the bay; they

are part of the ruins of a magnificent pier which the English,

who were the last foreign nation which held Tangier, destroyed

when they evacuated the place.  The Moors have never attempted

to repair it; the surf at high water breaks over it with great

fury.  I found it a difficult task to pick my way over the

slippery stones, and should once or twice have fallen but for

the kindness of the Genoese mariners.  At last we reached the

beach, and were proceeding towards the gate of the town, when

two persons, Moors, came up to us.  I almost started at sight

of the first; he was a huge old barbarian with a white uncombed

beard, dirty turban, haik, and trousers, naked legs, and

immense splay feet, the heels of which stood out a couple of

inches at least behind his rusty black slippers.



"That is the captain of the port," said one of the

Genoese; "pay him respect."  I accordingly doffed my hat and

cried, "SBA ALKHEIR A SIDI" (Good-morning, my lord).  "Are you

Englishmans?" shouted the old grisly giant.  "Englishmans, my

lord," I replied, and, advancing, presented him my hand, which

he nearly wrung off with his tremendous gripe.  The other Moor

now addressed me in a jargon composed of English, Spanish, and

Arabic.  A queer-looking personage was he also, but very

different in most respects from his companion, being shorter by

a head at least, and less complete by one eye, for the left orb

of vision was closed, leaving him, as the Spaniards style it,

TUERTO; he, however, far outshone the other in cleanliness of

turban, haik, and trousers.  From what he jabbered to me, I

collected that he was the English consul's mahasni or soldier;

that the consul, being aware of my arrival, had dispatched him

to conduct me to his house.  He then motioned me to follow him,

which I did, the old port captain attending us to the gate,

when he turned aside into a building, which I judged to be a

kind of custom-house from the bales and boxes of every

description piled up before it.  We passed the gate and

proceeded up a steep and winding ascent; on our left was a

battery full of guns, pointing to the sea, and on our right a

massive wall, seemingly in part cut out of the hill; a little

higher up we arrived at an opening where stood the mosque which

I have already mentioned.  As I gazed upon the tower I said to

myself, "Surely we have here a younger sister of the Giralda of

Seville."



I know not whether the resemblance between the two

edifices has been observed by any other individual; and perhaps

there are those who would assert that no resemblance exists,

especially if, in forming an opinion, they were much swayed by

size and colour: the hue of the Giralda is red, or rather

vermilion, whilst that which predominates in the Djmah of

Tangier is green, the bricks of which it is built being of that

colour; though between them, at certain intervals, are placed

others of a light red tinge, so that the tower is beautifully

variegated.  With respect to size, standing beside the giant

witch of Seville, the Tangerine Djmah would show like a ten-

year sapling in the vicinity of the cedar of Lebanon, whose

trunk the tempests of five hundred years have worn.  And yet I

will assert that the towers in other respects are one and the

same, and that the same mind and the same design are manifested

in both; the same shape do they exhibit, and the same marks

have they on their walls, even those mysterious arches graven

on the superficies of the bricks, emblematic of I know not

what.  The two structures may, without any violence, be said to

stand in the same relation to each other as the ancient and

modern Moors.  The Giralda is the world's wonder, and the old

Moor was all but the world's conqueror.  The modern Moor is

scarcely known, and who ever heard of the Tower of Tangier?

Yet examine it attentively, and you will find in that tower

much, very much, to admire, and certainly, if opportunity

enable you to consider the modern Moor as minutely, you will

discover in him, and in his actions, amongst much that is wild,

uncouth, and barbarous, not a little capable of amply rewarding

laborious investigation.



As we passed the mosque I stopped for a moment before the

door, and looked in upon the interior: I saw nothing but a

quadrangular court paved with painted tiles and exposed to the

sky; on all sides were arched piazzas, and in the middle was a

fountain, at which several Moors were performing their

ablutions.  I looked around for the abominable thing, and found

it not; no scarlet strumpet with a crown of false gold sat

nursing an ugly changeling in a niche.  "Come here," said I,

"papist, and take a lesson; here is a house of God, in

externals at least, such as a house of God should be: four

walls, a fountain, and the eternal firmament above, which

mirrors his glory.  Dost thou build such houses to the God who

hast said, `Thou shalt make to thyself no graven image'?  Fool,

thy walls are stuck with idols; thou callest a stone thy

Father, and a piece of rotting wood the Queen of Heaven.  Fool,

thou knowest not even the Ancient of Days, and the very Moor

can instruct thee.  He at least knows the Ancient of Days who

has said, `Thou shalt have no other gods but me.'"



And as I said these words, I heard a cry like the roaring

of a lion, and an awful voice in the distance exclaim, "KAPUL

UDBAGH" (there is no god but one).



We now turned to the left through a passage which passed

under the tower, and had scarcely proceeded a few steps, when I

heard a prodigious hubbub of infantine voices: I listened for a

moment, and distinguished verses of the Koran; it was a school.

Another lesson for thee, papist.  Thou callest thyself a

Christian, yet the book of Christ thou persecutest; thou

huntest it even to the sea-shore, compelling it to seek refuge

upon the billows of the sea.  Fool, learn a lesson from the

Moor, who teaches his child to repeat with its first accents

the most important portions of the book of his law, and

considers himself wise or foolish, according as he is versed in

or ignorant of that book; whilst thou, blind slave, knowest not

what the book of thy own law contains, nor wishest to know: yet

art thou not to be judged by thy own law?  Idolmonger, learn

consistency from the Moor: he says that he shall be judged

after his own law, and therefore he prizes and gets by heart

the entire book of his law.



We were now at the consul's house, a large roomy

habitation, built in the English style.  The soldier led me

through a court into a large hall hung with the skins of all

kinds of ferocious animals, from the kingly lion to the

snarling jackal.  Here I was received by a Jew domestic, who

conducted me at once to the consul, who was in his library.  He

received me with the utmost frankness and genuine kindness, and

informed me that, having received a letter from his excellent

friend Mr. B., in which I was strongly recommended, he had

already engaged me a lodging in the house of a Spanish woman,

who was, however, a British subject, and with whom he believed

that I should find myself as comfortable as it was possible to

be in such a place as Tangier.  He then inquired if I had any

particular motive for visiting the place, and I informed him

without any hesitation that I came with the intention of

distributing a certain number of copies of the New Testament in

the Spanish language amongst the Christian residents of the

place.  He smiled, and advised me to proceed with considerable

caution, which I promised to do.  We then discoursed on other

subjects, and it was not long before I perceived that I was in

the company of a most accomplished scholar, especially in the

Greek and Latin classics; he appeared likewise to be thoroughly

acquainted with the Barbary empire and with the Moorish

character.



After half an hour's conversation, exceedingly agreeable

and instructive to myself, I expressed a wish to proceed to my

lodging: whereupon he rang the bell, and the same Jewish

domestic entering who had introduced me, he said to him in the

English language, "Take this gentleman to the house of Joanna

Correa, the Mahonese widow, and enjoin her, in my name, to take

care of him and attend to his comforts; by doing which she will

confirm me in the good opinion which I at present entertain of

her, and will increase my disposition to befriend her."



So, attended by the Jew, I now bent my steps to the

lodging prepared for me.  Having ascended the street in which

the house of the consul was situated, we entered a small square

which stands about half way up the hill.  This, my companion

informed me, was the soc, or market-place.  A curious spectacle

here presented itself.  All round the square were small wooden

booths, which very much resembled large boxes turned on their

sides, the lid being supported above by a string.  Before each

of these boxes was a species of counter, or rather one long

counter ran in front of the whole line, upon which were

raisins, dates, and small barrels of sugar, soap, and butter,

and various other articles.  Within each box, in front of the

counter, and about three feet from the ground, sat a human

being, with a blanket on its shoulders, a dirty turban on its

head, and ragged trousers, which descended as far as the knee,

though in some instances, I believe, these were entirely

dispensed with.  In its hand it held a stick, to the end of

which was affixed a bunch of palm leaves, which it waved

incessantly as a fan, for the purpose of scaring from its goods

the million flies which, engendered by the Barbary sun,

endeavoured to settle upon them.  Behind it, and on either

side, were piles of the same kind of goods.  SHRIT HINAI, SHRIT

HINAI, (buy here, buy here), was continually proceeding from

its mouth.  Such are the grocers of Tangier, such their shops.



In the middle of the soc, upon the stones, were pyramids

of melons and sandias, (the water species), and also baskets

filled with other kinds of fruit, exposed for sale, whilst

round cakes of bread were lying here and there upon the stones,

beside which sat on their hams the wildest-looking beings that

the most extravagant imagination ever conceived, the head

covered with an enormous straw hat, at least two yards in

circumference, the eaves of which, flapping down, completely

concealed the face, whilst the form was swathed in a blanket,

from which occasionally were thrust skinny arms and fingers.

These were Moorish women, who were, I believe, in all

instances, old and ugly, judging from the countenances of which

I caught a glimpse as they lifted the eaves of their hats to

gaze on me as I passed, or to curse me for stamping on their

bread.  The whole soc was full of peoples and there was

abundance of bustle, screaming, and vociferation, and as the

sun, though the hour was still early, was shining with the

greatest brilliancy, I thought that I had scarcely ever

witnessed a livelier scene.



Crossing the soc we entered a narrow street with the same

kind of box-shops on each side, some of which, however, were

either unoccupied or not yet opened, the lid being closed.  We

almost immediately turned to the left, up a street somewhat

similar, and my guide presently entered the door of a low

house, which stood at the corner of a little alley, and which

he informed me was the abode of Joanna Correa.  We soon stood

in the midst of this habitation.  I say the midst, as all the

Moorish houses are built with a small court in the middle.

This one was not more than ten feet square.  It was open at the

top, and around it on three sides were apartments; on the

fourth a small staircase, which communicated with the upper

story, half of which consisted of a terrace looking down into

the court, over the low walls of which you enjoyed a prospect

of the sea and a considerable part of the town.  The rest of

the story was taken up by a long room, destined for myself, and

which opened upon the terrace by a pair of folding-doors.  At

either end of this apartment stood a bed, extending

transversely from wall to wall, the canopy touching the

ceiling.  A table and two or three chairs completed the

furniture.



I was so occupied in inspecting the house of Joanna

Correa, that at first I paid little attention to that lady

herself.  She now, however, came up upon the terrace where my

guide and myself were standing.  She was a woman about five and

forty, with regular features, which had once been handsome, but

had received considerable injury from time, and perhaps more

from trouble.  Two of her front teeth had disappeared, but she

still had fine black hair.  As I looked upon her countenance, I

said within myself, if there be truth in physiognomy, thou art

good and gentle, O Joanna; and, indeed, the kindness I

experienced from her during the six weeks which I spent beneath

her roof would have made me a convert to that science had I

doubted in it before.  I believe no warmer and more

affectionate heart ever beat in human bosom than in that of

Joanna Correa, the Mahonese widow, and it was indexed by

features beaming with benevolence and good nature, though

somewhat clouded with melancholy.



She informed me that she had been married to a Genoese,

the master of a felouk which passed between Gibraltar and

Tangier, who had been dead about four years, leaving her with a

family of four children, the eldest of which was a lad of

thirteen; that she had experienced great difficulty in

providing for her family and herself since the death of her

husband, but that Providence had raised her up a few excellent

friends, especially the British consul; that besides letting

lodgings to such travellers as myself, she made bread which was

in high esteem with the Moors, and that she was likewise in

partnership in the sale of liquors with an old Genoese.  She

added, that this last person lived below in one of the

apartments; that he was a man of great ability and much

learning, but that she believed he was occasionally somewhat

touched here, pointing with her finger to her forehead, and she

therefore hoped that I would not be offended at anything

extraordinary in his language or behaviour.  She then left me,

as she said, to give orders for my breakfast; whereupon the

Jewish domestic, who had accompanied me from the consul,

finding that I was established in the house, departed.



I speedily sat down to breakfast in an apartment on the

left side of the little wustuddur, the fare was excellent; tea,

fried fish, eggs, and grapes, not forgetting the celebrated

bread of Joanna Correa.  I was waited upon by a tall Jewish

youth of about twenty years, who informed me that his name was

Haim Ben Atar, that he was a native of Fez, from whence his

parents brought him at a very early age to Tangier, where he

had passed the greater part of his life principally in the

service of Joanna Correa, waiting upon those who, like myself,

lodged in the house.  I had completed my meal, and was seated

in the little court, when I heard in the apartment opposite to

that in which I had breakfasted several sighs, which were

succeeded by as many groans, and then came "AVE MARIA, GRATIA

PLENA, ORA PRO ME," and finally a croaking voice chanted:-





"Gentem auferte perfidam

Credentium de finibus,

Ut Christo laudes debitas

Persolvamus alacriter."





"That is the old Genoese," whispered Haim Ben Atar,

"praying to his God, which he always does with particular

devotion when he happens to have gone to bed the preceding

evening rather in liquor.  He has in his room a picture of

Maria Buckra, before which he generally burns a taper, and on

her account he will never permit me to enter his apartment.  He

once caught me looking at her, and I thought he would have

killed me, and since then he always keeps his chamber locked,

and carries the key in his pocket when he goes out.  He hates

both Jew and Moor, and says that he is now living amongst them

for his sins."



"They do not place tapers before pictures," said I, and

strolled forth to see the wonders of the land.
