





CHAPTER XXVII







Compostella - Rey Romero - The Treasure-seeker - Hopeful Project -

The Church of Refuge - Hidden Riches - The Canon - Spirit of Localism -

The Leper - Bones of St. James.





At the commencement of August, I found myself at St.

James of Compostella.  To this place I travelled from Coruna

with the courier or weekly post, who was escorted by a strong

party of soldiers, in consequence of the distracted state of

the country, which was overrun with banditti.  From Coruna to

St. James, the distance is but ten leagues; the journey,

however, endured for a day and a half.  It was a pleasant one,

through a most beautiful country, with a rich variety of hill

and dale; the road was in many places shaded with various kinds

of trees clad in most luxuriant foliage.  Hundreds of

travellers, both on foot and on horseback, availed themselves


of the security which the escort afforded: the dread of

banditti was strong.  During the journey two or three alarms

were given; we, however, reached Saint James without having

been attacked.



Saint James stands on a pleasant level amidst mountains:

the most extraordinary of these is a conical hill, called the

Pico Sacro, or Sacred Peak, connected with which are many

wonderful legends.  A beautiful old town is Saint James,

containing about twenty thousand inhabitants.  Time has been

when, with the single exception of Rome, it was the most

celebrated resort of pilgrims in the world; its cathedral being

said to contain the bones of Saint James the elder, the child

of the thunder, who, according to the legend of the Romish

church, first preached the Gospel in Spain.  Its glory,

however, as a place of pilgrimage is rapidly passing away.



The cathedral, though a work of various periods, and

exhibiting various styles of architecture, is a majestic

venerable pile, in every respect calculated to excite awe and

admiration; indeed, it is almost impossible to walk its long

dusky aisles, and hear the solemn music and the noble chanting,

and inhale the incense of the mighty censers, which are at

times swung so high by machinery as to smite the vaulted roof,

whilst gigantic tapers glitter here and there amongst the

gloom, from the shrine of many a saint, before which the

worshippers are kneeling, breathing forth their prayers and

petitions for help, love, and mercy, and entertain a doubt that

we are treading the floor of a house where God delighteth to

dwell.  Yet the Lord is distant from that house; he hears not,

he sees not, or if he do, it is with anger.  What availeth that

solemn music, that noble chanting, that incense of sweet

savour?  What availeth kneeling before that grand altar of

silver, surmounted by that figure with its silver hat and

breast-plate, the emblem of one who, though an apostle and

confessor, was at best an unprofitable servant?  What availeth

hoping for remission of sin by trusting in the merits of one

who possessed none, or by paying homage to others who were born

and nurtured in sin, and who alone, by the exercise of a lively

faith granted from above, could hope to preserve themselves

from the wrath of the Almighty?



Rise from your knees, ye children of Compostella, or if

ye bend, let it be to the Almighty alone, and no longer on the

eve of your patron's day address him in the following strain,

however sublime it may sound:





"Thou shield of that faith which in Spain we revere,

Thou scourge of each foeman who dares to draw near;

Whom the Son of that God who the elements tames,

Called child of the thunder, immortal Saint James!



"From the blessed asylum of glory intense,

Upon us thy sovereign influence dispense;

And list to the praises our gratitude aims

To offer up worthily, mighty Saint James.



"To thee fervent thanks Spain shall ever outpour;

In thy name though she glory, she glories yet more

In thy thrice-hallowed corse, which the sanctuary claims

Of high Compostella, O, blessed Saint James.



"When heathen impiety, loathsome and dread,

With a chaos of darkness our Spain overspread,

Thou wast the first light which dispell'd with its flames

The hell-born obscurity, glorious Saint James!



"And when terrible wars had nigh wasted our force,

All bright `midst the battle we saw thee on horse,

Fierce scattering the hosts, whom their fury proclaims

To be warriors of Islam, victorious Saint James.



"Beneath thy direction, stretch'd prone at thy feet,

With hearts low and humble, this day we intreat

Thou wilt strengthen the hope which enlivens our frames,

The hope of thy favour and presence, Saint James.



"Then praise to the Son and the Father above,

And to that Holy Spirit which springs from their love;

To that bright emanation whose vividness shames

The sun's burst of splendour, and praise to Saint James."





At Saint James I met with a kind and cordial coadjutor in

my biblical labours in the bookseller of the place, Rey Romero,

a man of about sixty.  This excellent individual, who was both

wealthy and respected, took up the matter with an enthusiasm

which doubtless emanated from on high, losing no opportunity of

recommending my book to those who entered his shop, which was

in the Azabacheria, and was a very splendid and commodious

establishment.  In many instances, when the peasants of the

neighbourhood came with an intention of purchasing some of the

foolish popular story-books of Spain, he persuaded them to

carry home Testaments instead, assuring them that the sacred

volume was a better, more instructive, and even far more

entertaining book than those they came in quest of.  He

speedily conceived a great fancy for me, and regularly came to

visit me every evening at my posada, and accompanied me in my

walks about the town and the environs.  He was a man of

considerable information, and though of much simplicity,

possessed a kind of good-natured humour which was frequently

highly diverting.



I was walking late one night alone in the Alameda of

Saint James, considering in what direction I should next bend

my course, for I had been already ten days in this place; the

moon was shining gloriously, and illumined every object around

to a considerable distance.  The Alameda was quite deserted;

everybody, with the exception of myself, having for some time

retired.  I sat down on a bench and continued my reflections,

which were suddenly interrupted by a heavy stumping sound.

Turning my eyes in the direction from which it proceeded, I

perceived what at first appeared a shapeless bulk slowly

advancing: nearer and nearer it drew, and I could now

distinguish the outline of a man dressed in coarse brown

garments, a kind of Andalusian hat, and using as a staff the

long peeled branch of a tree.  He had now arrived opposite the

bench where I was seated, when, stopping, he took off his hat

and demanded charity in uncouth tones and in a strange jargon,

which had some resemblance to the Catalan.  The moon shone on

grey locks and on a ruddy weather-beaten countenance which I at

once recognized: "Benedict Mol," said I, "is it possible that I

see you at Compostella?"



"Och, mein Gott, es ist der Herr!" replied Benedict.

"Och, what good fortune, that the Herr is the first person I

meet at Compostella."



MYSELF. - I can scarcely believe my eyes.  Do you mean to

say that you have just arrived at this place?



BENEDICT. - Ow yes, I am this moment arrived.  I have

walked all the long way from Madrid.



MYSELF. - What motive could possibly bring you such a

distance?



BENEDICT. - Ow, I am come for the schatz - the treasure.

I told you at Madrid that I was coming; and now I have met you

here, I have no doubt that I shall find it, the schatz.



MYSELF. - In what manner did you support yourself by the

way?



BENEDICT. - Ow, I begged, I bettled, and so contrived to

pick up some cuartos; and when I reached Toro, I worked at my

trade of soap-making for a time, till the people said I knew

nothing about it, and drove me out of the town.  So I went on

and begged and bettled till I arrived at Orense, which is in

this country of Galicia.  Ow, I do not like this country of

Galicia at all.



MYSELF. - Why not?



BENEDICT. - Why! because here they all beg and bettle,

and have scarce anything for themselves, much less for me whom

they know to be a foreign man.  O the misery of Galicia.  When

I arrive at night at one of their pigsties, which they call

posadas, and ask for bread to eat in the name of God, and straw

to lie down in, they curse me, and say there is neither bread

nor straw in Galicia; and sure enough, since I have been here I

have seen neither, only something that they call broa, and a

kind of reedy rubbish with which they litter the horses: all my

bones are sore since I entered Galicia.



MYSELF. - And yet you have come to this country, which

you call so miserable, in search of treasure?



BENEDICT. - Ow yaw, but the schatz is buried; it is not

above ground; there is no money above ground in Galicia.  I

must dig it up; and when I have dug it up I will purchase a

coach with six mules, and ride out of Galicia to Lucerne; and

if the Herr pleases to go with me, he shall be welcome to go

with me and the schatz.



MYSELF. - I am afraid that you have come on a desperate

errand.  What do you propose to do?  Have you any money?



BENEDICT. - Not a cuart; but I do not care now I have

arrived at Saint James.  The schatz is nigh; and I have,

moreover, seen you, which is a good sign; it tells me that the

schatz is still here.  I shall go to the best posada in the

place, and live like a duke till I have an opportunity of

digging up the schatz, when I will pay all scores.



"Do nothing of the kind," I replied; "find out some place

in which to sleep, and endeavour to seek some employment.  In

the mean time, here is a trifle with which to support yourself;

but as for the treasure which you have come to seek, I believe

it only exists in your own imagination."  I gave him a dollar

and departed.



I have never enjoyed more charming walks than in the

neighbourhood of Saint James.  In these I was almost invariably

accompanied by my friend the good old bookseller.  The streams

are numerous, and along their wooded banks we were in the habit

of straying and enjoying the delicious summer evenings of this

part of Spain.  Religion generally formed the topic of our

conversation, but we not unfrequently talked of the foreign

lands which I had visited, and at other times of matters which

related particularly to my companion.  "We booksellers of

Spain," said he, "are all liberals; we are no friends to the

monkish system.  How indeed should we be friends to it?  It

fosters darkness, whilst we live by disseminating light.  We

love our profession, and have all more or less suffered for it;

many of us, in the times of terror, were hanged for selling an

innocent translation from the French or English.  Shortly after

the Constitution was put down by Angouleme and the French

bayonets, I was obliged to flee from Saint James and take

refuge in the wildest part of Galicia, near Corcuvion.  Had I

not possessed good friends, I should not have been alive now;

as it was, it cost me a considerable sum of money to arrange

matters.  Whilst I was away, my shop was in charge of the

ecclesiastical officers.  They frequently told my wife that I

ought to be burnt for the books which I had sold.  Thanks be to

God, those times are past, and I hope they will never return."



Once, as we were walking through the streets of Saint

James, he stopped before a church and looked at it attentively.

As there was nothing remarkable in the appearance of this

edifice, I asked him what motive he had for taking such notice

of it.  "In the days of the friars," said he, "this church was

one of refuge, to which if the worst criminals escaped, they

were safe.  All were protected there save the negros, as they

called us liberals."  "Even murderers, I suppose?" said I.

"Murderers!" he answered, "far worse criminals than they.  By

the by, I have heard that you English entertain the utmost

abhorrence of murder.  Do you in reality consider it a crime of

very great magnitude?"  "How should we not," I replied; "for

every other crime some reparation can be made; but if we take

away life, we take away all.  A ray of hope with respect to

this world may occasionally enliven the bosom of any other

criminal, but how can the murderer hope?"  "The friars were of

another way of thinking," replied the old man; "they always

looked upon murder as a friolera; but not so the crime of

marrying your first cousin without dispensation, for which, if

we believe them, there is scarcely any atonement either in this

world or the next."



Two or three days after this, as we were seated in my

apartment in the posada, engaged in conversation, the door was

opened by Antonio, who, with a smile on his countenance, said

that there was a foreign GENTLEMAN below, who desired to speak

with me.  "Show him up," I replied; whereupon almost instantly

appeared Benedict Mol.



"This is a most extraordinary person," said I to the

bookseller.  "You Galicians, in general, leave your country in

quest of money; he, on the contrary, is come hither to find

some."



REY ROMERO. - And he is right.  Galicia is by nature the

richest province in Spain, but the inhabitants are very stupid,

and know not how to turn the blessings which surround them to

any account; but as a proof of what may be made out of Galicia,

see how rich the Catalans become who have settled down here and

formed establishments.  There are riches all around us, upon

the earth and in the earth.



BENEDICT. - Ow yaw, in the earth, that is what I say.

There is much more treasure below the earth than above it.



MYSELF. - Since I last saw you, have you discovered the

place in which you say the treasure is deposited?



BENEDICT. - O yes, I know all about it now.  It is buried

`neath the sacristy in the church of San Roque.



Myself. - How have you been able to make that discovery?



BENEDICT. - I will tell you: the day after my arrival I

walked about all the city in quest of the church, but could

find none which at all answered to the signs which my comrade

who died in the hospital gave me.  I entered several, and

looked about, but all in vain; I could not find the place which

I had in my mind's eye.  At last the people with whom I lodge,

and to whom I told my business, advised me to send for a meiga.



MYSELF. - A meiga!  What is that?



BENEDICT. - Ow! a haxweib, a witch; the Gallegos call

them so in their jargon, of which I can scarcely understand a

word.  So I consented, and they sent for the meiga.  Och! what

a weib is that meiga!  I never saw such a woman; she is as

large as myself, and has a face as round and red as the sun.

She asked me a great many questions in her Gallegan, and when I

had told her all she wanted to know, she pulled out a pack of

cards and laid them on the table in a particular manner, and

then she said that the treasure was in the church of San Roque;

and sure enough, when I went to that church, it answered in

every respect to the signs of my comrade who died in the

hospital.  O she is a powerful hax, that meiga; she is well

known in the neighbourhood, and has done much harm to the

cattle.  I gave her half the dollar I had from you for her

trouble.



MYSELF. - Then you acted like a simpleton; she has

grossly deceived you.  But even suppose that the treasure is

really deposited in the church you mention, it is not probable

that you will be permitted to remove the floor of the sacristy

to search for it.



BENEDICT. - Ow, the matter is already well advanced.

Yesterday I went to one of the canons to confess myself and to

receive absolution and benediction; not that I regard these

things much, but I thought this would be the best means of

broaching the matter, so I confessed myself, and then I spoke

of my travels to the canon, and at last I told him of the

treasure, and proposed that if he assisted me we should share

it between us.  Ow, I wish you had seen him; he entered at once

into the affair, and said that it might turn out a very

profitable speculation: and he shook me by the hand, and said

that I was an honest Swiss and a good Catholic.  And I then

proposed that he should take me into his house and keep me

there till we had an opportunity of digging up the treasure

together.  This he refused to do.



REY ROMERO. - Of that I have no doubt: trust one of our

canons for not committing himself so far until he sees very

good reason.  These tales of treasure are at present rather too

stale: we have heard of them ever since the time of the Moors.



BENEDICT. - He advised me to go to the Captain General

and obtain permission to make excavations, in which case he

promised to assist me to the utmost of his power.



Thereupon the Swiss departed, and I neither saw nor heard

anything farther of him during the time that I continued at

Saint James.



The bookseller was never weary of showing me about his

native town, of which he was enthusiastically fond.  Indeed, I

have never seen the spirit of localism, which is so prevalent

throughout Spain, more strong than at Saint James.  If their

town did but flourish, the Santiagians seemed to care but

little if all others in Galicia perished.  Their antipathy to

the town of Coruna was unbounded, and this feeling had of late

been not a little increased from the circumstance that the seat

of the provincial government had been removed from Saint James

to Coruna.  Whether this change was advisable or not, it is not

for me, who am a foreigner, to say; my private opinion,

however, is by no means favourable to the alteration.  Saint

James is one of the most central towns in Galicia, with large

and populous communities on every side of it, whereas Coruna

stands in a corner, at a considerable distance from the rest.

"It is a pity that the vecinos of Coruna cannot contrive to

steal away from us our cathedral, even as they have done our

government," said a Santiagian; "then, indeed, they would be

able to cut some figure.  As it is, they have not a church fit

to say mass in."  "A great pity, too, that they cannot remove

our hospital," would another exclaim; "as it is, they are

obliged to send us their sick, poor wretches.  I always think

that the sick of Coruna have more ill-favoured countenances

than those from other places; but what good can come from

Coruna?"



Accompanied by the bookseller, I visited this hospital,

in which, however, I did not remain long; the wretchedness and

uncleanliness which I observed speedily driving me away.  Saint

James, indeed, is the grand lazar-house for all the rest of

Galicia, which accounts for the prodigious number of horrible

objects to be seen in its streets, who have for the most part

arrived in the hope of procuring medical assistance, which,

from what I could learn, is very scantily and inefficiently

administered.  Amongst these unhappy wretches I occasionally

observed the terrible leper, and instantly fled from him with a

"God help thee," as if I had been a Jew of old.  Galicia is the

only province of Spain where cases of leprosy are still

frequent; a convincing proof this, that the disease is the

result of foul feeding, and an inattention to cleanliness, as

the Gallegans, with regard to the comforts of life and

civilized habits, are confessedly far behind all the other

natives of Spain.



"Besides a general hospital we have likewise a leper-

house," said the bookseller.  "Shall I show it you?  We have

everything at Saint James.  There is nothing lacking; the very

leper finds an inn here."  "I have no objection to your showing

me the house," I replied, "but it must be at a distance, for

enter it I will not."  Thereupon he conducted me down the road

which leads towards Padron and Vigo, and pointing to two or

three huts, exclaimed "That is our leper-house."  "It appears a

miserable place," I replied: "what accommodation may there be

for the patients, and who attends to their wants?"  "They are

left to themselves," answered the bookseller, "and probably

sometimes perish from neglect: the place at one time was

endowed and had rents which were appropriated to its support,

but even these have been sequestered during the late troubles.

At present, the least unclean of the lepers generally takes his

station by the road side, and begs for the rest.  See there he

is now."



And sure enough the leper in his shining scales, and half

naked, was seated beneath a ruined wall.  We dropped money into

the hat of the unhappy being, and passed on.



"A bad disorder that," said my friend.  "I confess that

I, who have seen so many of them, am by no means fond of the

company of lepers.  Indeed, I wish that they would never enter

my shop, as they occasionally do to beg.  Nothing is more

infectious, as I have heard, than leprosy: there is one very

virulent species, however, which is particularly dreaded here,

the elephantine: those who die of it should, according to law,

be burnt, and their ashes scattered to the winds: for if the

body of such a leper be interred in the field of the dead, the

disorder is forthwith communicated to all the corses even below

the earth.  Such, at least, is our idea in these parts.

Lawsuits are at present pending from the circumstance of

elephantides having been buried with the other dead.  Sad is

leprosy in all its forms, but most so when elephantine."



"Talking of corses," said I, "do you believe that the

bones of St. James are veritably interred at Compostella?"



"What can I say," replied the old man; "you know as much

of the matter as myself.  Beneath the high altar is a large

stone slab or lid, which is said to cover the mouth of a

profound well, at the bottom of which it is believed that the

bones of the saint are interred; though why they should be

placed at the bottom of a well, is a mystery which I cannot

fathom.  One of the officers of the church told me that at one

time he and another kept watch in the church during the night,

one of the chapels having shortly before been broken open and a

sacrilege committed.  At the dead of night, finding the time

hang heavy on their hands, they took a crowbar and removed the

slab and looked down into the abyss below; it was dark as the

grave; whereupon they affixed a weight to the end of a long

rope and lowered it down.  At a very great depth it seemed to

strike against something dull and solid like lead: they

supposed it might be a coffin; perhaps it was, but whose is the

question."
