






CHAPTER III







Shopkeeper at Evora - Spanish Contrabandistas - Lion and Unicorn -

The Fountain - Trust in the  Almighty - Distribution of Tracts -

Library at Evora -  Manuscript -The Bible as a Guide - The Infamous Mary

- The Man of Palmella - The Charm - The Monkish System - Sunday -

Volney - An Auto-Da-Fe - Men from Spain - Reading of a Tract -

New Arrival - The Herb Rosemary.





Evora is a small city, walled, but not regularly

fortified, and could not sustain a siege of a day.  It has five

gates; before that to the south-west is the principal promenade

of its inhabitants: the fair on St. John's day is likewise held

there; the houses are in general very ancient, and many of them

unoccupied.  It contains about five thousand inhabitants,

though twice that number would be by no means disproportionate

to its size.  The two principal edifices are the See, or

cathedral, and the convent of San Francisco, in the square

before the latter of which was situated the posada where I had

taken up my abode.  A large barrack for cavalry stands on the

right-hand side, on entering the south-west gate.  To the

south-east, at the distance of six leagues, is to be seen a

blue chain of hills, the highest of which is called Serra

Dorso; it is picturesquely beautiful, and contains within its

recesses wolves and wild boars in numbers.  About a league and

a half on the other side of this hill is Estremos.



I passed the day succeeding my arrival principally in

examining the town and its environs, and, as I strolled about,

entering into conversation with various people that I met;

several of these were of the middle class, shopkeepers and

professional men; they were all Constitutionalists, or

pretended to be so, but had very little to say except a few

commonplace remarks on the way of living of the friars, their

hypocrisy and laziness.  I endeavoured to obtain some

information respecting the state of instruction in the place,

and from their answers was led to believe that it must be at

the lowest ebb, for it seemed that there was neither book-shop

nor school.  When I spoke of religion, they exhibited the

utmost apathy for the subject, and making their bows left me as

soon as possible.



Having a letter of introduction to a person who kept a

shop in the market-place, I went thither and delivered it to

him as he stood behind his counter.  In the course of

conversation, I found that he had been much persecuted whilst

the old system was in its vigour, and that he entertained a

hearty aversion for it.  I told him that the ignorance of the

people in religious matters had served to nurse that system,

and that the surest way to prevent its return was to enlighten

their minds: I added that I had brought a small stock of Bibles

and Testaments to Evora, which I wished to leave for sale in

the hands of some respectable merchant, and that it he were

anxious to help to lay the axe to the root of superstition and

tyranny, he could not do so more effectually than by

undertaking the charge of these books.  He declared his

willingness to do so, and I went away determined to entrust to

him half of my stock.  I returned to the hostelry, and sat down

on a log of wood on the hearth within the immense chimney in

the common apartment; two surly looking men were on their knees

on the stones; before them was a large heap of pieces of old

iron, brass, and copper; they were assorting it, and stowing it

away in various bags.  They were Spanish contrabandistas of the

lowest class, and earned a miserable livelihood by smuggling

such rubbish from Portugal into Spain.  Not a word proceeded

from their lips, and when I addressed them in their native

language, they returned no other answer than a kind of growl.

They looked as dirty and rusty as the iron in which they

trafficked; their four miserable donkeys were in the stable in

the rear.



The woman of the house and her daughter were exceedingly

civil to me, and coming near crouched down, asking various

questions about England.  A man dressed somewhat like an

English sailor, who sat on the other side of the hearth

confronting me, said, "I hate the English, for they are not

baptized, and have not the law," meaning the law of God.  I

laughed, and told him that according to the law of England, no

one who was unbaptized could be buried in consecrated ground;

whereupon he said, "Then you are stricter than we."  He then

said, "What is meant by the lion and the unicorn which I saw

the other day on the coat of arms over the door of the English

consul at St. Ubes?"  I said they were the arms of England!

"Yes," he replied, "but what do they represent?"  I said I did

not know.  "Then," said he, "you do not know the secrets of

your own house."  I said, "Suppose I were to tell you that they

represent the Lion of Bethlehem, and the horned monster of the

flaming pit in combat, as to which should obtain the mastery in

England, what would you say?"  He replied, "I should say that

you gave a fair answer."  This man and myself became great

friends; he came from Palmella, not far from St. Ubes; he had

several mules and horses with him, and dealt in corn and

barley.  I again walked out and roamed in the environs of the

town.



About half a mile from the southern wall is a stone

fountain, where the muleteers and other people who visit the

town are accustomed to water their horses.  I sat down by it,

and there I remained about two hours, entering into

conversation with every one who halted at the fountain; and I

will here observe, that during the time of my sojourn at Evora,

I repeated my visit every day, and remained there the same

time; and by following this plan, I believe that I spoke to at

least two hundred of the children of Portugal upon matters

relating to their eternal welfare.  I found that very few of

those whom I addressed had received any species of literary

education, none of them had seen the Bible, and not more than

half a dozen had the slightest inkling of what the holy book

consisted.  I found that most of them were bigoted Papists and

Miguelites at heart.  I therefore, when they told me they were

Christians, denied the possibility of their being so, as they

were ignorant of Christ and His commandments, and placed their

hope of salvation on outward forms and superstitious

observances, which were the invention of Satan, who wished to

keep them in darkness that at last they might stumble into the

pit which he had dug for them.  I said repeatedly that the

Pope, whom they revered, was an arch deceiver, and the head

minister of Satan here on earth, and that the monks and friars,

whose absence they so deplored, and to whom they had been

accustomed to confess themselves, were his subordinate agents.

When called upon for proofs, I invariably cited the ignorance

of my auditors respecting the Scriptures, and said that if

their spiritual guides had been really ministers of Christ,

they would not have permitted their flocks to remain

unacquainted with His Word.



Since this occurred, I have been frequently surprised

that I experienced no insult and ill-treatment from the people,

whose superstitions I was thus attacking; but I really

experienced none, and am inclined to believe that the utter

fearlessness which I displayed, trusting in the Protection of

the Almighty, may have been the cause.  When threatened by

danger, the best policy is to fix your eye steadily upon it,

and it will in general vanish like the morning mist before the

sun; whereas, if you quail before it, it is sure to become more

imminent.  I have fervent hope that the words of my mouth sank

deep into the hearts of some of my auditors, as I observed many

of them depart musing and pensive.  I occasionally distributed

tracts amongst them; for although they themselves were unable

to turn them to much account, I thought that by their means

they might become of service at some future time, and fall into

the hands of others, to whom they might be of eternal interest.

Many a book which is abandoned to the waters is wafted to some

remote shore, and there proves a blessing and a comfort to

millions, who are ignorant from whence it came.



The next day, which was Friday, I called at the house of

my friend Don Geronimo Azveto.  I did not find him there, but

was directed to the see, or episcopal palace, in an apartment

of which I found him, writing, with another gentleman, to whom

he introduced me; it was the governor of Evora, who welcomed me

with every mark of kindness and affability.  After some

discourse, we went out together to examine an ancient edifice,

which was reported to have served, in bygone times, as a temple

to Diana.  Part of it was evidently of Roman architecture, for

there was no mistaking the beautiful light pillars which

supported a dome, under which the sacrifices to the most

captivating and poetical divinity of the heathen theocracy had

probably been made; but the original space between the pillars

had been filled up with rubbish of a modern date, and the rest

of the building was apparently of the architecture of the

latter end of the Middle Ages.  It was situated at one end of

the building which had once been the seat of the Inquisition,

and had served, before the erection of the present see, as the

residence of the bishop.



Within the see, where the governor now resides, is a

superb library, occupying an immense vaulted room, like the

aisle of a cathedral, and in a side apartment is a collection

of paintings by Portuguese artists, chiefly portraits, amongst

which is that of Don Sebastian.  I sincerely hope it did not do

him justice, for it represents him in the shape of an awkward

lad of about eighteen, with a bloated booby face with staring

eyes, and a ruff round a short apoplectic neck.



I was shown several beautifully illuminated missals and

other manuscripts; but the one which most arrested my

attention, I scarcely need say why, was that which bore the

following title:-





"Forma sive ordinatio Capelli illustrissimi et xianissimi

principis Henvici Sexti Regis Anglie et Francie am dm Hibernie

descripta serenissio principi Alfonso Regi Portugalie illustri

per humilem servitorem sm Willm. Sav. Decanu capelle

supradicte."





It seemed a voice from the olden times of my dear native

land!  This library and picture gallery had been formed by one

of the latter bishops, a person of much learning and piety.



In the evening I dined with Don Geronimo and his brother;

the latter soon left us to attend to his military duties.  My

friend and myself had now much conversation of considerable

interest; he lamented the deplorable state of ignorance in

which his countrymen existed at present.  He said that his

friend the governor and himself were endeavouring to establish

a school in the vicinity, and that they had made application to

the government for the use of an empty convent, called the

Espinheiro, or thorn tree, at about a league's distance, and

that they had little doubt of their request being complied

with.  I had before told him who I was, and after expressing

joy at the plan which he had in contemplation, I now urged him

in the most pressing manner to use all his influence to make

the knowledge of the Scripture the basis of the education which

the children were to receive, and added, that half the Bibles

and Testaments which I had brought with me to Evora were

heartily at his service; he instantly gave me his hand, said he

accepted my offer with the greatest pleasure, and would do all

in his power to forward my views, which were in many respects

his own.  I now told him that I did not come to Portugal with

the view of propagating the dogmas of any particular sect, but

with the hope of introducing the Bible, which is the well-head

of all that is useful and conducive to the happiness of

society, - that I cared not what people called themselves,

provided they followed the Bible as a guide; for that where the

Scriptures were read, neither priestcraft nor tyranny could

long exist, and instanced the case of my own country, the cause

of whose freedom and prosperity was the Bible, and that only,

as the last persecutor of this book, the bloody and infamous

Mary, was the last tyrant who had sat on the throne of England.

We did not part till the night was considerably advanced, and

the next morning I sent him the books, in the firm and

confident hope that a bright and glorious morning was about to

rise over the night which had so long cast its dreary shadows

over the regions of the Alemtejo.



The day after this interesting event, which was Saturday,

I had more conversation with the man from Palmella.  I asked

him if in his journeys he had never been attacked by robbers;

he answered no, for that he generally travelled in company with

others.  "However," said he, "were I alone I should have little

fear, for I am well protected."  I said that I supposed he

carried arms with him.  "No other arms than this," said he,

pulling out one of those long desperate looking knives, of

English manufacture, with which every Portuguese peasant is

usually furnished.  This knife serves for many purposes, and I

should consider it a far more efficient weapon than a dagger.

"But," said he, "I do not place much confidence in the knife."

I then inquired in what rested his hope of protection.  "In

this," said he: and unbuttoning his waistcoat, he showed me a

small bag, attached to his neck by a silken string.  "In this

bag is an oracam, or prayer, written by a person of power, and

as long as I carry it about with me, no ill can befall me."

Curiosity is the leading feature of my character, and I

instantly said, with eagerness, that I should feel great

pleasure in being permitted to read the prayer.  "Well," he

replied, "you are my friend, and I would do for you what I

would for few others, I will show it you."  He then asked for

my penknife, and having unripped the bag, took out a large

piece of paper closely folded up.  I hurried to my apartment

and commenced the examination of it.  It was scrawled over in a

very illegible hand, and was moreover much stained with

perspiration, so that I had considerable difficulty in making

myself master of its contents, but I at last accomplished the

following literal translation of the charm, which was written

in bad Portuguese, but which struck me at the time as being one

of the most remarkable compositions that had ever come to my

knowledge.





THE CHARM





"Just Judge and divine Son of the Virgin Maria, who wast

born in Bethlehem, a Nazarene, and wast crucified in the midst

of all Jewry, I beseech thee, O Lord, by thy sixth day, that

the body of me be not caught, nor put to death by the hands of

justice at all; peace be with you, the peace of Christ, may I

receive peace, may you receive peace, said God to his

disciples.  If the accursed justice should distrust me, or have

its eyes on me, in order to take me or to rob me, may its eyes

not see me, may its mouth not speak to me, may it have ears

which may not hear me, may it have hands which may not seize

me, may it have feet which may not overtake me; for may I be

armed with the arms of St. George, covered with the cloak of

Abraham, and shipped in the ark of Noah, so that it can neither

see me, nor hear me, nor draw the blood from my body.  I also

adjure thee, O Lord, by those three blessed crosses, by those

three blessed chalices, by those three blessed clergymen, by

those three consecrated hosts, that thou give me that sweet

company which thou gavest to the Virgin Maria, from the gates

of Bethlehem to the portals of Jerusalem, that I may go and

come with pleasure and joy with Jesus Christ, the Son of the

Virgin Maria, the prolific yet nevertheless the eternal

virgin."





The woman of the house and her daughter had similar bags

attached to their necks, containing charms, which, they said,

prevented the witches having power to harm them.  The belief in

witchcraft is very prevalent amongst the peasantry of the

Alemtejo, and I believe of other provinces of Portugal.  This

is one of the relies of the monkish system, the aim of which,

in all countries where it has existed, seems to have been to

beset the minds of the people, that they might be more easily

misled.  All these charms were fabrications of the monks, who

had sold them to their infatuated confessants.  The monks of

the Greek and Syrian churches likewise deal in this ware, which

they know to be poison, but which they would rather vend than

the wholesome balm of the gospel, because it brings them a

large price, and fosters the delusion which enables them to

live a life of luxury.



The Sunday morning was fine, and the plain before the

church of the convent of San Francisco was crowded with people

hastening to or returning from the mass.  After having

performed my morning devotion, and breakfasted, I went down to

the kitchen; the girl Geronima was seated by the fire.  I

inquired if she had heard mass?  She replied in the negative,

and that she did not intend to hear it.  Upon my inquiring her

motive for absenting herself, she replied, that since the

friars had been expelled from their churches and convents she

had ceased to attend mass, or to confess herself; for that the

government priests had no spiritual power, and consequently she

never troubled them.  She said the friars were holy men and

charitable; for that every morning those of the convent over

the way fed forty poor persons with the relics of the meals of

the preceding day, but that now these people were allowed to

starve.  I replied, that the friars, who lived on the fat of

the land, could well afford to bestow a few bones upon their

poor, and that their doing so was merely a part of their

policy, by which they hoped to secure to themselves friends in

time of need.  The girl then observed, that as it was Sunday, I

should perhaps like to see some books, and without waiting for

a reply she produced them.  They consisted principally of

popular stories, with lives and miracles of saints, but amongst

them was a translation of Volney's RUINS OF EMPIRES.  I

expressed a wish to know how she became possessed of this book.

She said that a young man, a great Constitutionalist, had given

it to her some months previous, and had pressed her much to

read it, for that it was one of the best books in the world.  I

replied, that the author of it was an emissary of Satan, and an

enemy of Jesus Christ and the souls of mankind; that it was

written with the sole aim of bringing all religion into

contempt, and that it inculcated the doctrine that there was no

future state, nor reward for the righteous nor punishment for

the wicked.  She made no reply, but going into another room,

returned with her apron full of dry sticks and brushwood, all

which she piled upon the fire, and produced a bright blaze.

She then took the book from my hand and placed it upon the

flaming pile; then sitting down, took her rosary out of her

pocket and told her beads till the volume was consumed.  This

was an AUTO DA FE in the best sense of the word.



On the Monday and Tuesday I paid my usual visits to the

fountain, and likewise rode about the neighbourhood on a mule,

for the purpose of circulating tracts.  I dropped a great many

in the favourite walks of the people of Evora, as I felt rather

dubious of their accepting them had I proffered them with my

own hand, whereas, should they be observed lying on the ground,

I thought that curiosity might cause them to be picked up and

examined.  I likewise, on the Tuesday evening, paid a farewell

visit to my friend Azveto, as it was my intention to leave

Evora on the Thursday following and return to Lisbon; in which

view I had engaged a calash of a man who informed me that he

had served as a soldier in the grande armee of Napoleon, and

been present in the Russian campaign.  He looked the very image

of a drunkard.  His face was covered with carbuncles, and his

breath impregnated with the fumes of strong waters.  He wished

much to converse with me in French, in the speaking of which

language it seemed he prided himself, but I refused, and told

him to speak the language of the country, or I would hold no

discourse with him.



Wednesday was stormy, with occasional rain.  On coming

down, I found that my friend from Palmella had departed: but

several contrabandistas had arrived from Spain.  They were

mostly fine fellows, and unlike the two I had seen the

preceding week, who were of much lower degree, were chatty and

communicative; they spoke their native language, and no other,

and seemed to hold the Portuguese in great contempt.  The

magnificent tones of the Spanish sounded to great advantage

amidst the shrill squeaking dialect of Portugal.  I was soon in

deep conversation with them, and was much pleased to find that

all of them could read.  I presented the eldest, a man of about

fifty years of age, with a tract in Spanish.  He examined it

for some time with great attention; he then rose from his seat,

and going into the middle of the apartment, began reading it

aloud, slowly and emphatically; his companions gathered around

him, and every now and then expressed their approbation of what

they heard.  The reader occasionally called upon me to explain

passages which, as they referred to particular texts of

Scripture, he did not exactly understand, for not one of the

party had ever seen either the Old or New Testament.



He continued reading for upwards of an hour, until he had

finished the tract; and, at its conclusion, the whole party

were clamorous for similar ones, with which I was happy to be

able to supply them.



Most of these men spoke of priestcraft and the monkish

system with the utmost abhorrence, and said that they should

prefer death to submitting again to the yoke which had formerly

galled their necks.  I questioned them very particularly

respecting the opinion of their neighbours and acquaintances on

this point, and they assured me that in their part of the

Spanish frontier all were of the same mind, and that they cared

as little for the Pope and his monks as they did for Don

Carlos; for the latter was a dwarf (CHICOTITO) and a tyrant,

and the others were plunderers and robbers.  I told them they

must beware of confounding religion with priestcraft, and that

in their abhorrence of the latter they must not forget that

there is a God and a Christ to whom they must look for

salvation, and whose word it was incumbent upon them to study

on every occasion; whereupon they all expressed a devout belief

in Christ and the Virgin.



These men, though in many respects more enlightened than

the surrounding peasantry, were in others as much in the dark;

they believed in witchcraft and in the efficacy of particular

charms.  The night was very stormy, and at about nine we heard

a galloping towards the door, and then a loud knocking; it was

opened, and in rushed a wild-looking man mounted on a donkey;

he wore a ragged jacket of sheepskin, called in Spanish

zamarra, with breeches of the same as far down as his knees;

his legs were bare.  Around his sombrero, or shadowy hat, was

tied a large quantity of the herb which in English is called

rosemary, in Spanish romero, and in the rustic language of

Portugal, alecrim; which last is a word of Scandinavian origin

(ELLEGREN), signifying the elfin plant, and was probably

carried into the south by the Vandals.  The man seemed frantic

with terror, and said that the witches had been pursuing him

and hovering over his head for the last two leagues.  He came

from the Spanish frontier with meal and other articles; he said

that his wife was following him and would soon arrive, and in

about a quarter of an hour she made her appearance, dripping

with rain, and also mounted on a donkey.



I asked my friends the contrabandistas why he wore the

rosemary in his hat; whereupon they told me that it was good

against witches and the mischances on the road.  I had no time

to argue against this superstition, for, as the chaise was to

be ready at five the next morning, I wished to make the most of

the short time which I could devote to sleep.
