






CHAPTER XV







The Steamer - Cape Finisterre - The Storm - Arrival at Cadiz -

The New Testament - Seville - Italica - The Amphitheatre -

The Prisoners - The Encounter - Baron Taylor - The Street and Desert.





At the commencement of November, I again found myself on

the salt water, on my way to Spain.  I had returned to England

shortly after the events which have been narrated in the last

chapter, for the purpose of consulting with my friends, and for

planning the opening of a biblical campaign in Spain.  It was

now determined by us to print the New Testament, with as little

delay as possible, at Madrid; and I was to be entrusted with

the somewhat arduous task of its distribution.  My stay in

England was very short, for time was precious, and I was eager

to return to the field of action.



I embarked in the Thames, on board the M- steamer.  We

had a most unpleasant passage to Falmouth; the ship was crowded

with passengers, most of them poor consumptive individuals, and

other invalids fleeing from the cold blasts of England's winter

to the sunny shores of Portugal and Madeira.  In a more

uncomfortable vessel, especially steam ship, it has never been

my fate to make a voyage.  The berths were small and

insupportably close, and of these wretched holes mine was

amongst the worst, the rest having been bespoken before I

arrived on board; so that to avoid the suffocation which seemed

to threaten me should I enter it, I lay upon the floor of one

of the cabins throughout the voyage.  We remained at Falmouth

twenty-four hours, taking in coal, and repairing the engine,

which had sustained considerable damage.



On Monday, the seventh, we again started, and made for

the Bay of Biscay.  The sea was high and the wind strong and

contrary; nevertheless, on the morning of the fourth day, we

were in sight of the rocky coast to the north of Cape

Finisterre.  I must here observe, that this was the first

voyage that the captain who commanded the vessel had ever made

on board of her, and that he knew little or nothing of the

coast towards which we were bearing.  He was a person picked up

in a hurry, the former captain having resigned his command on

the ground that the ship was not seaworthy, and that the

engines were frequently unserviceable.  I was not acquainted

with these circumstances at the time, or perhaps I should have

felt more alarmed than I did, when I saw the vessel approaching

nearer and nearer the shore, till at last we were only a few

hundred yards distant.  As it was, however, I felt very much

surprised; for having passed it twice before, both times in

steam vessels, and having seen with what care the captains

endeavoured to maintain a wide offing, I could not conceive the

reason of our being now so near this dangerous region.  The

wind was blowing hard towards the shore, if that can be called

a shore which consists of steep abrupt precipices, on which the

surf was breaking with the noise of thunder, tossing up clouds

of spray and foam to the height of a cathedral.  We coasted

slowly along, rounding several tall forelands, some of them

piled up by the hand of nature in the most fantastic shapes.

About nightfall Cape Finisterre was not far ahead, - a bluff,

brown, granite mountain, whose frowning head may be seen far

away by those who traverse the ocean.  The stream which poured

round its breast was terrific, and though our engines plied

with all their force, we made little or no way.



By about eight o'clock at night the wind had increased to

a hurricane, the thunder rolled frightfully, and the only light

which we had to guide us on our way was the red forked

lightning, which burst at times from the bosom of the big black

clouds which lowered over our heads.  We were exerting

ourselves to the utmost to weather the cape, which we could

descry by the lightning on our lee, its brow being frequently

brilliantly lighted up by the flashes which quivered around it,

when suddenly, with a great crash, the engine broke, and the

paddles, on which depended our lives, ceased to play.



I will not attempt to depict the scene of horror and

confusion which ensued; it may be imagined, but never

described.  The captain, to give him his due, displayed the

utmost coolness and intrepidity; he and the whole crew made the

greatest exertions to repair the engine, and when they found

their labour in vain, endeavoured, by hoisting the sails, and

by practising all possible manoeuvres, to preserve the ship

from impending destruction; but all was of no avail, we were

hard on a lee shore, to which the howling tempest was impelling

us.  About this time I was standing near the helm, and I asked

the steersman if there was any hope of saving the vessel, or

our lives.  He replied, "Sir, it is a bad affair, no boat could

live for a minute in this sea, and in less than an hour the

ship will have her broadside on Finisterre, where the strongest

man-of-war ever built must go to shivers instantly - none of us

will see the morning."  The captain, likewise, informed the

other passengers in the cabin to the same effect, telling them

to prepare themselves; and having done so, he ordered the door

to be fastened, and none to be permitted to come on deck.  I,

however, kept my station, though almost drowned with water,

immense waves continually breaking over our windward side and

flooding the ship.  The water casks broke from their lashings,

and one of them struck me down, and crushed the foot of the

unfortunate man at the helm, whose place was instantly taken by

the captain.  We were now close to the rocks, when a horrid

convulsion of the elements took place.  The lightning enveloped

us as with a mantle, the thunders were louder than the roar of

a million cannon, the dregs of the ocean seemed to be cast up,

and in the midst of all this turmoil, the wind, without the

slightest intimation, VEERED RIGHT ABOUT, and pushed us from

the horrible coast faster than it had previously driven us

towards it.



The oldest sailors on board acknowledged that they had

never witnessed so providential an escape.  I said, from the

bottom of my heart, "Our Father - hallowed be thy name."



The next day we were near foundering, for the sea was

exceedingly high, and our vessel, which was not intended for

sailing, laboured terribly, and leaked much.  The pumps were

continually working.  She likewise took fire, but the flames

were extinguished.  In the evening the steam-engine was

partially repaired, and we reached Lisbon on the thirteenth,

where in a few days we completed our repairs.



I found my excellent friend W- in good health.  During my

absence he had been doing everything in his power to further

the sale of the sacred volume in Portuguese: his zeal and

devotedness were quite admirable.  The distracted state of the

country, however, during the last six months, had sadly impeded

his efforts.  The minds of the people had been so engrossed

with politics, that they found scarcely any time to think of

the welfare of their souls.  The political history of Portugal

had of late afforded a striking parallel to that of the

neighbouring country.  In both a struggle for supremacy had

arisen between the court and the democratic party; in both the

latter had triumphed, whilst two distinguished individuals had

fallen a sacrifice to the popular fury - Freire in Portugal,

and Quesada in Spain.  The news which reached me at Lisbon from

the latter country was rather startling.  The hordes of Gomez

were ravaging Andalusia, which I was about to visit on my way

to Madrid; Cordova had been sacked and abandoned after a three

days' occupation by the Carlists.  I was told that if I

persisted in my attempt to enter Spain in the direction which I

proposed, I should probably fall into their hands at Seville.

I had, however, no fears, and had full confidence that the Lord

would open the path before me to Madrid.



The vessel being repaired, we again embarked, and in two

days arrived in safety at Cadiz.  I found great confusion

reigning there; numerous bands of the factious were reported to

be hovering in the neighbourhood.  An attack was not deemed

improbable, and the place had just been declared in a state of

siege.  I took up my abode at the French hotel in the Calle de

la Niveria, and was allotted a species of cockloft, or garret,

to sleep in, for the house was filled with guests, being a

place of much resort, on account of the excellent table d'hote

which is kept there.  I dressed myself and walked about the

town.  I entered several coffee-houses: the din of tongues in

all was deafening.  In one no less than six orators were

haranguing at the same time on the state of the country, and

the probability of an intervention on the part of England and

France.  As I was listening to one of them, he suddenly called

upon me for my opinion, as I was a foreigner, and seemingly

just arrived.  I replied that I could not venture to guess what

steps the two governments would pursue under the present

circumstances, but thought that it would be as well if the

Spaniards would exert themselves more and call less on Jupiter.

As I did not wish to engage in any political conversation, I

instantly quitted the house, and sought those parts of the town

where the lower classes principally reside.



I entered into discourse with several individuals, but

found them very ignorant; none could read or write, and their

ideas respecting religion were anything but satisfactory, -

most professing a perfect indifference.  I afterwards went into

a bookseller's shop and made inquiries respecting the demand

for literature, which, he informed me, was small.  I produced a

London edition of the New Testament in Spanish, and asked the

bookseller whether he thought a book of that description would

sell in Cadiz.  He said that both the type and paper were

exceedingly beautiful, but that it was a work not sought after,

and very little known.  I did not pursue my inquiries in other

shops, for I reflected that I was not likely to receive a very

favourable opinion from booksellers respecting a publication in

which they had no interest.  I had, moreover, but two or three

copies of the New Testament with me, and could not have

supplied them had they even given me an order.



Early on the twenty-fourth, I embarked for Seville in the

small Spanish steamer the BETIS: the morning was wet, and the

aspect of nature was enveloped in a dense mist, which prevented

my observing surrounding objects.  After proceeding about six

leagues, we reached the north-eastern extremity of the Bay of

Cadiz, and passed by Saint Lucar, an ancient town near to the

spot where the Guadalquivir disembogues itself.  The mist

suddenly disappeared, and the sun of Spain burst forth in full

brilliancy, enlivening all around, and particularly myself, who

had till then been lying on the deck in a dull melancholy

stupor.  We entered the mouth of "The Great River," for that is

the English translation of Oued al Kiber, as the Moors

designated the ancient Betis.  We came to anchor for a few

minutes at a little village called Bonanca, at the extremity of

the first reach of the river, where we received several

passengers, and again proceeded.  There is not much in the

appearance of the Guadalquivir to interest the traveller: the

banks are low and destitute of trees, the adjacent country is

flat, and only in the distance is seen a range of tall blue

sierras.  The water is turbid and muddy, and in colour closely

resembling the contents of a duck-pool; the average width of

the stream is from a hundred and fifty to two hundred yards,

but it is impossible to move along this river without

remembering that it has borne the Roman, the Vandal, and the

Arab, and has been the witness of deeds which have resounded

through the world and been the themes of immortal songs.  I

repeated Latin verses and fragments of old Spanish ballads till

we reached Seville, at about nine o'clock of a lovely moonlight

night.



Seville contains ninety thousand inhabitants, and is

situated on the eastern bank of the Guadalquivir, about

eighteen leagues from its mouth; it is surrounded with high

Moorish walls, in a good state of preservation, and built of

such durable materials that it is probable they will for many

centuries still bid defiance to the encroachments of time.  The

most remarkable edifices are the cathedral and Alcazar, or

palace of the Moorish kings; the tower of the former, called La

Giralda, belongs to the period of the Moors, and formed part of

the grand mosque of Seville: it is computed to be one hundred

ells in height, and is ascended not by stairs or ladders but by

a vaulted pathway, in the manner of an inclined plane: this

path is by no means steep, so that a cavalier might ride up to

the top, a feat which Ferdinand the Seventh is said to have

accomplished.  The view from the summit is very extensive, and

on a fine clear day the mountain ridge, called the Sierra de

Ronda, may be discovered, though upwards of twenty leagues

distant.  The cathedral itself is a noble Gothic structure,

reputed the finest of the kind in Spain.  In the chapels

allotted to the various saints are some of the most magnificent

paintings which Spanish art has produced; indeed the Cathedral

of Seville is at the present time far more rich in splendid

paintings than at any former period; possessing many very

recently removed from some of the suppressed convents,

particularly from the Capuchin and San Francisco.



No one should visit Seville without paying particular

attention to the Alcazar, that splendid specimen of Moorish

architecture.  It contains many magnificent halls, particularly

that of the ambassadors, so called, which is in every respect

more magnificent than the one of the same name within the

Alhambra of Granada.  This palace was a favourite residence of

Peter the Cruel, who carefully repaired it without altering its

Moorish character and appearance.  It probably remains in much

the same state as at the time of his death.



On the right side of the river is a large suburb, called

Triana, communicating with Seville by means of a bridge of

boats; for there is no permanent bridge across the

Guadalquivir, owing to the violent inundations to which it is

subject.  This suburb is inhabited by the dregs of the

populace, and abounds with Gitanos or Gypsies.  About a league

and a half to the north-west stands the village of Santo Ponce:

at the foot and on the side of some elevated ground higher up

are to be seen vestiges of ruined walls and edifices, which

once formed part of Italica, the birth-place of Silius Italicus

and Trajan, from which latter personage Triana derives its

name.



One fine morning I walked thither, and having ascended

the hill, I directed my course northward.  I soon reached what

had once been bagnios, and a little farther on, in a kind of

valley between two gentle declivities, the amphitheatre.  This

latter object is by far the most considerable relic of ancient

Italica; it is oval in its form, with two gateways fronting the

east and west.



On all sides are to be seen the time-worn broken granite

benches, from whence myriads of human beings once gazed down on

the area below, where the gladiator shouted, and the lion and

the leopard yelled: all around, beneath these flights of

benches, are vaulted excavations from whence the combatants,

part human part bestial, darted forth by their several doors. I

spent many hours in this singular place, forcing my way through

the wild fennel and brushwood into the caverns, now the haunts

of adders and other reptiles, whose hissings I heard.  Having

sated my curiosity, I left the ruins, and returning by another

way, reached a place where lay the carcass of a horse half

devoured; upon it, with lustrous eyes, stood an enormous

vulture, who, as I approached, slowly soared aloft till he

alighted on the eastern gate of the amphitheatre, from whence

he uttered a hoarse cry, as if in anger that I had disturbed

him from his feast of carrion.



Gomez had not hitherto paid a visit to Seville: when I

arrived he was said to be in the neighbourhood of Ronda.  The

city was under watch and ward: several gates had been blocked

up with masonry, trenches dug, and redoubts erected, but I am

convinced that the place would not have held out six hours

against a resolute attack.  Gomez had proved himself to be a

most extraordinary man, and with his small army of Aragonese

and Basques had, within the last four months, made the tour of

Spain.  He had very frequently been hemmed in by forces three

times the number of his own, in places whence escape appeared

impossible, but he had always battled his enemies, whom he

seemed to laugh at.  The most absurd accounts of victories

gained over him were continually issuing from the press at

Seville; amongst others, it was stated that his army had been

utterly defeated, himself killed, and that twelve hundred

prisoners were on their way to Saville.  I saw these prisoners:

instead of twelve hundred desperadoes, they consisted of about

twenty poor lame ragged wretches, many of them boys from

fourteen to sixteen years of age.  They were evidently camp

followers, who, unable to keep up with the army, had been

picked up straggling in the plains and amongst the hills.



It subsequently appeared that no battle had occurred, and

that the death of Gomez was a fiction.  The grand defect of

Gomez consisted in not knowing how to take advantage of

circumstances: after defeating Lopez, he might have marched to

Madrid and proclaimed Don Carlos there, and after sacking

Cordova he might have captured Seville.



There were several booksellers' shops at Seville, in two

of which I found copies of the New Testament in Spanish, which

had been obtained from Gibraltar about two years before, since

which time six copies had been sold in one shop and four in the

other.  The person who generally accompanied me in my walks

about the town and the neighbourhood, was an elderly Genoese,

who officiated as a kind of valet de place in the Posada del

Turco, where I had taken up my residence.  On learning from me

that it was my intention to bring out an edition of the New

Testament at Madrid, he observed that copies of the work might

be extensively circulated in Andalusia.  "I have been

accustomed to bookselling," he continued, "and at one time

possessed a small shop of my own in this place.  Once having

occasion to go to Gibraltar, I procured several copies of the

Scriptures; some, it is true, were seized by the officers of

the customs, but the rest I sold at a high price, and with

considerable profit to myself."



I had returned from a walk in the country, on a glorious

sunshiny morning of the Andalusian winter, and was directing my

steps towards my lodging: as I was passing by the portal of a

large gloomy house near the gate of Xeres, two individuals

dressed in zamarras emerged from the archway, and were about to

cross my path, when one, looking in my face, suddenly started

back, exclaiming in the purest and most melodious French: "What

do I see?  If my eyes do not deceive me - it is himself.  Yes,

the very same as I saw him first at Bayonne; then long

subsequently beneath the brick wall at Novogorod; then beside

the Bosphorus; and last at - at - Oh, my respectable and

cherished friend, where was it that I had last the felicity of

seeing your well-remembered and most remarkable physiognomy?"



MYSELF. - It was in the south of Ireland, if I mistake

not.  Was it not there that I introduced you to the sorcerer

who tamed the savage horses by a single whisper into their ear?

But tell me what brings you to Spain and Andalusia, the last

place where I should have expected to find you?



BARON TAYLOR. - And wherefore, my most respectable B-?

Is not Spain the land of the arts; and is not Andalusia of all

Spain that portion which has produced the noblest monuments of

artistic excellence and inspiration?  Surely you know enough of

me to be aware that the arts are my passion; that I am

incapable of imagining a more exalted enjoyment than to gaze in

adoration on a noble picture.  O come with me! for you too have

a soul capable of appreciating what is lovely and exalted; a

soul delicate and sensitive.  Come with me, and I will show you

a Murillo, such as -.  But first allow me to introduce you to

your compatriot.  My dear Monsieur W., turning to his companion

(an English gentleman from whom and from his family I

subsequently experienced unbounded kindness and hospitality on

various occasions, and at different periods at Seville), allow

me to introduce to you my most cherished and respectable

friend, one who is better acquainted with Gypsy ways than the

Chef des Bohemiens a Triana, one who is an expert whisperer and

horse-sorcerer, and who, to his honour I say it, can wield

hammer and tongs, and handle a horse-shoe with the best of the

smiths amongst the Alpujarras of Granada.



In the course of my travels I have formed various

friendships and acquaintances, but no one has more interested

me than Baron Taylor, and there is no one for whom I entertain

a greater esteem and regard.  To personal and mental

accomplishments of the highest order he unites a kindness of

heart rarely to be met with, and which is continually inducing

him to seek for opportunities of doing good to his fellow

creatures, and of contributing to their happiness; perhaps no

person in existence has seen more of the world and life in its

various phases than himself.  His manners are naturally to the

highest degree courtly, yet he nevertheless possesses a

disposition so pliable that he finds no difficulty in

accommodating himself to all kinds of company, in consequence

of which he is a universal favourite.  There is a mystery about

him, which, wherever he goes, serves not a little to increase

the sensation naturally created by his appearance and manner.

Who he is, no one pretends to assert with downright

positiveness: it is whispered, however, that he is a scion of

royalty; and who can gaze for a moment upon that most graceful

figure, that most intelligent but singularly moulded

countenance, and those large and expressive eyes, without

feeling as equally convinced that he is of no common lineage,

as that he is no common man.  Though possessed of talents and

eloquence which would speedily have enabled him to attain to an

illustrious position in the state, he has hitherto, and perhaps

wisely, contented himself with comparative obscurity, chiefly

devoting himself to the study of the arts and of literature, of

both of which he is a most bounteous patron.



He has, notwithstanding, been employed by the illustrious

house to which he is said to be related in more than one

delicate and important mission, both in the East and the West,

in which his efforts have uniformly been crowned with complete

success.  He was now collecting masterpieces of the Spanish

school of painting, which were destined to adorn the saloons of

the Tuileries.



He has visited most portions of the earth, and it is

remarkable enough that we are continually encountering each

other in strange places and under singular circumstances.

Whenever he descries me, whether in the street or the desert,

the brilliant hall or amongst Bedouin haimas, at Novogorod or

Stambul, he flings up his arms and exclaims, "O ciel!  I have

again the felicity of seeing my cherished and most respectable

B-."
