






CHAPTER XIX







Arrival at Madrid - Maria Diaz - Printing of the Testament -

My Project - Andalusian Steed - Servant Wanted - An Application -

Antonio Buchini - General Cordova - Principles of Honour.





On my arrival at Madrid I did not repair to my former

lodgings in the Calle de la Zarza, but took others in the Calle

de Santiago, in the vicinity of the palace.  The name of the

hostess (for there was, properly speaking, no host) was Maria

Diaz, of whom I shall take the present opportunity of saying

something in particular.



She was a woman of about thirty-five years of age, rather

good-looking, and with a physiognomy every lineament of which

bespoke intelligence of no common order.  Her eyes were keen

and penetrating, though occasionally clouded with a somewhat

melancholy expression.  There was a particular calmness and

quiet in her general demeanour, beneath which, however,

slumbered a firmness of spirit and an energy of action which

were instantly displayed whenever necessary.  A Spaniard and,

of course, a Catholic, she was possessed of a spirit of

toleration and liberality which would have done honour to

individuals much her superior in station.  In this woman,

during the remainder of my sojourn in Spain, I found a firm and

constant friend, and occasionally a most discreet adviser: she

entered into all my plans, I will not say with enthusiasm,

which, indeed, formed no part of her character, but with

cordiality and sincerity, forwarding them to the utmost of her

ability.  She never shrank from me in the hour of danger and

persecution, but stood my friend, notwithstanding the many

inducements which were held out to her by my enemies to desert

or betray me.  Her motives were of the noblest kind, friendship

and a proper feeling of the duties of hospitality; no prospect,

no hope of self-interest, however remote, influenced this

admirable woman in her conduct towards me.  Honour to Maria

Diaz, the quiet, dauntless, clever Castilian female.  I were an

ingrate not to speak well of her, for richly has she deserved

an eulogy in the humble pages of THE BIBLE IN SPAIN.



She was a native of Villa Seca, a hamlet of New Castile,

situated in what is called the Sagra, at about three leagues'

distance from Toledo: her father was an architect of some

celebrity, particularly skilled in erecting bridges.  At a very

early age she married a respectable yeoman of Villa Seca, Lopez

by name, by whom she had three sons.  On the death of her

father, which occurred about five years previous to the time of

which I am speaking, she removed to Madrid, partly for the

purpose of educating her children, and partly in the hope of

obtaining from the government a considerable sum of money for

which it stood indebted to her father, at the time of his

decease, for various useful and ornamental works, principally

in the neighbourhood of Aranjuez.  The justness of her claim

was at once acknowledged; but, alas! no money was forthcoming,

the royal treasury being empty.  Her hopes of earthly happiness

were now concentrated in her children.  The two youngest were

still of a very tender age; but the eldest, Juan Jose Lopez, a

lad of about sixteen, was bidding fair to realize the warmest

hopes of his affectionate mother; he had devoted himself to the

arts, in which he made such progress that he had already become

the favourite pupil of his celebrated namesake Lopez, the best

painter of modern Spain.  Such was Maria Diaz, who, according

to a custom formerly universal in Spain, and still very

prevalent, retained the name of her maidenhood though married.

Such was Maria Diaz and her family.



One of my first cares was to wait on Mr. Villiers, who

received me with his usual kindness.  I asked him whether he

considered that I might venture to commence printing the

Scriptures without any more applications to government.  His

reply was satisfactory: "You obtained the permission of the

government of Isturitz," said he, "which was a much less

liberal one than the present.  I am a witness to the promise

made to you by the former ministers, which I consider

sufficient.  You had best commence and complete the work as

soon as possible, without any fresh application; and should any

one attempt to interrupt you, you have only to come to me, whom

you may command at any time."  So I went away with a light

heart, and forthwith made preparation for the execution of the

object which had brought me to Spain.



I shall not enter here into unnecessary details, which

could possess but little interest for the reader; suffice it to

say that, within three months from this time, an edition of the

New Testament, consisting of five thousand copies, was

published at Madrid.  The work was printed at the establishment

of Mr. Borrego, a well-known writer on political economy, and

proprietor and editor of an influential newspaper called El

Espanol.  To this gentleman I had been recommended by Isturitz

himself, on the day of my interview with him.  That unfortunate

minister had, indeed, the highest esteem for Borrego, and had

intended raising him to the station of minister of finance,

when the revolution of the Granja occurring, of course rendered

abortive this project, with perhaps many others of a similar

kind which he might have formed.



The Spanish version of the New Testament which was thus

published, had been made many years before by a certain Padre

Filipe Scio, confessor of Ferdinand the Seventh, and had even

been printed, but so encumbered by notes and commentaries as to

be unfitted for general circulation, for which, indeed, it was

never intended.  In the present edition, the notes were of

course omitted, and the inspired word, and that alone, offered

to the public.  It was brought out in a handsome octavo volume,

and presented, upon the whole, a rather favourable specimen of

Spanish typography.



The mere printing, however, of the New Testament at

Madrid could be attended with no utility whatever, unless

measures, and energetic ones, were taken for the circulation of

the sacred volume.



In the case of the New Testament, it would not do to

follow the usual plan of publication in Spain, namely, to

entrust the work to the booksellers of the capital, and rest

content with the sale which they and their agents in the

provincial towns might be able to obtain for it, in the common

routine of business; the result generally being, the

circulation of a few dozen copies in the course of the year; as

the demand for literature of every kind in Spain was miserably

small.



The Christians of England had already made considerable

sacrifices in the hope of disseminating the word of God largely

amongst the Spaniards, and it was now necessary to spare no

exertion to prevent that hope becoming abortive.  Before the

book was ready, I had begun to make preparations for putting a

plan into execution, which had occupied my thoughts

occasionally during my former visit to Spain, and which I had

never subsequently abandoned.  I had mused on it when off Cape

Finisterre in the tempest; in the cut-throat passes of the

Morena; and on the plains of La Mancha, as I jogged along a

little way ahead of the Contrabandista.



I had determined, after depositing a certain number of

copies in the shops of the booksellers of Madrid, to ride

forth, Testament in hand, and endeavour to circulate the word

of God amongst the Spaniards, not only of the towns but of the

villages; amongst the children not only of the plains but of

the hills and mountains.  I intended to visit Old Castile, and

to traverse the whole of Galicia and the Asturias, - to

establish Scripture depots in the principal towns, and to visit

the people in secret and secluded spots, - to talk to them of

Christ, to explain to them the nature of his book, and to place

that book in the hands of those whom I should deem capable of

deriving benefit from it.  I was aware that such a journey

would be attended with considerable danger, and very possibly

the fate of St. Stephen might overtake me; but does the man

deserve the name of a follower of Christ who would shrink from

danger of any kind in the cause of Him whom he calls his

Master?  "He who loses his life for my sake, shall find it,"

are words which the Lord himself uttered.  These words were

fraught with consolation to me, as they doubtless are to every

one engaged in propagating the gospel in sincerity of heart, in

savage and barbarian lands.



I now purchased another horse; for these animals, at the

time of which I am speaking, were exceedingly cheap.  A royal

requisition was about to be issued for five thousand, the

consequence being, that an immense number were for sale, for,

by virtue of this requisition, the horses of any person not a

foreigner could be seized for the benefit of the service.  It

was probable that, when the number was made up, the price of

horses would be treble what it then was, which consideration

induced me to purchase this animal before I exactly wanted him.

He was a black Andalusian stallion of great power and strength,

and capable of performing a journey of a hundred leagues in a

week's time, but he was unbroke, savage, and furious.  A cargo

of Bibles, however, which I hoped occasionally to put on his

back, would, I had no doubt, thoroughly tame him, especially

when labouring up the flinty hills of the north of Spain.  I

wished to have purchased a mule, but, though I offered thirty

pounds for a sorry one, I could not obtain her; whereas the

cost of both the horses, tall powerful stately animals,

scarcely amounted to that sum.



The state of the surrounding country at this time was not

very favourable for venturing forth: Cabrera was within nine

leagues of Madrid, with an army nearly ten thousand strong; he

had beaten several small detachments of the queen's troops, and

had ravaged La Mancha with fire and sword, burning several

towns; bands of affrighted fugitives were arriving every hour,

bringing tidings of woe and disaster, and I was only surprised

that the enemy did not appear, and by taking Madrid, which was

almost at his mercy, put an end to the war at once.  But the

truth is, that the Carlist generals did not wish the war to

cease, for as long as the country was involved in bloodshed and

anarchy, they could plunder and exercise that lawless authority

so dear to men of fierce and brutal passions.  Cabrera,

moreover, was a dastardly wretch, whose limited mind was

incapable of harbouring a single conception approaching to

grandeur; whose heroic deeds were confined to cutting down

defenceless men, and to forcing and disembowelling unhappy

women; and yet I have seen this wretched fellow termed by

French journals (Carlist of course) the young, the heroic

general.  Infamy on the cowardly assassin!  The shabbiest

corporal of Napoleon would have laughed at his generalship, and

half a battalion of Austrian grenadiers would have driven him

and his rabble army headlong into the Ebro.



I now made preparations for my journey into the north.  I

was already provided with horses well calculated to support the

fatigues of the road and the burdens which I might deem

necessary to impose upon them.  One thing, however, was still

lacking, indispensable to a person about to engage on an

expedition of this description; I mean a servant to attend me.

Perhaps there is no place in the world where servants more

abound than at Madrid, or at least fellows eager to proffer

their services in the expectation of receiving food and wages,

though, with respect to the actual service which they are

capable of performing, not much can be said; but I was in want

of a servant of no common description, a shrewd active fellow,

of whose advice, in cases of emergency, I could occasionally

avail myself; courageous withal, for it certainly required some

degree of courage to follow a master bent on exploring the

greater part of Spain, and who intended to travel, not under

the protection of muleteers and carmen, but on his own

cabalgaduras.  Such a servant, perhaps, I might have sought for

years without finding; chance, however, brought one to my hand

at the very time I wanted him, without it being necessary for

me to make any laborious perquisitions.  I was one day

mentioning the subject to Mr. Borrego, at whose establishment I

had printed the New Testament, and inquiring whether he thought

that such an individual was to be found in Madrid, adding that

I was particularly anxious to obtain a servant who, besides

Spanish, could speak some other language, that occasionally we

might discourse without being understood by those who might

overhear us.  "The very description of person," he replied,

"that you appear to be in need of, quitted me about half an

hour ago, and, it is singular enough, came to me in the hope

that I might be able to recommend him to a master.  He has been

twice in my service: for his talent and courage I will answer;

and I believe him to be trustworthy, at least to masters who

may chime in with his humour, for I must inform you that he is

a most extraordinary fellow, full of strange likes and

antipathies, which he will gratify at any expense, either to

himself or others.  Perhaps he will attach himself to you, in

which case you will find him highly valuable; for if he please

he can turn his hand to any thing, and is not only acquainted

with two but half a dozen languages."



"Is he a Spaniard?" I inquired.



"I will send him to you to-morrow," said Borrego, "you

will best learn from his own mouth who and what he is."



The next day, as I had just sat down to my "sopa," my

hostess informed me that a man wished to speak to me.  "Admit

him," said I, and he almost instantly made his appearance.  He

was dressed respectably in the French fashion, and had rather a

juvenile look, though I subsequently learned that he was

considerably above forty.  He was somewhat above the middle

stature, and might have been called well made, had it not been

for his meagreness, which was rather remarkable.  His arms were

long and bony, and his whole form conveyed an idea of great

activity united with no slight degree of strength: his hair was

wiry, but of jetty blackness; his forehead low; his eyes small

and grey, expressive of much subtlety and no less malice,

strangely relieved by a strong dash of humour; the nose was

handsome, but the mouth was immensely wide, and his under jaw

projected considerably.  A more singular physiognomy I had

never seen, and I continued staring at him for some time in

silence.  "Who are you?" I at last demanded.



"Domestic in search of a master," answered the man in

good French, but in a strange accent.  "I come recommended to

you, my Lor, by Monsieur B."



MYSELF. - Of what nation may you be?  Are you French or Spanish?



MAN. - God forbid that I should be either, mi Lor, J'AI

L'HONNEUR D'ETRE DE LA NATION GRECQUE, my name is Antonio

Buchini, native of Pera the Belle near to Constantinople.



MYSELF. - And what brought you to Spain?



BUCHINI. - MI LOR, JE VAIS VOUS RACONTER MON HISTOIRE DU

COMMENCEMENT JUSQU'ICI: - my father was a native of Sceira in

Greece, from whence at an early age he repaired to Pera, where

he served as janitor in the hotels of various ambassadors, by

whom he was much respected for his fidelity.  Amongst others of

these gentlemen, he served him of your own nation: this

occurred at the time that there was war between England and the

Porte. * Monsieur the Ambassador had to escape for his life,

leaving the greater part of his valuables to the care of my

father, who concealed them at his own great risk, and when the

dispute was settled, restored them to Monsieur, even to the

most inconsiderable trinket.  I mention this circumstance to

show you that I am of a family which cherishes principles of

honour, and in which confidence may be placed.  My father

married a daughter of Pera, ET MOI JE SUIS L'UNIQUE FRUIT DE CE

MARIAGE.  Of my mother I know nothing, as she died shortly

after my birth.  A family of wealthy Jews took pity on my

forlorn condition and offered to bring me up, to which my

father gladly consented; and with them I continued several

years, until I was a BEAU GARCON; they were very fond of me,

and at last offered to adopt me, and at their death to bequeath

me all they had, on condition of my becoming a Jew.  MAIS LA

CIRCONCISION N'ETOIT GUERE A MON GOUT; especially that of the

Jews, for I am a Greek, am proud, and have principles of

honour.  I quitted them, therefore, saying that if ever I

allowed myself to be converted, it should be to the faith of

the Turks, for they are men, are proud, and have principles of

honour like myself.  I then returned to my father, who procured

me various situations, none of which were to my liking, until I

was placed in the house of Monsieur Zea.



* This was possibly the period when Admiral Duckworth

attempted to force the passage of the Dardanelles.



MYSELF. - You mean, I suppose, Zea Bermudez, who chanced

to be at Constantinople.



BUCHINI. - Just so, mi Lor, and with him I continued

during his stay.  He put great confidence in me, more

especially as I spoke the pure Spanish language, which I

acquired amongst the Jews, who, as I have heard Monsieur Zea

say, speak it better than the present natives of Spain.



I shall not follow the Greek step by step throughout his

history, which was rather lengthy: suffice it to say, that he

was brought by Zea Bermudez from Constantinople to Spain, where

he continued in his service for many years, and from whose

house he was expelled for marrying a Guipuscoan damsel, who was

fille de chambre to Madame Zea; since which time it appeared

that he had served an infinity of masters; sometimes as valet,

sometimes as cook, but generally in the last capacity.  He

confessed, however, that he had seldom continued more than

three days in the same service, on account of the disputes

which were sure to arise in the house almost immediately after

his admission, and for which he could assign no other reason

than his being a Greek, and having principles of honour.

Amongst other persons whom he had served was General Cordova,

who he said was a bad paymaster, and was in the habit of

maltreating his domestics.  "But he found his match in me,"

said Antonio, "for I was prepared for him; and once, when he

drew his sword against me, I pulled out a pistol and pointed it

in his face.  He grew pale as death, and from that hour treated

me with all kinds of condescension.  It was only pretence,

however, for the affair rankled in his mind; he had determined

upon revenge, and on being appointed to the command of the

army, he was particularly anxious that I should attend him to

the camp.  MAIS JE LUI RIS AU NEZ, made the sign of the

cortamanga - asked for my wages, and left him; and well it was

that I did so, for the very domestic whom he took with him he

caused to be shot upon a charge of mutiny."



"I am afraid," said I, "that you are of a turbulent

disposition, and that the disputes to which you have alluded

are solely to be attributed to the badness of your temper."



"What would you have, Monsieur?  MOI JE SUIS GREC, JE

SUIS FIER ET J'AI DES PRINCIPES D'HONNEUR.  I expect to be

treated with a certain consideration, though I confess that my

temper is none of the best, and that at times I am tempted to

quarrel with the pots and pans in the kitchen.  I think, upon

the whole, that it will be for your advantage to engage me, and

I promise you to be on my guard.  There is one thing that

pleases me relating to you, you are unmarried.  Now, I would

rather serve a young unmarried man for love and friendship,

than a Benedict for fifty dollars per month.  Madame is sure to

hate me, and so is her waiting woman; and more particularly the

latter, because I am a married man.  I see that mi Lor is

willing to engage me."



"But you say you are a married man," I replied; "how can

you desert your wife, for I am about to leave Madrid, and to

travel into the remote and mountainous parts of Spain."



"My wife will receive the moiety of my wages, while I am

absent, mi Lor, and therefore will have no reason to complain

of being deserted.  Complain! did I say; my wife is at present

too well instructed to complain.  She never speaks nor sits in

my presence unless I give her permission.  Am I not a Greek,

and do I not know how to govern my own house?  Engage me, mi

Lor, I am a man of many capacities: a discreet valet, an

excellent cook, a good groom and light rider; in a word, I am

[Greek word which cannot be reproduced].  What would you more?"



I asked him his terms, which were extravagant,

notwithstanding his PRINCIPES D'HONNEUR.  I found, however,

that he was willing to take one half.



I had no sooner engaged him, than seizing the tureen of

soup, which had by this time become quite cold, he placed it on

the top of his forefinger, or rather on the nail thereof,

causing it to make various circumvolutions over his head, to my

great astonishment, without spilling a drop, then springing

with it to the door, he vanished, and in another moment made

his appearance with the puchera, which, after a similar bound

and flourish, he deposited on the table; then suffering his

hands to sink before him, he put one over the other and stood

at his ease with half-shut eyes, for all the world as if he had

been in my service twenty years.



And in this manner Antonio Buchini entered upon his

duties.  Many was the wild spot to which he subsequently

accompanied me; many the wild adventure of which he was the

sharer.  His behaviour was frequently in the highest degree

extraordinary, but he served me courageously and faithfully:

such a valet, take him for all in all,





"His like I ne'er expect to see again."





KOSKO BAKH ANTON.
