






CHAPTER XLII







Liberation from Prison - The Apology - Human Nature -

The Greek's Return - Church of Rome - Light of Scripture -

Archbishop of Toledo - An Interview - Stones of Price -

A Resolution - The Foreign Language - Benedict's Farewell -

Treasure Hunt at Compostella - Truth and Fiction.





I Remained about three weeks in the prison of Madrid, and

then left it.  If I had possessed any pride, or harboured any

rancour against the party who had consigned me to durance, the

manner in which I was restored to liberty would no doubt have

been highly gratifying to those evil passions; the government

having acknowledged, by a document transmitted to Sir George,

that I had been incarcerated on insufficient grounds, and that

no stigma attached itself to me from the imprisonment I had

undergone; at the same time agreeing to defray all the expenses

to which I had been subjected throughout the progress of this

affair.



It moreover expressed its willingness to dismiss the

individual owing to whose information I had been first

arrested, namely, the corchete or police officer who had

visited me in my apartments in the Calle de Santiago, and

behaved himself in the manner which I have described in a

former chapter.  I declined, however, to avail myself of this

condescension of the government, more especially as I was

informed that the individual in question had a wife and family,

who, if he were disgraced, would be at once reduced to want.  I

moreover considered that, in what he had done and said, he had

probably only obeyed some private orders which he had received;

I therefore freely forgave him, and if he does not retain his

situation at the present moment, it is certainly no fault of

mine.



I likewise refused to accept any compensation for my

expenses, which were considerable.  It is probable that many

persons in my situation would have acted very differently in

this respect, and I am far from saying that herein I acted

discreetly or laudably; but I was averse to receive money from

people such as those of which the Spanish government was

composed, people whom I confess I heartily despised, and I was

unwilling to afford them an opportunity of saying that after

they had imprisoned an Englishman unjustly, and without a

cause, he condescended to receive money at their hands.  In a

word, I confess my own weakness; I was willing that they should

continue my debtors, and have little doubt that they had not

the slightest objection to remain so; they kept their money,

and probably laughed in their sleeves at my want of common

sense.



The heaviest loss which resulted from my confinement, and

for which no indemnification could be either offered or

received, was in the death of my affectionate and faithful

Basque Francisco, who having attended me during the whole time

of my imprisonment, caught the pestilential typhus or gaol

fever, which was then raging in the Carcel de la Corte, of

which he expired within a few days subsequent to my liberation.

His death occurred late one evening; the next morning as I was

lying in bed ruminating on my loss, and wondering of what

nation my next servant would be, I heard a noise which seemed

to be that of a person employed vigorously in cleaning boots or

shoes, and at intervals a strange discordant voice singing

snatches of a song in some unknown language: wondering who it

could be, I rang the bell.



"Did you ring, mon maitre," said Antonio, appearing at

the door with one of his arms deeply buried in a boot.



"I certainly did ring," said I, "but I scarcely expected

that you would have answered the summons."



"MAIS POURQUOI NON, MON MAITRE?" cried Antonio.  "Who

should serve you now but myself?  N'EST PAS QUE LE SIEUR

FRANCOIS EST MORT?  And did I not say, as soon as I heard of

his departure, I shall return to my functions CHEZ MON MAITRE,

Monsieur Georges?"



"I suppose you had no other employment, and on that

account you came."



"AU CONTRAIRE, MON MAITRE," replied the Greek, "I had

just engaged myself at the house of the Duke of Frias, from

whom I was to receive ten dollars per month more than I shall

accept from your worship; but on hearing that you were without

a domestic, I forthwith told the Duke, though it was late at

night, that he would not suit me, and here I am."



"I shall not receive you in this manner," said I; "return

to the Duke, apologize for your behaviour, request your

dismission in a regular way; and then if his grace is willing

to part with you, as will most probably be the case, I shall be

happy to avail myself of your services."



It is reasonable to expect that after having been

subjected to an imprisonment which my enemies themselves

admitted to be unjust, I should in future experience more

liberal treatment at their hands than that which they had

hitherto adopted towards me.  The sole object of my ambition at

this time was to procure toleration for the sale of the Gospel

in this unhappy and distracted kingdom, and to have attained

this end I would not only have consented to twenty such

imprisonments in succession, as that which I had undergone, but

would gladly have sacrificed life itself.  I soon perceived,

however, that I was likely to gain nothing by my incarceration;

on the contrary, I had become an object of personal dislike to

the government since the termination of this affair, which it

was probable I had never been before; their pride and vanity

were humbled by the concessions which they had been obliged to

make in order to avoid a rupture with England.  This dislike

they were now determined to gratify, by thwarting my views as

much as possible.  I had an interview with Ofalia on the

subject uppermost in my mind: I found him morose and snappish.

"It will be for your interest to be still," said he; "beware!

you have already thrown the whole corte into confusion; beware,

I repeat; another time you may not escape so easily."  "Perhaps

not," I replied, "and perhaps I do not wish it; it is a

pleasant thing to be persecuted for the Gospel's sake.  I now

take the liberty of inquiring whether, if I attempt to

circulate the word of God, I am to be interrupted."  "Of

course," exclaimed Ofalia; "the church forbids such

circulation."  "I shall make the attempt, however," I

exclaimed.  "Do you mean what you say?" demanded Ofalia,

arching his eyebrows and elongating his mouth.  "Yes," I

continued, "I shall make the attempt in every village in Spain

to which I can penetrate."



Throughout my residence in Spain the clergy were the

party from which I experienced the strongest opposition; and it

was at their instigation that the government originally adopted

those measures which prevented any extensive circulation of the

sacred volume through the land.  I shall not detain the course

of my narrative with reflections as to the state of a church,

which, though it pretends to be founded on Scripture, would yet

keep the light of Scripture from all mankind, if possible.  But

Rome is fully aware that she is not a Christian church, and

having no desire to become so, she acts prudently in keeping

from the eyes of her followers the page which would reveal to

them the truths of Christianity.  Her agents and minions

throughout Spain exerted themselves to the utmost to render my

humble labours abortive, and to vilify the work which I was

attempting to disseminate.  All the ignorant and fanatical

clergy (the great majority) were opposed to it, and all those

who were anxious to keep on good terms with the court of Rome

were loud in their cry against it.  There was, however, one

section of the clergy, a small one, it is true, rather

favourably disposed towards the circulation of the Gospel

though by no means inclined to make any particular sacrifice

for the accomplishment of such an end: these were such as

professed liberalism, which is supposed to mean a disposition

to adopt any reform both in civil and church matters, which may

be deemed conducive to the weal of the country.  Not a few

amongst the Spanish clergy were supporters of this principle,

or at least declared themselves so, some doubtless for their

own advancement, hoping to turn the spirit of the times to

their own personal profit; others, it is to be hoped, from

conviction, and a pure love of the principle itself.  Amongst

these were to be found, at the time of which I am speaking,

several bishops.  It is worthy of remark, however, that of all

these not one but owed his office, not to the Pope, who

disowned them one and all, but to the Queen Regent, the

professed head of liberalism throughout all Spain.  It is not,

therefore, surprising that men thus circumstanced should feel

rather disposed than not to countenance any measure or scheme

at all calculated to favour the advancement of liberalism; and

surely such an one was a circulation of the Scriptures.  I

derived but little assistance from their good will, however,

supposing that they entertained some, as they never took any

decided stand nor lifted up their voices in a bold and positive

manner, denouncing the conduct of those who would withhold the

light of Scripture from the world.  At one time I hoped by

their instrumentality to accomplish much in Spain in the Gospel

cause; but I was soon undeceived, and became convinced that

reliance on what they would effect, was like placing the hand

on a staff of reed which will only lacerate the flesh.  More

than once some of them sent messages to me, expressive of their

esteem, and assuring me how much the cause of the Gospel was

dear to their hearts.  I even received an intimation that a

visit from me would be agreeable to the Archbishop of Toledo,

the Primate of Spain.



Of this personage I can say but little, his early history

being entirely unknown to me.  At the death of Ferdinand, I

believe, he was Bishop of Mallorca, a small insignificant see,

of very scanty revenues, which perhaps he had no objection to

exchange for one more wealthy; it is probable, however, that

had he proved a devoted servant of the Pope, and consequently a

supporter of legitimacy, he would have continued to the day of

his death to fill the episcopal chair of Mallorca; but he was

said to be a liberal, and the Queen Regent thought fit to

bestow upon him the dignity of Archbishop of Toledo, by which

he became the head of the Spanish church.  The Pope, it is

true, had refused to ratify the nomination, on which account

all good Catholics were still bound to consider him as Bishop

of Mallorca, and not as Primate of Spain.  He however received

the revenues belonging to the see, which, though only a shadow

of what they originally were, were still considerable, and

lived in the primate's palace at Madrid, so that if he were not

archbishop DE JURE, he was what many people would have

considered much better, archbishop DE FACTO.



Hearing that this personage was a personal friend of

Ofalia, who was said to entertain a very high regard for him, I

determined upon paying him a visit, and accordingly one morning

betook myself to the palace in which he resided.  I experienced

no difficulty in obtaining an interview, being forthwith

conducted to his presence by a common kind of footman, an

Asturian, I believe, whom I found seated on a stone bench in

the entrance hall.  When I was introduced the Archbishop was

alone, seated behind a table in a large apartment, a kind of

drawing-room; he was plainly dressed, in a black cassock and

silken cap; on his finger, however, glittered a superb

amethyst, the lustre of which was truly dazzling.  He rose for

a moment as I advanced, and motioned me to a chair with his

hand.  He might be about sixty years of age; his figure was

very tall, but he stooped considerably, evidently from

feebleness, and the pallid hue of ill health overspread his

emaciated features.  When he had reseated himself, he dropped

his head, and appeared to be looking on the table before him.



"I suppose your lordship knows who I am?" said I, at last

breaking silence.



The Archbishop bent his head towards the right shoulder,

in a somewhat equivocal manner, but said nothing.



"I am he whom the Manolos of Madrid call Don Jorgito el

Ingles; I am just come out of prison, whither I was sent for

circulating my Lord's Gospel in this kingdom of Spain?"



The Archbishop made the same equivocal motion with his

head, but still said nothing.



"I was informed that your lordship was desirous of seeing

me, and on that account I have paid you this visit."



"I did not send for you," said the Archbishop, suddenly

raising his head with a startled look.



"Perhaps not: I was, however, given to understand that my

presence would be agreeable; but as that does not seem to be

the case, I will leave."



"Since you are come, I am very glad to see you."



"I am very glad to hear it," said I, reseating myself;

"and since I am here, we may as well talk of an all-important

matter, the circulation of the Scripture.  Does your lordship

see any way by which an end so desirable might be brought

about?"



"No," said the Archbishop faintly.



"Does not your lordship think that a knowledge of the

Scripture would work inestimable benefit in these realms?"



"I don't know."



"Is it probable that the government may be induced to

consent to the circulation?"



"How should I know?" and the Archbishop looked me in the

face.



I looked in the face of the Archbishop; there was an

expression of helplessness in it, which almost amounted to

dotage.  "Dear me," thought I, "whom have I come to on an

errand like mine?  Poor man, you are not fitted to play the

part of Martin Luther, and least of all in Spain.  I wonder why

your friends selected you to be Archbishop of Toledo; they

thought perhaps that you would do neither good nor harm, and

made choice of you, as they sometimes do primates in my own

country, for your incapacity.  You do not seem very happy in

your present situation; no very easy stall this of yours.  You

were more comfortable, I trow, when you were the poor Bishop of

Mallorca; could enjoy your puchera then without fear that the

salt would turn out sublimate.  No fear then of being smothered

in your bed.  A siesta is a pleasant thing when one is not

subject to be disturbed by `the sudden fear.'  I wonder whether

they have poisoned you already," I continued, half aloud, as I

kept my eyes fixed on his countenance, which methought was

becoming ghastly.



"Did you speak, Don Jorge?" demanded the Archbishop.



"That is a fine brilliant on your lordship's hand," said

I.



"You are fond of brilliants, Don Jorge," said the

Archbishop, his features brightening up; "vaya! so am I; they

are pretty things.  Do you understand them?"



"I do," said I, "and I never saw a finer brilliant than

your own, one excepted; it belonged to an acquaintance of mine,

a Tartar Khan.  He did not bear it on his finger, however; it

stood in the frontlet of his horse, where it shone like a star.

He called it Daoud Scharr, which, being interpreted, meaneth

LIGHT OF WAR."



"Vaya!" said the Archbishop, "how very extra-ordinary; I

am glad you are fond of brilliants, Don Jorge.  Speaking of

horses, reminds me that I have frequently seen you on

horseback.  Vaya! how you ride; it is dangerous to be in your

way."



"Is your lordship fond of equestrian exercise?"



"By no means, Don Jorge; I do not like horses; it is not

the practice of the church to ride on horseback.  We prefer

mules: they are the quieter animals; I fear horses, they kick

so violently."



"The kick of a horse is death," said I, "if it touches a

vital part.  I am not, however, of your lordship's opinion with

respect to mules: a good ginete may retain his seat on a horse

however vicious, but a mule - vaya! when a false mule TIRA POR

DETRAS, I do not believe that the Father of the Church himself

could keep the saddle a moment, however sharp his bit."



As I was going away, I said, "And with respect to the

Gospel, your lordship; what am I to understand?"



"NO SE," said the Archbishop, again bending his head

towards the right shoulder, whilst his features resumed their

former vacant expression.  And thus terminated my interview

with the Archbishop of Toledo.



"It appears to me," said I to Maria Diaz, on returning

home; "it appears to me, Marequita mia, that if the Gospel in

Spain is to wait for toleration until these liberal bishops and

archbishops come forward boldly in its behalf, it will have to

tarry a considerable time."



"I am much of your worship's opinion," answered Maria; "a

fine thing, truly, it would be to wait till they exerted

themselves in its behalf.  Ca! the idea makes me smile: was

your worship ever innocent enough to suppose that they cared

one tittle about the Gospel or its cause?  Vaya! they are true

priests, and had only self-interest in view in their advances

to you.  The Holy Father disowns them, and they would now fain,

by awaking his fears and jealousy, bring him to some terms; but

let him once acknowledge them and see whether they would admit

you to their palaces or hold any intercourse with you: `Forth

with the fellow,' they would say; `vaya! is he not a Lutheran?

Is he not an enemy to the Church?  A LA HORCA, A LA HORCA!'  I

know this family better than you do, Don Jorge."



"It is useless tarrying," said I; "nothing, however, can

be done in Madrid.  I cannot sell the work at the despacho, and

I have just received intelligence that all the copies exposed

for sale in the libraries in the different parts of Spain which

I visited, have been sequestrated by order of the government.

My resolution is taken: I shall mount my horses, which are

neighing in the stable, and betake myself to the villages and

plains of dusty Spain.  AL CAMPO, AL CAMPO: `Ride forth because

of the word of righteousness, and thy right hand shall show

thee terrible things.'  I will ride forth, Maria."



"Your worship can do no better; and allow me here to tell

you, that for every single book you might sell in a despacho in

the city, you may dispose of one hundred amongst the villages,

always provided you offer them cheap: for in the country money

is rather scant.  Vaya! should I not know? am I not a villager

myself, a villana from the Sagra?  Ride forth, therefore; your

horses are neighing in the stall, as your worship says, and you

might almost have added that the Senor Antonio is neighing in

the house.  He says he has nothing to do, on which account he

is once more dissatisfied and unsettled.  He finds fault with

everything, but more particularly with myself.  This morning I

saluted him, and he made me no reply, but twisted his mouth in

a manner very uncommon in this land of Spain."



"A thought strikes me," said I; "you have mentioned the

Sagra; why should not I commence my labours amongst the

villages of that district?"



"Your worship can do no better," replied Maria; "the

harvest is just over there, and you will find the people

comparatively unemployed, with leisure to attend and listen to

you; and if you follow my advice, you will establish yourself

at Villa Seca, in the house of my fathers, where at present

lives my lord and husband.  Go, therefore, to Villa Seca in the

first place, and from thence you can sally forth with the Senor

Antonio upon your excursions.  Peradventure, my husband will

accompany you; and if so, you will find him highly useful.  The

people of Villa Seca are civil and courteous, your worship;

when they address a foreigner they speak to him at the top of

their voice and in Gallegan."



"In Gallegan!" I exclaimed.



"They all understand a few words of Gallegan, which they

have acquired from the mountaineers, who occasionally assist

them in cutting the harvest, and as Gallegan is the only

foreign language they know, they deem it but polite to address

a foreigner in that tongue.  Vaya! it is not a bad village,

that of Villa Seca, nor are the people; the only ill-

conditioned person living there is his reverence the curate."



I was not long in making preparations for my enterprise.

A considerable stock of Testaments were sent forward by an

arriero, I myself followed the next day.  Before my departure,

however, I received a Benedict Mol.



"I am come to bid you farewell, lieber herr; I return to

Compostella."



"On what errand?"



"To dig up the schatz, lieber herr.  For what else should

I go?  For what have I lived until now, but that I may dig up

the schatz in the end?"



"You might have lived for something better," I exclaimed.

"I wish you success, however.  But on what grounds do you hope?

Have you obtained permission to dig?  Surely you remember your

former trials in Galicia?"



"I have not forgotten them, lieber herr, nor the journey

to Oviedo, nor `the seven acorns,' nor the fight with death in

the barranco.  But I must accomplish my destiny.  I go now to

Galicia, as is becoming a Swiss, at the expense of the

government, with coach and mule, I mean in the galera.  I am to

have all the help I require, so that I can dig down to the

earth's centre if I think fit.  I - but I must not tell your

worship, for I am sworn on `the four Evangiles' not to tell."



"Well, Benedict, I have nothing to say, save that I hope

you will succeed in your digging."



"Thank you, lieber herr, thank you; and now farewell.

Succeed!  I shall succeed!"  Here he stopped short, started,

and looking upon me with an expression of countenance almost

wild, he exclaimed: "Heiliger Gott!  I forgot one thing.

Suppose I should not find the treasure after all."



"Very rationally said; pity, though, that you did not

think of that contingency till now.  I tell you, my friend,

that you have engaged in a most desperate undertaking.  It is

true that you may find a treasure.  The chances are, however, a

hundred to one that you do not, and in that event, what will be

your situation?  You will be looked upon as an impostor, and

the consequences may be horrible to you.  Remember where you

are, and amongst whom you are.  The Spaniards are a credulous

people, but let them once suspect that they have been imposed

upon, and above all laughed at, and their thirst for vengeance

knows no limit.  Think not that your innocence will avail you.

That you are no impostor I feel convinced; but they would never

believe it.  It is not too late.  Return your fine clothes and

magic rattan to those from whom you had them.  Put on your old

garments, grasp your ragged staff, and come with me to the

Sagra, to assist in circulating the illustrious Gospel amongst

the rustics on the Tagus' bank."



Benedict mused for a moment, then shaking his head, he

cried, "No, no, I must accomplish my destiny.  The schatz is

not yet dug up.  So said the voice in the barranco.  To-morrow

to Compostella.  I shall find it - the schatz - it is still

there - it MUST be there."



He went, and I never saw him more.  What I heard,

however, was extraordinary enough.  It appeared that the

government had listened to his tale, and had been so struck

with Bennet's exaggerated description of the buried treasure,

that they imagined that, by a little trouble and outlay, gold

and diamonds might be dug up at Saint James sufficient to

enrich themselves and to pay off the national debt of Spain.

The Swiss returned to Compostella "like a duke," to use his own

words.  The affair, which had at first been kept a profound

secret, was speedily divulged.  It was, indeed, resolved that

the investigation, which involved consequences of so much

importance, should take place in a manner the most public and

imposing.  A solemn festival was drawing nigh, and it was

deemed expedient that the search should take place on that day.

The day arrived.  All the bells in Compostella pealed.  The

whole populace thronged from their houses, a thousand troops

were drawn up in the square, the expectation of all was wound

up to the highest pitch.  A procession directed its course to

the church of San Roque; at its head was the captain-general

and the Swiss, brandishing in his hand the magic rattan, close

behind walked the MEIGA, the Gallegan witch-wife, by whom the

treasure-seeker had been originally guided in the search;

numerous masons brought up the rear, bearing implements to

break up the ground.  The procession enters the church, they

pass through it in solemn march, they find themselves in a

vaulted passage.  The Swiss looks around.  "Dig here," said he

suddenly.  "Yes, dig here," said the meiga.  The masons labour,

the floor is broken up, - a horrible and fetid odour arises. .

. .



Enough; no treasure was found, and my warning to the

unfortunate Swiss turned out but too prophetic.  He was

forthwith seized and flung into the horrid prison of Saint

James, amidst the execrations of thousands, who would have

gladly torn him limb from limb.



The affair did not terminate here.  The political

opponents of the government did not allow so favourable an

opportunity to escape for launching the shafts of ridicule.

The Moderados were taunted in the cortes for their avarice and

credulity, whilst the liberal press wafted on its wings through

Spain the story of the treasure-hunt at Saint James.



"After all, it was a TRAMPA of Don Jorge's," said one of

my enemies.  "That fellow is at the bottom of half the

picardias which happen in Spain."



Eager to learn the fate of the Swiss, I wrote to my old

friend Rey Romero, at Compostella.  In his answer he states: "I

saw the Swiss in prison, to which place he sent for me, craving

my assistance, for the sake of the friendship which I bore to

you.  But how could I help him?  He was speedily after removed

from Saint James, I know not whither.  It is said that he

disappeared on the road."



Truth is sometimes stranger than fiction.  Where in the

whole cycle of romance shall we find anything more wild,

grotesque, and sad, than the easily-authenticated history of

Benedict Mol, the treasure-digger of Saint James?
