






CHAPTER XXVIII







Skippers of Padron - Caldas de los Reyes - Pontevedra - The Notary Public -

Insane Barber - An Introduction - Gallegan Language - Afternoon Ride -

Vigo - The Stranger - Jews of the Desert - Bay of Vigo -

Sudden Interruption - The Governor.





After a stay of about a fortnight at Saint James, we

again mounted our horses and proceeded in the direction of

Vigo.  As we did not leave Saint James till late in the

afternoon, we travelled that day no farther than Padron, a

distance of only three leagues.  This place is a small port,

situate at the extremity of a firth which communicates with the

sea.  It is called for brevity's sake, Padron, but its proper

appellation is Villa del Padron, or the town of the patron

saint; it having been, according to the legend, the principal

residence of Saint James during his stay in Galicia.  By the

Romans it was termed Iria Flavia.  It is a flourishing little

town, and carries on rather an extensive commerce, some of its

tiny barks occasionally finding their way across the Bay of

Biscay, and even so far as the Thames and London.



There is a curious anecdote connected with the skippers

of Padron, which can scarcely be considered as out of place

here, as it relates to the circulation of the Scriptures.  I

was one day in the shop of my friend the bookseller at Saint

James, when a stout good-humoured-looking priest entered.  He

took up one of my Testaments, and forthwith burst into a

violent fit of laughter.  "What is the matter?" demanded the

bookseller.  "The sight of this book reminds me of a

circumstance": replied the other, "about twenty years ago, when

the English first took it into their heads to be very zealous

in converting us Spaniards to their own way of thinking, they

distributed a great number of books of this kind amongst the

Spaniards who chanced to be in London; some of them fell into

the hands of certain skippers of Padron, and these good folks,

on their return to Galicia, were observed to have become on a

sudden exceedingly opinionated and fond of dispute.  It was

scarcely possible to make an assertion in their hearing without

receiving a flat contradiction, especially when religious

subjects were brought on the carpet.  `It is false,' they would

say; `Saint Paul, in such a chapter and in such a verse, says

exactly the contrary.'  `What can you know concerning what

Saint Paul or any other saint has written?' the priests would

ask them.  `Much more than you think,' they replied; `we are no

longer to be kept in darkness and ignorance respecting these

matters:' and then they would produce their books and read

paragraphs, making such comments that every person was

scandalized; they cared nothing about the Pope, and even spoke

with irreverence of the bones of Saint James.  However, the

matter was soon bruited about, and a commission was dispatched

from our see to collect the books and burn them.  This was

effected, and the skippers were either punished or reprimanded,

since which I have heard nothing more of them.  I could not

forbear laughing when I saw these books; they instantly brought

to my mind the skippers of Padron and their religious

disputations."



Our next day's journey brought us to Pontevedra.  As

there was no talk of robbers in these parts, we travelled

without any escort and alone.  The road was beautiful and

picturesque, though somewhat solitary, especially after we had

left behind us the small town of Caldas.  There is more than

one place of this name in Spain; the one of which I am speaking

is distinguished from the rest by being called Caldas de los

Reyes, or the warm baths of the kings.  It will not be amiss to

observe that the Spanish CALDAS is synonymous with the Moorish

ALHAMA, a word of frequent occurrence both in Spanish and

African topography.  Caldas seemed by no means undeserving of

its name: it stands on a confluence of springs, and the place

when we arrived was crowded with people who had come to enjoy

the benefit of the waters.  In the course of my travels I have

observed that wherever warm springs are found, vestiges of

volcanoes are sure to be nigh; the smooth black precipice, the

divided mountain, or huge rocks standing by themselves on the

plain or on the hill side, as if Titans had been playing at

bowls.  This last feature occurs near Caldas de los Reyes, the

side of the mountain which overhangs it in the direction of the

south being covered with immense granite stones, apparently at

some ancient period eructed from the bowels of the earth.  From

Caldas to Pontevedra the route was hilly and fatiguing, the

heat was intense, and those clouds of flies, which constitute

one of the pests of Galicia, annoyed our horses to such a

degree that we were obliged to cut down branches from the trees

to protect their heads and necks from the tormenting stings of

these bloodthirsty insects.  Whilst travelling in Galicia at

this period of the year on horseback, it is always advisable to

carry a fine net for the protection of the animal, a sure and

commodious means of defence, which appears, however, to be

utterly unknown in Galicia, where, perhaps, it is more wanted

than in any other part of the world.



Pontevedra, upon the whole, is certainly entitled to the

appellation of a magnificent town, some of its public edifices,

especially the convents, being such as are nowhere to be found

but in Spain and Italy.  It is surrounded by a wall of hewn

stone, and stands at the end of a creek into which the river

Levroz disembogues.  It is said to have been founded by a

colony of Greeks, whose captain was no less a personage than

Teucer the Telemonian.  It was in former times a place of

considerable commerce; and near its port are to be seen the

ruins of a farol, or lighthouse, said to be of great antiquity.

The port, however, is at a considerable distance from the town,

and is shallow and incommodious.  The whole country in the

neighbourhood of Pontevedra is inconceivably delicious,

abounding with fruits of every description, especially grapes,

which in the proper season are seen hanging from the "parras"

in luscious luxuriance.  An old Andalusian author has said that

it produces as many oranges and citron trees as the

neighbourhood of Cordova.  Its oranges are, however, by no

means good, and cannot compete with those of Andalusia.  The

Pontevedrians boast that their land produces two crops every

year, and that whilst they are gathering in one they may be

seen ploughing and sowing another.  They may well be proud of

their country, which is certainly a highly favoured spot.



The town itself is in a state of great decay, and

notwithstanding the magnificence of its public edifices, we

found more than the usual amount of Galician filth and misery.

The posada was one of the most wretched description, and to

mend the matter, the hostess was a most intolerable scold and

shrew.  Antonio having found fault with the quality of some

provision which she produced, she cursed him most immoderately

in the country language, which was the only one she spoke, and

threatened, if he attempted to breed any disturbance in her

house, to turn the horses, himself, and his master forthwith

out of doors.  Socrates himself, however, could not have

conducted himself on this occasion with greater forbearance

than Antonio, who shrugged his shoulders, muttered something in

Greek, and then was silent.



"Where does the notary public live?" I demanded.  Now the

notary public vended books, and to this personage I was

recommended by my friend at Saint James.  A boy conducted me to

the house of Senor Garcia, for such was his name.  I found him

a brisk, active, talkative little man of forty.  He undertook

with great alacrity the sale of my Testaments, and in a

twinkling sold two to a client who was waiting in the office,

and appeared to be from the country.  He was an enthusiastic

patriot, but of course in a local sense, for he cared for no

other country than Pontevedra.



"Those fellows of Vigo," said he, "say their town is a

better one than ours, and that it is more deserving to be the

capital of this part of Galicia.  Did you ever hear such folly?

I tell you what, friend, I should not care if Vigo were burnt,

and all the fools and rascals within it.  Would you ever think

of comparing Vigo with Pontevedra?"



"I don't know," I replied; "I have never been at Vigo,

but I have heard say that the bay of Vigo is the finest in the

world."



"Bay! my good sir.  Bay! yes, the rascals have a bay, and

it is that bay of theirs which has robbed us all our commerce.

But what needs the capital of a district with a bay?  It is

public edifices that it wants, where the provincial deputies

can meet to transact their business; now, so far from there

being a commodious public edifice, there is not a decent house

in all Vigo.  Bay! yes, they have a bay, but have they water

fit to drink?  Have they a fountain?  Yes, they have, and the

water is so brackish that it would burst the stomach of a

horse.  I hope, my dear sir, that you have not come all this

distance to take the part of such a gang of pirates as those of

Vigo."



"I am not come to take their part," I replied; "indeed, I

was not aware that they wanted my assistance in this dispute.

I am merely carrying to them the New Testament, of which they

evidently stand in much need, if they are such knaves and

scoundrels as you represent them."



"Represent them, my dear sir.  Does not the matter speak

for itself?  Do they not say that their town is better than

ours, more fit to be the capital of a district, QUE DISPARATE!

QUE BRIBONERIA! (what folly! what rascality!)"



"Is there a bookseller's shop at Vigo?" I inquired.



"There was one," he replied, "kept by an insane barber.

I am glad, for your sake, that it is broken up, and the fellow

vanished; he would have played you one of two tricks; he would

either have cut your throat with his razor, under pretence of

shaving you, or have taken your books and never have accounted

to you for the proceeds.  Bay! I never could see what right

such an owl's nest as Vigo has to a bay."



No person could exhibit greater kindness to another, than

did the notary public to myself, as soon as I had convinced him

that I had no intention of siding with the men of Vigo against

Pontevedra.  It was now six o'clock in the evening, and he

forthwith conducted me to a confectioner's shop, where he

treated me with an iced cream and a small cup of chocolate.

From hence we walked about the city, the notary showing the

various edifices, especially, the Convent of the Jesuits: "See

that front," said he, "what do you think of it?"



I expressed to him the admiration which I really felt,

and by so doing entirely won the good notary's heart: "I

suppose there is nothing like that at Vigo?" said I.  He looked

at me for a moment, winked, gave a short triumphant chuckle,

and then proceeded on his way, walking at a tremendous rate.

The Senor Garcia was dressed in all respects as an English

notary might be: he wore a white hat, brown frock coat, drab

breeches buttoned at the knees, white stockings, and well

blacked shoes.  But I never saw an English notary walk so fast:

it could scarcely be called walking: it seemed more like a

succession of galvanic leaps and bounds.  I found it impossible

to keep up with him: "Where are you conducting me?" I at last

demanded, quite breathless.



"To the house of the cleverest man in Spain," he replied,

"to whom I intend to introduce you; for you must not think that

Pontevedra has nothing to boast of but its splendid edifices

and its beautiful country; it produces more illustrious minds

than any other town in Spain.  Did you ever hear of the grand

Tamerlane?"



"Oh, yes," said I, "but he did not come from Pontevedra

or its neighbourhood: he came from the steppes of Tartary, near

the river Oxus."



"I know he did," replied the notary, "but what I mean to

say is, that when Enrique the Third wanted an ambassador to

send to that African, the only man he could find suited to the

enterprise was a knight of Pontevedra, Don - by name.  Let the

men of Vigo contradict that fact if they can."



We entered a large portal and ascended a splendid

staircase, at the top of which the notary knocked at a small

door: "Who is the gentleman to whom you are about to introduce

me?" demanded I.



"It is the advocate -," replied Garcia; "he is the

cleverest man in Spain, and understands all languages and

sciences."



We were admitted by a respectable-looking female, to all

appearance a housekeeper, who, on being questioned, informed us

that the Advocate was at home, and forthwith conducted us to an

immense room, or rather library, the walls being covered with

books, except in two or three places, where hung some fine

pictures of the ancient Spanish school.  There was a rich

mellow light in the apartment, streaming through a window of

stained glass, which looked to the west.  Behind the table sat

the Advocate, on whom I looked with no little interest: his

forehead was high and wrinkled, and there was much gravity on

his features, which were quite Spanish.  He was dressed in a

long robe, and might be about sixty; he sat reading behind a

large table, and on our entrance half raised himself and bowed

slightly.



The notary public saluted him most profoundly, and, in an

under voice, hoped that he might be permitted to introduce a

friend of his, an English gentleman, who was travelling through

Galicia.



"I am very glad to see him," said the Advocate, "but I

hope he speaks Castilian, else we can have but little

communication; for, although I can read both French and Latin,

I cannot speak them."



"He speaks, sir, almost as good Spanish," said the

notary, "as a native of Pontevedra."



"The natives of Pontevedra," I replied, "appear to be

better versed in Gallegan than in Castilian, for the greater

part of the conversation which I hear in the streets is carried

on in the former dialect."



"The last gentleman which my friend Garcia introduced to

me," said the Advocate, "was a Portuguese, who spoke little or

no Spanish.  It is said that the Gallegan and Portuguese are

very similar, but when we attempted to converse in the two

languages, we found it impossible.  I understood little of what

he said, whilst my Gallegan was quite unintelligible to him.

Can you understand our country dialect?" he continued.



"Very little of it," I replied; "which I believe chiefly

proceeds from the peculiar accent and uncouth enunciation of

the Gallegans, for their language is certainly almost entirely

composed of Spanish and Portuguese words."



"So you are an Englishman," said the Advocate.  "Your

countrymen have committed much damage in times past in these

regions, if we may trust our histories."



"Yes," said I, "they sank your galleons and burnt your

finest men-of-war in Vigo Bay, and, under old Cobham, levied a

contribution of forty thousand pounds sterling on this very

town of Pontevedra."



"Any foreign power," interrupted the notary public, "has

a clear right to attack Vigo, but I cannot conceive what plea

your countrymen could urge for distressing Pontevedra, which is

a respectable town, and could never have offended them."



"Senor Cavalier," said the Advocate, "I will show you my

library.  Here is a curious work, a collection of poems,

written mostly in Gallegan, by the curate of Fruime.  He is our

national poet, and we are very proud of him."



We stopped upwards of an hour with the Advocate, whose

conversation, if it did not convince me that he was the

cleverest man in Spain, was, upon the whole, highly

interesting, and who certainly possessed an extensive store of

general information, though he was by no means the profound

philologist which the notary had represented him to be.



When I was about to depart from Pontevedra in the

afternoon of the next day, the Senor Garcia stood by the side

of my horse, and having embraced me, thrust a small pamphlet

into my hand: "This book," said he, "contains a description of

Pontevedra.  Wherever you go, speak well of Pontevedra." I

nodded.  "Stay," said he, "my dear friend, I have heard of your

society, and will do my best to further its views.  I am quite

disinterested, but if at any future time you should have an

opportunity of speaking in print of Senor Garcia, the notary

public of Pontevedra, - you understand me, - I wish you would

do so."



"I will," said I.



It was a pleasant afternoon's ride from Pontevedra to

Vigo, the distance being only four leagues.  As we approached

the latter town, the country became exceedingly mountainous,

though scarcely anything could exceed the beauty of the

surrounding scenery.  The sides of the hills were for the most

part clothed with luxuriant forests, even to the very summits,

though occasionally a flinty and naked peak would present

itself, rising to the clouds.  As the evening came on, the

route along which we advanced became very gloomy, the hills and

forests enwrapping it in deep shade.  It appeared, however, to

be well frequented: numerous cars were creaking along it, and

both horsemen and pedestrians were continually passing us.  The

villages were frequent.  Vines, supported on parras, were

growing, if possible, in still greater abundance than in the

neighbourhood of Pontevedra.  Life and activity seemed to

pervade everything.  The hum of insects, the cheerful bark of

dogs, the rude songs of Galicia, were blended together in

pleasant symphony.  So delicious was my ride, that I almost

regretted when we entered the gate of Vigo.



The town occupies the lower part of a lofty hill, which,

as it ascends, becomes extremely steep and precipitous, and the

top of which is crowned with a strong fort or castle.  It is a

small compact place, surrounded with low walls, the streets are

narrow, steep, and winding, and in the middle of the town is a

small square.



There is rather an extensive faubourg extending along the

shore of the bay.  We found an excellent posada, kept by a man

and woman from the Basque provinces, who were both civil and

intelligent.  The town seemed to be crowded, and resounded with

noise and merriment.  The people were making a wretched attempt

at an illumination, in consequence of some victory lately

gained, or pretended to have been gained, over the forces of

the Pretender.  Military uniforms were glancing about in every

direction.  To increase the bustle, a troop of Portuguese

players had lately arrived from Oporto, and their first

representation was to take place this evening.  "Is the play to

be performed in Spanish?" I demanded.  "No," was the reply;

"and on that account every person is so eager to go; which

would not be the case if it were in a language which they could

understand."



On the morning of the next day I was seated at breakfast

in a large apartment which looked out upon the Plaza Mayor, or

great square of the good town of Vigo.  The sun was shining

very brilliantly, and all around looked lively and gay.

Presently a stranger entered, and bowing profoundly, stationed

himself at the window, where he remained a considerable time in

silence.  He was a man of very remarkable appearance, of about

thirty-five.  His features were of perfect symmetry, and I may

almost say, of perfect beauty.  His hair was the darkest I had

ever seen, glossy and shining; his eyes large, black, and

melancholy; but that which most struck me was his complexion.

It might be called olive, it is true, but it was a livid olive.

He was dressed in the very first style of French fashion.

Around his neck was a massive gold chain, while upon his

fingers were large rings, in one of which was set a magnificent

ruby.  Who can that man be? thought I; - Spaniard or

Portuguese, perhaps a Creole.  I asked him an indifferent

question in Spanish, to which he forthwith replied in that

language, but his accent convinced me that he was neither

Spaniard nor Portuguese.



"I presume I am speaking to an Englishman, sir?" said he,

in as good English as it was possible for one not an Englishman

to speak.



MYSELF. - You know me to be an Englishman; but I should

find some difficulty in guessing to what country you belong.



STRANGER. - May I take a seat?



MYSELF. - A singular question.  Have you not as much

right to sit in the public apartment of an inn as myself?



STRANGER. - I am not certain of that.  The people here

are not in general very gratified at seeing me seated by their

side.



MYSELF. - Perhaps owing to your political opinions, or to

some crime which it may have been your misfortune to commit?



STRANGER. - I have no political opinions, and I am not

aware that I ever committed any particular crime, - I am hated

for my country and my religion.



MYSELF. - Perhaps I am speaking to a Protestant, like

myself?



STRANGER. - I am no Protestant.  If I were, they would be

cautious here of showing their dislike, for I should then have

a government and a consul to protect me.  I am a Jew - a

Barbary Jew, a subject of Abderrahman.



MYSELF. - If that be the case, you can scarcely complain

of being looked upon with dislike in this country, since in

Barbary the Jews are slaves.



STRANGER. - In most parts, I grant you, but not where I

was born, which was far up the country, near the deserts.

There the Jews are free, and are feared, and are as valiant men

as the Moslems themselves; as able to tame the steed, or to

fire the gun.  The Jews of our tribe are not slaves, and I like

not to be treated as a slave either by Christian or Moor.



MYSELF. - Your history must be a curious one, I would

fain hear it.



STRANGER. - My history I shall tell to no one.  I have

travelled much, I have been in commerce and have thriven.  I am

at present established in Portugal, but I love not the people

of Catholic countries, and least of all these of Spain.  I have

lately experienced the most shameful injustice in the Aduana of

this town, and when I complained, they laughed at me and called

me Jew.  Wherever he turns, the Jew is reviled, save in your

country, and on that account my blood always warms when I see

an Englishman.  You are a stranger here.  Can I do aught for

you?  You may command me.



MYSELF. - I thank you heartily, but I am in need of no

assistance.



STRANGER. - Have you any bills, I will accept them if you

have?



MYSELF. - I have no need of assistance; but you may do me

a favour by accepting of a book.



STRANGER. - I will receive it with thanks.  I know what

it is.  What a singular people?  The same dress, the same look,

the same book.  Pelham gave me one in Egypt.  Farewell!  Your

Jesus was a good man, perhaps a prophet; but . . . farewell!



Well may the people of Pontevedra envy the natives of

Vigo their bay, with which, in many respects, none other in the

world can compare.  On every side it is defended by steep and

sublime hills, save on the part of the west, where is the

outlet to the Atlantic; but in the midst of this outlet, up

towers a huge rocky wall, or island, which breaks the swell,

and prevents the billows of the western sea from pouring

through in full violence.  On either side of this island is a

passage, so broad, that navies might pass through at all times

in safety.  The bay itself is oblong, running far into the

land, and so capacious, that a thousand sail of the line might

ride in it uncrowded.  The waters are dark, still, and deep,

without quicksands or shallows, so that the proudest man-of-war

might lie within a stone's throw of the town ramparts without

any fear of injuring her keel.



Of many a strange event, and of many a mighty preparation

has this bay been the scene.  It was here that the bulky

dragons of the grand armada were mustered, and it was from

hence that, fraught with the pomp, power, and terror of old

Spain, the monster fleet, spreading its enormous sails to the

wind, and bent on the ruin of the Lutheran isle, proudly

steered; - that fleet, to build and man which half the forests

of Galicia had been felled, and all the mariners impressed from

the thousand bays and creeks of the stern Cantabrian shore.  It

was here that the united flags of Holland and England triumphed

over the pride of Spain and France; when the burning timbers of

exploded war-ships soared above the tops of the Gallegan hills,

and blazing galleons sank with their treasure chests whilst

drifting in the direction of Sampayo.  It was on the shores of

this bay that the English guards first emptied Spanish bodegas,

whilst the bombs of Cobham were crushing the roofs of the

castle of Castro, and the vecinos of Pontevedra buried their

doubloons in cellars, and flying posts were conveying to Lugo

and Orensee the news of the heretic invasion and the disaster

of Vigo.  All these events occurred to my mind as I stood far

up the hill, at a short distance from the fort, surveying the

bay.



"What are you doing there, Cavalier?" roared several

voices.  "Stay, Carracho! if you attempt to run we will shoot

you!"  I looked round and saw three or four fellows in dirty

uniforms, to all appearance soldiers, just above me, on a

winding path, which led up the hill.  Their muskets were

pointed at me.  "What am I doing?  Nothing, as you see," said

I, "save looking at the bay; and as for running, this is by no

means ground for a course."  "You are our prisoner," said they,

"and you must come with us to the fort."  "I was just thinking

of going there," I replied, "before you thus kindly invited me.

The fort is the very spot I was desirous of seeing."  I

thereupon climbed up to the place where they stood, when they

instantly surrounded me, and with this escort I was marched

into the fort, which might have been a strong place in its

time, but was now rather ruinous.  "You are suspected of being

a spy," said the corporal, who walked in front.  "Indeed," said

I.  "Yes," replied the corporal, "and several spies have lately

been taken and shot."



Upon one of the parapets of the fort stood a young man,

dressed as a subaltern officer, and to this personage I was

introduced.  "We have been watching you this half hour," said

he, "as you were taking observations."  "Then you gave

yourselves much useless trouble," said I.  "I am an Englishman,

and was merely looking at the bay.  Have the kindness now to

show me the fort." . . .



After some conversation, he said, "I wish to be civil to

people of your nation, you may therefore consider yourself at

liberty."  I bowed, made my exit, and proceeded down the hill.

Just before I entered the town, however, the corporal, who had

followed me unperceived, tapped me on the shoulder.  "You must

go with me to the governor," said he.  "With all my heart," I

replied.  The governor was shaving, when we were shown up to

him.  He was in his shirt sleeves, and held a razor in his

hand.  He looked very ill-natured, which was perhaps owing to

his being thus interrupted in his toilet.  He asked me two or

three questions, and on learning that I had a passport, and was

the bearer of a letter to the English consul, he told me that I

was at liberty to depart.  So I bowed to the governor of the

town, as I had done to the governor of the fort, and making my

exit proceeded to my inn.



At Vigo I accomplished but little in the way of

distribution, and after a sojourn of a few days, I returned in

the direction of Saint James.
