





CHAPTER XL







Ofalia - The Juez - Carcel do la Corte - Sunday in Prison -

Robber Dress - Father and Son - Characteristic Behaviour -

The Frenchman - Prison Allowance - Valley of the Shadow -

Pure Castilian - Balseiro - The Cave - Robber Glory.





Ofalia quickly perceived that the imprisonment of a

British subject in a manner so illegal as that which had

attended my own, was likely to be followed by rather serious

consequences.  Whether he himself had at all encouraged the

corregidor in his behaviour towards me, it is impossible to

say; the probability is that he had not: the latter, however,

was an officer of his own appointing, for whose actions himself

and the government were to a certain extent responsible.  Sir

George had already made a very strong remonstrance upon the

subject, and had even gone so far as to state in an official

note that he should desist from all farther communication with

the Spanish government until full and ample reparation had been

afforded me for the violence to which I had been subjected.

Ofalia's reply was, that immediate measures should be taken for

my liberation, and that it would be my own fault if I remained

in prison.  He forthwith ordered a juez de la primera

instancia, a kind of solicitor-general, to wait upon me, who

was instructed to hear my account of the affair, and then to

dismiss me with an admonition to be cautious for the future.

My friends of the embassy, however, had advised me how to act

in such a case.  Accordingly, when the juez on the second night

of my imprisonment made his appearance at the prison, and

summoned me before him, I went, but on his proceeding to

question me, I absolutely refused to answer.  "I deny your

right to put any questions to me," said I; "I entertain,

however, no feelings of disrespect to the government or to

yourself, Caballero Juez; but I have been illegally imprisoned.

So accomplished a jurist as yourself cannot fail to be aware

that, according to the laws of Spain, I, as a foreigner, could

not be committed to prison for the offence with which I had

been charged, without previously being conducted before the

captain-general of this royal city, whose duty it is to protect

foreigners, and see that the laws of hospitality are not

violated in their persons."



JUEZ. - Come, come, Don Jorge, I see what you are aiming

at; but listen to reason: I will not now speak to you as a juez

but as a friend who wishes you well, and who entertains a

profound reverence for the British nation.  This is a foolish

affair altogether; I will not deny that the political chief

acted somewhat hastily on the information of a person not

perhaps altogether worthy of credit.  No great damage, however,

has been done to you, and to a man of the world like yourself,

a little adventure of this kind is rather calculated to afford

amusement than anything else.  Now be advised, forget what has

happened; you know that it is the part and duty of a Christian

to forgive; so, Don Jorge, I advise you to leave this place

forthwith.  I dare say you are getting tired of it.  You are

this moment free to depart; repair at once to your lodgings,

where, I promise you, that no one shall be permitted to

interrupt you for the future.  It is getting late, and the

prison doors will speedily be closed for the night.  VAMOS, DON

JORGE, A LA CASA, A LA POSADA!



MYSELF. - "But Paul said unto them, they have beaten us

openly uncondemned, being Romans, and have cast us into prison;

and now do they thrust us out privily?  Nay, verily: but let

them come themselves and fetch us out."



I then bowed to the juez, who shrugged his shoulders and

took snuff.  On leaving the apartment I turned to the alcayde,

who stood at the door: "Take notice," said I, "that I will not

quit this prison till I have received full satisfaction for

being sent hither uncondemned.  You may expel me if you please,

but any attempt to do so shall be resisted with all the bodily

strength of which I am possessed."



"Your worship is right," said the alcayde with a bow, but

in a low voice.



Sir George, on hearing of this affair, sent me a letter

in which he highly commanded my resolution not to leave the

prison for the present, at the same time begging me to let him

know if there were anything that he could send me from the

embassy to render my situation more tolerable.



I will now leave for the present my own immediate

affairs, and proceed to give some account of the prison of

Madrid and its inmates.



The Carcel de la Corte, where I now was, though the

principal prison of Madrid, is one which certainly in no

respect does credit to the capital of Spain.  Whether it was

originally intended for the purpose to which it is at present

applied, I have no opportunity of knowing.  The chances,

however, are, that it was not; indeed it was not till of late

years that the practice of building edifices expressly intended

and suited for the incarceration of culprits came at all into

vogue.  Castles, convents, and deserted palaces, have in all

countries, at different times, been converted into prisons,

which practice still holds good upon the greater part of the

continent, and more particularly in Spain and Italy, which

accounts, to a certain extent, for the insecurity of the

prisons, and the misery, want of cleanliness, and unhealthiness

which in general pervade them.



I shall not attempt to enter into a particular

description of the prison of Madrid, indeed it would be quite

impossible to describe so irregular and rambling an edifice.

Its principal features consisted of two courts, the one behind

the other, intended for the great body of the prisoners to take

air and recreation in.  Three large vaulted dungeons or

calabozos occupied three sides of this court, immediately below

the corridors of which I have already spoken.  These dungeons

were roomy enough to contain respectively from one hundred to

one hundred and fifty prisoners, who were at night secured

therein with lock and bar, but during the day were permitted to

roam about the courts as they thought fit.  The second court

was considerably larger than the first, though it contained but

two dungeons, horribly filthy and disgusting places; this

second court being used for the reception of the lower grades

of thieves.  Of the two dungeons one was, if possible, yet more

horrible than the other; it was called the gallineria, or

chicken coop, and within it every night were pent up the young

fry of the prison, wretched boys from seven to fifteen years of

age, the greater part almost in a state of nudity.  The common

bed of all the inmates of these dungeons was the ground,

between which and their bodies nothing intervened, save

occasionally a manta or horse-cloth, or perhaps a small

mattress; this latter luxury was, however, of exceedingly rare

occurrence.



Besides the calabozos connected with the courts, were

other dungeons in various parts of the prison; some of them

quite dark, intended for the reception of those whom it might

be deemed expedient to treat with peculiar severity.  There was

likewise a ward set apart for females.  Connected with the

principal corridor were many small apartments, where resided

prisoners confined for debt or for political offences.  And,

lastly, there was a small capilla or chapel, in which prisoners

cast for death passed the last three days of their existence in

company of their ghostly advisers.



I shall not soon forget my first Sunday in prison.

Sunday is the gala day of the prison, at least of that of

Madrid, and whatever robber finery is to be found within it, is

sure to be exhibited on that day of holiness.  There is not a

set of people in the world more vain than robbers in general,

more fond of cutting a figure whenever they have an

opportunity, and of attracting the eyes of their fellow

creatures by the gallantry of their appearance.  The famous

Sheppard of olden times delighted in sporting a suit of Genoese

velvet, and when he appeared in public generally wore a silver-

hilted sword at his side; whilst Vaux and Hayward, heroes of a

later day, were the best dressed men on the pave of London.

Many of the Italian bandits go splendidly decorated, and the

very Gypsy robber has a feeling for the charms of dress; the

cap alone of the Haram Pasha, or leader of the cannibal Gypsy

band which infested Hungary towards the conclusion of the last

century, was adorned with gold and jewels to the value of four

thousand guilders.  Observe, ye vain and frivolous, how vanity

and crime harmonize.  The Spanish robbers are as fond of this

species of display as their brethren of other lands, and,

whether in prison or out of it, are never so happy as when,

decked out in a profusion of white linen, they can loll in the

sun, or walk jauntily up and down.



Snow-white linen, indeed, constitutes the principal

feature in the robber foppery of Spain.  Neither coat nor

jacket is worn over the shirt, the sleeves of which are wide

and flowing, only a waistcoat of green or blue silk, with an

abundance of silver buttons, which are intended more for show

than use, as the vest is seldom buttoned.  Then there are wide

trousers, something after the Turkish fashion; around the waist

is a crimson faja or girdle, and about the head is tied a

gaudily coloured handkerchief from the loom of Barcelona; light

pumps and silk stockings complete the robber's array.  This

dress is picturesque enough, and well adapted to the fine

sunshiny weather of the Peninsula; there is a dash of

effeminacy about it, however, hardly in keeping with the

robber's desperate trade.  It must not, however, be supposed

that it is every robber who can indulge in all this luxury;

there are various grades of thieves, some poor enough, with

scarcely a rag to cover them.  Perhaps in the crowded prison of

Madrid, there were not more than twenty who exhibited the dress

which I have attempted to describe above; these were JENTE DE

REPUTACION, tip-top thieves, mostly young fellows, who, though

they had no money of their own, were supported in prison by

their majas and amigas, females of a certain class, who form

friendships with robbers, and whose glory and delight it is to

administer to the vanity of these fellows with the wages of

their own shame and abasement.  These females supplied their

cortejos with the snowy linen, washed, perhaps, by their own

hands in the waters of the Manzanares, for the display of the

Sunday, when they would themselves make their appearance

dressed a la maja, and from the corridors would gaze with

admiring eyes upon the robbers vapouring about in the court

below.



Amongst those of the snowy linen who most particularly

attracted my attention, were a father and son; the former was a

tall athletic figure of about thirty, by profession a

housebreaker, and celebrated throughout Madrid for the peculiar

dexterity which he exhibited in his calling.  He was now in

prison for a rather atrocious murder committed in the dead of

night, in a house at Caramanchel, in which his only accomplice

was his son, a child under seven years of age.  "The apple," as

the Danes say, "had not fallen far from the tree"; the imp was

in every respect the counterpart of the father, though in

miniature.  He, too, wore the robber shirt sleeves, the robber

waistcoat with the silver buttons, the robber kerchief round

his brow, and, ridiculous enough, a long Manchegan knife in the

crimson faja.  He was evidently the pride of the ruffian

father, who took all imaginable care of this chick of the

gallows, would dandle him on his knee, and would occasionally

take the cigar from his own moustached lips and insert it in

the urchin's mouth.  The boy was the pet of the court, for the

father was one of the valientes of the prison, and those who

feared his prowess, and wished to pay their court to him, were

always fondling the child.  What an enigma is this world of

ours!  How dark and mysterious are the sources of what is

called crime and virtue!  If that infant wretch become

eventually a murderer like his father, is he to blame?  Fondled

by robbers, already dressed as a robber, born of a robber,

whose own history was perhaps similar.  Is it right?



O, man, man, seek not to dive into the mystery of moral

good and evil; confess thyself a worm, cast thyself on the

earth, and murmur with thy lips in the dust, Jesus, Jesus!



What most surprised me with respect to the prisoners, was

their good behaviour; I call it good when all things are taken

into consideration, and when I compare it with that of the

general class of prisoners in foreign lands.  They had their

occasional bursts of wild gaiety, their occasional quarrels,

which they were in the habit of settling in a corner of the

inferior court with their long knives; the result not

unfrequently being death, or a dreadful gash in the face or the

abdomen; but, upon the whole, their conduct was infinitely

superior to what might have been expected from the inmates of

such a place.  Yet this was not the result of coercion, or any

particular care which was exercised over them; for perhaps in

no part of the world are prisoners so left to themselves and so

utterly neglected as in Spain: the authorities having no

farther anxiety about them, than to prevent their escape; not

the slightest attention being paid to their moral conduct and

not a thought bestowed upon their health, comfort or mental

improvement, whilst within the walls.  Yet in this prison of

Madrid, and I may say in Spanish prisons in general, for I have

been an inmate of more than one, the ears of the visitor are

never shocked with horrid blasphemy and obscenity, as in those

of some other countries, and more particularly in civilized

France; nor are his eyes outraged and himself insulted, as he

would assuredly be, were he to look down upon the courts from

the galleries of the Bicetre.  And yet in this prison of Madrid

were some of the most desperate characters in Spain: ruffians

who had committed acts of cruelly and atrocity sufficient to

make the flesh shudder.  But gravity and sedateness are the

leading characteristics of the Spaniards, and the very robber,

except in those moments when he is engaged in his occupation,

and then no one is more sanguinary, pitiless, and wolfishly

eager for booty, is a being who can be courteous and affable,

and who takes pleasure in conducting himself with sobriety and

decorum.



Happily, perhaps, for me, that my acquaintance with the

ruffians of Spain commenced and ended in the towns about which

I wandered, and in the prisons into which I was cast for the

Gospel's sake, and that, notwithstanding my long and frequent

journeys, I never came in contact with them on the road or in

the despoblado.



The most ill-conditioned being in the prison was a

Frenchman, though probably the most remarkable.  He was about

sixty years of age, of the middle stature, but thin and meagre,

like most of his countrymen; he had a villainously-formed head,

according to all the rules of craniology, and his features were

full of evil expression.  He wore no hat, and his clothes,

though in appearance nearly new, were of the coarsest

description.  He generally kept aloof from the rest, and would

stand for hours together leaning against the walls with his

arms folded, glaring sullenly on what was passing before him.

He was not one of the professed valientes, for his age

prevented his assuming so distinguished a character, and yet

all the rest appeared to hold him in a certain awe: perhaps

they feared his tongue, which he occasionally exerted in

pouring forth withering curses on those who incurred his

displeasure.  He spoke perfectly good Spanish, and to my great

surprise excellent Basque, in which he was in the habit of

conversing with Francisco, who, lolling from the window of my

apartment, would exchange jests and witticisms with the

prisoners in the court below, with whom he was a great

favourite.



One day when I was in the patio, to which I had free

admission whenever I pleased, by permission of the alcayde, I

went up to the Frenchman, who stood in his usual posture,

leaning against the wall, and offered him a cigar.  I do not

smoke myself, but it will never do to mix among the lower

classes of Spain unless you have a cigar to present

occasionally.  The man glared at me ferociously for a moment,

and appeared to be on the point of refusing my offer with

perhaps a hideous execration.  I repeated it, however, pressing

my hand against my heart, whereupon suddenly the grim features

relaxed, and with a genuine French grimace, and a low bow, he

accepted the cigar, exclaiming, "AH, MONSIEUR, PARDON, MAIS

C'EST FAIRE TROP D'HONNEUR A UN PAUVRE DIABLE COMME MOI."



"Not at all," said I, "we are both fellow prisoners in a

foreign land, and being so we ought to countenance each other.

I hope that whenever I have need of your co-operation in this

prison you will afford it me."



"Ah, Monsieur," exclaimed the Frenchman in rapture, "VOUS

AVEZ BIEN RAISON; IL FAUT QUE LES EIRANGERS SE DONNENT LA MAIN

DANS CE . . . PAYS DE BARBARES.  TENEZ," he added, in a

whisper, "if you have any plan for escaping, and require my

assistance, I have an arm and a knife at your service: you may

trust me, and that is more than you could any of these SACRES

GENS ICI," glancing fiercely round at his fellow prisoners.



"You appear to be no friend to Spain and the Spaniards,"

said I.  "I conclude that you have experienced injustice at

their hands.  For what have they immured you in this place?"



"POUR RIEN DU TOUT, C'EST A DIRE POUR UNE BAGATELLE; but

what can you expect from such animals?  For what are you

imprisoned?  Did I not hear say for Gypsyism and sorcery?"



"Perhaps you are here for your opinions?"



"AH, MON DIEU, NON; JE NE SUIS PAS HOMME A SEMBLABLE

BETISE.  I have no opinions.  JE FAISOIS . . . MAIS CE

N'IMPORTE; JE ME TROUVE ICI, OU JE CREVE DE FAIM."



"I am sorry to see a brave man in such a distressed

condition," said I; "have you nothing to subsist upon beyond

the prison allowance?  Have you no friends?"



"Friends in this country, you mock me; here one has no

friends, unless one buy them.  I am bursting with hunger; since

I have been here I have sold the clothes off my back, that I

might eat, for the prison allowance will not support nature,

and of half of that we are robbed by the Batu, as they call the

barbarian of a governor.  LES HAILLONS which now cover me were

given by two or three devotees who sometimes visit here.  I

would sell them if they would fetch aught.  I have not a sou,

and for want of a few crowns I shall be garroted within a month

unless I can escape, though, as I told you before, I have done

nothing, a mere bagatelle; but the worst crimes in Spain are

poverty and misery."



"I have heard you speak Basque, are you from French

Biscay?"



"I am from Bordeaux, Monsieur; but I have lived much on

the Landes and in Biscay, TRAVAILLANT A MON METIER.  I see by

your look that you wish to know my history.  I shall not tell

it you.  It contains nothing that is remarkable.  See, I have

smoked out your cigar; you may give me another, and add a

dollar if you please, NOUS SOMMES CREVES ICI DE FAIM.  I would

not say as much to a Spaniard, but I have a respect for your

countrymen; I know much of them; I have met them at Maida and

the other place." *



* Perhaps Waterloo.



"Nothing remarkable in his history!"  Why, or I greatly

err, one chapter of his life, had it been written, would have

unfolded more of the wild and wonderful than fifty volumes of

what are in general called adventures and hairbreadth escapes

by land and sea.  A soldier! what a tale could that man have

told of marches and retreats, of battles lost and won, towns

sacked, convents plundered; perhaps he had seen the flames of

Moscow ascending to the clouds, and had "tried his strength

with nature in the wintry desert," pelted by the snow-storm,

and bitten by the tremendous cold of Russia: and what could he

mean by plying his trade in Biscay and the Landes, but that he

had been a robber in those wild regions, of which the latter is

more infamous for brigandage and crime than any other part of

the French territory.  Nothing remarkable in his history! then

what history in the world contains aught that is remarkable?



I gave him the cigar and dollar: he received them, and

then once more folding his arms, leaned back against the wall

and appeared to sink gradually into one of his reveries.  I

looked him in the face and spoke to him, but he did not seem

either to hear or see me.  His mind was perhaps wandering in

that dreadful valley of the shadow, into which the children of

earth, whilst living, occasionally find their way; that

dreadful region where there is no water, where hope dwelleth

not, where nothing lives but the undying worm.  This valley is

the facsimile of hell, and he who has entered it, has

experienced here on earth for a time what the spirits of the

condemned are doomed to suffer through ages without end.



He was executed about a month from this time.  The

bagatelle for which he was confined was robbery and murder by

the following strange device.  In concert with two others, he

hired a large house in an unfrequented part of the town, to

which place he would order tradesmen to convey valuable

articles, which were to be paid for on delivery; those who

attended paid for their credulity with the loss of their lives

and property.  Two or three had fallen into the snare.  I

wished much to have had some private conversation with this

desperate man, and in consequence begged of the alcayde to

allow him to dine with me in my own apartment; whereupon

Monsieur Basompierre, for so I will take the liberty of calling

the governor, his real name having escaped my memory, took off

his hat, and, with his usual smile and bow, replied in purest

Castilian, "English Cavalier, and I hope I may add friend,

pardon me, that it is quite out of my power to gratify your

request, founded, I have no doubt, on the most admirable

sentiments of philosophy.  Any of the other gentlemen beneath

my care shall, at any time you desire it, be permitted to wait

upon you in your apartment.  I will even go so far as to cause

their irons, if irons they wear, to be knocked off in order

that they may partake of your refection with that comfort which

is seemly and convenient: but to the gentleman in question I

must object; he is the most evil disposed of the whole of this

family, and would most assuredly breed a funcion either in your

apartment or in the corridor, by an attempt to escape.

Cavalier, ME PESA, but I cannot accede to your request.  But

with respect to any other gentleman, I shall be most happy,

even Balseiro, who, though strange things are told of him,

still knows how to comport himself, and in whose behaviour

there is something both of formality and politeness, shall this

day share your hospitality if you desire it, Cavalier."



Of Balseiro I have already had occasion to speak in the

former part of this narrative.  He was now confined in an upper

story of the prison, in a strong room, with several other

malefactors.  He had been found guilty of aiding and assisting

one Pepe Candelas, a thief of no inconsiderable renown, in a

desperate robbery perpetrated in open daylight upon no less a

personage than the queen's milliner, a Frenchwoman, whom they

bound in her own shop, from which they took goods and money to

the amount of five or six thousand dollars.  Candelas had

already expiated his crime on the scaffold, but Balseiro, who

was said to be by far the worst ruffian of the two, had by dint

of money, an ally which his comrade did not possess, contrived

to save his own life; the punishment of death, to which he was

originally sentenced, having been commuted to twenty years'

hard labour in the presidio of Malaga.  I visited this worthy

and conversed with him for some time through the wicket of the

dungeon.  He recognized me, and reminded me of the victory

which I had once obtained over him, in the trial of our

respective skill in the crabbed Gitano, at which Sevilla the

bull-fighter was umpire.




Upon my telling him that I was sorry to see him in such a

situation, he replied that it was an affair of no manner of

consequence, as within six weeks he should be conducted to the

presidio, from which, with the assistance of a few ounces

distributed among the guards, he could at any time escape.

"But whither would you flee?" I demanded.  "Can I not flee to

the land of the Moors," replied Balseiro, "or to the English in

the camp of Gibraltar; or, if I prefer it, cannot I return to

this foro (CITY), and live as I have hitherto done, choring the

gachos (ROBBING THE NATIVES); what is to hinder me?  Madrid is

large, and Balseiro has plenty of friends, especially among the

lumias (WOMEN)," he added with a smile.  I spoke to him of his

ill-fated accomplice Candelas; whereupon his face assumed a

horrible expression.  "I hope he is in torment," exclaimed the

robber.  The friendship of the unrighteous is never of long

duration; the two worthies had it seems quarrelled in prison;

Candelas having accused the other of bad faith and an undue

appropriation to his own use of the CORPUS DELICTI in various

robberies which they had committed in company.



I cannot refrain from relating the subsequent history of

this Balseiro.  Shortly after my own liberation, too impatient

to wait until the presidio should afford him a chance of

regaining his liberty, he in company with some other convicts

broke through the roof of the prison and escaped.  He instantly

resumed his former habits, committing several daring robberies,

both within and without the walls of Madrid.  I now come to his

last, I may call it his master crime, a singular piece of

atrocious villainy.  Dissatisfied with the proceeds of street

robbery and house-breaking, he determined upon a bold stroke,

by which he hoped to acquire money sufficient to support him in

some foreign land in luxury and splendour.



There was a certain comptroller of the queen's household,

by name Gabiria, a Basque by birth, and a man of immense

possessions: this individual had two sons, handsome boys,

between twelve and fourteen years of age, whom I had frequently

seen, and indeed conversed with, in my walks on the bank of the

Manzanares, which was their favourite promenade.  These

children, at the time of which I am speaking, were receiving

their education at a certain seminary in Madrid.  Balseiro,

being well acquainted with the father's affection for his

children, determined to make it subservient to his own

rapacity.  He formed a plan which was neither more nor less

than to steal the children, and not to restore them to their

parent until he had received an enormous ransom.  This plan was

partly carried into execution: two associates of Balseiro well

dressed drove up to the door of the seminary, where the

children were, and, by means of a forged letter, purporting to

be written by the father, induced the school-master to permit

the boys to accompany them for a country jaunt, as they

pretended.  About five leagues from Madrid, Balseiro had a cave

in a wild unfrequented spot between the Escurial and a village

called Torre Lodones: to this cave the children were conducted,

where they remained in durance under the custody of the two

accomplices; Balseiro in the meantime remaining in Madrid for

the purpose of conducting negotiations with the father.  The

father, however, was a man of considerable energy, and instead

of acceding to the terms of the ruffian, communicated in a

letter, instantly took the most vigorous measures for the

recovery of his children.  Horse and foot were sent out to

scour the country, and in less than a week the children were

found near the cave, having been abandoned by their keepers,

who had taken fright on hearing of the decided measures which

had been resorted to; they were, however, speedily arrested and

identified by the boys as their ravishers.  Balseiro perceiving

that Madrid was becoming too hot to hold him, attempted to

escape, but whether to the camp of Gibraltar or to the land of

the Moor, I know not; he was recognized, however, at a village

in the neighbourhood of Madrid, and being apprehended, was

forthwith conducted to the capital, where he shortly after

terminated his existence on the scaffold, with his two

associates; Gabiria and his children being present at the

ghastly scene, which they surveyed from a chariot at their

ease.



Such was the end of Balseiro, of whom I should certainly

not have said so much, but for the affair of the crabbed

Gitano.  Poor wretch! he acquired that species of immortality

which is the object of the aspirations of many a Spanish thief,

whilst vapouring about in the patio, dressed in the snowy

linen; the rape of the children of Gabiria made him at once the

pet of the fraternity.  A celebrated robber, with whom I was

subsequently imprisoned at Seville, spoke his eulogy in the

following manner. -



"Balseiro was a very good subject, and an honest man.  He

was the head of our family, Don Jorge; we shall never see his

like again; pity that he did not sack the parne (MONEY), and

escape to the camp of the Moor, Don Jorge."
