





CHAPTER XXXII







Martin of Rivadeo - The Factious Mare - Asturians -

Luarca - The Seven Bellotas - Hermits - The Asturian's Tale -

Strange Guests - The Big Servant - Batuschca





"What may your business be?" said I to a short, thick,

merry-faced fellow in a velveteen jerkin and canvas pantaloons,

who made his way into my apartment, in the dusk of the evening.



"I am Martin of Rivadeo, your worship," replied the man,

"an alquilador by profession; I am told that you want a horse

for your journey into the Asturias tomorrow, and of course a

guide: now, if that be the case, I counsel you to hire myself

and mare."



"I am become tired of guides," I replied; "so much so

that I was thinking of purchasing a pony, and proceeding

without any guide at all.  The last which we had was an

infamous character."



"So I have been told, your worship, and it was well for

the bribon that I was not in Rivadeo when the affair to which

you allude occurred.  But he was gone with the pony Perico

before I came back, or I would have bled the fellow to a

certainty with my knife.  He is a disgrace to the profession,

which is one of the most honourable and ancient in the world.

Perico himself must have been ashamed of him, for Perico,

though a pony, is a gentleman, one of many capacities, and well

known upon the roads.  He is only inferior to my mare."



"Are you well acquainted with the road to Oviedo?" I

demanded.



"I am not, your worship; that is, no farther than Luarca,

which is the first day's journey.  I do not wish to deceive

you, therefore let me go with you no farther than that place;

though perhaps I might serve for the whole journey, for though

I am unacquainted with the country, I have a tongue in my head,

and nimble feet to run and ask questions.  I will, however,

answer for myself no farther than Luarca, where you can please

yourselves.  Your being strangers is what makes me wish to

accompany you, for I like the conversation of strangers, from

whom I am sure to gain information both entertaining and

profitable.  I wish, moreover, to convince you that we guides

of Galicia are not all thieves, which I am sure you will not

suppose if you only permit me to accompany you as far as

Luarca."



I was so much struck with the fellow's good humour and

frankness, and more especially by the originality of character

displayed in almost every sentence which he uttered, that I

readily engaged him to guide us to Luarca; whereupon he left

me, promising to be ready with his mare at eight next morning.



Rivadeo is one of the principal seaports of Galicia, and

is admirably situated for commerce, on a deep firth, into which

the river Mirando debouches.  It contains many magnificent

buildings, and an extensive square or plaza, which is planted

with trees.  I observed several vessels in the harbour; and the

population, which is rather numerous, exhibited none of those

marks of misery and dejection which I had lately observed among

the Ferrolese.



On the morrow Martin of Rivadeo made his appearance at

the appointed hour with his mare.  It was a lean haggard

animal, not much larger than a pony; it had good points,

however, and was very clean in its hinder legs, and Martin

insisted that it was the best animal of its kind in all Spain.

"It is a factious mare," said he, "and I believe an Alavese.

When the Carlists came here it fell lame, and they left it

behind, and I purchased it for a dollar.  It is not lame now,

however, as you shall soon see."



We had now reached the firth which divides Galicia from

the Asturias.  A kind of barge was lying about two yards from

the side of the quay, waiting to take us over.  Towards this

Martin led his mare, and giving an encouraging shout, the

creature without any hesitation sprang over the intervening

space into the barge.  "I told you she was a facciosa," said

Martin; "none but a factious animal would have taken such a

leap."



We all embarked in the barge and crossed over the firth,

which is in this place nearly a mile broad, to Castro Pol, the

first town in the Asturias.  I now mounted the factious mare,

whilst Antonio followed on my own horse.  Martin led the way,

exchanging jests with every person whom he met on the road, and

occasionally enlivening the way with an extemporaneous song.



We were now in the Asturias, and about noon we reached

Navias, a small fishing town, situate on a ria or firth; in the

neighbourhood are ragged mountains, called the Sierra de Buron,

which stand in the shape of a semi-circle.  We saw a small

vessel in the harbour, which we subsequently learned was from

the Basque provinces, come for a cargo of cider or sagadua, the

beverage so dearly loved by the Basques.  As we passed along

the narrow street, Antonio was hailed with an "Ola" from a

species of shop in which three men, apparently shoemakers, were

seated.  He stopped for some time to converse with them, and

when he joined us at the posada where we halted, I asked him

who they were: "Mon maitre," said he, "CE SONT DES MESSIEURS DE

MA CONNOISSANCE.  I have been fellow servant at different times

with all three; and I tell you beforehand, that we shall

scarcely pass through a village in this country where I shall

not find an acquaintance.  All the Asturians, at some period of

their lives, make a journey to Madrid, where, if they can

obtain a situation, they remain until they have scraped up

sufficient to turn to advantage in their own country; and as I

have served in all the great houses in Madrid, I am acquainted

with the greatest part of them.  I have nothing to say against

the Asturians, save that they are close and penurious whilst at

service; but they are not thieves, neither at home nor abroad,

and though we must have our wits about us in their country, I

have heard we may travel from one end of it to the other

without the slightest fear of being either robbed or ill

treated, which is not the case in Galicia, where we were always

in danger of having our throats cut."



Leaving Navias, we proceeded through a wild desolate

country, till we reached the pass of Baralla, which lies up the

side of a huge wall of rocks, which at a distance appear of a

light green colour, though perfectly bare of herbage or plants

of any description.



"This pass," said Martin of Rivadeo, "bears a very evil

reputation, and I should not like to travel it after sunset.

It is not infested by robbers, but by things much worse, the

duendes of two friars of Saint Francis.  It is said that in the

old time, long before the convents were suppressed, two friars

of the order of Saint Francis left their convent to beg; it

chanced that they were very successful, but as they were

returning at nightfall, by this pass, they had a quarrel about

what they had collected, each insisting that he had done his

duty better than the other; at last, from high words they fell

to abuse, and from abuse to blows.  What do you think these

demons of friars did?  They took off their cloaks, and at the

end of each they made a knot, in which they placed a large

stone, and with these they thrashed and belaboured each other

till both fell dead.  Master, I know not which are the worst

plagues, friars, curates, or sparrows:





"May the Lord God preserve us from evil birds three:

From all friars and curates and sparrows that be;

For the sparrows eat up all the corn that we sow,

The friars drink down all the wine that we grow,

Whilst the curates have all the fair dames at their nod:

From these three evil curses preserve us, Lord God."





In about two hours from this time we reached Luarca, the

situation of which is most singular.  It stands in a deep

hollow, whose sides are so precipitous that it is impossible to

descry the town until you stand just above it.  At the northern

extremity of this hollow is a small harbour, the sea entering

it by a narrow cleft.  We found a large and comfortable posada,

and by the advice of Martin, made inquiry for a fresh guide and

horse; we were informed, however, that all the horses of the

place were absent, and that if we waited for their return, we

must tarry for two days.  "I had a presentiment," said Martin,

"when we entered Luarca, that we were not doomed to part at

present.  You must now hire my mare and me as far as Giyon,

from whence there is a conveyance to Oviedo.  To tell you the

truth, I am by no means sorry that the guides are absent, for I

am pleased with your company, as I make no doubt you are with

mine.  I will now go and write a letter to my wife at Rivadeo,

informing her that she must not expect to see me back for

several days."  He then went out of the room singing the

following stanza:





"A handless man a letter did write,

A dumb dictated it word for word:

The person who read it had lost his sight,

And deaf was he who listened and heard."





Early the next morning we emerged from the hollow of

Luarca; about an hour's riding brought us to Caneiro, a deep

and romantic valley of rocks, shaded by tall chestnut trees.

Through the midst of this valley rushes a rapid stream, which

we crossed in a boat.  "There is not such a stream for trout in

all the Asturias," said the ferryman; "look down into the

waters and observe the large stones over which it flows; now in

the proper season and in fine weather, you cannot see those

stones for the multitude of fish which cover them."



Leaving the valley behind us, we entered into a wild and

dreary country, stony and mountainous.  The day was dull and

gloomy, and all around looked sad and melancholy.  "Are we in

the way for Giyon and Oviedo?" demanded Martin of an ancient

female, who stood at the door of a cottage.



"For Giyon and Oviedo!" replied the crone; "many is the

weary step you will have to make before you reach Giyon and

Oviedo.  You must first of all crack the bellotas: you are just

below them."



"What does she mean by cracking the bellotas?" demanded I

of Martin of Rivadeo.



"Did your worship never hear of the seven bellotas?"

replied our guide.  "I can scarcely tell you what they are, as

I have never seen them; I believe they are seven hills which we

have to cross, and are called bellotas from some resemblance to

acorns which it is fancied they bear.  I have often heard of

these acorns, and am not sorry that I have now an opportunity

of seeing them, though it is said that they are rather hard

things for horses to digest."



The Asturian mountains in this part rise to a

considerable altitude.  They consist for the most part of dark

granite, covered here and there with a thin layer of earth.

They approach very near to the sea, to which they slope down in

broken ridges, between which are deep and precipitous defiles,

each with its rivulet, the tribute of the hills to the salt

flood.  The road traverses these defiles.  There are seven of

them, which are called, in the language of the country, LAS

SIETE BELLOTAS.  Of all these, the most terrible is the

midmost, down which rolls an impetuous torrent.  At the upper

end of it rises a precipitous wall of rock, black as soot, to

the height of several hundred yards; its top, as we passed, was

enveloped with a veil of bretima.  From this gorge branch off,

on either side, small dingles or glens, some of them so

overgrown with trees and copse-wood, that the eye is unable to

penetrate the obscurity beyond a few yards.



"Fine places would some of these dingles prove for

hermitages," said I to Martin of Rivadeo.  "Holy men might lead

a happy life there on roots and water, and pass many years

absorbed in heavenly contemplation, without ever being

disturbed by the noise and turmoil of the world."



"True, your worship," replied Martin; "and perhaps on

that very account there are no hermitages in the barrancos of

the seven bellotas.  Our hermits had little inclination for

roots and water, and had no kind of objection to be

occasionally disturbed in their meditations.  Vaya! I never yet

saw a hermitage that was not hard by some rich town or village,

or was not a regular resort for all the idle people in the

neighbourhood.  Hermits are not fond of living in dingles,

amongst wolves and foxes; for how in that case could they

dispose of their poultry?  A hermit of my acquaintance left,

when he died, a fortune of seven hundred dollars to his niece,

the greatest part of which he scraped up by fattening turkeys."



At the top of this bellota we found a wretched venta,

where we refreshed ourselves, and then continued our journey.

Late in the afternoon we cleared the last of these difficult

passes.  The wind began now to rise, bearing on its wings a

drizzling rain.  We passed by Soto Luino, and shaping our

course through a wild but picturesque country, we found

ourselves about nightfall at the foot of a steep hill, up which

led a narrow bridle-way, amidst a grove of lofty trees.  Long

before we had reached the top it had become quite dark, and the

rain had increased considerably.  We stumbled along in the

obscurity, leading our horses, which were occasionally down on

their knees, owing to the slipperiness of the path.  At last we

accomplished the ascent in safety, and pushing briskly forward,

we found ourselves, in about half an hour, at the entrance of

Muros, a large village situated just on the declivity of the

farther side of the hill.



A blazing fire in the posada soon dried our wet garments,

and in some degree recompensed us for the fatigues which we had

undergone in scrambling up the bellotas.  A rather singular

place was this same posada of Muros.  It was a large rambling

house, with a spacious kitchen, or common room, on the ground

floor.  Above stairs was a large dining-apartment, with an

immense oak table, and furnished with cumbrous leathern chairs

with high backs, apparently three centuries old at least.

Communicating with this apartment was a wooden gallery, open to

the air, which led to a small chamber, in which I was destined

to sleep, and which contained an old-fashioned tester-bed with

curtains.  It was just one of those inns which romance writers

are so fond of introducing in their descriptions, especially

when the scene of adventure lies in Spain.  The host was a

talkative Asturian.



The wind still howled, and the rain descended in

torrents.  I sat before the fire in a very drowsy state, from

which I was presently aroused by the conversation of the host.

"Senor," said he, "it is now three years since I beheld

foreigners in my house.  I remember it was about this time of

the year, and just such a night as this, that two men on

horseback arrived here.  What was singular, they came without

any guide.  Two more strange-looking individuals I never yet

beheld with eye-sight.  I shall never forget them.  The one was

as tall as a giant, with much tawny moustache, like the coat of

a badger, growing about his mouth.  He had a huge ruddy face,

and looked dull and stupid, as he no doubt was, for when I

spoke to him, he did not seem to understand, and answered in a

jabber, valgame Dios! so wild and strange, that I remained

staring at him with mouth and eyes open.  The other was neither

tall nor red-faced, nor had he hair about his mouth, and,

indeed, he had very little upon his head.  He was very

diminutive, and looked like a jorobado (HUNCHBACK); but,

valgame Dios! such eyes, like wild cats', so sharp and full of

malice.  He spoke as good Spanish as I myself do, and yet he

was no Spaniard.  A Spaniard never looked like that man.  He

was dressed in a zamarra, with much silver and embroidery, and

wore an Andalusian hat, and I soon found that he was master,

and that the other was servant.



"Valgame Dios! what an evil disposition had that same

foreign jorobado, and yet he had much grace, much humour, and

said occasionally to me such comical things, that I was fit to

die of laughter.  So he sat down to supper in the room above,

and I may as well tell you here, that he slept in the same

chamber where your worship will sleep to-night, and his servant

waited behind his chair.  Well, I had curiosity, so I sat

myself down at the table too, without asking leave.  Why should

I?  I was in my own house, and an Asturian is fit company for a

king, and is often of better blood.  Oh, what a strange supper

was that.  If the servant made the slightest mistake in helping

him, up would start the jorobado, jump upon his chair, and

seizing the big giant by the hair, would cuff him on both sides

of the face, till I was afraid his teeth would have fallen out.

The giant, however, did not seem to care about it much.  He was

used to it, I suppose.  Valgame Dios! if he had been a

Spaniard, he would not have submitted to it so patiently.  But

what surprised me most was, that after beating his servant, the

master would sit down, and the next moment would begin

conversing and laughing with him as if nothing had happened,

and the giant also would laugh and converse with his master,

for all the world as if he had not been beaten.



"You may well suppose, Senor, that I understood nothing

of their discourse, for it was all in that strange unchristian

tongue in which the giant answered me when I spoke to him; the

sound of it is still ringing in my ears.  It was nothing like

other languages.  Not like Bascuen, not like the language in

which your worship speaks to my namesake Signor Antonio here.

Valgame Dios!  I can compare it to nothing but the sound a

person makes when he rinses his mouth with water.  There is one

word which I think I still remember, for it was continually

proceeding from the giant's lips, but his master never used it.



"But the strangest part of the story is yet to be told.

The supper was ended, and the night was rather advanced, the

rain still beat against the windows, even as it does at this

moment.  Suddenly the jorobado pulled out his watch.  Valgame

Dios! such a watch!  I will tell you one thing, Senor, that I

could purchase all the Asturias, and Muros besides, with the

brilliants which shone about the sides of that same watch: the

room wanted no lamp, I trow, so great was the splendour which

they cast.  So the jorobado looked at his watch, and then said

to me, I shall go to rest.  He then took the lamp and went

through the gallery to his room, followed by his big servant.

Well, Senor, I cleared away the things, and then waited below

for the servant, for whom I had prepared a comfortable bed,

close by my own.  Senor, I waited patiently for an hour, till

at last my patience was exhausted, and I ascended to the supper

apartment, and passed through the gallery till I came to the

door of the strange guest.  Senor, what do you think I saw at

the door?"



"How should I know?" I replied.  "His riding boots

perhaps."



"No, Senor, I did not see his riding boots; but,

stretched on the floor with his head against the door, so that

it was impossible to open it without disturbing him, lay the

big servant fast asleep, his immense legs reaching nearly the

whole length of the gallery.  I crossed myself, as well I

might, for the wind was howling even as it is now, and the rain

was rushing down into the gallery in torrents; yet there lay

the big servant fast asleep, without any covering, without any

pillow, not even a log, stretched out before his master's door.



"Senor, I got little rest that night, for I said to

myself, I have evil wizards in my house, folks who are not

human.  Once or twice I went up and peeped into the gallery,

but there still lay the big servant fast asleep, so I crossed

myself and returned to my bed again."



"Well," said I, "and what occurred next day?"



"Nothing particular occurred next day: the jorobado came

down and said comical things to me in good Spanish, and the big

servant came down, but whatever he said, and he did not say

much, I understood not, for it was in that disastrous jabber.

They stayed with me throughout the day till after supper-time,

and then the jorobado gave me a gold ounce, and mounting their

horses, they both departed as strangely as they had come, in

the dark night, I know not whither."



"Is that all?" I demanded.



"No, Senor, it is not all; for I was right in supposing

them evil brujos: the very next day an express arrived and a

great search was made after them, and I was arrested for having

harboured them.  This occurred just after the present wars had

commenced.  It was said they were spies and emissaries of I

don't know what nation, and that they had been in all parts of

the Asturias, holding conferences with some of the disaffected.

They escaped, however, and were never heard of more, though the

animals which they rode were found without their riders,

wandering amongst the hills; they were common ponies, and were

of no value.  As for the brujos, it is believed that they

embarked in some small vessel which was lying concealed in one

of the rias of the coast."



MYSELF. - What was the word which you continually heard

proceeding from the lips of the big servant, and which you

think you can remember?



HOST. - Senor, it is now three years since I heard it,

and at times I can remember it and at others not; sometimes I

have started up in my sleep repeating it.  Stay, Senor, I have

it now at the point of my tongue: it was Patusca.



MYSELF. - Batuschca, you mean; the men were Russians.

