






CHAPTER XX







Illness - Nocturnal Visit - A Master Mind - The Whisper - Salamanca -

Irish Hospitality - Spanish Soldiers - The Scriptures advertised.





But I am anxious to enter upon the narrative of my

journey, and shall therefore abstain from relating to my

readers a great many circumstances which occurred previously to

my leaving Madrid on this expedition.  About the middle of May

I had got everything in readiness, and I bade farewell to my

friends.  Salamanca was the first place which I intended to

visit.



Some days previous to my departure I was very much

indisposed, owing to the state of the weather, for violent and

biting winds had long prevailed.  I had been attacked with a

severe cold, which terminated in a disagreeable cough, which

the many remedies I successively tried seemed unable to subdue.

I had made preparations for departing on a particular day, but,

owing to the state of my health, I was apprehensive that I

should be compelled to defer my journey for a time.  The last

day of my stay in Madrid, finding myself scarcely able to

stand, I was fain to submit to a somewhat desperate experiment,

and by the advice of the barber-surgeon who visited me, I

determined to be bled.  Late on the night of that same day he

took from me sixteen ounces of blood, and having received his

fee left me, wishing me a pleasant journey, and assuring me,

upon his reputation, that by noon the next day I should be

perfectly recovered.



A few minutes after his departure, whilst I was sitting

alone, meditating on the journey which I was about to

undertake, and on the ricketty state of my health, I heard a

loud knock at the street door of the house, on the third floor

of which I was lodged.  In another minute Mr. S- of the British

Embassy entered my apartment.  After a little conversation, he

informed me that Mr. Villiers had desired him to wait upon me

to communicate a resolution which he had come to.  Being

apprehensive that, alone and unassisted, I should experience

great difficulty in propagating the gospel of God to any

considerable extent in Spain, he was bent upon exerting to the

utmost his own credit and influence to further my views, which

he himself considered, if carried into proper effect, extremely

well calculated to operate beneficially on the political and

moral state of the country.  To this end it was his intention

to purchase a very considerable number of copies of the New

Testament, and to dispatch them forthwith to the various

British consuls established in different parts of Spain, with

strict and positive orders to employ all the means which their

official situation should afford them to circulate the books in

question and to assure their being noticed.  They were,

moreover, to be charged to afford me, whenever I should appear

in their respective districts, all the protection,

encouragement, and assistance which I should stand in need of.



I was of course much rejoiced on receiving this

information, for though I had long been aware that Mr. Villiers

was at all times willing to assist me, he having frequently

given me sufficient proof, I could never expect that he would

come forward in so noble, and, to say the least of it,

considering his high diplomatic situation, so bold and decided

a manner.  I believe that this was the first instance of a

British ambassador having made the cause of the Bible Society a

national one, or indeed of having favoured it directly or

indirectly.  What renders the case of Mr. Villiers more

remarkable is, that on my first arrival at Madrid I found him

by no means well disposed towards the Society.  The Holy Spirit

had probably illumined his mind on this point.  I hoped that by

his means our institution would shortly possess many agents in

Spain, who, with far more power and better opportunities than I

myself could ever expect to possess, would scatter abroad the

seed of the gospel, and make of a barren and thirsty wilderness

a green and smiling corn-field.



A word or two about the gentleman who paid me this

nocturnal visit.  Though he has probably long since forgotten

the humble circulator of the Bible in Spain, I still bear in

mind numerous acts of kindness which I experienced at his

hands.  Endowed with an intellect of the highest order, master

of the lore of all Europe, profoundly versed in the ancient

tongues, and speaking most of the modern dialects with

remarkable facility, - possessed, moreover, of a thorough

knowledge of mankind, - he brought with him into the diplomatic

career advantages such as few, even the most highly gifted, can

boast of.  During his sojourn in Spain he performed many

eminent services for the government which employed him;

services which, I believe, it had sufficient discernment to

see, and gratitude to reward.  He had to encounter, however,

the full brunt of the low and stupid malignity of the party

who, shortly after the time of which I am speaking, usurped the

management of the affairs of Spain.  This party, whose foolish

manoeuvres he was continually discomfiting, feared and hated

him as its evil genius, taking every opportunity of showering

on his head calumnies the most improbable and absurd.  Amongst

other things, he was accused of having acted as an agent to the

English government in the affair of the Granja, bringing about

that revolution by bribing the mutinous soldiers, and more

particularly the notorious Sergeant Garcia.  Such an accusation

will of course merely extract a smile from those who are at all

acquainted with the English character, and the general line of

conduct pursued by the English government.  It was a charge,

however, universally believed in Spain, and was even preferred

in print by a certain journal, the official organ of the silly

Duke of Frias, one of the many prime ministers of the moderado

party who followed each other in rapid succession towards the

latter period of the Carlist and Christino struggle.  But when

did a calumnious report ever fall to the ground in Spain by the

weight of its own absurdity?  Unhappy land, not until the pure

light of the Gospel has illumined thee wilt thou learn that the

greatest of all gifts is charity.



The next day verified the prediction of the Spanish

surgeon; I had to a considerable degree lost my cough and

fever, though, owing to the loss of blood, I was somewhat

feeble.  Precisely at twelve o'clock the horses were led forth

before the door of my lodging in the Calle de Santiago, and I

prepared to mount: but my black entero of Andalusia would not

permit me to approach his side, and whenever I made the

attempt, commenced wheeling round with great rapidity.



"C'EST UN MAUVAIS SIGNE, MON MAITRE," said Antonio, who,

dressed in a green jerkin, a Montero cap, booted and spurred,

stood ready to attend me, holding by the bridle the horse which

I had purchased from the contrabandista.  "It is a bad sign,

and in my country they would defer the journey till to-morrow."



"Are there whisperers in your country?" I demanded; and

taking the horse by the mane, I performed the ceremony after

the most approved fashion: the animal stood still, and I

mounted the saddle, exclaiming -





"The Rommany Chal to his horse did cry,

As he placed the bit in his horse's jaw;

Kosko gry! Rommany gry!

Muk man kistur tute knaw."





We then rode forth from Madrid by the gate of San

Vincente, directing our course to the lofty mountains which

separate Old from New Castile.  That night we rested at

Guadarama, a large village at their foot, distant from Madrid

about seven leagues.  Rising early on the following morning, we

ascended the pass and entered into Old Castile.



After crossing the mountains, the route to Salamanca lies

almost entirely over sandy and arid plains, interspersed here

and there with thin and scanty groves of pine.  No adventure

worth relating occurred during this journey.  We sold a few

Testaments in the villages through which we passed, more

especially at Penaranda.  About noon of the third day, on

reaching the brow of a hillock, we saw a huge dome before us,

upon which the fierce rays of the sun striking, produced the

appearance of burnished gold.  It belonged to the cathedral of

Salamanca, and we flattered ourselves that we were already at

our journey's end; we were deceived, however, being still four

leagues distant from the town, whose churches and convents,

towering up in gigantic masses, can be distinguished at an

immense distance, flattering the traveller with an idea of

propinquity which does not in reality exist.  It was not till

long after nightfall that we arrived at the city gate, which we

found closed and guarded, in apprehension of a Carlist attack;

and having obtained admission with some difficulty, we led our

horses along dark, silent, and deserted streets, till we found

an individual who directed us to a large, gloomy, and

comfortless posada, that of the Bull, which we, however,

subsequently found was the best which the town afforded.



A melancholy town is Salamanca; the days of its

collegiate glory are long since past by, never more to return:

a circumstance, however, which is little to be regretted; for

what benefit did the world ever derive from scholastic

philosophy?  And for that alone was Salamanca ever famous.  Its

halls are now almost silent, and grass is growing in its

courts, which were once daily thronged by at least eight

thousand students; a number to which, at the present day, the

entire population of the city does not amount.  Yet, with all

its melancholy, what an interesting, nay, what a magnificent

place is Salamanca!  How glorious are its churches, how

stupendous are its deserted convents, and with what sublime but

sullen grandeur do its huge and crumbling walls, which crown

the precipitous bank of the Tormes, look down upon the lovely

river and its venerable bridge.



What a pity that, of the many rivers in Spain, scarcely

one is navigable.  The beautiful but shallow Tormes, instead of

proving a source of blessing and wealth to this part of

Castile, is of no further utility than to turn the wheels of

various small water mills, standing upon weirs of stone, which

at certain distances traverse the river.



My sojourn at Salamanca was rendered particularly

pleasant by the kind attentions and continual acts of

hospitality which I experienced from the inmates of the Irish

College, to the rector of which I bore a letter of

recommendation from my kind and excellent friend Mr. O'Shea,

the celebrated banker of Madrid.  It will be long before I

forget these Irish, more especially their head, Dr. Gartland, a

genuine scion of the good Hibernian tree, an accomplished

scholar, and a courteous and high-minded gentleman.  Though

fully aware who I was, he held out the hand of friendship to

the wandering heretic missionary, although by so doing he

exposed himself to the rancorous remarks of the narrow-minded

native clergy, who, in their ugly shovel hats and long cloaks,

glared at me askance as I passed by their whispering groups

beneath the piazzas of the Plaza.  But when did the fear of

consequences cause an Irishman to shrink from the exercise of

the duties of hospitality?  However attached to his religion -

and who is so attached to the Romish creed as the Irishman? - I

am convinced that not all the authority of the Pope or the

Cardinals would induce him to close his doors on Luther

himself, were that respectable personage at present alive and

in need of food and refuge.



Honour to Ireland and her "hundred thousand welcomes!"

Her fields have long been the greenest in the world; her

daughters the fairest; her sons the bravest and most eloquent.

May they never cease to be so.



The posada where I had put up was a good specimen of the

old Spanish inn, being much the same as those described in the

time of Philip the Third or Fourth.  The rooms were many and

large, floored with either brick or stone, generally with an

alcove at the end, in which stood a wretched flock bed.  Behind

the house was a court, and in the rear of this a stable, full

of horses, ponies, mules, machos, and donkeys, for there was no

lack of guests, who, however, for the most part slept in the

stable with their caballerias, being either arrieros or small

peddling merchants who travelled the country with coarse cloth

or linen.  Opposite to my room in the corridor lodged a wounded

officer, who had just arrived from San Sebastian on a galled

broken-kneed pony; he was an Estrimenian, and was returning to

his own village to be cured.  He was attended by three broken

soldiers, lame or maimed, and unfit for service: they told me

that they were of the same village as his worship, and on that

account he permitted them to travel with him.  They slept

amongst the litter, and throughout the day lounged about the

house smoking paper cigars.  I never saw them eating, though

they frequently went to a dark cool corner, where stood a bota

or kind of water pitcher, which they held about six inches from

their black filmy lips, permitting the liquid to trickle down

their throats.  They said they had no pay, and were quite

destitute of money, that SU MERCED the officer occasionally

gave them a piece of bread, but that he himself was poor and

had only a few dollars.  Brave guests for an inn, thought I;

yet, to the honour of Spain be it spoken, it is one of the few

countries in Europe where poverty is never insulted nor looked

upon with contempt.  Even at an inn, the poor man is never

spurned from the door, and if not harboured, is at least

dismissed with fair words, and consigned to the mercies of God

and his mother.  This is as it should be.  I laugh at the

bigotry and prejudices of Spain; I abhor the cruelty and

ferocity which have cast a stain of eternal infamy on her

history; but I will say for the Spaniards, that in their social

intercourse no people in the world exhibit a juster feeling of

what is due to the dignity of human nature, or better

understand the behaviour which it behoves a man to adopt

towards his fellow beings.  I have said that it is one of the

few countries in Europe where poverty is not treated with

contempt, and I may add, where the wealthy are not blindly

idolized.  In Spain the very beggar does not feel himself a

degraded being, for he kisses no one's feet, and knows not what

it is to be cuffed or spitten upon; and in Spain the duke or

the marquis can scarcely entertain a very overweening opinion

of his own consequence, as he finds no one, with perhaps the

exception of his French valet, to fawn upon or flatter him.



During my stay at Salamanca, I took measures that the

word of God might become generally known in this celebrated

city.  The principal bookseller of the town, Blanco, a man of

great wealth and respectability, consented to become my agent

here, and I in consequence deposited in his shop a certain

number of New Testaments.  He was the proprietor of a small

printing press, where the official bulletin of the place was

published.  For this bulletin I prepared an advertisement of

the work, in which, amongst other things, I said that the New

Testament was the only guide to salvation; I also spoke of the

Bible Society, and the great pecuniary sacrifices which it was

making with the view of proclaiming Christ crucified, and of

making his doctrine known.  This step will perhaps be

considered by some as too bold, but I was not aware that I

could take any more calculated to arouse the attention of the

people - a considerable point.  I also ordered numbers of the

same advertisement to be struck off in the shape of bills,

which I caused to be stuck up in various parts of the town.  I

had great hope that by means of these a considerable number of

New Testaments would be sold.  I intended to repeat this

experiment in Valladolid, Leon, St. Jago, and all the principal

towns which I visited, and to distribute them likewise as I

rode along: the children of Spain would thus be brought to know

that such a work as the New Testament is in existence, a fact

of which not five in one hundred were then aware,

notwithstanding their so frequently-repeated boasts of their

Catholicity and Christianity.

