





CHAPTER XXIII







Astorga - The Inn - The Maragatos - The Habits of the Maragatos -

The Statue.





We went to a posada in the suburbs, the only one, indeed,

which the place afforded.  The courtyard was full of arrieros

and carriers, brawling loudly; the master of the house was

fighting with two of his customers, and universal confusion

reigned around.  As I dismounted I received the contents of a

wineglass in my face, of which greeting, as it was probably

intended for another, I took no notice.  Antonio, however, was

not so patient, for on being struck with a cudgel, he instantly

returned the salute with his whip, scarifying the countenance

of a carman.  In my endeavours to separate these two

antagonists, my horse broke loose, and rushing amongst the

promiscuous crowd, overturned several individuals and committed

no little damage.  It was a long time before peace was

restored: at last we were shown to a tolerably decent chamber.

We had, however, no sooner taken possession of it, than the

waggon from Madrid arrived on its way to Coruna, filled with

dusty travellers, consisting of women, children, invalid

officers and the like.  We were now forthwith dislodged, and

our baggage flung into the yard.  On our complaining of this

treatment, we were told that we were two vagabonds whom nobody

knew; who had come without an arriero, and had already set the

whole house in confusion.  As a great favour, however, we were

at length permitted to take up our abode in a ruinous building

down the yard, adjoining the stable, and filled with rats and

vermin.  Here there was an old bed with a tester, and with this

wretched accommodation we were glad to content ourselves, for I

could proceed no farther, and was burnt with fever.  The heat

of the place was intolerable, and I sat on the staircase with

my head between my hands, gasping for breath: soon appeared

Antonio with vinegar and water, which I drank and felt

relieved.



We continued in this suburb three days, during the

greatest part of which time I was stretched on the tester bed.

I once or twice contrived to make my way into the town, but

found no bookseller, nor any person willing to undertake the

charge of disposing of my Testaments.  The people were brutal,

stupid, and uncivil, and I returned to my tester bed fatigued

and dispirited.  Here I lay listening from time to time to the

sweet chimes which rang from the clock of the old cathedral.

The master of the house never came near me, nor indeed, once

inquired about me.  Beneath the care of Antonio, however, I

speedily waxed stronger.  "MON MAITRE," said he to me one

evening, "I see you are better; let us quit this bad town and

worse posada to-morrow morning.  ALLONS, MON MAITRE!  IL EST

TEMPS DE NOUS METTRE EN CHEMIN POUR LUGO ET GALICE."



Before proceeding, however, to narrate what befell us in

this journey to Lugo and Galicia, it will perhaps not be amiss

to say a few words concerning Astorga and its vicinity.  It is

a walled town, containing about five or six thousand

inhabitants, with a cathedral and college, which last is,

however, at present deserted.  It is situated on the confines,

and may be called the capital of a tract of land called the

country of the Maragatos, which occupies about three square

leagues, and has for its north-western boundary a mountain

called Telleno, the loftiest of a chain of hills which have

their origin near the mouth of the river Minho, and are

connected with the immense range which constitutes the frontier

of the Asturias and Guipuscoa.



The land is ungrateful and barren, and niggardly repays

the toil of the cultivator, being for the most part rocky, with

a slight sprinkling of red brick earth.



The Maragatos are perhaps the most singular caste to be

found amongst the chequered population of Spain.  They have

their own peculiar customs and dress, and never intermarry with

the Spaniards.  Their name is a clue to their origin, as it

signifies, "Moorish Goths," and at the present day their garb

differs but little from that of the Moors of Barbary, as it

consists of a long tight jacket, secured at the waist by a

broad girdle, loose short trousers which terminate at the knee,

and boots and gaiters.  Their heads are shaven, a slight fringe

of hair being only left at the lower part.  If they wore the

turban or barret, they could scarcely be distinguished from the

Moors in dress, but in lieu thereof they wear the sombrero, or

broad slouching hat of Spain.  There can be little doubt that

they are a remnant of those Goths who sided with the Moors on

their invasion of Spain, and who adopted their religion,

customs, and manner of dress, which, with the exception of the

first, are still to a considerable degree retained by them.  It

is, however, evident that their blood has at no time mingled

with that of the wild children of the desert, for scarcely

amongst the hills of Norway would you find figures and faces

more essentially Gothic than those of the Maragatos.  They are

strong athletic men, but loutish and heavy, and their features,

though for the most part well formed, are vacant and devoid of

expression.  They are slow and plain of speech, and those

eloquent and imaginative sallies so common in the conversation

of other Spaniards, seldom or never escape them; they have,

moreover, a coarse thick pronunciation, and when you hear them

speak, you almost imagine that it is some German or English

peasant attempting to express himself in the language of the

Peninsula.  They are constitutionally phlegmatic, and it is

very difficult to arouse their anger; but they are dangerous

and desperate when once incensed; and a person who knew them

well, told me that he would rather face ten Valencians, people

infamous for their ferocity and blood-thirstiness, than

confront one angry Maragato, sluggish and stupid though he be

on other occasions.



The men scarcely ever occupy themselves in husbandry,

which they abandon to the women, who plough the flinty fields

and gather in the scanty harvests.  Their husbands and sons are

far differently employed: for they are a nation of arrieros or

carriers, and almost esteem it a disgrace to follow any other

profession.  On every road of Spain, particularly those north

of the mountains which divide the two Castiles, may be seen

gangs of fives and sixes of these people lolling or sleeping

beneath the broiling sun, on gigantic and heavily laden mutes

and mules.  In a word, almost the entire commerce of nearly one

half of Spain passes through the hands of the Maragatos, whose

fidelity to their trust is such, that no one accustomed to

employ them would hesitate to confide to them the transport of

a ton of treasure from the sea of Biscay to Madrid; knowing

well that it would not be their fault were it not delivered

safe and undiminished, even of a grain, and that bold must be

the thieves who would seek to wrest it from the far feared

Maragatos, who would cling to it whilst they could stand, and

would cover it with their bodies when they fell in the act of

loading or discharging their long carbines.



But they are far from being disinterested, and if they

are the most trustworthy of all the arrieros of Spain, they in

general demand for the transport of articles a sum at least

double to what others of the trade would esteem a reasonable

recompense: by this means they accumulate large sums of money,

notwithstanding that they indulge themselves in far superior

fare to that which contents in general the parsimonious

Spaniard; - another argument in favour of their pure Gothic

descent; for the Maragatos, like true men of the north, delight

in swilling liquors and battening upon gross and luscious

meats, which help to swell out their tall and goodly figures.

Many of them have died possessed of considerable riches, part

of which they have not unfrequently bequeathed to the erection

or embellishment of religious houses.



On the east end of the cathedral of Astorga, which towers

over the lofty and precipitous wall, a colossal figure of lead

may be seen on the roof.  It is the statue of a Maragato

carrier who endowed the cathedral with a large sum.  He is in

his national dress, but his head is averted from the lands of

his fathers, and whilst he waves in his hand a species of flag,

he seems to be summoning his race from their unfruitful region

to other climes, where a richer field is open to their industry

and enterprise.



I spoke to several of these men respecting the all-

important subject of religion; but I found "their hearts gross,

and their ears dull of hearing, and their eyes closed."  There

was one in particular to whom I showed the New Testament, and

whom I addressed for a considerable time.  He listened or

seemed to listen patiently, taking occasionally copious

draughts from an immense jug of whitish wine which stood

between his knees.  After I had concluded he said, "To-morrow I

set out for Lugo, whither, I am told, yourself are going.  If

you wish to send your chest, I have no objection to take it at

so much (naming an extravagant price).  As for what you have

told me, I understand little of it, and believe not a word of

it; but in respect to the books which you have shown me, I will

take three or four.  I shall not read them, it is true, but I

have no doubt that I can sell them at a higher price than you

demand."



So much for the Maragatos.

