






CHAPTER L







Night on the Guadalquivir - Gospel Light - Bonanza -

Strand of San Lucar - Andalusian Scenery - History of a Chest -

Cosas de los Ingleses - The Two Gypsies - The Driver -

The Red Nightcap - The Steam Boat - Christian Language.





On the night of the 31st of July I departed from Seville

upon my expendition, going on board one of the steamers which

ply on the Guadalquivir between Seville and Cadiz.



It was my intention to stop at San Lucar, for the purpose

of recovering the chest of Testaments which had been placed in

embargo there, until such time as they could be removed from

the kingdom of Spain.  These Testaments I intended for

distribution amongst the Christians whom I hoped to meet on the

shores of Barbary.  San Lucar is about fifteen leagues distant

from Seville, at the entrance of the bay of Cadiz, where the

yellow waters of the Guadalquivir unite with the brine.  The

steamer shot from the little quay, or wharf, at about half-past

nine, and then arose a loud cry, - it was the voices of those

on board and on shore wishing farewell to their friends.

Amongst the tumult I thought I could distinguish the accents of

some friends of my own who had accompanied me to the bank, and

I instantly raised my own voice louder than all.  The night was

very dark, so much so, indeed, that as we passed along we could

scarcely distinguish the trees which cover the eastern shore of

the river until it takes its first turn.  A calmazo had reigned

during the day at Seville, by which is meant, exceedingly

sultry weather, unenlivened by the slightest breeze.  The night

likewise was calm and sultry.  As I had frequently made the

voyage of the Guadalquivir, ascending and descending this

celebrated river, I felt nothing of that restlessness and

curiosity which people experience in a strange place, whether

in light or darkness, and being acquainted with none of the

other passengers, who were talking on the deck, I thought my

best plan would be to retire to the cabin and enjoy some rest,

if possible.  The cabin was solitary and tolerably cool, all

its windows on either side being open for the admission of air.

Flinging myself on one of the cushioned benches, I was soon

asleep, in which state I continued for about two hours, when I

was aroused by the curious biting of a thousand bugs, which

compelled me to seek the deck, where, wrapping myself in my

cloak, I again fell asleep.  It was near daybreak when I awoke;

we were then about two leagues from San Lucar.  I arose and

looked towards the east, watching the gradual progress of dawn,

first the dull light, then the streak, then the tinge, then the

bright flush, till at last the golden disk of that orb which

giveth day emerged from the abyss of immensity, and in a moment

the whole prospect was covered with brightness and glory.  The

land smiled, the waters sparkled, the birds sang, and men arose

from their resting places and rejoiced: for it was day, and the

sun was gone forth on the errand of its Creator, the diffusion

of light and gladness, and the dispelling of darkness and

sorrow.





"Behold the morning sun

Begins his glorious way;

His beams through all the nations run,

And life and light convey.



"But where the Gospel comes,

It spreads diviner light;

It calls dead sinners from their tombs,

And gives the blind their sight."





We now stopped before Bonanza: this is properly speaking

the port of San Lucar, although it is half a league distant

from the latter place.  It is called Bonanza on account of its

good anchorage, and its being secured from the boisterous winds

of the ocean; its literal meaning is "fair weather."  It

consists of several large white buildings, principally

government store-houses, and is inhabited by the coast-guard,

dependents on the custom-house, and a few fishermen.  A boat

came off to receive those passengers whose destination was San

Lucar, and to bring on board about half a dozen who were bound

for Cadiz: I entered with the rest.  A young Spaniard of very

diminutive stature addressed some questions to me in French as

to what I thought of the scenery and climate of Andalusia.  I

replied that I admired both, which evidently gave him great

pleasure.  The boatman now came demanding two reals for

conveying me on shore.  I had no small money, and offered him a

dollar to change.  He said that it was impossible.  I asked him

what was to be done; whereupon he replied uncivilly that he

knew not, but could not lose time, and expected to be paid

instantly.  The young Spaniard, observing my embarrassment,

took out two reals and paid the fellow.  I thanked him heartily

for this act of civility, for which I felt really grateful; as

there are few situations more unpleasant than to be in a crowd

in want of change, whilst you are importuned by people for

payment.  A loose character once told me that it was far

preferable to be without money at all, as you then knew what

course to take.  I subsequently met the young Spaniard at

Cadiz, and repaid him with thanks.



A few cabriolets were waiting near the wharf, in order to

convey us to San Lucar.  I ascended one, and we proceeded

slowly along the Playa or strand.  This place is famous in the

ancient novels of Spain, of that class called Picaresque, or

those devoted to the adventures of notorious scoundrels, the

father of which, as also of all others of the same kind, in

whatever language, is Lazarillo de Tormes.  Cervantes himself

has immortalized this strand in the most amusing of his smaller

tales, La Ilustre Fregona.  In a word, the strand of San Lucar

in ancient times, if not in modern, was a rendezvous for

ruffians, contrabandistas, and vagabonds of every, description,

who nested there in wooden sheds, which have now vanished.  San

Lucar itself was always noted for the thievish propensities of

its inhabitants - the worst in all Andalusia.  The roguish

innkeeper in DON QUIXOTE perfected his education at San Lucar.

All these recollections crowded into my mind as we proceeded

along the strand, which was beautifully gilded by the

Andalusian sun.  We at last arrived nearly opposite to San

Lucar, which stands at some distance from the water side.  Here

a lively spectacle presented itself to us: the shore was

covered with a multitude of females either dressing or

undressing themselves, while (I speak within bounds) hundreds

were in the water sporting and playing; some were close by the

beach, stretched at their full length on the sand and pebbles,

allowing the little billows to dash over their heads and

bosoms; whilst others were swimming boldly out into the firth.

There was a confused hubbub of female cries, thin shrieks and

shrill laughter; couplets likewise were being sung, on what

subject it is easy to guess, for we were in sunny Andalusia,

and what can its black-eyed daughters think, speak, or sing of

but AMOR, AMOR, which now sounded from the land and the waters.

Farther on along the beach we perceived likewise a crowd of men

bathing; we passed not by them, but turned to the left up an

alley or avenue which leads to San Lucar, and which may be a

quarter of a mile long.  The view from hence was truly

magnificent; before us lay the town, occupying the side and top

of a tolerably high hill, extending from east to west.  It

appeared to be of considerable size, and I was subsequently

informed that it contained at least twenty thousand

inhabitants.  Several immense edifices and walls towered up in

a style of grandeur, which can be but feebly described by

words; but the principal object was an ancient castle towards

the left.  The houses were all white, and would have shone

brilliantly in the sun had it been higher, but at this early

hour they lay comparatively in shade.  The TOUT ENSEMBLE was

very Moorish and oriental, and indeed in ancient times San

Lucar was a celebrated stronghold of the Moors, and next to

Almeria, the most frequented of their commercial places in

Spain.  Everything, indeed, in these parts of Andalusia, is

perfectly oriental.  Behold the heavens, as cloudless and as

brightly azure as those of Ind; the fiery sun which tans the

fairest cheek in a moment, and which fills the air with

flickering flame; and O, remark the scenery and the vegetable

productions.  The alley up which we were moving was planted on

each side with that remarkable tree or plant, for I know not

which to call it, the giant aloe, which is called in Spanish,

PITA, and in Moorish, GURSEAN.  It rises here to a height

almost as magnificent as on the African shore.  Need I say that

the stem, which springs up from the middle of the bush of green

blades, which shoot out from the root on all sides, is as high

as a palm-tree; and need I say, that those blades, which are of

an immense thickness at the root, are at the tip sharper than

the point of a spear, and would inflict a terrible wound on any

animal which might inadvertently rush against them?



One of the first houses at San Lucar was the posada at

which we stopped.  It confronted, with some others, the avenue

up which we had come.  As it was still early, I betook myself

to rest for a few hours, at the end of which time I went out to

visit Mr. Phillipi, the British vice-consul, who was already

acquainted with me by name, as I had been recommended to him in

a letter from a relation of his at Seville.  Mr. Phillipi was

at home in his counting-house, and received me with much

kindness and civility.  I told him the motive of my visit to

San Lucar, and requested his assistance towards obtaining the

books from the customhouse, in order to transport them out of

the country, as I was very well acquainted with the

difficulties which every one has to encounter in Spain, who has

any business to transact with the government authorities.  He

assured me that he should be most happy to assist me, and

accordingly despatched with me to the custom-house his head

clerk, a person well known and much respected at San Lucar.



It may be as well here at once to give the history of

these books, which might otherwise tend to embarrass the

narrative.  They consisted of a chest of Testaments in Spanish,

and a small box of Saint Luke's Gospel in the Gitano or

language of the Spanish Gypsies.  I obtained them from the

custom-house at San Lucar, with a pass for that of Cadiz.  At

Cadiz I was occupied two days, and also a person whom I

employed, in going through all the formalities, and in

procuring the necessary papers.  The expense was great, as

money was demanded at every step I had to take, though I was

simply complying in this instance with the orders of the

Spanish government in removing prohibited books from Spain.

The farce did not end until my arrival at Gibraltar, where I

paid the Spanish consul a dollar for certifying on the back of

the pass, which I had to return to Cadiz, that the books were

arrived at the former place.  It is true that he never saw the

books nor inquired about them, but he received the money, for

which he alone seemed to be anxious.



Whilst at the custom-house of San Lucar I was asked one

or two questions respecting the books contained in the chests:

this afforded me some opportunity of speaking of the New

Testaments and the Bible Society.  What I said excited

attention, and presently all the officers and dependents of the

house, great and small, were gathered around me, from the

governor to the porter.  As it was necessary to open the boxes

to inspect their contents, we all proceeded to the court-yard,

where, holding a Testament in my hand, I recommended my

discourse.  I scarcely know what I said; for I was much

agitated, and hurried away by my feelings, when I bethought me

of the manner in which the word of God was persecuted in this

unhappy kingdom.  My words evidently made impression, and to my

astonishment every person present pressed me for a copy.  I

sold several within the walls of the custom-house.  The object,

however, of most attention was the Gypsy Gospel, which was

minutely examined amidst smiles and exclamations of surprise;

an individual every now and then crying, "COSAS DE LOS

INGLESES."  A bystander asked me whether I could speak the

Gitano language.  I replied that I could not only speak it, but

write it, and instantly made a speech of about five minutes in

the Gypsy tongue, which I had no sooner concluded than all

clapped their hands and simultaneously shouted, "COSAS DE

INGALATERRA," "COSAS DE LOS INGLESES."  I disposed of several

copies of the Gypsy Gospel likewise, and having now settled the

business which had brought me to the custom-house, I saluted my

new friends and departed with my books.



I now revisited Mr. Phillipi, who, upon learning that it

was my intention to proceed to Cadiz next morning by the

steamer, which would touch at Bonanza at four o'clock,

despatched the chests and my little luggage to the latter

place, where he likewise advised me to sleep, in order that I

might be in readiness to embark at that early hour.  He then

introduced me to his family, his wife an English woman, and his

daughter an amiable and beautiful girl of about eighteen years

of age, whom I had previously seen at Seville; three or four

other ladies from Seville were likewise there on a visit, and

for the purpose of sea-bathing.  After a few words in English

between the lady of the house and myself, we all commenced

chatting in Spanish, which seemed to be the only language

understood or cared for by the rest of the company; indeed, who

would be so unreasonable as to expect Spanish females to speak

any language but their own, which, flexible and harmonious as

it is, (far more so I think than any other,) seemed at times

quite inadequate to express the wild sallies of their luxuriant

imagination.  Two hours fled rapidly away in discourse,

interrupted occasionally by music and song, when I bade

farewell to this delightful society, and strolled out to view

the town.



It was now past noon, and the heat was exceedingly

fierce: I saw scarcely a living being in the streets, the

stones of which burnt my feet through the soles of my boots.  I

passed through the square of the Constitution, which presents

nothing particular to the eye of the stranger, and ascended the

hill to obtain a nearer view of the castle.  It is a strong

heavy edifice of stone, with round towers, and, though

deserted, appears to be still in a tolerable state of

preservation.  I became tired of gazing, and was retracing my

steps, when I was accosted by two Gypsies, who by some means

had heard of my arrival.  We exchanged some words in Gitano,

but they appeared to be very ignorant of the dialect, and

utterly unable to maintain a conversation in it.  They were

clamorous for a gabicote, or book in the Gypsy tongue.  I

refused it them, saying that they could turn it to no

profitable account; but finding that they could read, I

promised them each a Testament in Spanish.  This offer,

however, they refused with disdain, saying that they cared for

nothing written in the language of the Busne or Gentiles.  They

then persisted in their demand, to which I at last yielded,

being unable to resist their importunity; whereupon they

accompanied me to the inn, and received what they so ardently

desired.



In the evening I was visited by Mr. Phillipi, who

informed me that he had ordered a cabriolet to call for me at

the inn at eleven at night, for the purpose of conveying me to

Bonanza, and that a person there who kept a small wine-house,

and to whom the chests and other things had been forwarded,

would receive me for the night, though it was probable that I

should have to sleep on the floor.  We then walked to the

beach, where there were a great number of bathers, all men.

Amongst them were some good swimmers; two, in particular, were

out at a great distance in the firth of the Guadalquivir, I

should say at least a mile; their heads could just be descried

with the telescope.  I was told that they were friars.  I

wondered at what period of their lives they had acquired their

dexterity at natation.  I hoped it was not at a time when,

according to their vows, they should have lived for prayer,

fasting, and mortification alone.  Swimming is a noble

exercise, but it certainly does not tend to mortify either the

flesh or the spirit.  As it was becoming dusk, we returned to

the town, when my friend bade me a kind farewell.  I then

retired to my apartment, and passed some hours in meditation.



It was night, ten o'clock; - eleven o'clock, and the

cabriolet was at the door.  I got in, and we proceeded down the

avenue and along the shore, which was quite deserted.  The

waves sounded mournfully; everything seemed to have changed

since the morning.  I even thought that the horse's feet

sounded differently, as it trotted slowly over the moist firm

sand.  The driver, however, was by no means mournful, nor

inclined to be silent long: he soon commenced asking me an

infinity of questions as to whence I came and whither I was

bound.  Having given him what answers I thought most proper, I,

in return, asked him whether he was not afraid to drive along

that beach, which had always borne so bad a character, at so

unseasonable an hour.  Whereupon, he looked around him, and

seeing no person, he raised a shout of derision, and said that

a fellow with his whiskers feared not all the thieves that ever

walked the playa, and that no dozen men in San Lucar dare to

waylay any traveller whom they knew to be beneath his

protection.  He was a good specimen of the Andalusian braggart.

We soon saw a light or two shining dimly before us; they

proceeded from a few barks and small vessels stranded on the

sand close below Bonanza: amongst them I distinguished two or

three dusky figures.  We were now at our journey's end, and

stopped before the door of the place where I was to lodge for

the night.  The driver, dismounting, knocked loud and long,

until the door was opened by an exceedingly stout man of about

sixty years of age; he held a dim light in his hand, and was

dressed in a red nightcap and dirty striped shirt.  He admitted

us, without a word, into a very large long room with a clay

floor.  A species of counter stood on one side near the door;

behind it stood a barrel or two, and against the wall, on

shelves, many bottles of various sizes.  The smell of liquors

and wine was very powerful.  I settled with the driver and gave

him a gratuity, whereupon he asked me for something to drink to

my safe journey.  I told him he could call for whatever he

pleased; whereupon he demanded a glass of aguardiente, which

the master of the house, who had stationed himself behind the

counter, handed him without saying a word.  The fellow drank it

off at once, but made a great many wry faces after having

swallowed it, and, coughing, said that he made no doubt it was

good liquor, as it burnt his throat terribly.  He then embraced

me, went out, mounted his cabriolet, and drove off.



The old man with the red nightcap now moved slowly to the

door, which he bolted and otherwise secured; he then drew

forward two benches, which he placed together, and pointed to

them as if to intimate to me that there was my bed: he then

blew out the candle and retired deeper into the apartment,

where I heard him lay himself down sighing and snorting.  There

was now no farther light than what proceeded from a small

earthen pan on the floor, filled with water and oil, on which

floated a small piece of card with a lighted wick in the

middle, which simple species of lamp is called "mariposa."  I

now laid my carpet bag on the bench as a pillow, and flung

myself down.  I should have been asleep instantly, but he of

the red nightcap now commenced snoring awfully, which brought

to my mind that I had not yet commended myself to my friend and

Redeemer: I therefore prayed, and then sank to repose.



I was awakened more than once during the night by cats,

and I believe rats, leaping upon my body.  At the last of these

interruptions I arose, and, approaching the mariposa, looked at

my watch; it was half-past three o'clock.  I opened the door

and looked out; whereupon some fishermen entered clamouring for

their morning draught: the old man was soon on his feet serving

them.  One of the men said to me that, if I was going by the

steamer, I had better order my things to the wharf without

delay, as he had heard the vessel coming down the river.  I

dispatched my luggage, and then demanded of the red nightcap

what I owed him.  He replied "One real."  These were the only

two words which I heard proceed from his mouth: he was

certainly addicted to silence, and perhaps to philosophy,

neither of which are much practised in Andalusia.  I now

hurried to the wharf; the steamer was not yet arrived, but I

heard its thunder up the river every moment becoming more

distinct: there was mist and darkness upon the face of the

waters, and I felt awe as I listened to the approach of the

invisible monster booming through the stillness of the night.

It came at last in sight, plashed its way forward, stopped, and

I was soon on board.  It was the Peninsula, the best boat on

the Guadalquivir.



What a wonderful production of art is a steamboat; and

yet why should we call it wonderful, if we consider its

history.  More than five hundred years have elapsed since the

idea of making one first originated; but it was not until the

close of the last century that the first, worthy of the name,

made its appearance on a Scottish river.



During this long period of time, acute minds and skilful

hands were occasionally busied in attempting to remove those

imperfections in the machinery, which alone prevented a vessel

being made capable of propelling itself against wind and tide.

All these attempts were successively abandoned in despair, yet

scarcely one was made which was perfectly fruitless; each

inventor leaving behind him some monument of his labour, of

which those who succeeded him took advantage, until at last a

fortunate thought or two, and a few more perfect arrangements,

were all that were wanting.  The time arrived, and now, at

length, the very Atlantic is crossed by haughty steamers.  Much

has been said of the utility of steam in spreading abroad

civilization, and I think justly.  When the first steam vessels

were seen on the Guadalquivir, about ten years ago, the

Sevillians ran to the banks of the river, crying "sorcery,

sorcery," which idea was not a little favoured by the

speculation being an English one, and the boats, which were

English built, being provided with English engineers, as,

indeed, they still are; no Spaniard having been found capable

of understanding the machinery.  They soon however, became

accustomed to them, and the boats are in general crowded with

passengers.  Fanatic and vain as the Sevillians still are, and

bigoted as they remain to their own customs, they know that

good, in one instance at least, can proceed from a foreign

land, and that land a land of heretics; inveterate prejudice

has been shaken, and we will hope that this is the dawn of

their civilization.



Whilst passing over the bay of Cadiz, I was reclining on

one of the benches on the deck, when the captain walked by in

company with another man; they stopped a short distance from

me, and I heard the captain ask the other, in a low voice, how

many languages he spoke; he replied "only one."  "That one,"

said the captain, "is of course the Christian"; by which name

the Spaniards style their own language in contradistinction to

all others.  "That fellow," continued the captain, "who is

lying on the deck, can speak Christian too, when it serves his

purpose, but he speaks others, which are by no means Christian:

he can talk English, and I myself have heard him chatter in

Gitano with the Gypsies of Triana; he is now going amongst the

Moors, and when he arrives in their country, you will hear him,

should he be there, converse as fluently in their gibberish as

in Christiano, nay, better, for he is no Christian himself.  He

has been several times on board my vessel already, but I do not

like him, as I consider that he carries something about with

him which is not good."



This worthy person, on my coming aboard the boat, had

shaken me by the hand and expressed his joy at seeing me again.

