






CHAPTER XLVII







Termination of our Rural Labours - Alarm of the Clergy -

A New Experiment - Success at Madrid - Goblin-Alguazil -

Staff of Office - The Corregidor - An Explanation -

The Pope in England - New Testament expounded - Works of Luther.





We proceeded in our task of distributing the Scriptures

with various success, until the middle of March, when I

determined upon starting for Talavera, for the purpose of

seeing what it was possible to accomplish in that town and the

neighbourhood.  I accordingly bent my course in that direction,

accompanied by Antonio and Victoriano.  On our way thither we

stopped at Naval Carnero, a large village five leagues to the

west of Madrid, where I remained three days, sending forth

Victoriano to the circumjacent hamlets with small cargoes of

Testaments.  Providence, however, which had hitherto so

remarkably favoured us in these rural excursions, now withdrew

from us its support, and brought them to a sudden termination;

for in whatever place the sacred writings were offered for

sale, they were forthwith seized by persons who appeared to be

upon the watch; which events compelled me to alter my intention

of proceeding to Talavera and to return forthwith to Madrid.



I subsequently learned that our proceedings on the other

side of Madrid having caused alarm amongst the heads of the

clergy, they had made a formal complaint to the government, who

immediately sent orders to all the alcaldes of the villages,

great and small, in New Castile, to seize the New Testament

wherever it might be exposed for sale; but at the same time

enjoining them to be particularly careful not to detain or

maltreat the person or persons who might be attempting to vend

it.  An exact description of myself accompanied these orders,

and the authorities both civil and military were exhorted to be

on their guard against me and my arts and machinations; for, I

as the document stated, was to-day in one place, and to-morrow

at twenty leagues' distance.



I was not much discouraged by this blow, which indeed did

not come entirely unexpected.  I, however, determined to change

the sphere of action, and not expose the sacred volume to

seizure at every step which I should take to circulate it.  In

my late attempts, I had directed my attention exclusively to

the villages and small towns, in which it was quite easy for

the government to frustrate my efforts by means of circulars to

the local authorities, who would of course be on the alert, and

whose vigilance it would be impossible to baffle as every

novelty which occurs in a small place is forthwith bruited

about.  But the case would be widely different amongst the

crowds of the capital, where I could pursue my labours with

comparative secrecy.  My present plan was to abandon the rural

districts, and to offer the sacred volume at Madrid, from house

to house, at the same low price as in the country.  This plan I

forthwith put into execution.



Having an extensive acquaintance amongst the lower

orders, I selected eight intelligent individuals to co-operate

with me, amongst whom were five women.  All these I supplied

with Testaments, and then sent them forth to all the parishes

in Madrid.  The result of their efforts more than answered my

expectations.  In less than fifteen days after my return from

Naval Carnero, nearly six hundred copies of the life and words

of Him of Nazareth had been sold in the streets and alleys of

Madrid; a fact which I hope I may be permitted to mention with

gladness and with decent triumph in the Lord.



One of the richest streets is the Calle Montera, where

reside the principal merchants and shopkeepers of Madrid.  It

is, in fact, the street of commerce, in which respect, and in

being a favourite promenade, it corresponds with the far-famed

"Nefsky" of Saint Petersburg.  Every house in this street was

supplied with its Testament, and the same might be said with

respect to the Puerto del Sol.  Nay, in some instances, every

individual in the house, man and child, man-servant and maid-

servant, was furnished with a copy.  My Greek, Antonio, made

wonderful exertions in this quarter; and it is but justice to

say that, but for his instrumentality, on many occasions, I

might have been by no means able to give so favourable an

account of the spread of "the Bible in Spain."  There was a

time when I was in the habit of saying "dark Madrid," an

expression which, I thank God, I could now drop.  It were

scarcely just to call a city, "dark," in which thirteen hundred

Testaments at least were in circulation, and in daily use.



It was now that I turned to account a supply of Bibles

which I had received from Barcelona, in sheets, at the

commencement of the preceding year.  The demand for the entire

Scriptures was great; indeed far greater than I could answer,

as the books were disposed of faster than they could be bound

by the man whom I employed for that purpose.  Eight-and-twenty

copies were bespoken and paid for before delivery.  Many of

these Bibles found their way into the best houses in Madrid.

The Marquis of - had a large family, but every individual of

it, old and young, was in possession of a Bible, and likewise a

Testament, which, strange to say, were recommended by the

chaplain of the house.  One of my most zealous agents in the

propagation of the Bible was an ecclesiastic.  He never walked

out without carrying one beneath his gown, which he offered to

the first person he met whom he thought likely to purchase.

Another excellent assistant was an elderly gentleman of

Navarre, enormously rich, who was continually purchasing copies

on his own account, which he, as I was told, sent into his

native province, for distribution amongst his friends and the

poor.



On a certain night I had retired to rest rather more

early than usual, being slightly indisposed.  I soon fell

asleep, and had continued so for some hours, when I was

suddenly aroused by the opening of the door of the small

apartment in which I lay.  I started up, and beheld Maria Diaz,

with a lamp in her hand, enter the room.  I observed that her

features, which were in general peculiarly calm and placid,

wore a somewhat startled expression.  "What is the hour, and

what brings you here?" I demanded.



"Senor," said she, closing the door, and coming up to the

bed-side.  "It is close upon midnight; but a messenger

belonging to the police has just entered the house and demanded

to see you.  I told him that it was impossible, for that your

worship was in bed.  Whereupon he sneezed in my face, and said

that he would see you if you were in your coffin.  He has all

the look of a goblin, and has thrown me into a tremor.  I am

far from being a timid person, as you are aware, Don Jorge; but

I confess that I never cast my eyes on these wretches of the

police, but my heart dies away within me!  I know them but too

well, and what they are capable of."



"Pooh," said I, "be under no apprehension, let him come

in, I fear him not, whether he be alguazil or hobgoblin.

Stand, however, at the doorway, that you may be a witness of

what takes place, as it is more than probable that he comes at

this unreasonable hour to create a disturbance, that he may

have an opportunity of making an unfavourable report to his

principals, like the fellow on the former occasion."



The hostess left the apartment, and I heard her say a

word or two to some one in the passage, whereupon there was a

loud sneeze, and in a moment after a singular figure appeared

at the doorway.  It was that of a very old man, with long white

hair, which escaped from beneath the eaves of an exceedingly

high-peaked hat.  He stooped considerably, and moved along with

a shambling gait.  I could not see much of his face, which, as

the landlady stood behind him with the lamp, was consequently

in deep shadow.  I could observe, however, that his eyes

sparkled like those of a ferret.  He advanced to the foot of

the bed, in which I was still lying, wondering what this

strange visit could mean; and there he stood gazing at me for a

minute, at least, without uttering a syllable.  Suddenly,

however, he protruded a spare skinny hand from the cloak in

which it had hitherto been enveloped, and pointed with a short

staff, tipped with metal, in the direction of my face, as it he

were commencing an exorcism.  He appeared to be about to speak,

but his words, if he intended any, were stifled in their birth

by a sudden sternutation which escaped him, and which was so

violent that the hostess started back, exclaiming, "Ave Maria

purissima!" and nearly dropped the lamp in her alarm.



"My good person," said I, "what do you mean by this

foolish hobgoblinry?  If you have anything to communicate do so

at once, and go about your business.  I am unwell, and you are

depriving me of my repose."



"By the virtue of this staff," said the old man, "and the

authority which it gives me to do and say that which is

convenient, I do command, order, and summon you to appear to-

morrow, at the eleventh hour at the office of my lord the

corregidor of this village of Madrid, in order that, standing

before him humbly, and with befitting reverence, you may listen

to whatever he may have to say, or if necessary, may yield

yourself up to receive the castigation of any crimes which you

may have committed, whether trivial or enormous.  TENEZ,

COMPERE," he added, in most villainous French, "VOILA MON

AFFAIRE; VOILA CE QUE JE VIENS VOUS DIRE."



Thereupon he glared at me for a moment, nodded his head

twice, and replacing his staff beneath is cloak, shambled out

of the room, and with a valedictory sneeze in the passage left

the house.



Precisely at eleven on the following day, I attended at

the office of the corregidor.  He was not the individual whose

anger I had incurred on a former occasion, and who had thought

proper to imprison me, but another person, I believe a Catalan,

whose name I have also forgotten.  Indeed, these civil

employments were at this period given to-day and taken away to-

morrow, so that the person who held one of them for a month

might consider himself a functionary of long standing.  I was

not kept waiting a moment, but as soon as I had announced

myself, was forthwith ushered into the presence of the

corregidor, a good-looking, portly, and well-dressed personage,

seemingly about fifty.  He was writing at a desk when I

entered, but almost immediately arose and came towards me.  He

looked me full in the face, and I, nothing abashed, kept my

eyes fixed upon his.  He had, perhaps, expected a less

independent bearing, and that I should have quaked and crouched

before him; but now, conceiving himself bearded in his own den,

his old Spanish leaven was forthwith stirred up.  He plucked

his whiskers fiercely.  "Escuchad," said he, casting upon me a

ferocious glance, "I wish to ask you a question."



"Before I answer any question of your excellency," said

I, "I shall take the liberty of putting one myself.  What law

or reason is there that I, a peaceable individual and a

foreigner, should have my rest disturbed by DUENDES and

hobgoblins sent at midnight to summon me to appear at public

offices like a criminal?"



"You do not speak the truth," shouted the corregidor;

"the person sent to summon you was neither duende nor

hobgoblin, but one of the most ancient and respectable officers

of this casa, and so far from being dispatched at midnight, it

wanted twenty-five minutes to that hour by my own watch when he

left this office, and as your lodging is not distant, he must

have arrived there at least ten minutes before midnight, so

that you are by no means accurate, and are found wanting in

regard to truth."



"A distinction without a difference," I replied.  "For my

own part, if I am to be disturbed in my sleep, it is of little

consequence whether at midnight or ten minutes before that

time; and with respect to your messenger, although he might not

be a hobgoblin, he had all the appearance of one, and assuredly

answered the purpose, by frightening the woman of the house

almost into fits by his hideous grimaces and sneezing

convulsions."



CORREGIDOR. - You are a - I know not what.  Do you know

that I have the power to imprison you?



MYSELF. - You have twenty alguazils at your beck and

call, and have of course the power, and so had your

predecessor, who nearly lost his situation by imprisoning me;

but you know full well that you have not the right, as I am not

under your jurisdiction, but that of the captain-general.  If I

have obeyed your summons, it was simply because I had a

curiosity to know what you wanted with me, and from no other

motive whatever.  As for imprisoning me, I beg leave to assure

you, that you have my full consent to do so; the most polite

society in Madrid is to be found in the prison, and as I am at

present compiling a vocabulary of the language of the

Madrilenian thieves, I should have, in being imprisoned, an

excellent opportunity of completing it.  There is much to be

learnt even in the prison, for, as the Gypsies say, "The dog

that trots about finds a bone."



CORREGIDOR. - Your words are not those of a Caballero.

Do you forget where you are, and in whose presence?  Is this a

fitting place to talk of thieves and Gypsies in?



MYSELF. - Really I know of no place more fitting, unless

it be the prison.  But we are wasting time, and I am anxious to

know for what I have been summoned; whether for crimes trivial

or enormous, as the messenger said.



It was a long time before I could obtain the required

information from the incensed corregidor; at last, however, it

came.  It appeared that a box of Testaments, which I had

despatched to Naval Carnero, had been seized by the local

authorities, and having been detained there for some time, was

at last sent back to Madrid, intended as it now appeared, for

the hands of the corregidor.  One day as it was lying at the

waggon-office, Antonio chanced to enter on some business of his

own and recognised the box, which he instantly claimed as my

property, and having paid the carriage, removed it to my

warehouse.  He had considered the matter as of so little

importance, that he had not as yet mentioned it to me.  The

poor corregidor, however, had no doubt that it was a deep-laid

scheme to plunder and insult him.  And now, working himself up

into almost a frenzy of excitement, he stamped on the ground,

exclaiming, "QUE PICARDIA!  QUE INFAMIA!"



The old system, thought I, of prejudging people and

imputing to them motives and actions of which they never

dreamed.  I then told him frankly that I was entirely ignorant

of the circumstance by which he had felt himself aggrieved; but

that if upon inquiry I found that the chest had actually been

removed by my servant from the office to which it had been

forwarded, I would cause it forthwith to be restored, although

it was my own property.  "I have plenty more Testaments," said

I, "and can afford to lose fifty or a hundred.  I am a man of

peace, and wish not to have any dispute with the authorities

for the sake of an old chest and a cargo of books, whose united

value would scarcely amount to forty dollars."



He looked at me for a moment, as if in doubt of my

sincerity, then, again plucking his whiskers, he forthwith

proceeded to attack me in another quarter: "PERO QUE INFAMIA,

QUE PICARDIA! to come into Spain for the purpose of overturning

the religion of the country.  What would you say if the

Spaniards were to go to England and attempt to overturn the

Lutheranism established there?"



"They would be most heartily welcome," I replied; "more

especially if they would attempt to do so by circulating the

Bible, the book of Christians, even as the English are doing in

Spain.  But your excellency is not perhaps aware that the Pope

has a fair field and fair play in England, and is permitted to

make as many converts from Lutheranism every day in the week as

are disposed to go over to him.  He cannot boast, however, of

much success; the people are too fond of light to embrace

darkness, and would smile at the idea of exchanging their

gospel privileges for the superstitious ceremonies and

observances of the church of Rome."



On my repeating my promise that the books and chest

should be forthwith restored, the corregidor declared himself

satisfied, and all of a sudden became excessively polite and

condescending: he even went so far as to say that he left it

entirely with myself, whether to return the books or not;

"and," continued he, "before you go, I wish to tell you that my

private opinion is, that it is highly advisable in all

countries to allow full and perfect tolerance in religious

matters, and to permit every religious system to stand or fall

according to its own merits."



Such were the concluding words of the corregidor of

Madrid, which, whether they expressed his private opinion or

not, were certainly grounded on sense and reason.  I saluted

him respectfully and retired, and forthwith performed my

promise with regard to the books; and thus terminated this

affair.



It almost appeared to me at this time, that a religious

reform was commencing in Spain; indeed, matters had of late

come to my knowledge, which, had they been prophesied only a

year before, I should have experienced much difficulty in

believing.



The reader will be surprised when I state that in two

churches of Madrid the New Testament was regularly expounded

every Sunday evening by the respective curates, to about twenty

children who attended, and who were all provided with copies of

the Society's edition of Madrid, 1837.  The churches which I

allude to, were those of San Gines and Santo Cruz.  Now I

humbly conceive that this fact alone is more than equivalent to

all the expense which the Society had incurred in the efforts

which it had been making to introduce the Gospel into Spain;

but be this as it may, I am certain that it amply recompensed

me for all the anxiety and unhappiness which I had undergone.

I now felt that whenever I should be compelled to discontinue

my labours in the Peninsula, I should retire without the

slightest murmur, my heart being filled with gratitude to the

Lord for having permitted me, useless vessel as I was, to see

at least some of the seed springing up, which during two years

I had been casting on the stony ground of the interior of

Spain.



When I recollected the difficulties which had encompassed

our path, I could sometimes hardly credit all that the Almighty

had permitted us to accomplish within the last year.  A large

edition of the New Testament had been almost entirely disposed

of in the very centre of Spain, in spite of the opposition and

the furious cry of the sanguinary priesthood and the edicts of

a deceitful government, and a spirit of religious inquiry

excited, which I had fervent hope would sooner or later lead to

blessed and most important results.  Till of late the name most

abhorred and dreaded in these parts of Spain, was that of

Martin Luther, who was in general considered as a species of

demon, a cousin-german to Belial and Beelzebub, who, under the

guise of a man, wrote and preached blasphemy against the

Highest; yet, now strange to say, this once abominated

personage was spoken of with no slight degree of respect.

People with Bibles in their hands not unfrequently visited me,

inquiring with much earnestness, and with no slight degree of

simplicity, for the writings of the great Doctor Martin, whom,

indeed, some supposed to be still alive.



It will be as well here to observe, that of all the names

connected with the Reformation, that of Luther is the only one

known in Spain; and let me add, that no controversial writings

but his are likely to be esteemed as possessing the slightest

weight or authority, however great their intrinsic merit may

be.  The common description of tracts, written with the view of

exposing the errors of popery, are therefore not calculated to

prove of much benefit in Spain, though it is probable that much

good might be accomplished by well-executed translations of

judicious selections from the works of Luther.

