






CHAPTER XVII







Cordova - Moors of Barbary - The English - An Old Priest -

The Roman Breviary - The Dovecote - The Holy Office - Judaism -

Desecration of Dovecotes - The Innkeeper's Proposal.





Little can be said with respect to the town of Cordova,

which is a mean dark gloomy place, full of narrow streets and

alleys, without squares or public buildings worthy of

attention, save and except its far-famed cathedral; its

situation, however, is beautiful and picturesque.  Before it

runs the Guadalquivir, which, though in this part shallow and

full of sandbanks, is still a delightful stream; whilst behind

it rise the steep sides of the Sierra Morena, planted up to the

top with olive groves.  The town or city is surrounded on all

sides by lofty Moorish walls, which may measure about three

quarters of a league in circumference; unlike Seville, and most

other towns in Spain, it has no suburbs.



I have said that Cordova has no remarkable edifices, save

its cathedral; yet this is perhaps the most extraordinary place

of worship in the world.  It was originally, as is well known,

a mosque, built in the brightest days of Arabian dominion in

Spain; in shape it was quadrangular, with a low roof, supported

by an infinity of small and delicately rounded marble pillars,

many of which still remain, and present at first sight the

appearance of a marble grove; the greater part, however, were

removed when the Christians, after the expulsion of the

Moslems, essayed to convert the mosque into a cathedral, which

they effected in part by the erection of a dome, and by

clearing an open space for a choir.  As it at present exists,

the temple appears to belong partly to Mahomet, and partly to

the Nazarene; and though this jumbling together of massive

Gothic architecture with the light and delicate style of the

Arabians produces an effect somewhat bizarre, it still remains

a magnificent and glorious edifice, and well calculated to

excite feelings of awe and veneration within the bosoms of

those who enter it.



The Moors of Barbary seem to care but little for the

exploits of their ancestors: their minds are centred in the

things of the present day, and only so far as those things

regard themselves individually.  Disinterested enthusiasm, that

truly distinguishing mark of a noble mind, and admiration for

what is great, good, and grand, they appear to be totally

incapable of feeling.  It is astonishing with what indifference

they stray amongst the relics of ancient Moorish grandeur in

Spain.  No feelings of exultation seem to be excited by the

proof of what the Moor once was, nor of regret at the

consciousness of what he now is.  More interesting to them are

their perfumes, their papouches, their dates, and their silks

of Fez and Maraks, to dispose of which they visit Andalusia;

and yet the generality of these men are far from being

ignorant, and have both heard and read of what was passing in

Spain in the old time.  I was once conversing with a Moor at

Madrid, with whom I was very intimate, about the Alhambra of

Granada, which he had visited.  "Did you not weep," said I,

"when you passed through the courts, and thought of the,

Abencerrages?"  "No," said he, "I did not weep; wherefore

should I weep?"  "And why did you visit the Alhambra?" I

demanded.  "I visited it," he replied, "because being at

Granada on my own affairs, one of your countrymen requested me

to accompany him thither, that I might explain some of the

inscriptions.  I should certainly not have gone of my own

accord, for the hill on which it stands is steep."  And yet

this man could compose verses, and was by no means a

contemptible poet.  Once at Cordova, whilst I was in the

cathedral, three Moors entered it, and proceeded slowly across

its floor in the direction of a gate, which stood at the

opposite side; they took no farther notice of what was around

them than by slightly glancing once or twice at the pillars,

one of them exclaiming, "HUAIJE DEL MSELMEEN, HUAIJE DEL

MSELMEEN" (things of the Moors, things of the Moors); and

showed no other respect for the place where Abderrahman the

Magnificent prostrated himself of old, than facing about on

arriving at the farther door and making their egress backwards;

yet these men were hajis and talebs, men likewise of much gold

and silver, men who had read, who had travelled, who had seen

Mecca, and the great city of Negroland.



I remained in Cordova much longer than I had originally

intended, owing to the accounts which I was continually hearing

of the unsafe state of the roads to Madrid.  I soon ransacked

every nook and cranny of this ancient town, formed various

acquaintances amongst the populace, which is my general

practice on arriving at a strange place.  I more than once

ascended the side of the Sierra Morena, in which excursions I

was accompanied by the son of my host, - the tall lad of whom I

have already spoken.  The people of the house, who had imbibed

the idea that I was of the same way of thinking as themselves,

were exceedingly courteous; it is true, that in return I was

compelled to listen to a vast deal of Carlism, in other words,

high treason against the ruling powers in Spain, to which,

however, I submitted with patience.  "Don Jorgito," said the

landlord to me one day, "I love the English; they are my best

customers.  It is a pity that there is not greater union

between Spain and England, and that more English do not visit

us.  Why should there not be a marriage?  The king will

speedily be at Madrid.  Why should there not be bodas between

the son of Don Carlos and the heiress of England?"



"It would certainly tend to bring a considerable number

of English to Spain," said I, "and it would not be the first

time that the son of a Carlos has married a Princess of

England."



The host mused for a moment, and then exclaimed,

"Carracho, Don Jorgito, if this marriage could be brought

about, both the king and myself should have cause to fling our

caps in the air."



The house or posada in which I had taken up my abode was

exceedingly spacious, containing an infinity of apartments,

both large and small, the greater part of which were, however,

unfurnished.  The chamber in which I was lodged stood at the

end of an immensely long corridor, of the kind so admirably

described in the wondrous tale of Udolfo.  For a day or two

after my arrival I believed myself to be the only lodger in the

house.  One morning, however, I beheld a strange-looking old

man seated in the corridor, by one of the windows, reading

intently in a small thick volume.  He was clad in garments of

coarse blue cloth, and wore a loose spencer over a waistcoat

adorned with various rows of small buttons of mother of pearl;

he had spectacles upon his nose.  I could perceive,

notwithstanding he was seated, that his stature bordered upon

the gigantic.  "Who is that person?" said I to the landlord,

whom I presently met; "is he also a guest of yours?"  "Not

exactly, Don Jorge de mi alma," replied he, "I can scarcely

call him a guest, inasmuch as I gain nothing by him, though he

is staying at my house.  You must know, Don Jorge, that he is

one of two priests who officiate at a large village at some

slight distance from this place.  So it came to pass, that when

the soldiers of Gomez entered the village, his reverence went

to meet them, dressed in full canonicals, with a book in his

hand, and he, at their bidding, proclaimed Carlos Quinto in the

market-place.  The other priest, however, was a desperate

liberal, a downright negro, and upon him the royalists laid

their hands, and were proceeding to hang him.  His reverence,

however, interfered, and obtained mercy for his colleague, on

condition that he should cry VIVA CARLOS QUINTO! which the

latter did in order to save his life.  Well; no sooner had the

royalists departed from these parts than the black priest

mounts his mule, comes to Cordova, and informs against his

reverence, notwithstanding that he had saved his life.  So his

reverence was seized and brought hither to Cordova, and would

assuredly have been thrown into the common prison as a Carlist,

had I not stepped forward and offered to be surety that he

should not quit the place, but should come forward at any time

to answer whatever charge might be brought against him; and he

is now in my house, though guest I cannot call him, for he is

not of the slightest advantage to me, as his very food is daily

brought from the country, and that consists only of a few eggs

and a little milk and bread.  As for his money, I have never

seen the colour of it, notwithstanding they tell me that he has

buenas pesetas.  However, he is a holy man, is continually

reading and praying and is, moreover, of the right opinion.  I

therefore keep him in my house, and would be bail for him were

he twenty times more of a skinflint than he seems to be."



The next day, as I was again passing through the

corridor, I observed the old man in the same place, and saluted

him.  He returned my salutation with much courtesy, and closing

the book, placed it upon his knee as if willing to enter into

conversation.  After exchanging a word or two, I took up the

book for the purpose of inspecting it.



"You will hardly derive much instruction from that book,

Don Jorge," said the old man; "you cannot understand it, for it

is not written in English."



"Nor in Spanish," I replied.  "But with respect to

understanding the book, I cannot see what difficulty there can

be in a thing so simple; it is only the Roman breviary written

in the Latin tongue."



"Do the English understand Latin?" exclaimed he.  "Vaya!

Who would have thought that it was possible for Lutherans to

understand the language of the church?  Vaya! the longer one

lives the more one learns."



"How old may your reverence be?" I inquired.



"I am eighty years, Don Jorge; eighty years, and somewhat

more."



Such was the first conversation which passed between his

reverence and myself.  He soon conceived no inconsiderable

liking for me, and favoured me with no little of his company.

Unlike our friend the landlord, I found him by no means

inclined to talk politics, which the more surprised me,

knowing, as I did, the decided and hazardous part which he had

taken on the late Carlist irruption into the neighbourhood.  He

took, however, great delight in discoursing on ecclesiastical

subjects and the writings of the fathers.



"I have got a small library at home, Don Jorge, which

consists of all the volumes of the fathers which I have been

able to pick up, and I find the perusal of them a source of

great amusement and comfort.  Should these dark days pass by,

Don Jorge, and you should be in these parts, I hope you will

look in upon me, and I will show you my little library of the

fathers, and likewise my dovecote, where I rear numerous broods

of pigeons, which are also a source of much solace and at the

same time of profit."



"I suppose by your dovecote," said I, "you mean your

parish, and by rearing broods of pigeons, you allude to the

care you take of the souls of your people, instilling therein

the fear of God, and obedience to his revealed law, which

occupation must of course afford you much solace and spiritual

profit."



"I was not speaking metaphorically, Don Jorge," replied

my companion; "and by rearing doves, I mean neither more nor

less than that I supply the market of Cordova with pigeons, and

occasionally that of Seville; for my birds are very celebrated,

and plumper or fatter flesh than theirs I believe cannot be

found in the whole kingdom.  Should you come into my village,

you will doubtless taste them, Don Jorge, at the venta where

you will put up, for I suffer no dovecotes but my own within my

district.  With respect to the souls of my parishioners, I

trust I do my duty - I trust I do, as far as in my power lies.

I always took great pleasure in these spiritual matters, and it

was on that account that I attached myself to the Santa Casa of

Cordova, the duties of which I assisted to perform for a long

period."



"Your reverence has been an inquisitor?" I exclaimed,

somewhat startled.



"From my thirtieth year until the time of the suppression

of the holy office in these afflicted kingdoms."



"You both surprise and delight me," I exclaimed.

"Nothing could have afforded me greater pleasure than to find

myself conversing with a father formerly attached to the holy

house of Cordova."



The old man looked at me steadfastly; "I understand you,

Don Jorge.  I have long seen that you are one of us.  You are a

learned and holy man; and though you think fit to call yourself

a Lutheran and an Englishman, I have dived into your real

condition.  No Lutheran would take the interest in church

matters which you do, and with respect to your being an

Englishman, none of that nation can speak Castilian, much less

Latin.  I believe you to be one of us - a missionary priest,

and I am especially confirmed in that idea by your frequent

conversations and interviews with the Gitanos; you appear to be

labouring among them.  Be, however, on your guard, Don Jorge,

trust not to Egyptian faith; they are evil penitents, whom I

like not.  I would not advise you to trust them."



"I do not intend," I replied; "especially with money.

But to return to more important matters: - of what crimes did

this holy house of Cordova take cognizance?"



"You are of course aware of the matters on which the holy

office exercises its functions.  I need scarcely mention

sorcery, Judaism, and certain carnal misdemeanours."



"With respect to sorcery," said I, "what is your opinion

of it?  Is there in reality such a crime?"



"QUE SE IO *?" said the old man, shrugging up his

shoulders.  "How should I know?  The church has power, Don

Jorge, or at least it had power, to punish for anything, real

or unreal; and as it was necessary to punish in order to prove

that it had the power of punishing, of what consequence whether

it punished for sorcery or any other crime."



* "How should I know?"



"Did many cases of sorcery occur within your own sphere

of knowledge?"



"One or two, Don Jorge; they were by no means frequent.

The last that I remember was a case which occurred in a convent

at Seville: a certain nun was in the habit of flying through

the windows and about the garden over the tops of the orange

trees; declarations of various witnesses were taken, and the

process was arranged with much formality; the fact, I believe,

was satisfactorily proved: of one thing I am certain, that the

nun was punished."



"Were you troubled with much Judaism in these parts?"



"Wooh!  Nothing gave so much trouble to the Santa Casa as

this same Judaism.  Its shoots and ramifications are numerous,

not only in these parts, but in all Spain; and it is singular

enough, that even among the priesthood, instances of Judaism of

both kinds were continually coming to our knowledge, which it

was of course our duty to punish."



"Is there more than one species of Judaism?" I demanded.



"I have always arranged Judaism under two heads," said

the old man, "the black and the white: by the black, I mean the

observance of the law of Moses in preference to the precepts of

the church; then there is the white Judaism, which includes all

kinds of heresy, such as Lutheranism, freemasonry, and the

like."



"I can easily conceive," said I, "that many of the

priesthood favoured the principles of the reformation, and that

the minds of not a few had been led astray by the deceitful

lights of modern philosophy, but it is almost inconceivable to

me that there should be Jews amongst the priesthood who follow

in secret the rites and observances of the old law, though I

confess that I have been assured of the fact ere now."



"Plenty of Judaism amongst the priesthood, whether of the

black or white species; no lack of it, I assure you, Don Jorge;

I remember once searching the house of an ecclesiastic who was

accused of the black Judaism, and after much investigation, we

discovered beneath the floor a wooden chest, in which was a

small shrine of silver, inclosing three books in black hogskin,

which, on being opened, were found to be books of Jewish

devotion, written in Hebrew characters, and of great antiquity;

and on being questioned, the culprit made no secret of his

guilt, but rather gloried in it, saying that there was no God

but one, and denouncing the adoration of Maria Santissima as

rank idolatry."



"And between ourselves, what is your own opinion of the

adoration of this same Maria Santissima?"



"What is my opinion!  QUE SE IO?" said the old man,

shrugging up his shoulders still higher than on the former

occasion; "but I will tell you; I think, on consideration, that

it is quite right and proper; why not?  Let any one pay a visit

to my church, and look at her as she stands there, TAN BONITA,

TAN GUAPITA - so well dressed and so genteel - with such pretty

colours, such red and white, and he would scarcely ask me why

Maria Santissima should not be adored.  Moreover, Don Jorgito

mio, this is a church matter and forms an important part of the

church system."



"And now, with respect to carnal misdemeanours.  Did you

take much cognizance of them?"



"Amongst the laity, not much; we, however, kept a

vigilant eye upon our own body, but, upon the whole, were

rather tolerant in these matters, knowing that the infirmities

of human nature are very great indeed: we rarely punished, save

in cases where the glory of the church and loyalty to Maria

Santissima made punishment absolutely imperative."



"And what cases might those be?" I demanded.



"I allude to the desecration of dovecotes, Don Jorge, and

the introduction therein of strange flesh, for purposes neither

seemly nor convenient."



"Your reverence will excuse me for not yet perfectly

understanding."



"I mean, Don Jorge, certain acts of flagitiousness

practised by the clergy in lone and remote palomares

(DOVECOTES) in olive grounds and gardens; actions denounced, I

believe, by the holy Pablo in his first letter to Pope Sixtus.

*  You understand me now, Don Jorge, for you are learned in

church matters."



* Qu. The Epistle to the Romans.



"I think I understand you," I replied.



After remaining several days more at Cordova, I

determined to proceed on my journey to Madrid, though the roads

were still said to be highly insecure.  I, however, saw but

little utility in tarrying and awaiting a more tranquil state

of affairs, which might never arrive.  I therefore consulted

with the landlord respecting the best means of making the

journey.  "Don Jorgito," he replied, "I think I can tell you.

You say you are anxious to depart, and I never wish to keep

guests in my house longer than is agreeable to them; to do so,

would not become a Christian inn-keeper: I leave such conduct

to Moors, Christinos, and Negroes.  I will further you on your

journey, Don Jorge: I have a plan in my head, which I had

resolved to propose to you before you questioned me.  There is

my wife's brother, who has two horses which he occasionally

lets out for hire; you shall hire them, Don Jorge, and he

himself shall attend you to take care of you, and to comfort

you, and to talk to you, and you shall pay him forty dollars

for the journey.  Moreover, as there are thieves upon the

route, and MALOS SUJETOS, such as Palillos and his family, you

shall make an engagement and a covenant, Don Jorge, that

provided you are robbed and stripped on the route, and the

horses of my wife's brother are taken from him by the thieves,

you shall, on arriving at Madrid, make good any losses to which

my wife's brother may be subject in following you.  This is my

plan, Don Jorge, which no doubt will meet with your worship's

approbation, as it is devised solely for your benefit, and not

with any view of lucre or interest either to me or mine.  You

will find my wife's brother pleasant company on the route: he

is a very respectable man, and one of the right opinion, and

has likewise travelled much; for between ourselves, Don Jorge,

he is something of a Contrabandista and frequently smuggles

diamonds and precious stones from Portugal, which he disposes

of sometimes in Cordova and sometimes at Madrid.  He is

acquainted with all the short cuts, all the atajos, Don Jorge,

and is much respected in all the ventas and posadas on the way;

so now give me your hand upon the bargain, and I will forthwith

repair to my wife's brother to tell him to get ready to set out

with your worship the day after to-morrow."
