






CHAPTER XLI







Maria Diaz - Priestly Vituperation - Antonio's Visit -

Antonio at Service - A Scene - Benedict Mol -

Wandering in Spain - The Four Evangiles.





"Well," said I to Maria Diaz on the third morning after

my imprisonment, "what do the people of Madrid say to this

affair of mine?"



"I do not know what the people of Madrid in general say

about it, probably they do not take much interest in it;

indeed, imprisonments at the present time are such common

matters that people seem to be quite indifferent to them; the

priests, however, are in no slight commotion, and confess that

they have committed an imprudent thing in causing you to be

arrested by their friend the corregidor of Madrid."



"How is that?" I inquired.  "Are they afraid that their

friend will be punished?"



"Not so, Senor," replied Maria; "slight grief indeed

would it cause them, however great the trouble in which he had

involved himself on their account; for this description of

people have no affection, and would not care if all their

friends were hanged, provided they themselves escaped.  But

they say that they have acted imprudently in sending you to

prison, inasmuch as by so doing they have given you an

opportunity of carrying a plan of yours into execution.  `This

fellow is a bribon,' say they, `and has commenced tampering

with the prisoners; they have taught him their language, which

he already speaks as well as if he were a son of the prison.

As soon as he comes out he will publish a thieves' gospel,

which will still be a more dangerous affair than the Gypsy one,

for the Gypsies are few, but the thieves! woe is us; we shall

all be Lutheranized.  What infamy, what rascality!  It was a

trick of his own.  He was always eager to get into prison, and

now in evil hour we have sent him there, EL BRIBONAZO; there

will be no safety for Spain until he is hanged; he ought to be

sent to the four hells, where at his leisure he might translate

his fatal gospels into the language of the demons.' "



"I but said three words to the alcayde of the prison,"

said I, "relative to the jargon used by the children of the

prison."



"Three words!  Don Jorge; and what may not be made out of

three words?  You have lived amongst us to little purpose if

you think we require more than three words to build a system

with: those three words about the thieves and their tongue were

quite sufficient to cause it to be reported throughout Madrid

that you had tampered with the thieves, had learnt their

language, and had written a book which was to overturn Spain,

open to the English the gates of Cadiz, give Mendizabal all the

church plate and jewels, and to Don Martin Luther the

archiepiscopal palace of Toledo."



Late in the afternoon of a rather gloomy day, as I was

sitting in the apartment which the alcayde had allotted me, I

heard a rap at the door.  "Who is that?" I exclaimed.  "C'EST

MOI, MON MAITRE," cried a well-known voice, and presently in

walked Antonio Buchini, dressed in the same style as when I

first introduced him to the reader, namely, in a handsome but

rather faded French surtout, vest and pantaloons, with a

diminutive hat in one hand, and holding in the other a long and

slender cane.



"BON JOUR, MON MAITRE," said the Greek; then glancing

around the apartment, he continued, "I am glad to find you so

well lodged.  If I remember right, mon maitre, we have slept in

worse places during our wanderings in Galicia and Castile."



"You are quite right, Antonio," I replied; "I am very

comfortable.  Well, this is kind of you to visit your ancient

master, more especially now he is in the toils; I hope,

however, that by so doing you will not offend your present

employer.  His dinner hour must be at hand; why are not you in

the kitchen?"



"Of what employer are you speaking, mon maitre?" demanded

Antonio.



"Of whom should I speak but Count -, to serve whom you

abandoned me, being tempted by an offer of a monthly salary

less by four dollars than that which I was giving you."



"Your worship brings an affair to my remembrance which I

had long since forgotten.  I have at present no other master

than yourself, Monsieur Georges, for I shall always consider

you as my master, though I may not enjoy the felicity of

waiting upon you."



"You have left the Count, then," said I, "after remaining

three days in the house, according to your usual practice."



"Not three hours, mon maitre," replied Antonio; "but I

will tell you the circumstances.  Soon after I left you I

repaired to the house of Monsieur le Comte; I entered the

kitchen, and looked about me.  I cannot say that I had much

reason to be dissatisfied with what I saw; the kitchen was

large and commodious, and every thing appeared neat and in its

proper place, and the domestics civil and courteous; yet I know

not how it was, the idea at once rushed into my mind that the

house was by no means suited to me, and that I was not destined

to stay there long; so hanging my haversac upon a nail, and

sitting down on the dresser, I commenced singing a Greek song,

as I am in the habit of doing when dissatisfied.  The domestics

came about me asking questions; I made them no answer, however,

and continued singing till the hour for preparing the dinner

drew nigh, when I suddenly sprang on the floor and was not long

in thrusting them all out of the kitchen, telling them that

they had no business there at such a season; I then at once

entered upon my functions.  I exerted myself, mon maitre, I

exerted myself, and was preparing a repast which would have

done me honour; there was, indeed, some company expected that

day, and I therefore determined to show my employer that

nothing was beyond the capacity of his Greek cook.  EH BIEN,

mon maitre, all was going on remarkably well, and I felt almost

reconciled to my new situation, when who should rush into the

kitchen but LE FILS DE LA MAISON, my young master, an ugly

urchin of thirteen years or thereabouts; he bore in his hand a

manchet of bread, which, after prying about for a moment, he

proceeded to dip in the pan where some delicate woodcocks were

in the course of preparation.  You know, mon maitre, how

sensitive I am on certain points, for I am no Spaniard but a

Greek, and have principles of honour.  Without a moment's

hesitation I took my young master by the shoulders, and

hurrying him to the door, dismissed him in the manner which he

deserved; squalling loudly, he hurried away to the upper part

of the house.  I continued my labours, but ere three minutes

had elapsed, I heard a dreadful confusion above stairs, ON

FAISOIT UNE HORRIBLE TINTAMARRE, and I could occasionally

distinguish oaths and execrations: presently doors were flung

open, and there was an awful rushing downstairs, a gallopade.

It was my lord the count, his lady, and my young master,

followed by a regular bevy of women and filles de chambre.  Far

in advance of all, however, was my lord with a drawn sword in

his hand, shouting, `Where is the wretch who has dishonoured my

son, where is he?  He shall die forthwith.'  I know not how it

was, mon maitre, but I just then chanced to spill a large bowl

of garbanzos, which were intended for the puchera of the

following day.  They were uncooked, and were as hard as

marbles; these I dashed upon the floor, and the greater part of

them fell just about the doorway.  EH BIEN, mon maitre, in

another moment in bounded the count, his eyes sparkling like

coals, and, as I have already said, with a rapier in his hand.

`TENEZ, GUEUX ENRAGE,' he screamed, making a desperate lunge at

me, but ere the words were out of his mouth, his foot slipping

on the pease, he fell forward with great violence at his full

length, and his weapon flew out of his hand, COMME UNE FLECHE.

You should have heard the outcry which ensued - there was a

terrible confusion: the count lay upon the floor to all

appearance stunned; I took no notice, however, continuing

busily employed.  They at last raised him up, and assisted him

till he came to himself, though very pale and much shaken.  He

asked for his sword: all eyes were now turned upon me, and I

saw that a general attack was meditated.  Suddenly I took a

large caserolle from the fire in which various eggs were

frying; this I held out at arm's length peering at it along my

arm as if I were curiously inspecting it; my right foot

advanced and the other thrown back as far as possible.  All

stood still, imagining, doubtless, that I was about to perform

some grand operation, and so I was; for suddenly the sinister

leg advancing, with one rapid COUP DE PIED, I sent the

caserolle and its contents flying over my head, so that they

struck the wall far behind me.  This was to let them know that

I had broken my staff and had shaken the dust off my feet; so

casting upon the count the peculiar glance of the Sceirote

cooks when they feel themselves insulted, and extending my

mouth on either side nearly as far as the ears, I took down my

haversac and departed, singing as I went the song of the

ancient Demos, who, when dying, asked for his supper, and water

wherewith to lave his hands:





[Greek text which cannot be reproduced]





And in this manner, mon maitre, I left the house of the

Count of - ."



MYSELF. - And a fine account you have given of yourself;

by your own confession, your behaviour was most atrocious.

Were it not for the many marks of courage and fidelity which

you have exhibited in my service, I would from this moment hold

no farther communication with you.



ANTONIO. - MAIS QU' EST CE QUE VOUS VOUDRIEZ, MON MAITRE?

Am I not a Greek, full of honour and sensibility?  Would you

have the cooks of Sceira and Stambul submit to be insulted here

in Spain by the sons of counts rushing into the temple with

manchets of bread.  Non, non, mon maitre, you are too noble to

require that, and what is more, TOO JUST.  But we will talk of

other things.  Mon maitre, I came not alone; there is one now

waiting in the corridor anxious to speak to you.



MYSELF. - Who is it?



ANTONIO. - One whom you have met, mon maitre, in various

and strange places.



MYSELF. - But who is it?



ANTONIO. - One who will come to a strange end, FOR SO IT

IS WRITTEN.  The most extraordinary of all the Swiss, he of

Saint James, - DER SCHATZ GRABER.



MYSELF. - Not Benedict Mol?



"YAW, MEIN LIEBER HERR," said Benedict, pushing open the

door which stood ajar; "it is myself.  I met Herr Anton in the

street, and hearing that you were in this place, I came with

him to visit you."



MYSELF. - And in the name of all that is singular, how is

it that I see you in Madrid again?  I thought that by this time

you were returned to your own country.



BENEDICT. - Fear not, lieber herr, I shall return thither

in good time; but not on foot, but with mules and coach.  The

schatz is still yonder, waiting to be dug up, and now I have

better hope than ever: plenty of friends, plenty of money.  See

you not how I am dressed, lieber herr?



And verily his habiliments were of a much more

respectable appearance than any which he had sported on former

occasions.  His coat and pantaloons, which were of light green,

were nearly new.  On his head he still wore an Andalusian hat,

but the present one was neither old nor shabby, but fresh and

glossy, and of immense altitude of cone: whilst in his hand,

instead of the ragged staff which I had observed at Saint James

and Oviedo, he now carried a huge bamboo rattan, surmounted by

the grim head of either a bear or lion, curiously cut out of

pewter.



"You have all the appearance of a treasure seeker

returned from a successful expedition," I exclaimed.



"Or rather," interrupted Antonio, "of one who has ceased

to trade on his own bottom, and now goes seeking treasures at

the cost and expense of others."



I questioned the Swiss minutely concerning his adventures

since I last saw him, when I left him at Oviedo to pursue my

route to Santander.  From his answers I gathered that he had

followed me to the latter place; he was, however, a long time

in performing the journey, being weak from hunger and

privation.  At Santander he could hear no tidings of me, and by

this time the trifle which he had received from me was

completely exhausted.  He now thought of making his way into

France, but was afraid to venture through the disturbed

provinces, lest he should fall into the hands of the Carlists,

who he conceived might shoot him as a spy.  No one relieving

him at Santander, he departed and begged his way till he found

himself in some part of Aragon, but where he scarcely knew.

"My misery was so great," said Bennet, "that I nearly lost my

senses.  Oh, the horror of wandering about the savage hills and

wide plains of Spain, without money and without hope!

Sometimes I became desperate, when I found myself amongst rocks

and barrancos, perhaps after having tasted no food from sunrise

to sunset, and then I would raise my staff towards the sky and

shake it, crying, lieber herr Gott, ach lieber herr Gott, you

must help me now or never; if you tarry, I am lost; you must

help me now, now!  And once when I was raving in this manner,

methought I heard a voice, nay I am sure I heard it, sounding

from the hollow of a rock, clear and strong; and it cried, `Der

schatz, der schatz, it is not yet dug up; to Madrid, to Madrid.

The way to the schatz is through Madrid.'  And then the thought

of the schatz once more rushed into my mind, and I reflected

how happy I might be, could I but dig up the schatz.  No more

begging, then, no more wandering amidst horrid mountains and

deserts; so I brandished my staff, and my body and my limbs

became full of new and surprising strength, and I strode

forward, and was not long before I reached the high road; and

then I begged and bettled as I best could, until I reached

Madrid."



"And what has befallen you since you reached Madrid?" I

inquired.  "Did you find the treasure in the streets?"



On a sudden Bennet became reserved and taciturn, which

the more surprised me, as, up to the present moment, he had at

all times been remarkably communicative with respect to his

affairs and prospects.  From what I could learn from his broken

hints and innuendoes, it appeared that, since his arrival at

Madrid, he had fallen into the hands of certain people who had

treated him with kindness, and provided him with both money and

clothes; not from disinterested motives, however, but having an

eye to the treasure.  "They expect great things from me," said

the Swiss; "and perhaps, after all, it would have been more

profitable to have dug up the treasure without their

assistance, always provided that were possible."  Who his new

friends were, he either knew not or would not tell me, save

that they were people in power.  He said something about Queen

Christina and an oath which he had taken in the presence of a

bishop on the crucifix and "the four Evangiles."  I thought

that his head was turned, and forbore questioning.  Just before

taking his departure, he observed "Lieber herr, pardon me for

not being quite frank towards you, to whom I owe so much, but I

dare not; I am not now my own man.  It is, moreover, an evil

thing at all times to say a word about treasure before you have

secured it.  There was once a man in my own country, who dug

deep into the earth until he arrived at a copper vessel which

contained a schatz.  Seizing it by the handle, he merely

exclaimed in his transport, `I have it'; that was enough,

however: down sank the kettle, though the handle remained in

his grasp.  That was all he ever got for his trouble and

digging.  Farewell, lieber herr, I shall speedily be sent back

to Saint James to dig up the schatz; but I will visit you ere I

go - farewell."
