






CHAPTER XXXVIII







The Prohibition - Gospel Persecuted - Charge of Sorcery - Ofalia.





About the middle of January a swoop was made upon me by

my enemies, in the shape of a peremptory prohibition from the

political governor of Madrid to sell any more New Testaments.

This measure by no means took me by surprise, as I had for some

time previously been expecting something of the kind, on

account of the political sentiments of the ministers then in

power.  I forthwith paid a visit to Sir George Villiers,

informing him of what had occurred.  He promised to do all he

could to cause the prohibition to be withdrawn.  Unfortunately

at this time he had not much influence, having opposed with all

his might the entrance of the moderado ministry to power, and

the nomination of Ofalia to the presidency of the cabinet.  I,

however, never lost confidence in the Almighty, in whose cause

I was engaged.



Matters were going on very well before this check.  The

demand for Testaments was becoming considerable, so much so,

that the clergy were alarmed, and this step was the

consequence.  But they had previously recourse to another, well

worthy of them, they attempted to act upon my fears.  One of

the ruffians of Madrid, called Manolos, came up to me one

night, in a dark street, and told me that unless I discontinued

selling my "Jewish books," I should have a knife "NAILED IN MY

HEART"; but I told him to go home, say his prayers, and tell

his employers that I pitied them; whereupon he turned away with

an oath.  A few days after, I received an order to send two

copies of the Testament to the office of the political

governor, with which I complied, and in less than twenty-four

hours an alguazil arrived at the shop with a notice prohibiting

the further sale of the work.



One circumstance rejoiced me.  Singular as it may appear,

the authorities took no measures to cause my little despacho to

be closed, and I received no prohibition respecting the sale of

any work but the New Testament, and as the Gospel of Saint

Luke, in Romany and Basque, would within a short time be ready

for delivery, I hoped to carry on matters in a small way till

better times should arrive.



I was advised to erase from the shop windows the words

"Despacho of the British and Foreign Bible Society."  This,

however, I refused to do.  Those words had tended very much to

call attention, which was my grand object.  Had I attempted to

conduct things in an underhand manner, I should, at the time of

which I am speaking, scarcely have sold thirty copies in

Madrid, instead of nearly three hundred.  People who know me

not, may be disposed to call me rash; but I am far from being

so, as I never adopt a venturous course when any other is open

to me.  I am not, however, a person to be terrified by any

danger, when I see that braving it is the only way to achieve

an object.



The booksellers were unwilling to sell my work; I was

compelled to establish a shop of my own.  Every shop in Madrid

has a name.  What name could I give it but the true one?  I was

not ashamed of my cause or my colours.  I hoisted them, and

fought beneath them not without success.



The priestly party in Madrid, in the meantime, spared no

effort to vilify me.  They started a publication called THE

FRIEND OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION, in which a stupid but furious

attack upon me appeared, which I, however, treated with the

contempt it deserved.  But not satisfied with this, they

endeavoured to incite the populace against me, by telling them

that I was a sorcerer, and a companion of Gypsies and witches,

and their agents even called me so in the streets.  That I was

an associate of Gypsies and fortune-tellers I do not deny.  Why

should I be ashamed of their company when my Master mingled

with publicans and thieves?  Many of the Gypsy race came

frequently to visit me; received instruction, and heard parts

of the Gospel read to them in their own language, and when they

were hungry and faint, I gave them to eat and drink.  This

might be deemed sorcery in Spain, but I am not without hope

that it will be otherwise estimated in England, and had I

perished at this period, I think there are some who would have

been disposed to acknowledge that I had not lived altogether in

vain (always as an instrument of the "Most Highest"), having

been permitted to turn one of the most valuable books of God

into the speech of the most degraded of his creatures.



In the meantime I endeavoured to enter into negotiations

with the ministry, for the purpose of obtaining permission to

sell the New Testament in Madrid, and the nullification of the

prohibition.  I experienced, however, great opposition, which I

was unable to surmount.  Several of the ultra-popish bishops,

then resident in Madrid, had denounced the Bible, the Bible

Society, and myself.  Nevertheless, notwithstanding their

powerful and united efforts, they were unable to effect their

principal object, namely, my expulsion from Madrid and Spain.

The Count Ofalia, notwithstanding he had permitted himself to

be made the instrument, to a certain extent, of these people,

would not consent to be pushed to such a length.  Throughout

this affair, I cannot find words sufficiently strong to do

justice to the zeal and interest which Sir George Villiers

displayed in the cause of the Testament.  He had various

interviews with Ofalia on the subject, and in these he

expressed to him his sense of the injustice and tyranny which

had been practised in this instance towards his countryman.



Ofalia had been moved by these remonstrances, and more

than once promised to do all in his power to oblige Sir George;

but then the bishops again beset him, and playing upon his

political if not religious fears, prevented him from acting a

just, honest, and honourable part.  At the desire of Sir George

Villiers, I drew up a brief account of the Bible Society, and

an exposition of its views, especially in respect to Spain,

which he presented with his own hands to the Count.  I shall

not trouble the reader by inserting this memorial, but content

myself with observing, that I made no attempts to flatter and

cajole, but expressed myself honestly and frankly, as a

Christian ought.  Ofalia, on reading it, said, "What a pity

that this is a Protestant society, and that all its members are

not Catholics."



A few days subsequently, to my great astonishment, he

sent a message to me by a friend, requesting that I would send

him a copy of my Gypsy Gospel.  I may as well here state, that

the fame of this work, though not yet published, had already

spread like wildfire through Madrid, and every person was

passionately eager to possess a copy; indeed, several grandees

of Spain sent messages with similar requests, all of which I

however denied.  I instantly resolved to take advantage of this

overture on the part of Count Ofalia, and to call on him

myself.  I therefore caused a copy of the Gospel to be

handsomely bound, and proceeding to the palace, was instantly

admitted to him.  He was a dusky, diminutive person, between

fifty and sixty years of age, with false hair and teeth, but

exceedingly gentlemanly manners.  He received me with great

affability, and thanked me for my present; but on my proceeding

to speak of the New Testament, he told me that the subject was

surrounded with difficulties, and that the great body of the

clergy had taken up the matter against me; he conjured me,

however, to be patient and peaceable, in which case he said he

would endeavour to devise some plan to satisfy me.  Amongst

other things, he observed that the bishops hated a sectarian

more than an Atheist.  Whereupon I replied, that, like the

Pharisees of old, they cared more for the gold of the temple

than the temple itself.  Throughout the whole of our interview

he evidently laboured under great fear, and was continually

looking behind and around him, seemingly in dread of being

overheard, which brought to my mind an expression of a friend

of mine, that if there be any truth in metempsychosis, the soul

of Count Ofalia must have originally belonged to a mouse.  We

parted in kindness, and I went away, wondering by what strange

chance this poor man had become prime minister of a country

like Spain.
