








CHAPTER XXXIX







The Two Gospels - The Alguazil - The Warrant - The Good Maria -

The Arrest - Sent to Prison - Reflections - The Reception -

The Prison Room - Redress Demanded.





At length the Gospel of Saint Luke in the Gypsy language

was in a state of readiness.  I therefore deposited a certain

number of copies in the despacho, and announced them for sale.

The Basque, which was by this time also printed, was likewise

advertised.  For this last work there was little demand.  Not

so, however, for the Gypsy Luke, of which I could have easily

disposed of the whole edition in less than a fortnight.  Long,

however, before this period had expired, the clergy were up in

arms.  "Sorcery!" said one bishop.  "There is more in this than

we can dive into," exclaimed a second.  "He will convert all

Spain by means of the Gypsy language," cried a third.  And then

came the usual chorus on such occasions, of QUE INFAMIA!  QUE

PICARDIA!  At last, having consulted together, away they

hurried to their tool the corregidor, or, according to the

modern term, the gefe politico of Madrid.  I have forgotten the

name of this worthy, of whom I had myself no personal knowledge

whatever.  Judging from his actions, however, and from common

report, I should say that he was a stupid wrong-headed

creature, savage withal - a melange of borrico, mule, and wolf.

Having an inveterate antipathy to all foreigners, he lent a

willing ear to the complaint of my accusers, and forthwith gave

orders to make a seizure of all the copies of the Gypsy Gospel

which could be found in the despacho.  The consequence was,

that a numerous body of alguazils directed their steps to the

Calle del principe; some thirty copies of the book in question

were pounced upon, and about the same number of Saint Luke in

Basque.  With this spoil these satellites returned in triumph

to the gefatura politica, where they divided the copies of the

Gypsy volume amongst themselves, selling subsequently the

greater number at a large price, the book being in the greatest

demand, and thus becoming unintentionally agents of an

heretical society.  But every one must live by his trade, say

these people, and they lose no opportunity of making their

words good, by disposing to the best advantage of any booty

which falls into their hands.  As no person cared about the

Basque Gospel, it was safely stowed away, with other

unmarketable captures, in the warehouses of the office.



The Gypsy Gospels had now been seized, at least as many

as were exposed for sale in the despacho.  The corregidor and

his friends, however, were of opinion that many more might be

obtained by means of a little management.  Fellows, therefore,

hangers-on of the police office, were daily dispatched to the

shop in all kinds of disguises, inquiring, with great seeming

anxiety, for "Gypsy books," and offering high prices for

copies.  They, however, returned to their employers empty-

handed.  My Gallegan was on his guard, informing all who made

inquiries, that books of no description would be sold at the

establishment for the present.  Which was in truth the case, as

I had given him particular orders to sell no more under any

pretence whatever.



I got no credit, however, for my frank dealing.  The

corregidor and his confederates could not persuade themselves

but that by some means mysterious and unknown to them, I was

daily selling hundreds of these Gypsy books, which were to

revolutionize the country, and annihilate the power of the

Father of Rome.  A plan was therefore resolved upon, by means

of which they hoped to have an opportunity of placing me in a

position which would incapacitate me for some time from taking

any active measures to circulate the Scriptures, either in

Gypsy or in any other language.



It was on the morning of the first of May, if I forget

not, that an unknown individual made his appearance in my

apartment as I was seated at breakfast; he was a mean-looking

fellow, about the middle stature, with a countenance on which

knave was written in legible characters.  The hostess ushered

him in, and then withdrew.  I did not like the appearance of my

visitor, but assuming some degree of courtesy, I requested him

to sit down, and demanded his business.  "I come from his

excellency the political chief of Madrid," he replied, "and my

business is to inform you that his excellency is perfectly

aware of your proceedings, and is at any time able to prove

that you are still disposing of in secret those evil books

which you have been forbidden to sell."  "Is he so," I replied;

"pray let him do so forthwith, but what need of giving me

information?"  "Perhaps," continued the fellow, "you think his

worship has no witnesses; know, however, that he has many, and

respectable ones too."  "Doubtless," I replied, "and from the

respectability of your own appearance, you are perhaps one of

them.  But you are occupying my time unprofitably; begone,

therefore, and tell whoever sent you, that I have by no means a

high opinion of his wisdom."  "I shall go when I please,"

retorted the fellow; "do you know to whom you are speaking?

Are you aware that if I think fit I can search your apartment,

yes, even below your bed?  What have we here," he continued;

and commenced with his stick poking a heap of papers which lay

upon a chair; "what have we here; are these also papers of the

Gypsies?"  I instantly determined upon submitting no longer to

this behaviour, and taking the fellow by the arm, led him out

of the apartment, and then still holding him, conducted him

downstairs from the third floor in which I lived, into the

street, looking him steadfastly in the face the whole while.



The fellow had left his sombrero on the table, which I

dispatched to him by the landlady, who delivered it into his

hand as he stood in the street staring with distended eyes at

the balcony of my apartment.



"A trampa has been laid for you, Don Jorge," said Maria

Diaz, when she had reascended from the street; "that corchete

came here with no other intention than to have a dispute with

you; out of every word you have said he will make a long

history, as is the custom with these people: indeed he said, as

I handed him his hat, that ere twenty-four hours were over, you

should see the inside of the prison of Madrid."



In effect, during the course of the morning, I was told

that a warrant had been issued for my apprehension.  The

prospect of incarceration, however, did not fill me with much

dismay; an adventurous life and inveterate habits of wandering

having long familiarized me to situations of every kind, so

much so as to feel myself quite as comfortable in a prison as

in the gilded chamber of palaces; indeed more so, as in the

former place I can always add to my store of useful

information, whereas in the latter, ennui frequently assails

me.  I had, moreover, been thinking for some time past of

paying a visit to the prison, partly in the hope of being able

to say a few words of Christian instruction to the criminals,

and partly with the view of making certain investigations in

the robber language of Spain, a subject about which I had long

felt much curiosity; indeed, I had already made application for

admittance into the Carcel de la Corte, but had found the

matter surrounded with difficulties, as my friend Ofalia would

have said.  I rather rejoiced then in the opportunity which was

now about to present itself of entering the prison, not in the

character of a visitor for an hour, but as a martyr, and as one

suffering in the holy cause of religion.  I was determined,

however, to disappoint my enemies for that day at least, and to

render null the threat of the alguazil, that I should be

imprisoned within twenty-four hours.  I therefore took up my

abode for the rest of the day in a celebrated French tavern in

the Calle del Caballero de Gracia, which, as it was one of the

most fashionable and public places in Madrid, I naturally

concluded was one of the last where the corregidor would think

of seeking me.



About ten at night, Maria Diaz, to whom I had

communicated the place of my retreat, arrived with her son,

Juan Lopez.  "O senor," said she on seeing me, "they are

already in quest of you; the alcalde of the barrio, with a

large comitiva of alguazils and such like people, have just

been at our house with a warrant for your imprisonment from the

corregidor.  They searched the whole house, and were much

disappointed at not finding you.  Wo is me, what will they do

when they catch you?"  "Be under no apprehensions, good Maria,"

said I; "you forget that I am an Englishman, and so it seems

does the corregidor.  Whenever he catches me, depend upon it he

will be glad enough to let me go.  For the present, however, we

will permit him to follow his own course, for the spirit of

folly seems to have seized him."



I slept at the tavern, and in the forenoon of the

following day repaired to the embassy, where I had an interview

with Sir George, to whom I related every circumstance of the

affair.  He said that he could scarcely believe that the

corregidor entertained any serious intentions of imprisoning

me: in the first place, because I had committed no offence; and

in the second, because I was not under the jurisdiction of that

functionary, but under that of the captain-general, who was

alone empowered to decide upon matters which relate to

foreigners, and before whom I must be brought in the presence

of the consul of my nation.  "However," said he, "there is no

knowing to what length these jacks in office may go.  I

therefore advise you, if you are under any apprehension, to

remain as my guest at the embassy for a few days, for here you

will be quite safe."  I assured him that I was under no

apprehension whatever, having long been accustomed to

adventures of this kind.  From the apartment of Sir George, I

proceeded to that of the first secretary of embassy, Mr.

Southern, with whom I entered into conversation.  I had

scarcely been there a minute when my servant Francisco rushed

in, much out of breath, and in violent agitation, exclaiming in

Basque, "Niri jauna (MASTER MINE), the alguaziloac and the

corchetoac, and all the other lapurrac (THIEVES) are again at

the house.  They seem half mad, and not being able to find you,

are searching your papers, thinking, I suppose, that you are

hid among them."  Mr. Southern here interrupting him, inquired

of me what all this meant.  Whereupon I told him, saying at the

same time, that it was my intention to proceed at once to my

lodgings.  "But perhaps these fellows will arrest you," said

Mr. S., "before we can interfere."  "I must take my chance as

to that," I replied, and presently afterwards departed.



Ere, however, I had reached the middle of the street of

Alcala, two fellows came up to me, and telling me that I was

their prisoner, commanded me to follow them to the office of

the corregidor.  They were in fact alguazils, who, suspecting

that I might enter or come out of the embassy, had stationed

themselves in the neighbourhood.  I instantly turned round to

Francisco, and told him in Basque to return to the embassy and

to relate there to the secretary what had just occurred.  The

poor fellow set off like lightning, turning half round,

however, to shake his fist, and to vent a Basque execration at

the two lapurrac, as he called the alguazils.



They conducted me to the gefatura or office of the

corregidor, where they ushered me into a large room, and

motioned me to sit down on a wooden bench.  They then stationed

themselves on each side of me: there were at least twenty

people in the apartment beside ourselves, evidently from their

appearance officials of the establishment.  They were all well

dressed, for the most part in the French fashion, in round

hats, coats, and pantaloons, and yet they looked what in

reality they were, Spanish alguazils, spies, and informers, and

Gil Blas, could he have waked from his sleep of two centuries,

would, notwithstanding the change of fashion, have had no

difficulty in recognizing them.  They glanced at me as they

stood lounging about the room; they gathered themselves

together in a circle and began conversing in whispers.  I heard

one of them say, "he understands the seven Gypsy jargons."

Then presently another, evidently from his language an

Andalusian, said, "ES MUY DIESTRO (he is very skilful), and can

ride a horse and dart a knife full as well as if he came from

my own country."  Thereupon they all turned round and regarded

me with a species of interest, evidently mingled with respect,

which most assuredly they would not have exhibited had they

conceived that I was merely an honest man bearing witness in a

righteous cause.



I waited patiently on the bench at least one hour,

expecting every moment to be summoned before my lord the

corregidor.  I suppose, however, that I was not deemed worthy

of being permitted to see so exalted a personage, for at the

end of that time, an elderly man, one however evidently of the

alguazil genus, came into the room and advanced directly

towards me.  "Stand up," said he.  I obeyed.  "What is your

name?" he demanded.  I told him.  "Then," he replied,

exhibiting a paper which he held in his hand, "Senor, it is the

will of his excellency the corregidor that you be forthwith

sent to prison."



He looked at me steadfastly as he spoke, perhaps

expecting that I should sink into the earth at the formidable

name of prison; I however only smiled.  He then delivered the

paper, which I suppose was the warrant for my committal, into

the hand of one of my two captors, and obeying a sign which

they made, I followed them.



I subsequently learned that the secretary of legation,

Mr. Southern, had been dispatched by Sir George, as soon as the

latter had obtained information of my arrest, and had been

waiting at the office during the greater part of the time that

I was there.  He had demanded an audience of the corregidor, in

which he had intended to have remonstrated with him, and

pointed out to him the danger to which he was subjecting

himself by the rash step which he was taking.  The sullen

functionary, however, had refused to see him, thinking,

perhaps, that to listen to reason would be a dereliction of

dignity: by this conduct, however, he most effectually served

me, as no person, after such a specimen of uncalled-for

insolence, felt disposed to question the violence and injustice

which had been practised towards me.



The alguazils conducted me across the Plaza Mayor to the

Carcel de la Corte, or prison of the court, as it is called.

Whilst going across the square, I remembered that this was the

place where, in "the good old times," the Inquisition of Spain

was in the habit of holding its solemn AUTOS DA FE, and I cast

my eye to the balcony of the city hall, where at the most

solemn of them all, the last of the Austrian line in Spain sat,

and after some thirty heretics, of both sexes, had been burnt

by fours and by fives, wiped his face, perspiring with heat,

and black with smoke, and calmly inquired, "No hay mas?" for

which exemplary proof of patience he was much applauded by his

priests and confessors, who subsequently poisoned him.  "And

here am I," thought I, "who have done more to wound Popery,

than all the poor Christian martyrs that ever suffered in this

accursed square, merely sent to prison, from which I am sure to

be liberated in a few days, with credit and applause.  Pope of

Rome! I believe you to be as malicious as ever, but you are

sadly deficient in power.  You are become paralytic, Batuschca,

and your club has degenerated to a crutch."



We arrived at the prison, which stands in a narrow street

not far from the great square.  We entered a dusky passage, at

the end of which was a wicket door.  My conductors knocked, a

fierce visage peered through the wicket; there was an exchange

of words, and in a few moments I found myself within the prison

of Madrid, in a kind of corridor which overlooked at a

considerable altitude what appeared to be a court, from which

arose a hubbub of voices, and occasionally wild shouts and

cries.  Within the corridor which served as a kind of office,

were several people; one of them sat behind a desk, and to him

the alguazils went up, and after discoursing with him some time

in low tones, delivered the warrant into his hands.  He perused

it with attention, then rising he advanced to me.  What a

figure!  He was about forty years of age, and his height might

have amounted to some six feet two inches, had he not been

curved much after the fashion of the letter S.  No weazel ever

appeared lanker, and he looked as if a breath of air would have

been sufficient to blow him away; his face might certainly have

been called handsome, had it not been for its extraordinary and

portentous meagreness; his nose was like an eagle's bill, his

teeth white as ivory, his eyes black (Oh how black!) and

fraught with a strange expression, his skin was dark, and the

hair of his head like the plumage of the raven.  A deep quiet

smile dwelt continually on his features; but with all the quiet

it was a cruel smile, such a one as would have graced the

countenance of a Nero.  "MAIS EN REVANCHE PERSONNE N'ETOIT PLUS

HONNETE."  "Caballero," said he, "allow me to introduce myself

to you as the alcayde of this prison.  I perceive by this paper

that I am to have the honour of your company for a time, a

short time doubtless, beneath this roof; I hope you will banish

every apprehension from your mind.  I am charged to treat you

with all the respect which is due to the illustrious nation to

which you belong, and which a cavalier of such exalted category

as yourself is entitled to expect.  A needless charge, it is

true, as I should only have been too happy of my own accord to

have afforded you every comfort and attention.  Caballero, you

will rather consider yourself here as a guest than a prisoner;

you will be permitted to roam over every part of this house

whenever you think proper.  You will find matters here not

altogether below the attention of a philosophic mind!  Pray,

issue whatever commands you may think fit to the turnkeys and

officials, even as if they were your own servants.  I will now

have the honour of conducting you to your apartment - the only

one at present unoccupied.  We invariably reserve it for

cavaliers of distinction.  I am happy to say that my orders are

again in consonance with my inclination.  No charge whatever

will be made for it to you, though the daily hire of it is not

unfrequently an ounce of gold.  I entreat you, therefore, to

follow me, cavalier, who am at all times and seasons the most

obedient and devoted of your servants."  Here he took off his

hat and bowed profoundly.



Such was the speech of the alcayde of the prison of

Madrid; a speech delivered in pure sonorous Castilian, with

calmness, gravity, and almost with dignity; a speech which

would have done honour to a gentleman of high birth, to

Monsieur Basompierre, of the Old Bastile, receiving an Italian

prince, or the high constable of the Tower an English duke

attainted of high treason.  Now, who in the name of wonder was

this alcayde?



One of the greatest rascals in all Spain.  A fellow who

had more than once by his grasping cupidity, and by his

curtailment of the miserable rations of the prisoners, caused

an insurrection in the court below only to be repressed by

bloodshed, and by summoning military aid; a fellow of low

birth, who, only five years previous, had been DRUMMER to a

band of royalist volunteers!



But Spain is the land of extraordinary characters.



I followed the alcayde to the end of the corridor, where

was a massive grated door, on each side of which sat a grim

fellow of a turnkey.  The door was opened, and turning to the

right we proceeded down another corridor, in which were many

people walking about, whom I subsequently discovered to be

prisoners like myself, but for political offences.  At the end

of this corridor, which extended the whole length of the patio,

we turned into another, and the first apartment in this was the

one destined for myself.  It was large and lofty, but totally

destitute of every species of furniture, with the exception of

a huge wooden pitcher, intended to hold my daily allowance of

water.  "Caballero," said the alcayde, "the apartment is

without furniture, as you see.  It is already the third hour of

the tarde, I therefore advise you to lose no time in sending to

your lodgings for a bed and whatever you may stand in need of,

the llavero here shall do your bidding.  Caballero, adieu till

I see you again."



I followed his advice, and writing a note in pencil to

Maria Diaz, I dispatched it by the llavero, and then sitting

down on the wooden pitcher, I fell into a reverie, which

continued for a considerable time.



Night arrived, and so did Maria Diaz, attended by two

porters and Francisco, all loaded with furniture.  A lamp was

lighted, charcoal was kindled in the brasero, and the prison

gloom was to a certain degree dispelled.



I now left my seat on the pitcher, and sitting down on a

chair, proceeded to dispatch some wine and viands, which my

good hostess had not forgotten to bring with her.  Suddenly Mr.

Southern entered.  He laughed heartily at finding me engaged in

the manner I have described.  "B-," said he, "you are the man

to get through the world, for you appear to take all things

coolly, and as matters of course.  That, however, which most

surprises me with respect to you is, your having so many

friends; here you are in prison, surrounded by people

ministering to your comforts.  Your very servant is your

friend, instead of being your worst enemy, as is usually the

case.  That Basque of yours is a noble fellow.  I shall never

forget how he spoke for you, when he came running to the

embassy to inform us of your arrest.  He interested both Sir

George and myself in the highest degree: should you ever wish

to part with him, I hope you will give me the refusal of his

services.  But now to other matters."  He then informed me that

Sir George had already sent in an official note to Ofalia,

demanding redress for such a wanton outrage on the person of a

British subject.  "You must remain in prison," said he, "to-

night, but depend upon it that to-morrow, if you are disposed,

you may quit in triumph."  "I am by no means disposed for any

such thing," I replied.  "They have put me in prison for their

pleasure, and I intend to remain here for my own."  "If the

confinement is not irksome to you," said Mr. Southern, "I

think, indeed, it will be your wisest plan; the government have

committed themselves sadly with regard to you; and, to speak

plainly, we are by no means sorry for it.  They have on more

than one occasion treated ourselves very cavalierly, and we

have now, if you continue firm, an excellent opportunity of

humbling their insolence.  I will instantly acquaint Sir George

with your determination, and you shall hear from us early on

the morrow."  He then bade me farewell; and flinging myself on

my bed, I was soon asleep in the prison of Madrid.

