





CHAPTER IX







Badajoz - Antonio the Gypsy - Antonio's Proposal - The Proposal Accepted -

Gypsy Breakfast - Departure from Badajoz - The Gypsy Donkey - Merida -

The Ruined Wall - The Crone - The Land of the Moor - The Black Men -

Life in the Desert - The Supper.





I was now at Badajoz in Spain, a country which for the

next four years was destined to be the scene of my labour: but

I will not anticipate.  The neighbourhood of Badajoz did not

prepossess me much in favour of the country which I had just

entered; it consists chiefly of brown moors, which bear little

but a species of brushwood, called in Spanish CARRASCO; blue

mountains are however seen towering up in the far distance,

which relieve the scene from the monotony which would otherwise

pervade it.



It was at this town of Badajoz, the capital of

Estremadura, that I first fell in with those singular people,

the Zincali, Gitanos, or Spanish gypsies.  It was here I met

with the wild Paco, the man with the withered arm, who wielded

the cachas (SHEARS) with his left hand; his shrewd wife,

Antonia, skilled in hokkano baro, or the great trick; the

fierce gypsy, Antonio Lopez, their father-in-law; and many

other almost equally singular individuals of the Errate, or

gypsy blood.  It was here that I first preached the gospel to

the gypsy people, and commenced that translation of the New

Testament in the Spanish gypsy tongue, a portion of which I

subsequently printed at Madrid.



After a stay of three weeks at Badajoz, I prepared to

depart for Madrid: late one afternoon, as I was arranging my

scanty baggage, the gypsy Antonio entered my apartment, dressed

in his zamarra and high-peaked Andalusian hat.



ANTONIO. - Good evening, brother; they tell me that on

the callicaste (DAY AFTER TO-MORROW) you intend to set out for

Madrilati.



MYSELF. - Such is my intention; I can stay here no

longer.



ANTONIO. - The way is far to Madrilati: there are,

moreover, wars in the land and many chories (THIEVES) walk

about; are you not afraid to journey?



MYSELF. - I have no fears; every man must accomplish his

destiny: what befalls my body or soul was written in a gabicote

(BOOK) a thousand years before the foundation of the world.



ANTONIO. - I have no fears myself, brother; the dark

night is the same to me as the fair day, and the wild carrascal

as the market-place or the chardy (FAIR); I have got the bar

lachi in my bosom, the precious stone to which sticks the

needle.



MYSELF. - You mean the loadstone, I suppose.  Do you

believe that a lifeless stone can preserve you from the dangers

which occasionally threaten your life?



ANTONIO. - Brother, I am fifty years old, and you see me

standing before you in life and strength; how could that be

unless the bar lachi had power?  I have been soldier and

contrabandista, and I have likewise slain and robbed the Busne.

The bullets of the Gabine (FRENCH) and of the jara canallis

(REVENUE OFFICERS) have hissed about my ears without injuring

me, for I carried the bar lachi.  I have twenty times done that

which by Busnee law should have brought me to the filimicha

(GALLOWS), yet my neck has never yet been squeezed by the cold

garrote.  Brother, I trust in the bar lachi, like the Calore of

old: were I in the midst of the gulph of Bombardo (LYONS),

without a plank to float upon, I should feel no fear; for if I

carried the precious stone, it would bring me safe to shore:

the bar lachi has power, brother.



MYSELF. - I shall not dispute the matter with you, more

especially as I am about to depart from Badajoz: I must

speedily bid you farewell, and we shall see each other no more.



ANTONIO. - Brother, do you know what brings me hither?



MYSELF. - I cannot tell, unless it be to wish me a happy

journey: I am not gypsy enough to interpret the thoughts of

other people.



ANTONIO. - All last night I lay awake, thinking of the

affairs of Egypt; and when I arose in the morning I took the

bar lachi from my bosom, and scraping it with a knife,

swallowed some of the dust in aguardiente, as I am in the habit

of doing when I have made up my mind; and I said to myself, I

am wanted on the frontiers of Castumba (CASTILE) on a certain

matter.  The strange Caloro is about to proceed to Madrilati;

the journey is long, and he may fall into evil hands,

peradventure into those of his own blood; for let me tell you,

brother, the Cales are leaving their towns and villages, and

forming themselves into troops to plunder the Busne, for there

is now but little law in the land, and now or never is the time

for the Calore to become once more what they were in former

times; so I said, the strange Caloro may fall into the hands of

his own blood and be ill-treated by them, which were shame: I

will therefore go with him through the Chim del Manro

(ESTREMADURA) as far as the frontiers of Castumba, and upon the

frontiers of Castumba I will leave the London Caloro to find

his own way to Madrilati, for there is less danger in Castumba

than in the Chim del Manro, and I will then betake me to the

affairs of Egypt which call me from hence.



MYSELF. - This is a very hopeful plan of yours, my

friend; and in what manner do you propose that we shall travel?



ANTONIO. - I will tell you, brother; I have a gras in the

stall, even the one which I purchased at Olivencas, as I told

you on a former occasion; it is good and fleet, and cost me,

who am a gypsy, fifty chule (DOLLARS); upon that gras you shall

ride.  As for myself, I will journey upon the macho.



MYSELF. - Before I answer you, I shall wish you to inform

me what business it is which renders your presence necessary in

Castumba; your son-in-law, Paco, told me that it was no longer

the custom of the gypsies to wander.



ANTONIO. - It is an affair of Egypt, brother, and I shall

not acquaint you with it; peradventure it relates to a horse or

an ass, or peradventure it relates to a mule or a macho; it

does not relate to yourself, therefore I advise you not to

inquire about it - Dosta (ENOUGH).  With respect to my offer,

you are free to decline it; there is a drungruje (ROYAL ROAD)

between here and Madrilati, and you can travel it in the

birdoche (STAGE-COACH) or with the dromale (MULETEERS); but I

tell you, as a brother, that there are chories upon the drun,

and some of them are of the Errate.



Certainly few people in my situation would have accepted

the offer of this singular gypsy.  It was not, however, without

its allurements for me; I was fond of adventure, and what more

ready means of gratifying my love of it than by putting myself

under the hands of such a guide.  There are many who would have

been afraid of treachery, but I had no fears on this point, as

I did not believe that the fellow harboured the slightest ill

intention towards me; I saw that he was fully convinced that I

was one of the Errate, and his affection for his own race, and

his hatred for the Busne, were his strongest characteristics.

I wished, moreover, to lay hold of every opportunity of making

myself acquainted with the ways of the Spanish gypsies, and an

excellent one here presented itself on my first entrance into

Spain.  In a word, I determined to accompany the gypsy.  "I

will go with you," I exclaimed; "as for my baggage, I will

despatch it to Madrid by the birdoche."  "Do so, brother," he

replied, "and the gras will go lighter.  Baggage, indeed! -

what need of baggage have you?  How the Busne on the road would

laugh if they saw two Cales with baggage behind them."



During my stay at Badajoz, I had but little intercourse

with the Spaniards, my time being chiefly devoted to the

gypsies, with whom, from long intercourse with various sections

of their race in different parts of the world, I felt myself

much more at home than with the silent, reserved men of Spain,

with whom a foreigner might mingle for half a century without

having half a dozen words addressed to him, unless he himself

made the first advances to intimacy, which, after all, might be

rejected with a shrug and a NO INTENDO; for, among the many

deeply rooted prejudices of these people, is the strange idea

that no foreigner can speak their language; an idea to which

they will still cling though they hear him conversing with

perfect ease; for in that case the utmost that they will

concede to his attainments is, HABLA QUATRO PALABRAS Y NADA MAS

(he can speak four words, and no more).



Early one morning, before sunrise, I found myself at the

house of Antonio; it was a small mean building, situated in a

dirty street.  The morning was quite dark; the street, however,

was partially illumined by a heap of lighted straw, round which

two or three men were busily engaged, apparently holding an

object over the flames.  Presently the gypsy's door opened, and

Antonio made his appearance; and, casting his eye in the

direction of the light, exclaimed, "The swine have killed their

brother; would that every Busno was served as yonder hog is.

Come in, brother, and we will eat the heart of that hog."  I

scarcely understood his words, but, following him, he led me

into a low room in which was a brasero, or small pan full of

lighted charcoal; beside it was a rude table, spread with a

coarse linen cloth, upon which was bread and a large pipkin

full of a mess which emitted no disagreeable savour.  "The

heart of the balichow is in that puchera," said Antonio; "eat,

brother."  We both sat down and ate, Antonio voraciously.  When

we had concluded he arose:- "Have you got your LI?" he

demanded.  "Here it is," said I, showing him my passport.

"Good," said he, "you may want it; I want none, my passport is

the bar lachi.  Now for a glass of repani, and then for the

road."



We left the room, the door of which he locked, hiding the

key beneath a loose brick in a corner of the passage.  "Go into

the street, brother, whilst I fetch the caballerias from the

stable."  I obeyed him.  The sun had not yet risen, and the air

was piercingly cold; the grey light, however, of dawn enabled

me to distinguish objects with tolerable accuracy; I soon heard

the clattering of the animals' feet, and Antonio presently

stepped forth leading the horse by the bridle; the macho

followed behind.  I looked at the horse and shrugged my

shoulders: as far as I could scan it, it appeared the most

uncouth animal I had ever beheld.  It was of a spectral white,

short in the body, but with remarkably long legs.  I observed

that it was particularly high in the cruz or withers.  "You are

looking at the grasti," said Antonio; "it is eighteen years

old, but it is the very best in the Chim del Manro; I have long

had my eye upon it; I bought it for my own use for the affairs

of Egypt.  Mount, brother, mount and let us leave the foros -

the gate is about being opened."



He locked the door, and deposited the key in his faja.

In less than a quarter of an hour we had left the town behind

us.  "This does not appear to be a very good horse," said I to

Antonio, as we proceeded over the plain.  "It is with

difficulty that I can make him move."



"He is the swiftest horse in the Chim del Manro,

brother," said Antonio; "at the gallop and at the speedy trot

there is no one to match him; but he is eighteen years old, and

his joints are stiff, especially of a morning; but let him once

become heated and the genio del viejo (SPIRIT OF THE OLD MAN)

comes upon him and there is no holding him in with bit or

bridle.  I bought that horse for the affairs of Egypt,

brother."



About noon we arrived at a small village in the

neighbourhood of a high lumpy hill.  "There is no Calo house in

this place," said Antonio; "we will therefore go to the posada

of the Busne, and refresh ourselves, man and beast."  We

entered the kitchen and sat down at the boards, calling for

wine and bread.  There were two ill-looking fellows in the

kitchen, smoking cigars; I said something to Antonio in the

Calo language.



"What is that I hear?" said one of the fellows, who was

distinguished by an immense pair of moustaches.  "What is that

I hear? is it in Calo that you are speaking before me, and I a

Chalan and national?  Accursed gypsy, how dare you enter this

posada and speak before me in that speech?  Is it not forbidden

by the law of the land in which we are, even as it is forbidden

for a gypsy to enter the mercado?  I tell you what, friend, if

I hear another word of Calo come from your mouth, I will cudgel

your bones and send you flying over the house-tops with a kick

of my foot."



"You would do right," said his companion; "the insolence

of these gypsies is no longer to be borne.  When I am at Merida

or Badajoz I go to the mercado, and there in a corner stand the

accursed gypsies jabbering to each other in a speech which I

understand not.  `Gypsy gentleman,' say I to one of them, `what

will you have for that donkey?'  `I will have ten dollars for

it, Caballero nacional,' says the gypsy; `it is the best donkey

in all Spain.'  `I should like to see its paces,' say I.  `That

you shall, most valorous!' says the gypsy, and jumping upon its

back, he puts it to its paces, first of all whispering

something into its ears in Calo, and truly the paces of the

donkey are most wonderful, such as I have never seen before.

`I think it will just suit me,' and after looking at it awhile,

I take out the money and pay for it.  `I shall go to my house,'

says the gypsy; and off he runs.  `I shall go to my village,'

say I, and I mount the donkey.  `Vamonos,' say I, but the

donkey won't move.  I give him a switch, but I don't get on the

better for that.  `How is this?' say I, and I fall to spurring

him.  What happens then, brother?  The wizard no sooner feels

the prick than he bucks down, and flings me over his head into

the mire.  I get up and look about me; there stands the donkey

staring at me, and there stand the whole gypsy canaille

squinting at me with their filmy eyes.  `Where is the scamp who

has sold me this piece of furniture?' I shout.  `He is gone to

Granada, Valorous,' says one.  `He is gone to see his kindred

among the Moors,' says another.  `I just saw him running over

the field, in the direction of -, with the devil close behind

him,' says a third.  In a word, I am tricked.  I wish to

dispose of the donkey; no one, however, will buy him; he is a

Calo donkey, and every person avoids him.  At last the gypsies

offer thirty rials for him; and after much chaffering I am glad

to get rid of him at two dollars.  It is all a trick, however;

he returns to his master, and the brotherhood share the spoil

amongst them.  All which villainy would be prevented, in my

opinion, were the Calo language not spoken; for what but the

word of Calo could have induced the donkey to behave in such an

unaccountable manner?"



Both seemed perfectly satisfied with the justness of this

conclusion, and continued smoking till their cigars were burnt

to stumps, when they arose, twitched their whiskers, looked at

us with fierce disdain, and dashing the tobacco-ends to the

ground, strode out of the apartment.



"Those people seem no friends to the gypsies," said I to

Antonio, when the two bullies had departed, "nor to the Calo

language either."



"May evil glanders seize their nostrils," said Antonio;

"they have been jonjabadoed by our people.  However, brother,

you did wrong to speak to me in Calo, in a posada like this; it

is a forbidden language; for, as I have often told you, the

king has destroyed the law of the Cales.  Let us away, brother,

or those juntunes (SNEAKING SCOUNDRELS) may set the justicia

upon us."



Towards evening we drew near to a large town or village.

"That is Merida," said Antonio, "formerly, as the Busne say, a

mighty city of the Corahai.  We shall stay here to-night, and

perhaps for a day or two, for I have some business of Egypt to

transact in this place.  Now, brother, step aside with the

horse, and wait for me beneath yonder wall.  I must go before

and see in what condition matters stand."



I dismounted from the horse, and sat down on a stone

beneath the ruined wall to which Antonio had motioned me; the

sun went down, and the air was exceedingly keen; I drew close

around me an old tattered gypsy cloak with which my companion

had provided me, and being somewhat fatigued, fell into a doze

which lasted for nearly an hour.



"Is your worship the London Caloro?" said a strange voice

close beside me.



I started and beheld the face of a woman peering under my

hat.  Notwithstanding the dusk, I could see that the features

were hideously ugly and almost black; they belonged, in fact,

to a gypsy crone, at least seventy years of age, leaning upon a

staff.



"Is your worship the London Caloro?" repeated she.



"I am he whom you seek," said I; "where is Antonio?"



"CURELANDO, CURELANDO, BARIBUSTRES CURELOS TERELA," *

said the crone: "come with me, Caloro of my garlochin, come

with me to my little ker, he will be there anon."



* Doing business, doing business - he has much business

to do.



I followed the crone, who led the way into the town,

which was ruinous and seemingly half deserted; we went up the

street, from which she turned into a narrow and dark lane, and

presently opened the gate of a large dilapidated house; "Come

in," said she.



"And the gras?" I demanded.



"Bring the gras in too, my chabo, bring the gras in too;

there is room for the gras in my little stable."  We entered a

large court, across which we proceeded till we came to a wide

doorway.  "Go in, my child of Egypt," said the hag; "go in,

that is my little stable."



"The place is as dark as pitch," said I, "and may be a

well for what I know; bring a light or I will not enter."



"Give me the solabarri (BRIDLE)," said the hag, "and I

will lead your horse in, my chabo of Egypt, yes, and tether him

to my little manger."  She led the horse through the doorway,

and I heard her busy in the darkness; presently the horse shook

himself: "GRASTI TERELAMOS," said the hag, who now made her

appearance with the bridle in her hand; "the horse has shaken

himself, he is not harmed by his day's journey; now let us go

in, my Caloro, into my little room."



We entered the house and found ourselves in a vast room,

which would have been quite dark but for a faint glow which

appeared at the farther end; it proceeded from a brasero,

beside which were squatted two dusky figures.



"These are Callees," said the hag; "one is my daughter

and the other is her chabi; sit down, my London Caloro, and let

us hear you speak."



I looked about for a chair, but could see none; at a

short distance, however, I perceived the end of a broken pillar

lying on the floor; this I rolled to the brasero and sat down

upon it.



"This is a fine house, mother of the gypsies," said I to

the hag, willing to gratify the desire she had expressed of

hearing me speak; "a fine house is this of yours, rather cold

and damp, though; it appears large enough to be a barrack for

hundunares."



"Plenty of houses in this foros, plenty of houses in

Merida, my London Caloro, some of them just as they were left

by the Corahanoes; ah, a fine people are the Corahanoes; I

often wish myself in their chim once more."



"How is this, mother," said I, "have you been in the land

of the Moors?"



"Twice have I been in their country, my Caloro, - twice

have I been in the land of the Corahai; the first time is more

than fifty years ago, I was then with the Sese (SPANIARDS), for

my husband was a soldier of the Crallis of Spain, and Oran at

that time belonged to Spain."



"You were not then with the real Moors," said I, "but

only with the Spaniards who occupied part of their country."



"I have been with the real Moors, my London Caloro.  Who

knows more of the real Moors than myself?  About forty years

ago I was with my ro in Ceuta, for he was still a soldier of

the king, and he said to me one day, `I am tired of this place

where there is no bread and less water, I will escape and turn

Corahano; this night I will kill my sergeant and flee to the

camp of the Moor.'  `Do so,' said I, `my chabo, and as soon as

may be I will follow you and become a Corahani.'  That same

night he killed his sergeant, who five years before had called

him Calo and cursed him, then running to the wall he dropped

from it, and amidst many shots he escaped to the land of the

Corahai, as for myself, I remained in the presidio of Ceuta as

a suttler, selling wine and repani to the soldiers.  Two years

passed by and I neither saw nor heard from my ro; one day there

came a strange man to my cachimani (WINE-SHOP), he was dressed

like a Corahano, and yet he did not look like one, he looked

like more a callardo (BLACK), and yet he was not a callardo

either, though he was almost black, and as I looked upon him I

thought he looked something like the Errate, and he said to me,

`Zincali; chachipe!' and then he whispered to me in queer

language, which I could scarcely understand, `Your ro is

waiting, come with me, my little sister, and I will take you

unto him.'  `Where is he?' said I, and he pointed to the west,

to the land of the Corahai, and said, `He is yonder away; come

with me, little sister, the ro is waiting.'  For a moment I was

afraid, but I bethought me of my husband and I wished to be

amongst the Corahai; so I took the little parne (MONEY) I had,

and locking up the cachimani went with the strange man; the

sentinel challenged us at the gate, but I gave him repani

(BRANDY) and he let us pass; in a moment we were in the land of

the Corahai.  About a league from the town beneath a hill we

found four people, men and women, all very black like the

strange man, and we joined ourselves with them and they all

saluted me and called me little sister.  That was all I

understood of their discourse, which was very crabbed; and they

took away my dress and gave me other clothes, and I looked like

a Corahani, and away we marched for many days amidst deserts

and small villages, and more than once it seemed to me that I

was amongst the Errate, for their ways were the same: the men

would hokkawar (CHEAT) with mules and asses, and the women told

baji, and after many days we came before a large town, and the

black man said, `Go in there, little sister, and there you will

find your ro;' and I went to the gate, and an armed Corahano

stood within the gate, and I looked in his face, and lo! it was

my ro.



"O what a strange town it was that I found myself in,

full of people who had once been Candore (CHRISTIANS) but had

renegaded and become Corahai.  There were Sese and Lalore

(PORTUGUESE), and men of other nations, and amongst them were

some of the Errate from my own country; all were now soldiers

of the Crallis of the Corahai and followed him to his wars; and

in that town I remained with my ro a long time, occasionally

going out with him to the wars, and I often asked him about the

black men who had brought me thither, and he told me that he

had had dealings with them, and that he believed them to be of

the Errate.  Well, brother, to be short, my ro was killed in

the wars, before a town to which the king of the Corahai laid

siege, and I became a piuli (WIDOW), and I returned to the

village of the renegades, as it was called, and supported

myself as well as I could; and one day as I was sitting

weeping, the black man, whom I had never seen since the day he

brought me to my ro, again stood before me, and he said, `Come

with me, little sister, come with me, the ro is at hand'; and I

went with him, and beyond the gate in the desert was the same

party of black men and women which I had seen before.  `Where

is my ro?' said I.  `Here he is, little sister,' said the black

man, `here he is; from this day I am the ro and you the romi;

come, let us go, for there is business to be done.'



"And I went with him, and he was my ro, and we lived

amongst the deserts, and hokkawar'd and choried and told baji;

and I said to myself, this is good, sure I am amongst the

Errate in a better chim than my own; and I often said that they

were of the Errate, and then they would laugh and say that it

might be so, and that they were not Corahai, but they could

give no account of themselves.



"Well, things went on in this way for years, and I had

three chai by the black man, two of them died, but the

youngest, who is the Calli who sits by the brasero, was spared;

so we roamed about and choried and told baji; and it came to

pass that once in the winter time our company attempted to pass

a wide and deep river, of which there are many in the Chim del

Corahai, and the boat overset with the rapidity of the current

and all our people were drowned, all but myself and my chabi,

whom I bore in my bosom.  I had now no friends amongst the

Corahai, and I wandered about the despoblados howling and

lamenting till I became half lili (MAD), and in this manner I

found my way to the coast, where I made friends with the

captain of a ship and returned to this land of Spain.  And now

I am here, I often wish myself back again amongst the Corahai."



Here she commenced laughing loud and long, and when she

had ceased, her daughter and grandchild took up the laugh,

which they continued so long that I concluded they were all

lunatics.



Hour succeeded hour, and still we sat crouching over the

brasero, from which, by this time, all warmth had departed; the

glow had long since disappeared, and only a few dying sparks

were to be distinguished.  The room or hall was now involved in

utter darkness; the women were motionless and still; I shivered

and began to feel uneasy.  "Will Antonio be here to-night?" at

length I demanded.



"NO TENGA USTED CUIDAO, my London Caloro," said the Gypsy

mother, in an unearthly tone; "Pepindorio * has been here some

time."



* THE Gypsy word for Antonio.



I was about to rise from my seat and attempt to escape

from the house, when I felt a hand laid upon my shoulder, and

in a moment I heard the voice of Antonio.



"Be not afraid, `tis I, brother; we will have a light

anon, and then supper."



The supper was rude enough, consisting of bread, cheese,

and olives.  Antonio, however, produced a leathern bottle of

excellent wine; we despatched these viands by the light of an

earthen lamp which was placed upon the floor.



"Now," said Antonio to the youngest female, "bring me the

pajandi, and I will sing a gachapla."



The girl brought the guitar, which, with some difficulty,

the Gypsy tuned, and then strumming it vigorously, he sang:



"I stole a plump and bonny fowl,

But ere I well had dined,

The master came with scowl and growl,

And me would captive bind.



"My hat and mantle off I threw,

And scour'd across the lea,

Then cried the beng * with loud halloo,

Where does the Gypsy flee?"



* Devil.



He continued playing and singing for a considerable time,

the two younger females dancing in the meanwhile with unwearied

diligence, whilst the aged mother occasionally snapped her

fingers or beat time on the ground with her stick.  At last

Antonio suddenly laid down the instrument:-



"I see the London Caloro is weary; enough, enough, to-

morrow more thereof - we will now to the charipe (BED)."



"With all my heart," said I; "where are we to sleep?"



"In the stable," said he, "in the manger; however cold

the stable may be we shall be warm enough in the bufa."
