





CHAPTER XXX







Autumnal Morning - The World's End - Corcuvion - Duyo -

The Cape - A Whale - The Outer Bay - The Arrest - The Fisher-

Magistrate - Calros Rey - Hard of Belief - Where is your Passport? -

The Beach - A Mighty Liberal - The Handmaid - The Grand Baintham -

Eccentric Book - Hospitality.





It was a beautiful autumnal morning when we left the

choza and pursued our way to Corcuvion.  I satisfied our host

by presenting him with a couple of pesetas, and he requested as

a favour, that if on our return we passed that way, and were

overtaken by the night, we would again take up our abode

beneath his roof.  This I promised, at the same time

determining to do my best to guard against the contingency; as

sleeping in the loft of a Gallegan hut, though preferable to

passing the night on a moor or mountain, is anything but

desirable.



So we again started at a rapid pace along rough bridle-

ways and footpaths, amidst furze and brushwood.  In about an

hour we obtained a view of the sea, and directed by a lad, whom

we found on the moor employed in tending a few miserable sheep,

we bent our course to the north-west, and at length reached the

brow of an eminence, where we stopped for some time to survey

the prospect which opened before us.



It was not without reason that the Latins gave the name

of Finnisterrae to this district.  We had arrived exactly at

such a place as in my boyhood I had pictured to myself as the

termination of the world, beyond which there was a wild sea, or

abyss, or chaos.  I now saw far before me an immense ocean, and

below me a long and irregular line of lofty and precipitous

coast.  Certainly in the whole world there is no bolder coast

than the Gallegan shore, from the debouchement of the Minho to

Cape Finisterra.  It consists of a granite wall of savage

mountains, for the most part serrated at the top, and

occasionally broken, where bays and firths like those of Vigo

and Pontevedra intervene, running deep into the land.  These

bays and firths are invariably of an immense depth, and

sufficiently capacious to shelter the navies of the proudest

maritime nations.



There is an air of stern and savage grandeur in

everything around, which strongly captivates the imagination.

This savage coast is the first glimpse of Spain which the

voyager from the north catches, or he who has ploughed his way

across the wide Atlantic: and well does it seem to realize all

his visions of this strange land.  "Yes," he exclaims, "this is

indeed Spain - stern flinty Spain - land emblematic of those

spirits to which she has given birth.  From what land but that

before me could have proceeded those portentous beings, who

astounded the Old World and filled the New with horror and

blood: Alba and Philip, Cortez and Pizarro: stern colossal

spectres looming through the gloom of bygone years, like yonder

granite mountains through the haze, upon the eye of the

mariner.  Yes, yonder is indeed Spain; flinty, indomitable

Spain; land emblematic of its sons!"



As for myself, when I viewed that wide ocean and its

savage shore, I cried, "Such is the grave, and such are its

terrific sides; those moors and wilds, over which I have

passed, are the rough and dreary journey of life.  Cheered with

hope, we struggle along through all the difficulties of moor,

bog, and mountain, to arrive at - what?  The grave and its

dreary sides.  Oh, may hope not desert us in the last hour:

hope in the Redeemer and in God!"



We descended from the eminence, and again lost sight of

the sea amidst ravines and dingles, amongst which patches of

pine were occasionally seen.  Continuing to descend, we at last

came, not to the sea, but to the extremity of a long narrow

firth, where stood a village or hamlet; whilst at a small

distance, on the Western side of the firth, appeared one

considerably larger, which was indeed almost entitled to the

appellation of town.  This last was Corcuvion; the first, if I

forget not, was called Ria de Silla.  We hastened on to

Corcuvion, where I bade my guide make inquiries respecting

Finisterra.  He entered the door of a wine-house, from which

proceeded much noise and vociferation, and presently returned,

informing me that the village of Finisterra was distant about a

league and a half.  A man, evidently in a state of

intoxication, followed him to the door: "Are you bound for

Finisterra, Cavalheiros?" he shouted.



"Yes, my friend," I replied, "we are going thither."



"Then you are going amongst a flock of drunkards (FATO DE

BARRACHOS)," he answered.  "Take care that they do not play you

a trick."



We passed on, and striking across a sandy peninsula at

the back of the town, soon reached the shore of an immense bay,

the north-westernmost end of which was formed by the far-famed

cape of Finisterra, which we now saw before us stretching far

into the sea.



Along a beach of dazzling white sand, we advanced towards

the cape, the bourne of our journey.  The sun was shining

brightly, and every object was illumined by his beams.  The sea

lay before us like a vast mirror, and the waves which broke

upon the shore were so tiny as scarcely to produce a murmur.

On we sped along the deep winding bay, overhung by gigantic

hills and mountains.  Strange recollections began to throng

upon my mind.  It was upon this beach that, according to the

tradition of all ancient Christendom, Saint James, the patron

saint of Spain, preached the Gospel to the heathen Spaniards.

Upon this beach had once stood an immense commercial city, the

proudest in all Spain.  This now desolate bay had once

resounded with the voices of myriads, when the keels and

commerce of all the then known world were wafted to Duyo.



"What is the name of this village?" said I to a woman, as

we passed by five or six ruinous houses at the bend of the bay,

ere we entered upon the peninsula of Finisterra.



"This is no village," said the Gallegan, "this is no

village, Sir Cavalier, this is a city, this is Duyo."



So much for the glory of the world!  These huts were all

that the roaring sea and the tooth of time had left of Duyo,

the great city!  Onward now to Finisterra.



It was midday when we reached the village of Finisterra,

consisting of about one hundred houses, and built on the

southern side of the peninsula, just before it rises into the

huge bluff head which is called the Cape.  We sought in vain

for an inn or venta, where we might stable our beast; at one

moment we thought that we had found one, and had even tied the

animal to the manger.  Upon our going out, however, he was

instantly untied and driven forth into the street.  The few

people whom we saw appeared to gaze upon us in a singular

manner.  We, however, took little notice of these

circumstances, and proceeded along the straggling street until

we found shelter in the house of a Castilian shopkeeper, whom

some chance had brought to this corner of Galicia, - this end

of the world.  Our first care was to feed the animal, who now

began to exhibit considerable symptoms of fatigue.  We then

requested some refreshment for ourselves; and in about an hour

a tolerably savoury fish, weighing about three pounds, and

fresh from the bay, was prepared for us by an old woman who

appeared to officiate as house-keeper.  Having finished our

meal, I and my uncouth companion went forth and prepared to

ascend the mountain.



We stopped to examine a small dismantled fort or battery

facing the bay; and whilst engaged in this examination, it more

than once occurred to me that we were ourselves the objects of

scrutiny and investigation: indeed I caught a glimpse of more

than one countenance peering upon us through the holes and

chasms of the walls.  We now commenced ascending Finisterra;

and making numerous and long detours, we wound our way up its

flinty sides.  The sun had reached the top of heaven, whence he

showered upon us perpendicularly his brightest and fiercest

rays.  My boots were torn, my feet cut, and the perspiration

streamed from my brow.  To my guide, however, the ascent

appeared to be neither toilsome nor difficult.  The heat of the

day for him had no terrors, no moisture was wrung from his

tanned countenance; he drew not one short breath; and hopped

upon the stones and rocks with all the provoking agility of a

mountain goat.  Before we had accomplished one half of the

ascent, I felt myself quite exhausted.  I reeled and staggered.

"Cheer up, master mine, be of good cheer, and have no care,"

said the guide.  "Yonder I see a wall of stones; lie down

beneath it in the shade."  He put his long and strong arm round

my waist, and though his stature compared with mine was that of

a dwarf, he supported me, as if I had been a child, to a rude

wall which seemed to traverse the greatest part of the hill,

and served probably as a kind of boundary.  It was difficult to

find a shady spot: at last he perceived a small chasm, perhaps

scooped by some shepherd as a couch, in which to enjoy his

siesta.  In this he laid me gently down, and taking off his

enormous hat, commenced farming me with great assiduity.  By

degrees I revived, and after having rested for a considerable

time, I again attempted the ascent, which, with the assistance

of my guide, I at length accomplished.



We were now standing at a great altitude between two

bays: the wilderness of waters before us.  Of all the ten

thousand barks which annually plough those seas in sight of

that old cape, not one was to be descried.  It was a blue shiny

waste, broken by no object save the black head of a spermaceti

whale, which would occasionally show itself at the top, casting

up thin jets of brine.  The principal bay, that of Finisterra,

as far as the entrance, was beautifully variegated by an

immense shoal of sardinhas, on whose extreme skirts the monster

was probably feasting.  From the northern side of the cape we

looked down upon a smaller bay, the shore of which was overhung

by rocks of various and grotesque shapes; this is called the

outer bay, or, in the language of the country, PRAIA DO MAR DE

FORA: a fearful place in seasons of wind and tempest, when the

long swell of the Atlantic pouring in, is broken into surf and

foam by the sunken rocks with which it abounds.  Even in the

calmest day there is a rumbling and a hollow roar in that bay

which fill the heart with uneasy sensations.



On all sides there was grandeur and sublimity.  After

gazing from the summit of the Cape for nearly an hour we

descended.



On reaching the house where we had taken up our temporary

habitation, we perceived that the portal was occupied by

several men, some of whom were reclining on the floor drinking

wine out of small earthen pans, which are much used in this

part of Galicia.  With a civil salutation I passed on, and

ascended the staircase to the room in which we had taken our

repast.  Here there was a rude and dirty bed, on which I flung

myself, exhausted with fatigue.  I determined to take a little

repose, and in the evening to call the people of the place

together, to read a few chapters of the Scripture, and then to

address them with a little Christian exhortation.  I was soon

asleep, but my slumbers were by no means tranquil.  I thought I

was surrounded with difficulties of various kinds amongst rocks

and ravines, vainly endeavouring to extricate myself; uncouth

visages showed themselves amidst the trees and in the hollows,

thrusting out cloven tongues and uttering angry cries.  I

looked around for my guide, but could not find him; methought,

however, that I heard his voice down a deep dingle.  He

appeared to be talking of me.  How long I might have continued

in these wild dreams I know not.  I was suddenly, however,

seized roughly by the shoulder and nearly dragged from the bed.

I looked up in amazement, and by the light of the descending

sun I beheld hanging over me a wild and uncouth figure; it was

that of an elderly man, built as strong as a giant, with much

beard and whiskers, and huge bushy eyebrows, dressed in the

habiliments of a fisherman; in his hand was a rusty musket.



MYSELF. - Who are you and what do you want?



FIGURE. - Who I am matters but little.  Get up and follow

me; it is you I want.



MYSELF. - By what authority do you thus presume to

interfere with me?



FIGURE. - By the authority of the justicia of Finisterra.

Follow me peaceably, Calros, or it will be the worse for you.



"Calros," said I, "what does the person mean?"  I thought

it, however, most prudent to obey his command, and followed him

down the staircase.  The shop and the portal were now thronged

with the inhabitants of Finisterra, men, women, and children;

the latter for the most part in a state of nudity, and with

bodies wet and dripping, having been probably summoned in haste

from their gambols in the brine.  Through this crowd the figure

whom I have attempted to describe pushed his way with an air of

authority.



On arriving in the street, he laid his heavy hand upon my

arm, not roughly however.  "It is Calros! it is Calros!" said a

hundred voices; "he has come to Finisterra at last, and the

justicia have now got hold of him."  Wondering what all this

could mean, I attended my strange conductor down the street.

As we proceeded, the crowd increased every moment, following

and vociferating.  Even the sick were brought to the door to

obtain a view of what was going forward and a glance at the

redoubtable Calros.  I was particularly struck by the eagerness

displayed by one man, a cripple, who, in spite of the

entreaties of his wife, mixed with the crowd, and having lost

his crutch, hopped forward on one leg, exclaiming, - "CARRACHO!

TAMBIEN VOY YO!"



We at last reached a house of rather larger size than the

rest; my guide having led me into a long low room, placed me in

the middle of the floor, and then hurrying to the door, he

endeavoured to repulse the crowd who strove to enter with us.

This he effected, though not without considerable difficulty,

being once or twice compelled to have recourse to the butt of

his musket, to drive back unauthorized intruders.  I now looked

round the room.  It was rather scantily furnished: I could see

nothing but some tubs and barrels, the mast of a boat, and a

sail or two.  Seated upon the tubs were three or four men

coarsely dressed, like fishermen or shipwrights.  The principal

personage was a surly ill-tempered-looking fellow of about

thirty-five, whom eventually I discovered to be the alcalde of

Finisterra, and lord of the house in which we now were.  In a

corner I caught a glimpse of my guide, who was evidently in

durance, two stout fishermen standing before him, one with a

musket and the other with a boat-hook.  After I had looked

about me for a minute, the alcalde, giving his whiskers a

twist, thus addressed me:-



"Who are you, where is your passport, and what brings you

to Finisterra?"



MYSELF. - I am an Englishman.  Here is my passport, and I

came to see Finisterra.



This reply seemed to discomfit them for a moment.  They

looked at each other, then at my passport.  At length the

alcalde, striking it with his finger, bellowed forth:



"This is no Spanish passport; it appears to be written in

French."



MYSELF. - I have already told you that I am a foreigner.

I of course carry a foreign passport.



ALCALDE. - Then you mean to assert that you are not

Calros Rey.



MYSELF. - I never heard before of such a king, nor indeed

of such a name.



ALCALDE. - Hark to the fellow: he has the audacity to say

that he has never heard of Calros the pretender, who calls

himself king.



MYSELF. - If you mean by Calros, the pretender Don

Carlos, all I can reply is, that you can scarcely be serious.

You might as well assert that yonder poor fellow, my guide,

whom I see you have made prisoner, is his nephew, the infante

Don Sebastian.



ALCALDE. - See, you have betrayed yourself; that is the

very person we suppose him to be.



MYSELF. - It is true that they are both hunchbacks.  But

how can I be like Don Carlos?  I have nothing the appearance of

a Spaniard, and am nearly a foot taller than the pretender.



ALCALDE. - That makes no difference; you of course carry

many waistcoats about you, by means of which you disguise

yourself, and appear tall or low according to your pleasure.



This last was so conclusive an argument that I had of

course nothing to reply to it.  The alcalde looked around him

in triumph, as if he had made some notable discovery.  "Yes, it

is Calros; it is Calros," said the crowd at the door.  "It will

be as well to have these men shot instantly," continued the

alcalde; "if they are not the two pretenders, they are at any

rate two of the factious."



"I am by no means certain that they are either one or the

other," said a gruff voice.



The justicia of Finisterra turned their eyes in the

direction from which these words proceeded, and so did I.  Our

glances rested upon the figure who held watch at the door.  He

had planted the barrel of his musket on the floor, and was now

leaning his chin against the butt.



"I am by no means certain that they are either one or the

other," repeated he, advancing forward.  "I have been examining

this man," pointing to myself, "and listening whilst he spoke,

and it appears to me that after all he may prove an Englishman;

he has their very look and voice.  Who knows the English better

than Antonio de la Trava, and who has a better right?  Has he

not sailed in their ships; has he not eaten their biscuit; and

did he not stand by Nelson when he was shot dead?"



Here the alcalde became violently incensed.  "He is no

more an Englishman than yourself," he exclaimed; "if he were an

Englishman would he have come in this manner, skulking across

the land?  Not so I trow.  He would have come in a ship,

recommended to some of us, or to the Catalans.  He would have

come to trade, to buy; but nobody knows him in Finisterra, nor

does he know anybody: and the first thing, moreover, that he

does when he reaches this place is to inspect the fort, and to

ascend the mountain where, no doubt, he has been marking out a

camp.  What brings him to Finisterra if he is neither Calros

nor a bribon of a faccioso?"



I felt that there was a good deal of justice in some of

these remarks, and I was aware, for the first time, that I had,

indeed, committed a great imprudence in coming to this wild

place, and among these barbarous people, without being able to

assign any motive which could appear at all valid in their

eyes.  I endeavoured to convince the alcalde that I had come

across the country for the purpose of making myself acquainted

with the many remarkable objects which it contained, and of

obtaining information respecting the character and condition of

the inhabitants.  He could understand no such motives.  "What

did you ascend the mountain for?"  "To see prospects."

"Disparate! I have lived at Finisterra forty years and never

ascended that mountain.  I would not do it in a day like this

for two ounces of gold.  You went to take altitudes, and to

mark out a camp."  I had, however, a staunch friend in old

Antonio, who insisted, from his knowledge of the English, that

all I had said might very possibly be true.  "The English,"

said he, "have more money than they know what to do with, and

on that account they wander all over the world, paying dearly

for what no other people care a groat for."  He then proceeded,

notwithstanding the frowns of the alcalde, to examine me in the

English language.  His own entire knowledge of this tongue was

confined to two words - KNIFE and FORK, which words I rendered

into Spanish by their equivalents, and was forthwith pronounced

an Englishman by the old fellow, who, brandishing his musket,

exclaimed:-



"This man is not Calros; he is what he declares himself

to be, an Englishman, and whosoever seeks to injure him, shall

have to do with Antonio de la Trava el valiente de Finisterra."

No person sought to impugn this verdict, and it was at length

determined that I should be sent to Corcuvion, to be examined

by the alcalde mayor of the district.  "But," said the alcalde

of Finisterra, "what is to be done with the other fellow?  He

at least is no Englishman.  Bring him forward, and let us hear

what he has to say for himself.  Now, fellow, who are you, and

what is your master?"



GUIDE. - I am Sebastianillo, a poor broken mariner of

Padron, and my master for the present is the gentleman whom you

see, the most valiant and wealthy of all the English.  He has

two ships at Vigo laden with riches.  I told you so when you

first seized me up there in our posada.



ALCALDE. - Where is your passport?



GUIDE. - I have no passport.  Who would think of bringing

a passport to such a place as this, where I don't suppose there

are two individuals who can read?  I have no passport; my

master's passport of course includes me.



ALCALDE. - It does not.  And since you have no passport,

and have confessed that your name is Sebastian, you shall be

shot.  Antonio de la Trava, do you and the musketeers lead this

Sebastianillo forth, and shoot him before the door.



ANTONIO DE LA TRAVA. - With much pleasure, Senor Alcalde,

since you order it.  With respect to this fellow, I shall not

trouble myself to interfere.  He at least is no Englishman.  He

has more the look of a wizard or nuveiro; one of those devils

who raise storms and sink launches.  Moreover, he says he is

from Padron, and those of that place are all thieves and

drunkards.  They once played me a trick, and I would gladly be

at the shooting of the whole pueblo.



I now interfered, and said that if they shot the guide

they must shoot me too; expatiating at the same time on the

cruelty and barbarity of taking away the life of a poor

unfortunate fellow who, as might be seen at the first glance,

was only half witted; adding, moreover, that if any person was

guilty in this case it was myself, as the other could only be

considered in the light of a servant acting under my orders.



"The safest plan after all," said the alcalde, "appears

to be, to send you both prisoners to Corcuvion, where the head

alcalde can dispose of you as he thinks proper.  You must,

however, pay for your escort; for it is not to be supposed that

the housekeepers of Finisterra have nothing else to do than to

ramble about the country with every chance fellow who finds his

way to this town."  "As for that matter," said Antonio, "I will

take charge of them both.  I am the valiente of Finisterra, and

fear no two men living.  Moreover, I am sure that the captain

here will make it worth my while, else he is no Englishman.

Therefore let us be quick and set out for Corcuvion at once, as

it is getting late.  First of all, however, captain, I must

search you and your baggage.  You have no arms, of course?  But

it is best to make all sure."



Long ere it was dark I found myself again on the pony, in

company with my guide, wending our way along the beach in the

direction of Corcuvion.  Antonio de la Trava tramped heavily on

before, his musket on his shoulder.



MYSELF. - Are you not afraid, Antonio, to be thus alone

with two prisoners, one of whom is on horseback?  If we were to

try, I think we could overpower you.



ANTONIO DE LA TRAVA. - I am the valiente do Finisterra,

and I fear no odds.



MYSELF. - Why do you call yourself the valiente of

Finisterra?



ANTONIO DE LA TRAVA. - The whole district call me so.

When the French came to Finisterra, and demolished the fort,

three perished by my hand.  I stood on the mountain, up where I

saw you scrambling to-day.  I continued firing at the enemy,

until three detached themselves in pursuit of me.  The fools!

two perished amongst the rocks by the fire of this musket, and

as for the third, I beat his head to pieces with the stock.  It

is on that account that they call me the valiente of

Finisterra.



MYSELF. - How came you to serve with the English fleet?

I think I heard you say that you were present when Nelson fell.



ANTONIO DE LA TRAVA. - I was captured by your countrymen,

captain; and as I had been a sailor from my childhood, they

were glad of my services.  I was nine months with them, and

assisted at Trafalgar.  I saw the English admiral die.  You

have something of his face, and your voice, when you spoke,

sounded in my ears like his own.  I love the English, and on

that account I saved you.  Think not that I would toil along

these sands with you if you were one of my own countrymen.

Here we are at Duyo, captain.  Shall we refresh?



We did refresh, or rather Antonio de la Trava refreshed,

swallowing pan after pan of wine, with a thirst which seemed

unquenchable.  "That man was a greater wizard than myself,"

whispered Sebastian, my guide, "who told us that the drunkards

of Finisterra would play us a trick."  At length the old hero

of the Cape slowly rose, saying, that we must hasten on to

Corcuvion, or the night would overtake us by the way.



"What kind of person is the alcalde to whom you are

conducting me?" said I.



"Oh, very different from him of Finisterra," replied

Antonio.  "This is a young Senorito, lately arrived from

Madrid.  He is not even a Gallegan.  He is a mighty liberal,

and it is owing chiefly to his orders that we have lately been

so much on the alert.  It is said that the Carlists are

meditating a descent on these parts of Galicia.  Let them only

come to Finisterra, we are liberals there to a man, and the old

valiente is ready to play the same part as in the time of the

French.  But, as I was telling you before, the alcalde to whom

I am conducting you is a young man, and very learned, and if he

thinks proper, he can speak English to you, even better than

myself, notwithstanding I was a friend of Nelson, and fought by

his side at Trafalgar."



It was dark night before we reached Corcuvion.  Antonio

again stopped to refresh at a wine-shop, after which he

conducted us to the house of the alcalde.  His steps were by

this time not particularly steady, and on arriving at the gate

of the house, he stumbled over the threshold and fell.  He got

up with an oath, and instantly commenced thundering at the door

with the stock of his musket.  "Who is it?" at length demanded

a soft female voice in Gallegan.  "The valiente of Finisterra,"

replied Antonio; whereupon the gate was unlocked, and we beheld

before us a very pretty female with a candle in her hand.

"What brings you here so late, Antonio?" she inquired.  "I

bring two prisoners, mi pulida," replied Antonio.  "Ave Maria!"

she exclaimed, "I hope they will do no harm."  "I will answer

for one," replied the old man; "but, as for the other, he is a

nuveiro, and has sunk more ships than all his brethren in

Galicia.  But be not afraid, my beauty," he continued, as the

female made the sign of the cross: "first lock the gate, and

then show me the way to the alcalde.  I have much to tell him."

The gate was locked, and bidding us stay below in the court-

yard, Antonio followed the young woman up a stone stair, whilst

we remained in darkness below.



After the lapse of about a quarter of an hour we again

saw the candle gleam upon the staircase, and the young female

appeared.  Coming up to me, she advanced the candle to my

features, on which she gazed very intently.  After a long

scrutiny she went to my guide, and having surveyed him still

more fixedly, she turned to me, and said, in her best Spanish,

"Senhor Cavalier, I congratulate you on your servant.  He is

the best-looking mozo in all Galicia.  Vaya! if he had but a

coat to his back, and did not go barefoot, I would accept him

at once as a novio; but I have unfortunately made a vow never

to marry a poor man, but only one who has got a heavy purse and

can buy me fine clothes.  So you are a Carlist, I suppose?

Vaya! I do not like you the worse for that.  But, being so, how

went you to Finisterra, where they are all Christinos and

negros?  Why did you not go to my village?  None would have

meddled with you there.  Those of my village are of a different

stamp to the drunkards of Finisterra.  Those of my village

never interfere with honest people.  Vaya! how I hate that

drunkard of Finisterra who brought you, he is so old and ugly;

were it not for the love which I bear to the Senhor Alcalde, I

would at once unlock the gate and bid you go forth, you and

your servant, the buen mozo."



Antonio now descended.  "Follow me," said he; "his

worship the alcalde will be ready to receive you in a moment."

Sebastian and myself followed him upstairs to a room where,

seated behind a table, we beheld a young man of low stature but

handsome features and very fashionably dressed.  He appeared to

be inditing a letter, which, when he had concluded, he

delivered to a secretary to be transcribed.  He then looked at

me for a moment fixedly, and the following conversation ensued

between us:-



ALCALDE. - I see that you are an Englishman, and my

friend Antonio here informs me that you have been arrested at

Finisterra.



MYSELF. - He tells you true; and but for him I believe

that I should have fallen by the hands of those savage

fishermen.



ALCALDE. - The inhabitants of Finisterra are brave, and

are all liberals.  Allow me to look at your passport?  Yes, all

in form.  Truly it was very ridiculous that they should have

arrested you as a Carlist.



MYSELF. - Not only as a Carlist, but as Don Carlos

himself.



ALCALDE. - Oh! most ridiculous; mistake a countryman of

the grand Baintham for such a Goth!



MYSELF. - Excuse me, Sir, you speak of the grand

somebody.



ALCALDE. - The grand Baintham.  He who has invented laws

for all the world.  I hope shortly to see them adopted in this

unhappy country of ours.



MYSELF. - Oh! you mean Jeremy Bentham.  Yes! a very

remarkable man in his way.



ALCALDE. - In his way!  In all ways.  The most universal

genius which the world ever produced:- a Solon, a Plato, and a

Lope de Vega.



MYSELF. - I have never read his writings.  I have no

doubt that he was a Solon; and as you say, a Plato.  I should

scarcely have thought, however, that he could be ranked as a

poet with Lope de Vega.



ALCALDE. - How surprising!  I see, indeed, that you know

nothing of his writings, though an Englishman.  Now, here am I,

a simple alcalde of Galicia, yet I possess all the writings of

Baintham on that shelf, and I study them day and night.



MYSELF. - You doubtless, Sir, possess the English

Language.



ALCALDE. - I do.  I mean that part of it which is

contained in the writings of Baintham.  I am most truly glad to

see a countryman of his in these Gothic wildernesses.  I

understand and appreciate your motives for visiting them:

excuse the incivility and rudeness which you have experienced.

But we will endeavour to make you reparation.  You are this

moment free: but it is late; I must find you a lodging for the

night.  I know one close by which will just suit you.  Let us

repair thither this moment.  Stay, I think I see a book in your

hand.



MYSELF. - The New Testament.



ALCALDE. - What book is that?



MYSELF. - A portion of the sacred writings, the Bible.



ALCALDE. - Why do you carry such a book with you?



MYSELF. - One of my principal motives in visiting

Finisterra was to carry this book to that wild place.



ALCALDE. - Ha, ha! how very singular.  Yes, I remember.

I have heard that the English highly prize this eccentric book.

How very singular that the countrymen of the grand Baintham

should set any value upon that old monkish book.



It was now late at night, and my new friend attended me

to the lodging which he had destined for me, and which was at

the house of a respectable old female, where I found a clean

and comfortable room.  On the way I slipped a gratuity into the

hand of Antonio, and on my arrival, formally, and in the

presence of the alcalde, presented him with the Testament,

which I requested he would carry back to Finisterra, and keep

in remembrance of the Englishman in whose behalf he had so

effectually interposed.



ANTONIO. - I will do so, your worship; and when the winds

blow from the north-west, preventing our launches from putting

to sea, I will read your present.  Farewell, my captain, and

when you next come to Finisterra I hope it will be in a valiant

English bark, with plenty of contrabando on board, and not

across the country on a pony, in company with nuveiros and men

of Padron.



Presently arrived the handmaid of the alcalde with a

basket, which she took into the kitchen, where she prepared an

excellent supper for her master's friend.  On its being served

up the alcalde bade me farewell, having first demanded whether

he could in any way forward my plans.



"I return to Saint James to-morrow," I replied, "and I

sincerely hope that some occasion will occur which will enable

me to acquaint the world with the hospitality which I have

experienced from so accomplished a scholar as the Alcalde of

Corcuvion."
