






CHAPTER XIV







State of Spain - Isturitz - Revolution of the Granja - The Disturbance -

Signs of Mischief - Newspaper Reporters - Quesada's Onslaught -

The Closing Scene - Flight of the Moderados - The Coffee Bowl.





In the meantime the affairs of the moderados did not

proceed in a very satisfactory manner; they were unpopular at

Madrid, and still more so in the other large towns of Spain, in

most of which juntas had been formed, which, taking the local

administration into their own hands, declared themselves

independent of the queen and her ministers, and refused to pay

taxes; so that the government was within a short time reduced

to great straits for money; the army was unpaid, and the war

languished; I mean on the part of the Christinos, for the

Carlists were pushing it on with considerable vigour; parties

of their guerillas scouring the country in all directions,

whilst a large division, under the celebrated Gomez, was making

the entire circuit of Spain.  To crown the whole, an

insurrection was daily expected at Madrid, to prevent which the

nationals were disarmed, which measure tended greatly to

increase their hatred against the moderado government, and

especially against Quesada, with whom it was supposed to have

originated.



With respect to my own matters, I lost no opportunity of

pushing forward my application; the Aragonese secretary,

however, still harped upon the Council of Trent, and succeeded

in baffling all my efforts.  He appeared to have inoculated his

principal with his own ideas upon the subject, for the duke,

when he beheld me at his levees, took no farther notice of me

than by a contemptuous glance; and once, when I stepped up for

the purpose of addressing him, disappeared through a side door,

and I never saw him again, for I was disgusted with the

treatment which I had received, and forebore paying any more

visits at the Casa de la Inquisicion.  Poor Galiano still

proved himself my unshaken friend, but candidly informed me

that there was no hope of my succeeding in the above quarter.

"The duke," said he, "says that your request cannot be granted;

and the other day, when I myself mentioned it in the council,

began to talk of the decision of Trent, and spoke of yourself

as a plaguy pestilent fellow; whereupon I answered him with

some acrimony, and there ensued a bit of a function between us,

at which Isturitz laughed heartily.  By the by," continued he,

"what need have you of a regular permission, which it does not

appear that any one has authority to grant.  The best thing

that you can do under all circumstances is to commit the work

to the press, with an understanding that you shall not be

interfered with when you attempt to distribute it. I strongly

advise you to see Isturitz himself upon the matter.  I will

prepare him for the interview, and will answer that he receives

you civilly."



In fact, a few days afterwards, I had an interview with

Isturitz at the palace, and for the sake of brevity I shall

content myself with saying that I found him perfectly well

disposed to favour my views.  "I have lived long in England,"

said he; "the Bible is free there, and I see no reason why it

should not be free in Spain also.  I am not prepared to say

that England is indebted for her prosperity to the knowledge

which all her children, more or less, possess of the sacred

writings; but of one thing I am sure, namely, that the Bible

has done no harm in that country, nor do I believe that it will

effect any in Spain; print it, therefore, by all means, and

circulate it as extensively as possible."  I retired, highly

satisfied with my interview, having obtained, if not a written

permission to print the sacred volume, what, under all

circumstances, I considered as almost equivalent, an

understanding that my biblical pursuits would be tolerated in

Spain; and I had fervent hope that whatever was the fate of the

present ministry, no future one, particularly a liberal one,

would venture to interfere with me, more especially as the

English ambassador was my friend, and was privy to all the

steps I had taken throughout the whole affair.



Two or three things connected with the above interview

with Isturitz struck me as being highly remarkable.  First of

all, the extreme facility with which I obtained admission to

the presence of the prime minister of Spain.  I had not to

wait, or indeed to send in my name, but was introduced at once

by the door-keeper.  Secondly, the air of loneliness which

pervaded the place, so unlike the bustle, noise, and activity

which I observed when I waited on Mendizabal.  In this

instance, there were no eager candidates for an interview with

the great man; indeed, I did not behold a single individual,

with the exception of Isturitz and the official.  But that

which made the most profound impression upon me, was the manner

of the minister himself, who, when I entered, sat upon a sofa,

with his arms folded, and his eyes directed to the ground.

When he spoke there was extreme depression in the tones of his

voice, his dark features wore an air of melancholy, and he

exhibited all the appearance of a person meditating to escape

from the miseries of this life by the most desperate of all

acts - suicide.



And a few days showed that he had, indeed, cause for much

melancholy meditation: in less than a week occurred the

revolution of the Granja, as it is called.  The Granja, or

Grange, is a royal country seat, situated amongst pine forests,

on the other side of the Guadarama hills, about twelve leagues

distant from Madrid.  To this place the queen regent Christina

had retired, in order to be aloof from the discontent of the

capital, and to enjoy rural air and amusements in this

celebrated retreat, a monument of the taste and magnificence of

the first Bourbon who ascended the throne of Spain.  She was

not, however, permitted to remain long in tranquillity; her own

guards were disaffected, and more inclined to the principles of

the constitution of 1823 than to those of absolute monarchy,

which the moderados were attempting to revive again in the

government of Spain.  Early one morning, a party of these

soldiers, headed by a certain Sergeant Garcia, entered her

apartment, and proposed that she should subscribe her hand to

this constitution, and swear solemnly to abide by it.

Christina, however, who was a woman of considerable spirit,

refused to comply with this proposal, and ordered them to

withdraw.  A scene of violence and tumult ensued, but the

regent still continuing firm, the soldiers at length led her

down to one of the courts of the palace, where stood her well-

known paramour, Munos, bound and blindfolded.  "Swear to the

constitution, you she-rogue," vociferated the swarthy sergeant.

"Never!" said the spirited daughter of the Neapolitan Bourbons.

"Then your cortejo shall die!" replied the sergeant.  "Ho! ho!

my lads; get ready your arms, and send four bullets through the

fellow's brain."  Munos was forthwith led to the wall, and

compelled to kneel down, the soldiers levelled their muskets

and another moment would have consigned the unfortunate wight

to eternity, when Christina, forgetting everything but the

feelings of her woman's heart, suddenly started forward with a

shriek, exclaiming: "Hold, hold!  I sign, I sign!"



The day after this event I entered the Puerta del Sol at

about noon.  There is always a crowd there about this hour, but

it is generally a very quiet motionless crowd, consisting of

listless idlers calmly smoking their cigars, or listening to or

retailing the - in general - very dull news of the capital; but

on the day of which I am speaking the mass was no longer inert.

There was much gesticulation and vociferation, and several

people were running about shouting, "VIVA LA CONSTITUCION!" - a

cry which, a few days previously, would have been visited on

the utterer with death, the city having for some weeks past

been subjected to the rigour of martial law.  I occasionally

heard the words, "LA GRANJA!  LA GRANJA!"  Which words were

sure to be succeeded by the shout of "VIVA LA CONSTITUCION!"

Opposite the Casa de Postas were drawn up in a line about a

dozen mounted dragoons, some of whom were continually waving

their caps in the air and joining the common cry, in which they

were encouraged by their commander, a handsome young officer,

who flourished his sword, and more than once cried out with

great glee, "Long live the constitutional queen!  Long live the

constitution!"



The crowd was rapidly increasing, and several nationals

made their appearance in their uniforms, but without their

arms, of which they had been deprived, as I have already

stated.  "What has become of the moderado government?" said I

to Baltasar, whom I suddenly observed amongst the crowd,

dressed as when I had first seen him, in his old regimental

great coat and foraging cap; "have the ministers been deposed

and others put in their place?"



"Not yet, Don Jorge," said the little soldier-tailor;

"not yet; the scoundrels still hold out, relying on the brute

bull Quesada and a few infantry, who still continue true to

them; but there is no fear, Don Jorge; the queen is ours,

thanks to the courage of my friend Garcia, and if the brute

bull should make his appearance - ho! ho! Don Jorge, you shall

see something - I am prepared for him, ho! ho!" and thereupon

he half opened his great coat, and showed me a small gun, which

he bore beneath it in a sling, and then moving away with a wink

and a nod, disappeared amongst the crowd.



Presently I perceived a small body of soldiers advancing

up the Calle Mayor, or principal street which runs from the

Puerta del Sol in the direction of the palace; they might be

about twenty in number, and an officer marched at their head

with a drawn sword; the men appeared to have been collected in

a hurry, many of them being in fatigue dress, with foraging

caps on their heads.  On they came, slowly marching; neither

their officer nor themselves paying the slightest attention to

the cries of the crowd which thronged about them, shouting

"Long live the constitution!" save and except by an occasional

surly side glance: on they marched with contracted brows and

set teeth, till they came in front of the cavalry, where they

halted and drew up in a rank.



"Those men mean mischief," said I to my friend D-, of the

MORNING CHRONICLE, who at this moment joined me; "and depend

upon it, that if they are ordered they will commence firing,

caring nothing whom they hit, - but what can those cavalry

fellows behind them mean, who are evidently of the other

opinion by their shouting, why don't they charge at once this

handful of foot people and overturn them?  Once down, the crowd

would wrest from them their muskets in a moment.  You are a

liberal, which I am not; why do you not go to that silly young

man who commands the horse and give him a word of counsel in

time?"



D - turned upon me his broad red good-humoured English

countenance, with a peculiarly arch look, as much as to say -

(whatever you think most applicable, gentle reader), then

taking me by the arm, "Let us get," said he, "out of this crowd

and mount to some window, where I can write down what is about

to take place, for I agree with you that mischief is meant."

Just opposite the post office was a large house, in the topmost

story of which we beheld a paper displayed, importing that

apartments were to let; whereupon we instantly ascended the

common stair, and having agreed with the mistress of the etage

for the use of the front room for the day, we bolted the door,

and the reporter, producing his pocket-book and pencil,

prepared to take notes of the coming events, which were already

casting their shadow before.



What most extraordinary men are these reporters of

newspapers in general, I mean English newspapers; surely if

there be any class of individuals who are entitled to the

appellation of cosmopolites, it is these; who pursue their

avocation in all countries indifferently, and accommodate

themselves at will to the manners of all classes of society:

their fluency of style as writers is only surpassed by their

facility of language in conversation, and their attainments in

classical and polite literature only by their profound

knowledge of the world, acquired by an early introduction into

its bustling scenes.  The activity, energy, and courage which

they occasionally display in the pursuit of information are

truly remarkable.  I saw them during the three days at Paris,

mingled with canaille and gamins behind the barriers, whilst

the mitraille was flying in all directions, and the desperate

cuirassiers were dashing their fierce horses against these

seemingly feeble bulwarks.  There stood they, dotting down

their observations in their pocket-books as unconcernedly as if

reporting the proceedings of a reform meeting in Covent Garden

or Finsbury Square; whilst in Spain, several of them

accompanied the Carlist and Christino guerillas in some of

their most desperate raids and expeditions, exposing themselves

to the danger of hostile bullets, the inclemency of winter, and

the fierce heat of the summer sun.



We had scarcely been five minutes at the window, when we

suddenly heard the clattering of horses' feet hastening down

the street called the Calle de Carretas.  The house in which we

had stationed ourselves was, as I have already observed, just

opposite to the post office, at the left of which this street

debouches from the north into the Puerta del Sol: as the sounds

became louder and louder, the cries of the crowd below

diminished, and a species of panic seemed to have fallen upon

all: once or twice, however, I could distinguish the words

Quesada! Quesada!  The foot soldiers stood calm and motionless,

but I observed that the cavalry, with the young officer who

commanded them, displayed both confusion and fear, exchanging

with each other some hurried words; all of a sudden that part

of the crowd which stood near the mouth of the Calle de

Carretas fell back in great disorder, leaving a considerable

space unoccupied, and the next moment Quesada, in complete

general's uniform, and mounted on a bright bay thorough bred

English horse, with a drawn sword in his hand, dashed at full

gallop into the area, in much the same manner as I have seen a

Manchegan bull rush into the amphitheatre when the gates of his

pen are suddenly flung open.



He was closely followed by two mounted officers, and at a

short distance by as many dragoons.  In almost less time than

is sufficient to relate it, several individuals in the crowd

were knocked down and lay sprawling upon the ground, beneath

the horses of Quesada and his two friends, for as to the

dragoons, they halted as soon as they had entered the Puerta

del Sol.  It was a fine sight to see three men, by dint of

valour and good horsemanship, strike terror into at least as

many thousands: I saw Quesada spur his horse repeatedly into

the dense masses of the crowd, and then extricate himself in

the most masterly manner.  The rabble were completely awed and

gave way, retiring by the Calle del Comercio and the street of

Alcala.  All at once, Quesada singled out two nationals, who

were attempting to escape, and setting spurs to his horse,

turned them in a moment, and drove them in another direction,

striking them in a contemptuous manner with the flat of his

sabre.  He was crying out, "Long live the absolute queen!"

when, just beneath me, amidst a portion of the crowd which had

still maintained its ground, perhaps from not having the means

of escaping, I saw a small gun glitter for a moment, then there

was a sharp report, and a bullet had nearly sent Quesada to his

long account, passing so near to the countenance of the general

as to graze his hat.  I had an indistinct view for a moment of

a well-known foraging cap just about the spot from whence the

gun had been discharged, then there was a rush of the crowd,

and the shooter, whoever he was, escaped discovery amidst the

confusion which arose.



As for Quesada, he seemed to treat the danger from which

he had escaped with the utmost contempt.  He glared about him

fiercely for a moment, then leaving the two nationals, who

sneaked away like whipped hounds, he went up to the young

officer who commanded the cavalry, and who had been active in

raising the cry of the constitution, and to him he addressed a

few words with an air of stern menace; the youth evidently

quailed before him, and probably in obedience to his orders,

resigned the command of the party, and rode slowly away with a

discomfited air; whereupon Quesada dismounted and walked slowly

backwards and forwards before the Casa de Postas with a mien

which seemed to bid defiance to mankind.



This was the glorious day of Quesada's existence, his

glorious and last day.  I call it the day of his glory, for he

certainly never before appeared under such brilliant

circumstances, and he never lived to see another sun set.  No

action of any conqueror or hero on record is to be compared

with this closing scene of the life of Quesada, for who, by his

single desperate courage and impetuosity, ever before stopped a

revolution in full course?  Quesada did: he stopped the

revolution at Madrid for one entire day, and brought back the

uproarious and hostile mob of a huge city to perfect order and

quiet.  His burst into the Puerta del Sol was the most

tremendous and successful piece of daring ever witnessed.  I

admired so much the spirit of the "brute bull" that I

frequently, during his wild onset, shouted "Viva Quesada!" for

I wished him well.  Not that I am of any political party or

system.  No, no!  I have lived too long with Rommany Chals and

Petulengres * to be of any politics save Gypsy politics; and it

is well known that, during elections, the children of Roma side

with both parties so long as the event is doubtful, promising

success to each; and then when the fight is done, and the

battle won, invariably range themselves in the ranks of the

victorious.  But I repeat that I wished well to Quesada,

witnessing, as I did, his stout heart and good horsemanship.

Tranquillity was restored to Madrid throughout the remainder of

the day; the handful of infantry bivouacked in the Puerta del

Sol.  No more cries of long live the constitution were heard;

and the revolution in the capital seemed to have been

effectually put down.  It is probable, indeed, that had the

chiefs of the moderado party but continued true to themselves

for forty-eight hours longer, their cause would have triumphed,

and the revolutionary soldiers at the Granja would have been

glad to restore the Queen Regent to liberty, and to have come

to terms, as it was well known that several regiments, who

still continued loyal, were marching upon Madrid.  The

moderados, however, were not true to themselves; that very

night their hearts failed them, and they fled in various

directions.  Isturitz and Galiano to France; and the Duke of

Rivas to Gibraltar: the panic of his colleagues even infected

Quesada, who, disguised as a civilian, took to flight.  He was

not, however, so successful as the rest, but was recognised at

a village about three leagues from Madrid, and cast into prison

by some friends of the constitution.  Intelligence of his

capture was instantly transmitted to the capital, and a vast

mob of the nationals, some on foot, some on horseback, and

others in cabriolets, instantly set out.  "The nationals are

coming," said a paisano to Quesada.  "Then," said he, "I am

lost," and forthwith prepared himself for death.



* A compound of the modern Greek [Greek word which cannot

be reproduced], and the Sanskrit KARA, the literal meaning

being LORD of the horse-shoe (i.e. MAKER); it is one of the

private cognominations of "The Smiths," an English Gypsy clan.



There is a celebrated coffee-house in the Calle d'Alcala

at Madrid, capable of holding several hundred individuals.  On

the evening of the day in question, I was seated there, sipping

a cup of the brown beverage, when I heard a prodigious noise

and clamour in the street; it proceeded from the nationals, who

were returning from their expedition.  In a few minutes I saw a

body of them enter the coffee-house marching arm in arm, two by

two, stamping on the ground with their feet in a kind of

measure, and repeating in loud chorus as they walked round the

spacious apartment, the following grisly stanza:-





"Que es lo que abaja

Por aquel cerro?

Ta ra ra ra ra.

Son los huesos de Quesada,

Que los trae un perro -

Ta ra ra ra ra." *





* Of these lines the following translation, in the style

of the old English ballad, will, perhaps, not be unacceptable:-



"What down the hill comes hurrying there? -

With a hey, with a ho, a sword, and a gun!

Quesada's bones, which a hound doth bear. -

Hurrah, brave brothers! - the work is done."



A huge bowl of coffee was then called for, which was

placed upon a table, around which gathered the national

soldiers: there was silence for a moment, which was interrupted

by a voice roaring out, "EL PANUELO!"  A blue kerchief was

forthwith produced, which appeared to contain a substance of

some kind; it was untied, and a gory hand and three or four

dissevered fingers made their appearance, and with these the

contents of the bowl were stirred up.  "Cups! cups!" cried the

nationals.



"Ho, ho, Don Jorge," cried Baltasarito, coming up to me

with a cup of coffee, "pray do me the favour to drink upon this

glorious occasion.  This is a pleasant day for Spain, and for

the gallant nationals of Madrid.  I have seen many a bull

funcion, but none which has given me so much pleasure as this.

Yesterday the brute had it all his own way, but to-day the

toreros have prevailed, as you see, Don Jorge.  Pray drink; for

I must now run home to fetch my pajandi to play my brethren a

tune, and sing a copla.  What shall it be?  Something in

Gitano?





"Una noche sinava en tucue."





You shake your head, Don Jorge.  Ha, ha; I am young, and

youth is the time for pleasure; well, well, out of compliment

to you, who are an Englishman and a monro, it shall not be

that, but something liberal, something patriotic, the Hymn of

Riego - Hasta despues, Don Jorge!"
