






CHAPTER XIII







Intrigues at Court - Quesada and Galiano - Dissolution of the Cortes -

The Secretary - Aragonese Pertinacity - The  Council of Trent -

The Asturian - The Three Thieves - Benedict Mol - The Men of Lucerne -

The Treasure





Mendizabal had told me to call upon him again at the end

of three months, giving me hopes that he would not then oppose

himself to the publication of the New Testament; before,

however, the three months had elapsed, he had fallen into

disgrace, and had ceased to be prime minister.



An intrigue had been formed against him, at the head of

which were two quondam friends of his, and fellow-townsmen,

Gaditanians, Isturitz and Alcala Galiano; both of them had been

egregious liberals in their day, and indeed principal members

of those cortes which, on the Angouleme invasion, had hurried

Ferdinand from Madrid to Cadiz, and kept him prisoner there

until that impregnable town thought proper to surrender, and

both of them had been subsequently refugees in England, where

they had spent a considerable number of years.



These gentlemen, however, finding themselves about this

time exceedingly poor, and not seeing any immediate prospect of

advantage from supporting Mendizabal; considering themselves,

moreover, quite as good men as he, and as capable of governing

Spain in the present emergency; determined to secede from the

party of their friend, whom they had hitherto supported, and to

set up for themselves.



They therefore formed an opposition to Mendizabal in the

cortes; the members of this opposition assumed the name of

moderados, in contra-distinction to Mendizabal and his

followers, who were ultra liberals.  The moderados were

encouraged by the Queen Regent Christina, who aimed at a little

more power than the liberals were disposed to allow her, and

who had a personal dislike to the minister.  They were likewise

encouraged by Cordova, who at that time commanded the army, and

was displeased with Mendizabal, inasmuch as the latter did not

supply the pecuniary demands of the general with sufficient

alacrity, though it is said that the greater part of what was

sent for the payment of the troops was not devoted to that

purpose, but, was invested in the French funds in the name and

for the use and behoof of the said Cordova.



It is, however, by no means my intention to write an

account of the political events which were passing around me at

this period; suffice it to say, that Mendizabal finding himself

thwarted in all his projects by the regent and the general, the

former of whom would adopt no measure which he recommended,

whilst the latter remained inactive and refused to engage the

enemy, which by this time had recovered from the check caused

by the death of Zumalacarregui, and was making considerable

progress, resigned and left the field for the time open to his

adversaries, though he possessed an immense majority in the

cortes, and had the voice of the nation, at least the liberal

part of it, in his favour.



Thereupon, Isturitz became head of the cabinet, Galiano

minister of marine, and a certain Duke of Rivas minister of the

interior.  These were the heads of the moderado government, but

as they were by no means popular at Madrid, and feared the

nationals, they associated with themselves one who hated the

latter body and feared nothing, a man of the name of Quesada, a

very stupid individual, but a great fighter, who, at one period

of his life, had commanded a legion or body of men called the

Army of the Faith, whose exploits both on the French and

Spanish side of the Pyrenees are too well known to require

recapitulation.  This person was made captain general of

Madrid.



By far the most clever member of this government was

Galiano, whose acquaintance I had formed shortly after my

arrival.  He was a man of considerable literature, and

particularly well versed in that of his own country.  He was,

moreover, a fluent, elegant, and forcible speaker, and was to

the moderado party within the cortes what Quesada was without,

namely, their horses and chariots.  Why he was made minister of

marine is difficult to say, as Spain did not possess any;

perhaps, however, from his knowledge of the English language,

which he spoke and wrote nearly as well as his own tongue,

having indeed during his sojourn in England chiefly supported

himself by writing for reviews and journals, an honourable

occupation, but to which few foreign exiles in England would be

qualified to devote themselves.



He was a very small and irritable man, and a bitter enemy

to every person who stood in the way of his advancement.  He

hated Mendizabal with undisguised rancour, and never spoke of

him but in terms of unmeasured contempt.  "I am afraid that I

shall have some difficulty in inducing Mendizabal to give me

permission to print the Testament," said I to him one day.

"Mendizabal is a jackass," replied Galiano.  "Caligula made his

horse consul, which I suppose induced Lord - to send over this

huge burro of the Stock Exchange to be our minister."



It would be very ungrateful on my part were I not to

confess my great obligations to Galiano, who assisted me to the

utmost of his power in the business which had brought me to

Spain.  Shortly after the ministry was formed, I went to him

and said, "that now or never was the time to mike an effort in

my behalf."  "I will do so," said he, in a waspish tone; for he

always spoke waspishly whether to friend or foe; "but you must

have patience for a few days, we are very much occupied at

present.  We have been outvoted in the cortes, and this

afternoon we intend to dissolve them.  It is believed that the

rascals will refuse to depart, but Quesada will stand at the

door ready to turn them out, should they prove refractory.

Come along, and you will perhaps see a funcion."



After an hour's debate, the cortes were dissolved without

it being necessary to call in the aid of the redoubtable

Quesada, and Galiano forthwith gave me a letter to his

colleague the Duke of Rivas, in whose department he told me was

vested the power either of giving or refusing the permission to

print the book in question.  The duke was a very handsome young

man, of about thirty, an Andalusian by birth, like his two

colleagues.  He had published several works, tragedies, I

believe, and enjoyed a certain kind of literary reputation.  He

received me with the greatest affability; and having heard what

I had to say, he replied with a most captivating bow, and a

genuine Andalusian grimace: "Go to my secretary; go to my

secretary - EL HARA POR USTED EL GUSIO."  So I went to the

secretary, whose name was Oliban, an Aragonese, who was not

handsome, and whose manners were neither elegant nor affable.

"You want permission to print the Testament?"  "I do," said I.

"And you have come to His Excellency about it," continued

Oliban.  "Very true," I replied.  "I suppose you intend to

print it without notes."  "Yes."  "Then His Excellency cannot

give you permission," said the Aragonese secretary: "it was

determined by the Council of Trent that no part of the

Scripture should be printed in any Christian country without

the notes of the church."  "How many years was that ago?" I

demanded.  "I do not know how many years ago it was," said

Oliban; "but such was the decree of the Council of Trent."  "Is

Spain at present governed according to the decrees of the

Council of Trent?" I inquired.  "In some points she is,"

answered the Aragonese, "and this is one.  But tell me who are

you?  Are you known to the British minister?"  "O yes, and he

takes a great interest in the matter."  "Does he?" said Oliban;

"that indeed alters the case: if you can show me that His

Excellency takes in interest in this business, I certainly

shall not oppose myself to it."



The British minister performed all I could wish, and much

more than I could expect; he had an interview with the Duke of

Rivas, with whom he had much discourse upon my affair: the duke

was all smiles and courtesy.  He moreover wrote a private

letter to the duke, which he advised me to present when I next

paid him a visit, and, to crown all, he wrote a letter directed

to myself, in which he did me the honour to say that he had a

regard for me, and that nothing would afford him greater

pleasure than to hear that I had obtained the permission which

I was seeking.  So I went to the duke, and delivered the

letter.  He was ten times more kind and affable than before: he

read the letter, smiled most sweetly, and then, as if seized

with sudden enthusiasm, he extended his arms in a manner almost

theatrical, exclaiming, "AL SECRETARIO, EL HARA POR USTED EL

GUSTO."  Away I hurried to the secretary, who received me with

all the coolness of an icicle: I related to him the words of

his principal, and then put into his hand the letter of the

British minister to myself.  The secretary read it very

deliberately, and then said that it was evident His Excellency

did take an interest in the matter.  He then asked me my name,

and taking a sheet of paper, sat down as if for the purpose of

writing the permission.  I was in ecstasy - all of a sudden,

however, he stopped, lifted up his head, seemed to consider a

moment, and then putting his pen behind his ear, he said,

"Amongst the decrees of the Council of Trent is one to the

effect" . . . .





"Oh dear!" said I.



"A singular person is this Oliban," said I to Galiano;

"you cannot imagine what trouble he gives me: he is continually

talking about the Council of Trent."



"I wish he was in the Trent up to the middle," said

Galiano, who, as I have observed already, spoke excellent

English; "I wish he was there for talking such nonsense.

However," said he, "we must not offend Oliban, he is one of us,

and has done us much service; he is, moreover, a very clever

man, but he is an Aragonese, and when one of that nation once

gets an idea into his head, it is the most difficult thing in

the world to dislodge it; however, we will go to him; he is an

old friend of mine, and I have no doubt but that we shall be

able to make him listen to reason."  So the next day I called

upon Galiano, at his marine or admiralty office (what shall I

call it?), and from thence we proceeded to the bureau of the

interior, a magnificent edifice, which had formerly been the

casa of the Inquisition, where we had an interview with Oliban,

whom Galiano took aside to the window, and there held with him

a long conversation, which, as they spoke in whispers, and the

room was immensely large, I did not hear.  At length Galiano

came to me and said, "There is some difficulty with respect to

this business of yours, but I have told Oliban that you are a

friend of mine, and he says that that is sufficient; remain

with him now, and he will do anything to oblige you; your

affair is settled - farewell"; whereupon he departed and I

remained with Oliban, who proceeded forthwith to write

something, which having concluded, he took out a box of cigars,

and having lighted one and offered me another, which I declined

as I do not smoke, he placed his feet against the table, and

thus proceeded to address me, speaking in the French language.



"It is with great pleasure that I see you in this

capital, and, I may say, upon this business.  I consider it a

disgrace to Spain that there is no edition of the Gospel in

circulation, at least such a one as would be within the reach

of all classes of society, the highest or poorest; one

unencumbered with notes and commentaries, human devices,

swelling it to an unwieldy bulk.  I have no doubt that such an

edition as you propose to print, would have a most beneficial

influence on the minds of the people, who, between ourselves,

know nothing of pure religion; how should they? seeing that the

Gospel has always been sedulously kept from them, just as if

civilization could exist where the light of the Gospel beameth

not.  The moral regeneration of Spain depends upon the free

circulation of the Scriptures; to which alone England, your own

happy country, is indebted for its high state of civilization,

and the unmatched prosperity which it at present enjoys; all

this I admit, in fact, reason compels me to do so, but - "



"Now for it," thought I.



"But" - and then he began to talk once more of the

wearisome Council of Trent, and I found that his writing in the

paper, the offer of the cigar, and the long and prosy harangue

were - what shall I call it? - mere [Greek word which cannot be

reproduced].



By this time the spring was far advanced, the sides

though not the tops of the Guadarama hills had long since lost

their snows; the trees of the Prado had donned their full

foliage, and all the Campina in the neighbourhood of Madrid

smiled and was happy: the summer heats had not commenced, and

the weather was truly delicious.



Towards the west, at the foot of the hill on which stands

Madrid, is a canal running parallel with the Manzanares for

some leagues, from which it is separated by pleasant and

fertile meadows.  The banks of this canal, which was begun by

Carlos Tercero, and has never been completed, are planted with

beautiful trees, and form the most delightful walk in the

neighbourhood of the capital.  Here I would loiter for hours

looking at the shoals of gold and silver fish which basked on

the surface of the green sunny waters, or listening, not to the

warbling of birds - for Spain is not the land of feathered

choristers - but to the prattle of the narangero or man who

sold oranges and water by a little deserted watch tower just

opposite the wooden bridge that crosses the canal, which

situation he had chosen as favourable for his trade, and there

had placed his stall.  He was an Asturian by birth, about fifty

years of age, and about five feet high.  As I purchased freely

of his fruit, he soon conceived a great friendship for me, and

told me his history; it contained, however, nothing very

remarkable, the leading incident being an adventure which had

befallen him amidst the mountains of Granada, where, falling

into the hands of certain Gypsies, they stripped him naked, and

then dismissed him with a sound cudgelling.  "I have wandered

throughout Spain," said he, "and I have come to the conclusion

that there are but two places worth living in, Malaga and

Madrid.  At Malaga everything is very cheap, and there is such

an abundance of fish, that I have frequently seen them piled in

heaps on the sea-shore: and as for Madrid, money is always

stirring at the Corte, and I never go supperless to bed; my

only care is to sell my oranges, and my only hope that when I

die I shall be buried yonder."



And he pointed across the Manzanares, where, on the

declivity of a gentle hill, at about a league's distance, shone

brightly in the sunshine the white walls of the Campo Santo, or

common burying ground of Madrid.



He was a fellow of infinite drollery, and, though he

could scarcely read or write, by no means ignorant of the ways

of the world; his knowledge of individuals was curious and

extensive, few people passing his stall with whose names,

character, and history he was not acquainted.  "Those two

gentry," said he, pointing to a magnificently dressed cavalier

and lady, who had dismounted from a carriage, and arm in arm

were coming across the wooden bridge, followed by two

attendants; "those gentry are the Infante Francisco Paulo, and

his wife the Neapolitana, sister of our Christina; he is a very

good subject, but as for his wife - vaya - the veriest scold in

Madrid; she can say carrajo with the most ill-conditioned

carrier of La Mancha, giving the true emphasis and genuine

pronunciation.  Don't take off your hat to her, amigo - she has

neither formality nor politeness - I once saluted her, and she

took no more notice of me than if I had not been what I am, an

Asturian and a gentleman, of better blood than herself.  Good

day, Senor Don Francisco.  Que tal (HOW GOES IT)? very fine

weather this - VAYA SU MERCED CON DIOS.  Those three fellows

who just stopped to drink water are great thieves, true sons of

the prison; I am always civil to them, for it would not do to

be on ill terms; they pay me or not, just as they think proper.

I have been in some trouble on their account: about a year ago

they robbed a man a little farther on beyond the second bridge.

By the way, I counsel you, brother, not to go there, as I

believe you often do - it is a dangerous place.  They robbed a

gentleman and ill-treated him, but his brother, who was an

escribano, was soon upon their trail, and had them arrested;

but he wanted someone to identify them, and it chanced that

they had stopped to drink water at my stall, just as they did

now.  This the escribano heard of, and forthwith had me away to

the prison to confront me with them.  I knew them well enough,

but I had learnt in my travels when to close my eyes and when

to open them; so I told the escribano that I could not say that

I had ever seen them before.  He was in a great rage and

threatened to imprison me; I told him he might and that I cared

not.  Vaya, I was not going to expose myself to the resentment

of those three and to that of their friends; I live too near

the Hay Market for that.  Good day, my young masters. - Murcian

oranges, as you see; the genuine dragon's blood.  Water sweet

and cold.  Those two boys are the children of Gabiria,

comptroller of the queen's household, and the richest man in

Madrid; they are nice boys, and buy much fruit.  It is said

their father loves them more than all his possessions.  The old

woman who is lying beneath yon tree is the Tia Lucilla; she has

committed murders, and as she owes me money, I hope one day to

see her executed.  This man was of the Walloon guard; - Senor

Don Benito Mol, how do you do?"



This last named personage instantly engrossed my

attention; he was a bulky old man, somewhat above the middle

height, with white hair and ruddy features; his eyes were large

and blue, and whenever he fixed them on any one's countenance,

were full of an expression of great eagerness, as if he were

expecting the communication of some important tidings.  He was

dressed commonly enough, in a jacket and trousers of coarse

cloth of a russet colour, on his head was an immense sombrero,

the brim of which had been much cut and mutilated, so as in

some places to resemble the jags or denticles of a saw.  He

returned the salutation of the orange-man, and bowing to me,

forthwith produced two scented wash-balls which he offered for

sale in a rough dissonant jargon, intended for Spanish, but

which seemed more like the Valencian or Catalan.



Upon my asking him who he was, the following conversation

ensued between us:



"I am a Swiss of Lucerne, Benedict Mol by name, once a

soldier in the Walloon guard, and now a soap-boiler, at your

service."



"You speak the language of Spain very imperfectly," said

I; "how long have you been in the country?"



"Forty-five years," replied Benedict; "but when the guard

was broken up, I went to Minorca, where I lost the Spanish

language without acquiring the Catalan."



"You have been a soldier of the king of Spain," said I;

"how did you like the service?"



"Not so well, but that I should have been glad to leave

it forty years ago; the pay was bad, and the treatment worse.

I will now speak Swiss to you, for, if I am not much mistaken,

you are a German man, and understand the speech of Lucerne; I

should soon have deserted from the service of Spain, as I did

from that of the Pope, whose soldier I was in my early youth

before I came here; but I had married a woman of Minorca, by

whom I had two children; it was this that detained me in those

parts so long; before, however, I left Minorca, my wife died,

and as for my children, one went east, the other west, and I

know not what became of them; I intend shortly to return to

Lucerne, and live there like a duke."



"Have you, then, realized a large capital in Spain?" said

I, glancing at his hat and the rest of his apparel.



"Not a cuart, not a cuart; these two wash-balls are all

that I possess."



"Perhaps you are the son of good parents, and have lands

and money in your own country wherewith to support yourself."



"Not a heller, not a heller; my father was hangman of

Lucerne, and when he died, his body was seized to pay his

debts."



"Then doubtless," said I, "you intend to ply your trade

of soap-boiling at Lucerne; you are quite right, my friend, I

know of no occupation more honourable or useful."



"I have no thoughts of plying my trade at Lucerne,"

replied Bennet; "and now, as I see you are a German man, Lieber

Herr, and as I like your countenance and your manner of

speaking, I will tell you in confidence that I know very little

of my trade, and have already been turned out of several

fabriques as an evil workman; the two wash-balls that I carry

in my pocket are not of my own making.  IN KURTZEN, I know

little more of soap-boiling than I do of tailoring, horse-

farriery, or shoe-making, all of which I have practised."



"Then I know not how you can hope to live like a hertzog

in your native canton, unless you expect that the men of

Lucerne, in consideration of your services to the Pope and to

the king of Spain, will maintain you in splendour at the public

expense."



"Lieber Herr," said Benedict, "the men of Lucerne are by

no means fond of maintaining the soldiers of the Pope and the

king of Spain at their own expense; many of the guard who have

returned thither beg their bread in the streets, but when I go,

it shall be in a coach drawn by six mules, with a treasure, a

mighty schatz which lies in the church of Saint James of

Compostella, in Galicia."



"I hope you do not intend to rob the church," said I; "

if you do, however, I believe you will be disappointed.

Mendizabal and the liberals have been beforehand with you.  I

am informed that at present no other treasure is to be found in

the cathedrals of Spain than a few paltry ornaments and plated

utensils."



"My good German Herr," said Benedict, "it is no church

schatz, and no person living, save myself, knows of its

existence: nearly thirty years ago, amongst the sick soldiers

who were brought to Madrid, was one of my comrades of the

Walloon Guard, who had accompanied the French to Portugal; he

was very sick and shortly died.  Before, however, he breathed

his last, he sent for me, and upon his deathbed told me that

himself and two other soldiers, both of whom had since been

killed, had buried in a certain church at Compostella a great

booty which they had made in Portugal: it consisted of gold

moidores and of a packet of huge diamonds from the Brazils; the

whole was contained in a large copper kettle.  I listened with

greedy ears, and from that moment, I may say, I have known no

rest, neither by day nor night, thinking of the schatz.  It is

very easy to find, for the dying man was so exact in his

description of the place where it lies, that were I once at

Compostella, I should have no difficulty in putting my hand

upon it; several times I have been on the point of setting out

on the journey, but something has always happened to stop me.

When my wife died, I left Minorca with a determination to go to

Saint James, but on reaching Madrid, I fell into the hands of a

Basque woman, who persuaded me to live with her, which I have

done for several years; she is a great hax, * and says that if

I desert her she will breathe a spell which shall cling to me

for ever.  DEM GOT SEY DANK, - she is now in the hospital, and

daily expected to die.  This is my history, Lieber Herr."



* Witch.  Ger.  Hexe.



I have been the more careful in relating the above

conversation, as I shall have frequent occasion to mention the

Swiss in the course of these journals; his subsequent

adventures were highly extraordinary, and the closing one

caused a great sensation in Spain.
