





CHAPTER XLIV







Aranjuez - A Warning - A Night Adventure - A Fresh Expedition -

Segovia - Abades - Factions Curas - Lopez in Prison - Rescue of Lopez.





The success which had attended our efforts in the Sagra

of Toledo speedily urged me on to a new enterprise.  I now

determined to direct my course to La Mancha, and to distribute

the word amongst the villages of that province.  Lopez, who had

already performed such important services in the Sagra, had

accompanied us to Madrid, and was eager to take part in this

new expedition.  We determined in the first place to proceed to

Aranjuez, where we hoped to obtain some information which might

prove of utility in the further regulation of our movements;

Aranjuez being but a slight distance from the frontier of La

Mancha and the high road into that province passing directly

through it.  We accordingly sallied forth from Madrid, selling

from twenty to forty Testaments in every village which lay in

our way, until we arrived at Aranjuez, to which place we had

forwarded a large supply of books.



A lovely spot is Aranjuez, though in desolation: here the

Tagus flows through a delicious valley, perhaps the most

fertile in Spain; and here upsprang, in Spain's better days, a

little city, with a small but beautiful palace shaded by

enormous trees, where royalty delighted to forget its cares.

Here Ferdinand the Seventh spent his latter days, surrounded by

lovely senoras and Andalusian bull-fighters: but as the German

Schiller has it in one of his tragedies:





"The happy days in fair Aranjuez,

Are past and gone."





When the sensual king went to his dread account, royalty

deserted it, and it soon fell into decay.  Intriguing counters

no longer crowd its halls; its spacious circus, where Manchegan

bulls once roared in rage and agony, is now closed, and the

light tinkling of guitars is no longer heard amidst its groves

and gardens.



At Aranjuez I made a sojourn of three days, during which

time Antonio, Lopez, and myself visited every house in the

town.  We found a vast deal of poverty and ignorance amongst

the inhabitants, and experienced some opposition: nevertheless

it pleased the Almighty to permit us to dispose of about eighty

Testaments, which were purchased entirely by the very poor

people; those in easier circumstances paying no attention to

the word of God, but rather turning it to scoff and ridicule.



One circumstance was very gratifying and cheering to me,

namely, the ocular proof which I possessed that the books which

I had disposed of were read, and with attention, by those to

whom I sold them; and that many others participated in their

benefit.  In the streets of Aranjuez, and beneath the mighty

cedars and gigantic elms and plantains which compose its noble

woods, I have frequently seen groups assembled listening to

individuals who, with the New Testament in their hands, were

reading aloud the comfortable words of salvation.



It is probable that, had I remained a longer period at

Aranjuez, I might have sold many more of these divine books,

but I was eager to gain La Mancha and its sandy plains, and to

conceal myself for a season amongst its solitary villages, for

I was apprehensive that a storm was gathering around me; but

when once through Ocana, the frontier town, I knew well that I

should have nothing to fear from the Spanish authorities, as

their power ceased there, the rest of La Mancha being almost

entirely in the hands of the Carlists, and overrun by small

parties of banditti, from whom, however, I trusted that the

Lord would preserve me.  I therefore departed for Ocana,

distant three leagues from Aranjuez.



I started with Antonio at six in the evening, having

early in the morning sent forward Lopez with between two and

three hundred Testaments.  We left the high road, and proceeded

by a shorter way through wild hills and over very broken and

precipitous ground: being well mounted we found ourselves just

after sunset opposite Ocana, which stands on a steep hill.  A

deep valley lay between us and the town: we descended, and came

to a small bridge, which traverses a rivulet at the bottom of

the valley, at a very small distance from a kind of suburb.  We

crossed the bridge, and were passing by a deserted house on our

left hand, when a man appeared from under the porch.



What I am about to state will seem incomprehensible, but

a singular history and a singular people are connected with it:

the man placed himself before my horse so as to bar the way,

and said "SCHOPHON," which, in the Hebrew tongue, signifies a

rabbit.  I knew this word to be one of the Jewish countersigns,

and asked the man if he had any thing to communicate?  He said,

"You must not enter the town, for a net is prepared for you.

The corregidor of Toledo, on whom may all evil light, in order

to give pleasure to the priests of Maria, in whose face I spit,

has ordered all the alcaldes of these parts, and the escribanos

and the corchetes to lay hands on you wherever they may find

you, and to send you, and your books, and all that pertains to

you to Toledo.  Your servant was seized this morning in the

town above, as he was selling the writings in the streets, and

they are now awaiting your arrival in the posada; but I knew

you from the accounts of my brethren, and I have been waiting

here four hours to give you warning in order that your horse

may turn his tail to your enemies, and neigh in derision of

them.  Fear nothing for your servant, for he is known to the

alcalde, and will be set at liberty, but do you flee, and may

God attend you."  Having said this, he hurried towards the

town.



I hesitated not a moment to take his advice, knowing full

well that, as my books had been taken possession of, I could do

no more in that quarter.  We turned back in the direction of

Aranjuez, the horses, notwithstanding the nature of the ground,

galloping at full speed; but our adventures were not over.

Midway, and about half a league from the village of Antigola,

we saw close to us on our left hand three men on a low bank.

As far as the darkness would permit us to distinguish, they

were naked, but each bore in his hand a long gun.  These were

rateros, or the common assassins and robbers of the roads.  We

halted and cried out, "Who goes there?"  They replied, "What's

that to you? pass by."  Their drift was to fire at us from a

position from which it would be impossible to miss.  We

shouted, "If you do not instantly pass to the right side of the

road, we will tread you down between the horses' hoofs."  They

hesitated and then obeyed, for all assassins are dastards, and

the least show of resolution daunts them.  As we galloped past,

one cried, with an obscene oath, "Shall we fire?"  But another

said, "No, no! there's danger."  We reached Aranjuez, where

early next morning Lopez rejoined us, and we returned to

Madrid.



I am sorry to state that two hundred Testaments were

seized at Ocana, from whence, after being sealed up, they were

despatched to Toledo.  Lopez informed me, that in two hours he

could have sold them all, the demand was so great.  As it was,

twenty-seven were disposed of in less than ten minutes.



"Ride on because of the word of righteousness."

Notwithstanding the check which we had experienced at Ocana, we

were far from being discouraged, and forthwith prepared

ourselves for another expedition.  As we returned from Aranjeuz

to Madrid, my eyes had frequently glanced towards the mighty

wall of mountains dividing the two Castiles, and I said to

myself, "Would it not be well to cross those hills, and

commence operations on the other side, even in Old Castile?

There I am unknown, and intelligence of my proceedings can

scarcely have been transmitted thither.  Peradventure the enemy

is asleep, and before he has roused himself, I may have sown

much of the precious seed amongst the villages of the Old

Castilians.  To Castile, therefore, to Castile la Vieja!"

Accordingly, on the day after my arrival, I despatched several

cargoes of books to various places which I proposed to visit,

and sent forward Lopez and his donkey, well laden, with

directions to meet me on a particular day beneath a particular

arch of the aqueduct of Segovia.  I likewise gave him orders to

engage any persons willing to co-operate with us in the

circulation of the Scriptures, and who might be likely to prove

of utility in the enterprise.  A more useful assistant than

Lopez in an expedition of this kind it was impossible to have.

He was not only well acquainted with the country, but had

friends, and even connexions on the other side of the hills, in

whose houses he assured me that we should at all times find a

hearty welcome.  He departed in high spirits, exclaiming, "Be

of good cheer, Don Jorge; before we return we will have

disposed of every copy of your evangelic library.  Down with

the friars!  Down with superstition!  Viva Ingalaterra, viva el

Evangelio!"



In a few days I followed with Antonio.  We ascended the

mountains by the pass called Pena Cerrada, which lies about

three leagues to the eastward of that of Guadarama.  It is very

unfrequented, the high road between the two Castiles passing

through Guadarama.  It has, moreover, an evil name, being,

according to common report, infested with banditti.  The sun

was just setting when we reached the top of the hills, and

entered a thick and gloomy pine forest, which entirely covers

the mountains on the side of Old Castile.  The descent soon

became so rapid and precipitous, that we were fain to dismount

from our horses and to drive them before us.  Into the woods we

plunged deeper and deeper still; night-birds soon began to hoot

and cry, and millions of crickets commenced their shrill

chirping above, below, and around us.  Occasionally, amidst the

trees at a distance, we could see blazes, as if from immense

fires.  "They are those of the charcoal-burners, mon maitre!"

said Antonio; "we will not go near them, however, for they are

savage people, and half bandits.  Many is the traveller whom

they have robbed and murdered in these horrid wildernesses."



It was blackest night when we arrived at the foot of the

mountains; we were still, however, amidst woods and pine

forests, which extended for leagues in every direction.  "We

shall scarcely reach Segovia to-night, mon maitre," said

Antonio.  And so indeed it proved, for we became bewildered,

and at last arrived where two roads branched off in different

directions, we took not the left hand road, which would have

conducted us to Segovia, but turned to the right, in the

direction of La Granja, where we arrived at midnight.



We found the desolation of La Granja far greater than

that of Aranjuez; both had suffered from the absence of

royalty, but the former to a degree which was truly appalling.

Nine-tenths of the inhabitants had left this place, which,

until the late military revolution, had been the favourite

residence of Christina.  So great is the solitude of La Granja,

that wild boars from the neighbouring forests, and especially

from the beautiful pine-covered mountain which rises like a

cone directly behind the palace, frequently find their way into

the streets and squares, and whet their tusks against the

pillars of the porticos.



"Ride on because of the word of righteousness."  After a

stay of twenty-four hours at La Granja, we proceeded to

Segovia.  The day had arrived on which I had appointed to meet

Lopez.  I repaired to the aqueduct, and sat down beneath the

hundred and seventh arch, where I waited the greater part of

the day, but he came not, whereupon I rose and went into the

city.



At Segovia I tarried two days in the house of a friend,

still I could hear nothing of Lopez.  At last, by the greatest

chance in the world, I heard from a peasant that there were men

in the neighbourhood of Abades selling books.



Abades is about three leagues distant from Segovia, and

upon receiving this intelligence, I instantly departed for the

former place, with three donkeys laden with Testaments.  I

reached Abades at nightfall, and found Lopez, with two peasants

whom he had engaged, in the house of the surgeon of the place,

where I also took up my residence.  He had already disposed of

a considerable number of Testaments in the neighbourhood, and

had that day commenced selling at Abades itself; he had,

however, been interrupted by two of the three curas of the

village, who, with horrid curses denounced the work,

threatening eternal condemnation to Lopez for selling it, and

to any person who should purchase it; whereupon Lopez,

terrified, forbore until I should arrive.  The third cura,

however, exerted himself to the utmost to persuade the people

to provide themselves with Testaments, telling them that his

brethren were hypocrites and false guides, who, by keeping them

in ignorance of the word and will of Christ, were leading them

to the abyss.  Upon receiving this information, I instantly

sallied forth to the market-place, and that same night

succeeded in disposing of upwards of thirty Testaments.  The

next morning the house was entered by the two factious curas,

but upon my rising to confront them, they retreated, and I

heard no more of them, except that they publicly cursed me in

the church more than once, an event which, as no ill resulted

from it, gave me little concern.



I will not detail the events of the next week; suffice it

to say that arranging my forces in the most advantageous way, I

succeeded, by God's assistance, in disposing of from five to

six hundred Testaments amongst the villages from one to seven

leagues' distance from Abades.  At the expiration of that

period I received information that my proceedings were known in

Segovia, in which province Abades is situated, and that an

order was about to be sent to the alcalde to seize all books in

my possession.  Whereupon, notwithstanding that it was late in

the evening, I decamped with all my people, and upwards of

three hundred Testaments, having a few hours previously

received a fresh supply from Madrid.  That night we passed in

the fields, and next morning proceeded to Labajos, a village on

the high road from Madrid to Valladolid.  In this place we

offered no books for sale, but contented ourselves with

supplying the neighbouring villages with the word of God: we

likewise sold it in the highways.



We had not been at Labajos a week, during which time we

were remarkably successful, when the Carlist chieftain,

Balmaseda, at the head of his cavalry, made his desperate

inroad into the southern part of Old Castile, dashing down like

an avalanche from the pine-woods of Soria.  I was present at

all the horrors which ensued, - the sack of Arrevalo, and the

forcible entry into Martin Munoz.  Amidst these terrible scenes

we continued our labours.  Suddenly I lost Lopez for three

days, and suffered dreadful anxiety on his account, imagining

that he had been shot by the Carlists; at last I heard that he

was in prison at Villallos, three leagues distant.  The steps

which I took to rescue him will be found detailed in a

communication, which I deemed it my duty to transmit to Lord

William Hervey, who, in the absence of Sir George Villiers, now

became Earl of Clarendon, fulfilled the duties of minister at

Madrid:-





    LABAJOS, PROVINCE OF SEGOVIA,

    AUGUST 23, 1838.



MY LORD, - I beg leave to call your attention to the

following facts.  On the 21st inst. I received information that

a person in my employ, of the name of Juan Lopez, had been

thrown into the prison of Villallos, in the province of Avila,

by order of the cura of that place.  The crime with which he

was charged was selling the New Testament.  I was at that time

at Labajos, in the province of Segovia, and the division of the

factious chieftain Balmaseda was in the immediate

neighbourhood.  On the 22nd, I mounted my horse and rode to

Villallos, a distance of three leagues.  On my arrival there, I

found that Lopez had been removed from the prison to a private

house.  An order had arrived from the corregidor of Avila,

commanding that the person of Lopez should be set at liberty,

and that the books which had been found in his possession

should be alone detained.  Nevertheless, in direct opposition

to this order, (a copy of which I herewith transmit,) the

alcalde of Villallos, at the instigation of the cura, refused

to permit the said Lopez to quit the place, either to proceed

to Avila or in any other direction.  It had been hinted to

Lopez that as the factious were expected, it was intended on

their arrival to denounce him to them as a liberal, and to

cause him to be sacrificed.  Taking these circumstances into

consideration, I deemed it my duty as a Christian and a

gentleman, to rescue my unfortunate servant from such lawless

hands, and in consequence, defying opposition, I bore him off,

though entirely unarmed, through a crowd of at least one

hundred peasants.  On leaving the place I shouted, "VIVA ISABEL

SEGUNDA."



As it is my belief that the cura of Villallos is a person

capable of any infamy, I beg leave humbly to intreat your

Lordship to cause a copy of the above narration to be forwarded

to the Spanish government. - I have the honour to remain, My

Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient,



GEORGE BORROW.



To the Right Honourable

LORD WILLIAM HERVEY.





After the rescue of Lopez we proceeded in the work of

distribution.  Suddenly, however, the symptoms of an

approaching illness came over me, which compelled us to return

in all haste to Madrid.  Arrived there, I was attacked by a

fever which confined me to my bed for several weeks; occasional

fits of delirium came over me, during one of which, I imagined

myself in the market-place of Martin Munos, engaged in deadly

struggle with the chieftain Balmaseda.



The fever had scarcely departed, when a profound

melancholy took possession of me, which entirely disqualified

me for active exertion.  Change of scene and air was

recommended; I therefore returned to England.
