





CHAPTER XXXVI







State of Affairs at Madrid - The New Ministry - Pope of Rome -

The Bookseller of Toledo - Sword Blades - Houses of Toledo -

The Forlorn Gypsy - Proceedings at Madrid - Another Servant.





During my journey in the northern provinces of Spain,

which occupied a considerable portion of the year 1837, I had

accomplished but a slight portion of what I proposed to myself

to effect in the outset.  Insignificant are the results of

man's labours compared with the swelling ideas of his

presumption; something, however, had been effected by the

journey, which I had just concluded.  The New Testament of

Christ was now enjoying a quiet sale in the principal towns of

the north, and I had secured the friendly interest and co-

operation of the booksellers of those parts, particularly of

him the most considerable of them all, old Rey of Compostella.

I had, moreover, disposed of a considerable number of

Testaments with my own hands, to private individuals, entirely

of the lower class, namely, muleteers, carmen, contrabandistas,

etc., so that upon the whole I had abundant cause for gratitude

and thanksgiving.



I did not find our affairs in a very prosperous state at

Madrid, few copies having been sold in the booksellers' shops,

yet what could be rationally expected during these latter

times?  Don Carlos, with a large army, had been at the gates;

plunder and massacre had been expected; so that people were too

much occupied in forming plans to secure their lives and

property, to give much attention to reading of any description.



The enemy, however, had now retired to his strongholds in

Alava and Guipuscoa.  I hoped that brighter days were dawning,

and that the work, under my own superintendence, would, with

God's blessing, prosper in the capital of Spain.  How far the

result corresponded with my expectations will be seen in the

sequel.  During my absence in the north, a total change of

ministers had occurred.  The liberal party had been ousted from

the cabinet, and in their place had entered individuals

attached to the moderado or court party: unfortunately,

however, for my prospects, they consisted of persons with whom

I had no acquaintance whatever, and with whom my former

friends, Galiano and Isturitz, had little or no influence.

These gentlemen were now regularly laid on the shelf, and their

political career appeared to be terminated for ever.



From the present ministry I could expect but little; they

consisted of men, the greater part of whom had been either

courtiers or employes of the deceased King Ferdinand, who were

friends to absolutism, and by no means inclined to do or to

favour anything calculated to give offence to the court of

Rome, which they were anxious to conciliate, hoping that

eventually it might be induced to recognize the young queen,

not as the constitutional but as the absolute Queen Isabella

the Second.



Such was the party which continued in power throughout

the remainder of my sojourn in Spain, and which persecuted me

less from rancour and malice than from policy.  It was not

until the conclusion of the war of the succession that it lost

the ascendancy, when it sank to the ground with its patroness

the queen-mother, before the dictatorship of Espartero.



The first step which I took after my return to Madrid,

towards circulating the Scriptures, was a very bold one.  It

was neither more nor less than the establishment of a shop for

the sale of Testaments.  This shop was situated in the Calle

del Principe, a respectable and well-frequented street in the

neighbourhood of the Square of Cervantes.  I furnished it

handsomely with glass cases and chandeliers, and procured an

acute Gallegan of the name of Pepe Calzado, to superintend the

business, who gave me weekly a faithful account of the copies

sold.



"How strangely times alter," said I, the second day

subsequent to the opening of my establishment, as I stood on

the opposite side of the street, leaning against the wall with

folded arms, surveying my shop, on the windows of which were

painted in large yellow characters, DESPACHO DE LA SOCIEDAD

BIBLICA Y ESTRANGERA; "how strangely times alter; here have I

been during the last eight months running about old Popish

Spain, distributing Testaments, as agent of what the Papists

call an heretical society, and have neither been stoned nor

burnt; and here am I now in the capital, doing that which one

would think were enough to cause all the dead inquisitors and

officials buried within the circuit of the walls to rise from

their graves and cry abomination; and yet no one interferes

with me.  Pope of Rome!  Pope of Rome! look to thyself.  That

shop may be closed; but oh! what a sign of the times, that it

has been permitted to exist for one day.  It appears to me, my

Father, that the days of your sway are numbered in Spain; that

you will not be permitted much longer to plunder her, to scoff

at her, and to scourge her with scorpions, as in bygone

periods.  See I not the hand on the wall?  See I not in yonder

letters a `Mene, mene, Tekel, Upharsin'?  Look to thyself,

Batuschca."



And I remained for two hours, leaning against the wall,

staring at the shop.



A short time after the establishment of the despacho at

Madrid, I once more mounted the saddle, and, attended by

Antonio, rode over to Toledo, for the purpose of circulating

the Scriptures, sending beforehand by a muleteer a cargo of one

hundred Testaments.  I instantly addressed myself to the

principal bookseller of the place, whom from the circumstance

of his living in a town so abounding with canons, priests, and

ex-friars as Toledo, I expected to find a Carlist, or a SERVILE

at least.  I was never more mistaken in my life; on entering

the shop, which was very large and commodious, I beheld a stout

athletic man, dressed in a kind of cavalry uniform, with a

helmet on his head, and an immense sabre in his hand: this was

the bookseller himself, who I soon found was an officer in the

national cavalry.  Upon learning who I was, he shook me

heartily by the hand, and said that nothing would give him

greater pleasure than taking charge of the books, which he

would endeavour to circulate to the utmost of his ability.



"Will not your doing so bring you into odium with the

clergy?"



"Ca!" said he; "who cares?  I am rich, and so was my

father before me.  I do not depend on them, they cannot hate me

more than they do already, for I make no secret of my opinions.

I have just returned from an expedition," said he; "my brother

nationals and myself have, for the last three days, been

occupied in hunting down the factious and thieves of the

neighbourhood; we have killed three and brought in several

prisoners.  Who cares for the cowardly priests?  I am a

liberal, Don Jorge, and a friend of your countryman, Flinter.

Many is the Carlist guerilla-curate and robber-friar whom I

have assisted him to catch.  I am rejoiced to hear that he has

just been appointed captain-general of Toledo; there will be

fine doings here when he arrives, Don Jorge.  We will make the

clergy shake between us, I assure you."



Toledo was formerly the capital of Spain.  Its population

at present is barely fifteen thousand souls, though, in the

time of the Romans, and also during the Middle Ages, it is said

to have amounted to between two and three hundred thousand.  It

is situated about twelve leagues (forty miles) westward of

Madrid, and is built upon a steep rocky hill, round which flows

the Tagus, on all sides but the north.  It still possesses a

great many remarkable edifices, notwithstanding that it has

long since fallen into decay.  Its cathedral is the most

magnificent of Spain, and is the see of the primate.  In the

tower of this cathedral is the famous bell of Toledo, the

largest in the world with the exception of the monster bell of

Moscow, which I have also seen.  It weighs 1,543 arrobes, or

37,032 pounds.  It has, however, a disagreeable sound, owing to

a cleft in its side.  Toledo could once boast the finest

pictures in Spain, but many were stolen or destroyed by the

French during the Peninsular war, and still more have lately

been removed by order of the government.  Perhaps the most

remarkable one still remains; I allude to that which represents

the burial of the Count of Orgaz, the masterpiece of Domenico,

the Greek, a most extraordinary genius, some of whose

productions possess merit of a very high order.  The picture in

question is in the little parish church of San Tome, at the

bottom of the aisle, on the left side of the altar.  Could it

be purchased, I should say it would be cheap at five thousand

pounds.



Amongst the many remarkable things which meet the eye of

the curious observer at Toledo, is the manufactory of arms,

where are wrought the swords, spears, and other weapons

intended for the army, with the exception of fire-arms, which

mostly come from abroad.



In old times, as is well known, the sword-blades of

Toledo were held in great estimation, and were transmitted as

merchandise throughout Christendom.  The present manufactory,

or fabrica, as it is called, is a handsome modern edifice,

situated without the wall of the city, on a plain contiguous to

the river, with which it communicates by a small canal.  It is

said that the water and the sand of the Tagus are essential for

the proper tempering of the swords.  I asked some of the

principal workmen whether, at the present day, they could

manufacture weapons of equal value to those of former days, and

whether the secret had been lost.



"Ca!" said they, "the swords of Toledo were never so good

as those which we are daily making.  It is ridiculous enough to

see strangers coming here to purchase old swords, the greater

part of which are mere rubbish, and never made at Toledo, yet

for such they will give a large price, whilst they would grudge

two dollars for this jewel, which was made but yesterday";

thereupon putting into my hand a middle-sized rapier.  "Your

worship," said they, "seems to have a strong arm, prove its

temper against the stone wall; - thrust boldly and fear not."



I HAVE a strong arm and dashed the point with my utmost

force against the solid granite: my arm was numbed to the

shoulder from the violence of the concussion, and continued so

for nearly a week, but the sword appeared not to be at all

blunted, or to have suffered in any respect.



"A better sword than that," said an ancient workman, a

native of Old Castile, "never transfixed Moor out yonder on the

sagra."



During my stay at Toledo, I lodged at the Posada de los

Caballeros, which signifies the inn of the gentlemen, which

name, in some respects, is certainly well deserved, for there

are many palaces far less magnificent than this inn of Toledo.

By magnificence it must not be supposed, however, that I allude

to costliness of furniture, or any kind of luxury which

pervaded the culinary department.  The rooms were as empty as

those of Spanish inns generally are, and the fare, though good

in its kind, was plain and homely; but I have seldom seen a

more imposing edifice.  It was of immense size, consisting of

several stories, and was built something in the Moorish taste,

with a quadrangular court in the centre, beneath which was an

immense algibe or tank, serving as a reservoir for rain-water.

All the houses in Toledo are supplied with tanks of this

description, into which the waters in the rainy season flow

from the roofs through pipes.  No other water is used for

drinking; that of the Tagus, not being considered salubrious,

is only used for purposes of cleanliness, being conveyed up the

steep narrow streets on donkeys in large stone jars.  The city,

standing on a rocky mountain, has no wells.  As for the rain-

water, it deposits a sediment in the tank, and becomes very

sweet and potable: these tanks are cleaned out: twice every

year.  During the summer, at which time the heat in this part

of Spain is intense, the families spend the greater part of the

day in the courts, which are overhung with a linen awning, the

heat of the atmosphere being tempered by the coolness arising

from the tank below, which answers the same purpose as the

fountain in the southern provinces of Spain.



I spent about a week at Toledo, during which time several

copies of the Testament were disposed of in the shop of my

friend the bookseller.  Several priests took it up from the

mostrador on which it lay, examined it, but made no remarks;

none of them purchased it.  My friend showed me through his

house, almost every apartment of which was lined from roof to

floor with books, many of which were highly valuable.  He told

me that he possessed the best collection in Spain of the

ancient literature of the country.  He was, however, less proud

of his library than his stud; finding that I had some

acquaintance with horses, his liking for me and also his

respect considerably increased.  "All I have," said he, "is at

your service; I see you are a man after my own heart.  When you

are disposed to ride out upon the sagra, you have only to apply

to my groom, who will forthwith saddle you my famed Cordovese

entero; I purchased him from the stables at Aranjuez, when the

royal stud was broken up.  There is but one other man to whom I

would lend him, and that man is Flinter."



At Toledo I met with a forlorn Gypsy woman and her son, a

lad of about fourteen years of age; she was not a native of the

place, but had come from La Mancha, her husband having been

cast into the prison of Toledo on a charge of mule-stealing:

the crime had been proved against him, and in a few days he was

to depart for Malaga, with the chain of galley slaves.  He was

quite destitute of money, and his wife was now in Toledo,

earning a few cuartos by telling fortunes about the streets, to

support him in prison.  She told me that it was her intention

to follow him to Malaga, where she hoped to be able to effect

his escape.  What an instance of conjugal affection; and yet

the affection here was all on one side, as is too frequently

the case.  Her husband was a worthless scoundrel, who had

previously abandoned her and betaken himself to Madrid, where

he had long lived in concubinage with the notorious she-thug

Aurora, at whose instigation he had committed the robbery for

which he was now held in durance.  "Should your husband escape

from Malaga, in what direction will he fly?" I demanded.



"To the chim of the Corahai, my son; to the land of the

Moors, to be a soldier of the Moorish king."



"And what will become of yourself?"  I inquired; "think

you that he will take you with him?"



"He will leave me on the shore, my son, and as soon as he

has crossed the black pawnee, he will forget me and never think

of me more."



"And knowing his ingratitude, why should you give

yourself so much trouble about him?"



"Am I not his romi, my son, and am I not bound by the law

of the Cales to assist him to the last?  Should he return from

the land of the Corahai at the end of a hundred years, and

should find me alive, and should say, I am hungry, little wife,

go forth and steal or tell bahi, I must do it, for he is the

rom and I the romi."



On my return to Madrid, I found the despacho still open:

various Testaments had been sold, though the number was by no

means considerable: the work had to labour under great

disadvantage, from the ignorance of the people at large with

respect to its tenor and contents.  It was no wonder, then,

that little interest was felt respecting it.  To call, however,

public attention to the despacho, I printed three thousand

advertisements on paper, yellow, blue, and crimson, with which

I almost covered the sides of the streets, and besides this,

inserted an account of it in all the journals and periodicals;

the consequence was, that in a short time almost every person

in Madrid was aware of its existence.  Such exertions in London

or Paris would probably have ensured the sale of the entire

edition of the New Testament within a few days.  In Madrid,

however, the result was not quite so flattering; for after the

establishment had been open an entire month, the copies

disposed of barely amounted to one hundred.



These proceedings of mine did not fail to cause a great

sensation: the priests and their partisans were teeming with

malice and fury, which, for some time, however, they thought

proper to exhibit only in words; it being their opinion that I

was favoured by the ambassador and by the British government;

but there was no attempt, however atrocious, that might not be

expected from their malignity; and were it right and seemly for

me, the most insignificant of worms, to make such a comparison,

I might say, like Paul at Ephesus, I was fighting with wild

beasts.



On the last day of the year 1837, my servant Antonio thus

addressed me: "Mon maitre, it is necessary that I leave you for

a time.  Ever since we have returned from our journeys, I have

become unsettled and dissatisfied with the house, the

furniture, and with Donna Marequita.  I have therefore engaged

myself as cook in the house of the Count of -, where I am to

receive four dollars per month less than what your worship

gives me.  I am fond of change, though it be for the worse.

Adieu, mon maitre, may you be as well served as you deserve;

should you chance, however, to have any pressing need DE MES

SOINS, send for me without hesitation, and I will at once give

my new master warning, if I am still with him, and come to

you."



Thus was I deprived for a time of the services of

Antonio.  I continued for a few days without a domestic, at the

end of which time I hired a certain Cantabrian or Basque, a

native of the village of Hernani, in Guipuscoa, who was

strongly recommended to me.
