





CHAPTER LIV







Again on Board - The Strange Visage - The Hadji - Setting Sail -

The Two Jews - American Vessel - Tangier - Adun Oulem -

The Struggle - The Forbidden Thing.





On Thursday, the 8th of August, I was again on board the

Genoese bark, at as early an hour as on the previous morning.

After waiting, however, two or three hours without any

preparation being made for departing, I was about to return to

the shore once more, but the old Genoese mate advised me to

stay, assuring me that he had no doubt of our sailing speedily,

as all the cargo was on board, and we had nothing further to

detain us.  I was reposing myself in the little cabin, when I

heard a boat strike against the side of the vessel, and some

people come on board.  Presently a face peered in at the

opening, strange and wild.  I was half asleep, and at first

imagined I was dreaming, for the face seemed more like that of

a goat or an orge than of a human being; its long beard almost

touching my face as I lay extended in a kind of berth.

Starting up, however, I recognised the singular-looking Jew

whom I had seen in the company of Judah Lib.  He recognised me

also, and nodding, bent his huge features into a smile.  I

arose and went upon deck, where I found him in company with

another Jew, a young man in the dress of Barbary.  They had

just arrived in the boat.  I asked my friend of the beard who

he was, from whence he came, and where he was going?  He

answered, in broken Portuguese, that he was returning from

Lisbon, where he had been on business, to Mogadore, of which

place he was a native.  He then looked me in the face and

smiled, and taking out a book from his pocket, in Hebrew

characters, fell to reading it; whereupon a Spanish sailor on

board observed that with such a beard and book he must needs be

a sabio, or sage.  His companion was from Mequinez, and spoke

only Arabic.



A large boat now drew nigh, the stern of which was filled

with Moors; there might be about twelve, and the greater part

evidently consisted of persons of distinction, as they were

dressed in all the pomp and gallantry of the East, with snow-

white turbans, jabadores of green silk or scarlet cloth, and

bedeyas rich with gold galloon.  Some of them were exceedingly

fine men, and two amongst them, youths, were strikingly

handsome, and so far from exhibiting the dark swarthy

countenance of Moors in general, their complexions were of a

delicate red and white.  The principal personage, and to whom

all the rest paid much deference, was a tall athletic man of

about forty.  He wore a vest of white quilted cotton, and white

kandrisa, whilst gracefully wound round his body, and swathing

the upper part of his head, was the balk, or white flannel

wrapping plaid always held in so much estimation by the Moors

from the earliest period of their history.  His legs were bare

and his feet only protected from the ground by yellow slippers.

He displayed no farther ornament than one large gold ear-ring,

from which depended a pearl, evidently of great price.  A noble

black beard, about a foot in length, touched his muscular

breast.  His features were good, with the exception of the

eyes, which were somewhat small; their expression, however,

was, evil; their glances were sullen; and malignity and ill-

nature were painted in every lineament of his countenance,

which seemed never to have been brightened with a smile.  The

Spanish sailor, of whom I have already had occasion to speak,

informed me in a whisper, that he was a santuron, or big saint,

and was so far back on his way from Mecca; adding, that he was

a merchant of immense wealth.  It soon appeared that the other

Moors had merely attended him on board through friendly

politeness, as they all successively came to bid him adieu,

with the exception of two blacks, who were his attendants.  I

observed that these blacks, when the Moors presented them their

hands at departing, invariably made an effort to press them to

their lips, which effort was as uniformly foiled, the Moors in

every instance, by a speedy and graceful movement, drawing back

their hand locked in that of the black, which they pressed

against their own heart; as much as to say, "though a negro and

a slave you are a Moslem, and being so, you art our brother -

Allah knows no distinctions."  The boatman now went up to the

hadji, demanding payment, stating, at the same time, that he

had been on board three times on his account, conveying his

luggage.  The sum which he demanded appeared exorbitant to the

hadji, who, forgetting that he was a saint, and fresh from

Mecca, fumed outrageously, and in broken Spanish called the

boatman thief.  If there be any term of reproach which stings a

Spaniard (and such was the boatman) more than another, it is

that one; and the fellow no sooner heard it applied to himself,

than with eyes sparkling with fury, he put his fist to the

hadji's nose, and repaid the one opprobrious name by at least

ten others equally bad or worse.  He would perhaps have

proceeded to acts of violence had he not been pulled away by

the other Moors, who led him aside, and I suppose either said

or gave him something which pacified him, as he soon got into

his boat, and returned with them on shore.  The captain now

arrived with his Jewish secretary, and orders were given for

setting sail.



At a little past twelve we were steering out of the bay

of Gibraltar; the wind was in the right quarter, but for some

time we did not make much progress, lying almost becalmed

beneath the lee of the hill; by degrees, however, our progress

became brisker, and in about an hour we found ourselves

careering smartly towards Tarifa.



The Jew secretary stood at the helm, and indeed appeared

to be the person who commanded the vessel, and who issued out

all the necessary orders, which were executed under the

superintendence of the old Genoese mate.  I now put some

questions to the hadji, but he looked at me askance with his

sullen eye, pouted with his lip, and remained silent; as much

as to say, "Speak not to me, I am holier than thou."  I found

his negroes, however, far more conversable.  One of them was

old and ugly, the other about twenty, and as well looking as it

is possible for a negro to be.  His colour was perfect ebony,

his features exceedingly well formed and delicate, with the

exception of the lips, which were too full.  The shape of his

eyes was peculiar; they were rather oblong than round, like

those of an Egyptian figure.  Their expression was thoughtful

and meditative.  In every respect he differed from his

companion, even in colour, (though both were negroes,) and was

evidently a scion of some little known and superior race.  As

he sat beneath the mast gazing at the sea, I thought he was

misplaced, and that he would have appeared to more advantage

amidst boundless sands, and beneath a date tree, and then he

might have well represented a Jhin.  I asked him from whence he

came, he replied that he was a native of Fez, but that he had

never known his parents.  He had been brought up, he added, in

the family of his present master, whom he had followed in the

greater part of his travels, and with whom he had thrice

visited Mecca.  I asked him if he liked being a slave?

Whereupon he replied, that he was a slave no longer, having

been made free for some time past, on account of his faithful

services, as had likewise his companion.  He would have told me

much more, but the hadji called him away, and otherwise

employed him, probably to prevent his being contaminated by me.



Thus avoided by the Moslems, I betook myself to the Jews,

whom I found nowise backward in cultivating an intimacy.  The

sage of the beard told me his history, which in some respects

reminded me of that of Judah Lib, as it seemed that, a year or

two previous, he had quitted Mogadore in pursuit of his son,

who had betaken himself to Portugal.  On the arrival, however,

of the father at Lisbon, he discovered that the fugitive had, a

few days before, shipped himself for the Brazils.  Unlike Judah

in quest of his father, he now became weary, and discontinued

the pursuit.  The younger Jew from Mequinez was exceedingly gay

and lively as soon as he perceived that I was capable of

understanding him, and made me smile by his humorous account of

Christian life, as he had observed it at Gibraltar, where he

had made a stay of about a month.  He then spoke of Mequinez,

which, he said, was a Jennut, or Paradise, compared with which

Gibraltar was a sty of hogs.  So great, so universal is the

love of country.  I soon saw that both these people believed me

to be of their own nation; indeed, the young one, who was much

the most familiar, taxed me with being so, and spoke of the

infamy of denying my own blood.  Shortly before our arrival off

Tarifa, universal hunger seemed to prevail amongst us.  The

hadji and his negroes produced their store, and feasted on

roast fowls, the Jews ate grapes and bread, myself bread and

cheese, whilst the crew prepared a mess of anchovies.  Two of

them speedily came, with a large portion, which they presented

to me with the kindness of brothers: I made no hesitation in

accepting their present, and found the anchovies delicious.  As

I sat between the Jews, I offered them some, but they turned

away their heads with disgust, and cried HALOOF (hogsflesh).

They at the same time, however, shook me by the hand, and,

uninvited, took a small portion of my bread.  I had a bottle of

Cognac, which I had brought with me as a preventive to sea

sickness, and I presented it to them; but this they also

refused, exclaiming, HARAM (it is forbidden).  I said nothing.



We were now close to the lighthouse of Tarifa, and

turning the head of the bark towards the west, we made directly

for the coast of Africa.  The wind was now blowing very fresh,

and as we had it almost in our poop, we sprang along at a

tremendous rate, the huge lateen sails threatening every moment

to drive us beneath the billows, which an adverse tide raised

up against us.  Whilst scudding along in this manner, we passed

close under the stern of a large vessel bearing American

colours; she was tacking up the straits, and slowly winning her

way against the impetuous Levanter.  As we passed under her, I

observed the poop crowded with people gazing at us; indeed, we

must have offered a singular spectacle to those on board, who,

like my young American friend at Gibraltar, were visiting the

Old World for the first time.  At the helm stood the Jew; his

whole figure enveloped in a gabardine, the cowl of which,

raised above his head, gave him almost the appearance of a

spectre in its shroud; whilst upon the deck, mixed with

Europeans in various kinds of dresses, all of them picturesque

with the exception of my own, trod the turbaned Moors, the haik

of the hadji flapping loosely in the wind.  The view they

obtained of us, however, could have been but momentary, as we

bounded past them literally with the speed of a racehorses so

that in about an hour's time we were not more than a mile's

distance from the foreland on which stands the fortress

Alminar, and which constitutes the boundary point of the bay of

Tangier towards the east.  There the wind dropped and our

progress was again slow.



For a considerable time Tangier had appeared in sight.

Shortly after standing away from Tarifa, we had descried it in

the far distance, when it showed like a white dove brooding on

its nest.  The sun was setting behind the town when we dropped

anchor in its harbour, amidst half a dozen barks and felouks

about the size of our own, the only vessels which we saw.

There stood Tangier before us, and a picturesque town it was,

occupying the sides and top of two hills, one of which, bold

and bluff, projects into the sea where the coast takes a sudden

and abrupt turn.  Frowning and battlemented were its walls,

either perched on the top of precipitous rocks, whose base was

washed by the salt billows, or rising from the narrow strand

which separates the hill from the ocean.



Yonder are two or three tiers of batteries, displaying

heavy guns which command the harbour; above them you see the

terraces of the town rising in succession like steps for

giants.  But all is white, perfectly white, so that the whole

seems cut out of an immense chalk rock, though true it is that

you behold here and there tall green trees springing up from

amidst the whiteness: perhaps they belong to Moorish gardens,

and beneath them even now peradventure is reclining many a

dark-eyed Leila, akin to the houries.  Right before you is a

high tower or minaret, not white but curiously painted, which

belongs to the principal mosque of Tangier; a black banner

waves upon it, for it is the feast of Ashor.  A noble beach of

white sand fringes the bay from the town to the foreland of

Alminar.  To the east rise prodigious hills and mountains; they

are Gibil Muza and his chain; and yon tall fellow is the peak

of Tetuan; the grey mists of evening are enveloping their

sides.  Such was Tangier, such its vicinity, as it appeared to

me whilst gazing from the Genoese bark.



A boat was now lowered from the vessel, in which the

captain, who was charged with the mail from Gibraltar, the Jew

secretary, and the hadji and his attendant negroes departed for

the shore.  I would have gone with them, but I was told that I

could not land that night, as ere my passport and bill of

health could be examined, the gates would be closed; so I

remained on board with the crew and the two Jews.  The former

prepared their supper, which consisted simply of pickled

tomatoes, the other provisions having been consumed.  The old

Genoese brought me a portion, apologizing at the same time, for

the plainness of the fare.  I accepted it with thanks, and told

him that a million better men than myself had a worse super.  I

never ate with more appetite.  As the night advanced, the Jews

sang Hebrew hymns, and when they had concluded, demanded of me

why I was silent, so I lifted up my voice and chanted Adun

Oulem:-





"Reigned the Universe's Master, ere were earthly things

begun;

When His mandate all created, Ruler was the name He won;

And alone He'll rule tremendous when all things are past

and gone,

He no equal has, nor consort, He, the singular and lone,

Has no end and no beginning; His the sceptre, might and

throne.

He's my God and living Saviour, rock to whom in need I

run;

He's my banner and my refuge, fount of weal when called

upon;

In His hand I place my spirit at nightfall and rise of

sun,

And therewith my body also; God's my God - I fear no

one."





Darkness had now fallen over land and sea; not a sound

was heard save occasionally the distant barking of a dog from

the shore, or some plaintive Genoese ditty, which arose from a

neighbouring bark.  The town seemed buried in silence and

gloom, no light, not even that of a taper, could be descried.

Turning our eyes in the direction of Spain, however, we

perceived a magnificent conflagration seemingly enveloping the

side and head of one of the lofty mountains northward of

Tarifa; the blaze was redly reflected in the waters of the

strait; either the brushwood was burning or the Carboneros were

plying their dusky toil.  The Jews now complained, of

weariness, and the younger, uncording a small mattress, spread

it on the deck and sought repose.  The sage descended into the

cabin, but he had scarcely time to lie down ere the old mate,

darting forward, dived in after him, and pulled him out by the

heels, for it was very shallow, and the descent was effected by

not more than two or three steps.  After accomplishing this, he

called him many opprobrious names, and threatened him with his

foot, as he lay sprawling on the deck.  "Think you," said he,

"who are a dog and a Jew, and pay as a dog and a Jew; think you

to sleep in the cabin?  Undeceive yourself, beast; that cabin

shall be slept in by none to-night but this Christian

Cavallero."  The sage made no reply, but arose from the deck

and stroked his beard, whilst the old Genoese proceeded in his

philippic.  Had the Jew been disposed, he could have strangled

the insulter in a moment, or crushed him to death in his brawny

arms, as I never remember to have seen a figure so powerful and

muscular; but he was evidently slow to anger, and long-

suffering; not a resentful word escaped him, and his features

retained their usual expression of benignant placidity.



I now assured the mate that I had not the slightest

objection to the Jew's sharing the cabin with me, but rather

wished it, as there was room for us both and for more.  "Excuse

me, Sir Cavalier," replied the Genoese, "but I swear to permit

no such thing; you are young and do not know this canaille as I

do, who have been backward and forward to this coast for twenty

years; if the beast is cold, let him sleep below the hatches as

I and the rest shall, but that cabin he shall not enter."

Observing that he was obstinate I retired, and in a few minutes

was in a sound sleep which lasted till daybreak.  Twice or

thrice, indeed, I thought that a struggle was taking place near

me, but I was so overpowered with weariness, or "sleep

drunken," as the Germans call it, that I was unable to arouse

myself sufficiently to discover what was going on; the truth

is, that three times during the night, the sage feeling himself

uncomfortable in the open air by the side of his companion,

penetrated into the cabin, and was as many times dragged out by

his relentless old enemy, who, suspecting his intentions, kept

his eye upon him throughout the night.



About five I arose; the sun was shining brightly and

gloriously upon town, bay, and mountain; the crew were already

employed upon deck repairing a sail which had been shivered in

the wind of the preceding day.  The Jews sat disconsolate on

the poop; they complained much of the cold they had suffered in

their exposed situation.  Over the left eye of the sage I

observed a bloody cut, which he informed me he had received

from the old Genoese after he had dragged him out of the cabin

for the last time.  I now produced my bottle of Cognac, begging

that the crew would partake of it as a slight return for their

hospitality.  They thanked me, and the bottle went its round;

it was last in the hands of the old mate, who, after looking

for a moment at the sage, raised it to his mouth, where he kept

it a considerable time longer than any of his companions, after

which he returned it to me with a low bow.  The sage now

inquired what the bottle contained: I told him Cognac or

aguardiente, whereupon with some eagerness he begged that I

would allow him to take a draught.  "How is this?" said I;

"yesterday you told me that it was a forbidden thing, an

abomination."  "Yesterday," said he, "I was not aware that it

was brandy; I thought it wine, which assuredly is an

abomination, and a forbidden thing."  "Is it forbidden in the

Torah?" I inquired.  "Is it forbidden in the law of God?"  "I

know not," said he, "but one thing I know, that the sages have

forbidden it."  "Sages like yourself," cried I with warmth;

"sages like yourself, with long beards and short

understandings: the use of both drinks is permitted, but more

danger lurks in this bottle than in a tun of wine.  Well said

my Lord the Nazarene, `ye strain at a gnat, and swallow a

camel'; but as you are cold and shivering, take the bottle and

revive yourself with a small portion of its contents."  He put

it to his lips and found not a single drop.  The old Genoese

grinned.



"Bestia," said he, "I saw by your looks that you wished

to drink of that bottle, and I said within me, even though I

suffocate, yet will I not leave one drop of the aguardiente of

the Christian Cavalier to be wasted on that Jew, on whose head

may evil lightnings fall."



"Now, Sir Cavalier," he continued, "you can go ashore;

these two sailors shall row you to the Mole, and convey your

baggage where you think proper; may the Virgin bless you

wherever you go."
