






CHAPTER LIII







Genoese Mariners - St. Michael's Cave - Midnight Abysses -

Young American - A Slave Proprietor - The Fairy Man - Infidelity.





Throughout the whole of that night it blew very hard, but

as the wind was in the Levant quarter, I had no apprehension of

being detained longer at Gibraltar on that account.  I went on

board the vessel at an early hour, when I found the crew

engaged in hauling the anchor close, and making other

preparations for sailing.  They informed me that we should

probably start in an hour.  That time however passed, and we

still remained where we were, and the captain continued on

shore.  We formed one of a small flotilla of Genoese barks, the

crews of which seemed in their leisure moments to have no

better means of amusing themselves than the exchange of abusive

language; a furious fusillade of this kind presently commenced,

in which the mate of our vessel particularly distinguished

himself; he was a grey-haired Genoese of sixty.  Though not

able to speak their patois, I understood much of what was said;

it was truly shocking, and as they shouted it forth, judging

from their violent gestures and distorted features, you would

have concluded them to be bitter enemies; they were, however,

nothing of the kind, but excellent friends all the time, and

indeed very good-humoured fellows at bottom.  Oh, the

infirmities of human nature!  When will man learn to become

truly Christian?



I am upon the whole very fond of the Genoese; they have,

it is true, much ribaldry and many vices, but they are a brave

and chivalrous people, and have ever been so, and from them I

have never experienced aught but kindness and hospitality.



After the lapse of another two hours, the Jew secretary

arrived and said something to the old mate, who grumbled much;

then coming up to me, he took off his hat and informed me that

we were not to start that day, saying at the same time that it

was a shame to lose such a noble wind, which would carry us to

Tangier in three hours.  "Patience," said I, and went on shore.



I now strolled towards Saint Michael's cave, in company

with the Jewish lad whom I have before mentioned.



The way thither does not lie in the same direction as

that which leads to the excavations; these confront Spain,

whilst the cave yawns in the face of Africa.  It lies nearly at

the top of the mountain, several hundred yards above the sea.

We passed by the public walks, where there are noble trees, and

also by many small houses, situated delightfully in gardens,

and occupied by the officers of the garrison.  It is wrong to

suppose Gibraltar a mere naked barren rock; it is not without

its beautiful spots - spots such as these, looking cool and

refreshing, with bright green foliage.  The path soon became

very steep, and we left behind us the dwellings of man.  The

gale of the preceding night had entirely ceased, and not a

breath of air was stirring; the midday sun shone in all its

fierce glory, and the crags up which we clambered were not

unfrequently watered with the perspiration drops which rained

from our temples: at length we arrived at the cavern.



The mouth is a yawning cleft in the side of the mountain,

about twelve feet high and as many wide; within there is a very

rapid precipitous descent for some fifty yards, where the

cavern terminates in an abyss which leads to unknown depths.

The most remarkable object is a natural column, which rises up

something like the trunk of an enormous oak, as if for the

purpose of supporting the roof; it stands at a short distance

from the entrance, and gives a certain air of wildness and

singularity to that part of the cavern which is visible, which

it would otherwise not possess.  The floor is exceedingly

slippery, consisting of soil which the continual drippings from

the roof have saturated, so that no slight precaution is

necessary for him who treads it.  It is very dangerous to enter

this place without a guide well acquainted with it, as, besides

the black pit at the extremity, holes which have never been

fathomed present themselves here and there, falling into which

the adventurer would be dashed to pieces.  Whatever men may

please to say of this cave, one thing it seems to tell to all

who approach it, namely, that the hand of man has never been

busy about it; there is many a cave of nature's forming, old as

the earth on which we exist, which nevertheless exhibits

indications that man has turned it to some account, and that it

has been subjected more or less to his modifying power; not so

this cave of Gibraltar, for, judging from its appearance, there

is not the slightest reason for supposing that it ever served

for aught else than a den for foul night birds, reptiles, and

beasts of prey.  It has been stated by some to have been used

in the days of paganism as a temple to the god Hercules, who,

according to the ancient tradition, raised the singular mass of

crags now called Gibraltar, and the mountain which confronts it

on the African shores, as columns which should say to all

succeeding times that he had been there, and had advanced no

farther.  Sufficient to observe, that there is nothing within

the cave which would authorize the adoption of such an opinion,

not even a platform on which an altar could have stood, whilst

a narrow path passes before it, leading to the summit of the

mountain.  As I have myself never penetrated into its depths, I

can of course not pretend to describe them.  Numerous have been

the individuals who, instigated by curiosity, have ventured

down to immense depths, hoping to discover an end, and indeed

scarcely a week passes without similar attempts being made

either by the officers or soldiers of the garrison, all of

which have proved perfectly abortive.  No termination has ever

been reached, nor any discoveries made to repay the labour and

frightful danger incurred; precipice succeeds precipice, and

abyss succeeds abyss, in apparently endless succession, with

ledges at intervals, which afford the adventurers opportunities

for resting themselves and affixing their rope-ladders for the

purpose of descending yet farther.  What is, however, most

mortifying and perplexing is to observe that these abysses are

not only before, but behind you, and on every side; indeed,

close within the entrance of the cave, on the right, there is a

gulf almost equally dark and full as threatening as that which

exists at the nether end, and perhaps contains within itself as

many gulfs and horrid caverns branching off in all directions.

Indeed, from what I have heard, I have come to the opinion,

that the whole hill of Gibraltar is honeycombed, and I have

little doubt that, were it cleft asunder, its interior would be

found full of such abysses of Erebus as those to which Saint

Michael's cave conducts.  Many valuable lives are lost every

year in these horrible places; and only a few weeks before my

visit, two sergeants, brothers, had perished in the gulf on the

right hand side of the cave, having, when at a great depth,

slipped down a precipice.  The body of one of these adventurous

men is even now rotting in the bowels of the mountain, preyed

upon by its blind and noisome worms; that of his brother was

extricated.  Immediately after this horrible accident, a gate

was placed before the mouth of the cave, to prevent

individuals, and especially the reckless soldiers, from

indulging in their extravagant curiosity.  The lock, however,

was speedily forced, and at the period of my arrival the gate

swung idly upon its hinges.



As I left the place, I thought that perhaps similar to

this was the cave of Horeb, where dwelt Elijah, when he heard

the still small voice, after the great and strong wind which

rent the mountains and brake in pieces the rocks before the

Lord; the cave to the entrance of which he went out and stood

with his face wrapped in his mantle, when he heard the voice

say unto him, "What doest thou here, Elijah?" (1 Kings xix. 11-

13.)



And what am I doing here, I inquired of myself as, vexed

at my detention, I descended into the town.



That afternoon I dined in the company of a young

American, a native of South Carolina.  I had frequently seen

him before, as he had been staying for some time at the inn

previous to my arrival at Gibraltar.  His appearance was

remarkable: he was low of stature, and exceedingly slightly

made; his features were pale but very well formed; he had a

magnificent head of crispy black hair, and as superb a pair of

whiskers of the same colour as I ever beheld.  He wore a white

hat, with broad brim and particularly shallow crown, and was

dressed in a light yellow gingham frock striped with black, and

ample trousers of calico, in a word, his appearance was

altogether queer and singular.  On my return from my ramble to

the cave, I found that he had himself just descended from the

mountain, having since a very early hour been absent exploring

its wonders.



A man of the rock asked him how he liked the excavations.

"Liked them," said he; "you might just as well ask a person who

has just seen the Niagara Falls how he liked them - like is not

the word, mister."  The heat was suffocating, as it almost

invariably is in the town of Gibraltar, where rarely a breath

of air is to be felt, as it is sheltered from all winds.  This

led another individual to inquire of him whether he did not

think it exceedingly hot?  "Hot, sir," he replied, "not at all:

fine cotton gathering weather as a man could wish for.  We

couldn't beat it in South Carolina, sir."  "You live in South

Carolina, sir - I hope, sir, you are not a slave proprietor,"

said the short fat Jewish personage in the snuff-coloured coat,

who had offered me the bitters on a previous occasion; "it is a

terrible thing to make slaves of poor people, simply because

they happen to be black; don't you think so, sir?"  "Think so,

sir - no, sir, I don't think so - I glory in being a slave

proprietor; have four hundred black niggers on my estate - own

estate, sir, near Charleston - flog half a dozen of them before

breakfast, merely for exercise.  Niggers only made to be

flogged, sir: try to escape sometimes; set the blood-hounds in

their trail, catch them in a twinkling; used to hang themselves

formerly: the niggers thought that a sure way to return to

their own country and get clear of me: soon put a stop to that:

told them that if any more hanged themselves I'd hang myself

too, follow close behind them, and flog them in their own

country ten times worse than in mine.  What do you think of

that, friend?"  It was easy to perceive that there was more of

fun than malice in this eccentric little fellow, for his large

grey eyes were sparkling with good humour whilst he poured out

these wild things.  He was exceedingly free of his money; and a

dirty Irish woman, a soldier's wife, having entered with a

basketful of small boxes and trinkets, made of portions of the

rock of Gibraltar, he purchased the greatest part of her ware,

giving her for every article the price (by no means

inconsiderable) which she demanded.  He had glanced at me

several times, and at last I saw him stoop down and whisper

something to the Jew, who replied in an undertone, though with

considerable earnestness "O dear no, sir; perfectly mistaken,

sir: is no American, sir:- from Salamanca, sir; the gentleman

is a Salamancan Spaniard."  The waiter at length informed us

that he had laid the table, and that perhaps it would be

agreeable to us to dine together: we instantly assented.  I

found my new acquaintance in many respects a most agreeable

companion: he soon told me his history.  He was a planter, and,

from what he hinted, just come to his property.  He was part

owner of a large vessel which traded between Charleston and

Gibraltar, and the yellow fever having just broken out at the

former place, he had determined to take a trip (his first) to

Europe in this ship; having, as he said, already visited every

state in the Union, and seen all that was to be seen there.  He

described to me, in a very naive and original manner, his

sensations on passing by Tarifa, which was the first walled

town he had ever seen.  I related to him the history of that

place, to which he listened with great attention.  He made

divers attempts to learn from me who I was; all of which I

evaded, though he seemed fully convinced that I was an

American; and amongst other things asked me whether my father

had not been American consul at Seville.  What, however, most

perplexed him was my understanding Moorish and Gaelic, which he

had heard me speak respectively to the hamalos and the Irish

woman, the latter of whom, as he said, had told him that I was

a fairy man.  At last he introduced the subject of religion,

and spoke with much contempt of revelation, avowing himself a

deist; he was evidently very anxious to hear my opinion, but

here again I evaded him, and contented myself with asking him,

whether he had ever read the Bible.  He said he had not; but

that he was well acquainted with the writings of Volney and

Mirabeau.  I made no answer; whereupon he added, that it was by

no means his habit to introduce such subjects, and that there

were very few persons to whom he would speak so unreservedly,

but that I had very much interested him, though our

acquaintance had been short.  I replied, that he would scarcely

have spoken at Boston in the manner that I had just heard him,

and that it was easy to perceive that he was not a New

Englander.  "I assure you," said he, "I should as little have

thought of speaking so at Charleston, for if I held such

conversation there, I should soon have had to speak to myself."



Had I known less of deists than it has been my fortune to

know, I should perhaps have endeavoured to convince this young

man of the erroneousness of the ideas which he had adopted; but

I was aware of all that he would have urged in reply, and as

the believer has no carnal arguments to address to carnal

reason upon this subject, I thought it best to avoid

disputation, which I felt sure would lead to no profitable

result.  Faith is the free gift of God, and I do not believe

that ever yet was an infidel converted by means of after-dinner

polemics.  This was the last evening of my sojourn in

Gibraltar.

