





CHAPTER XI







The Pass of Mirabete - Wolves and Shepherds - Female Subtlety -

Death by Wolves - The Mystery Solved - The Mountains - The Dark Hour -

The Traveller of the Night - Abarbenel - Hoarded Treasure -

Force of Gold - The Archbishop - Arrival at Madrid.





I proceeded down the pass of Mirabete, occasionally

ruminating on the matter which had brought me to Spain, and

occasionally admiring one of the finest prospects in the world;

before me outstretched lay immense plains, bounded in the

distance by huge mountains, whilst at the foot of the hill

which I was now descending, rolled the Tagus, in a deep narrow

stream, between lofty banks; the whole was gilded by the rays

of the setting sun; for the day, though cold and wintry, was

bright and clear.  In about an hour I reached the river at a

place where stood the remains of what had once been a

magnificent bridge, which had, however, been blown up in the

Peninsular war and never since repaired.



I crossed the river in a ferry-boat; the passage was

rather difficult, the current very rapid and swollen, owing to

the latter rains.



"Am I in New Castile?" I demanded of the ferryman, on

reaching the further bank.  "The raya is many leagues from

hence," replied the ferryman; "you seem a stranger.  Whence do

you come?"  "From England," I replied, and without waiting for

an answer, I sprang on the burra, and proceeded on my way.  The

burra plied her feet most nimbly, and, shortly after nightfall,

brought me to a village at about two leagues' distance from the

river's bank.



I sat down in the venta where I put up; there was a huge

fire, consisting of the greater part of the trunk of an olive

tree; the company was rather miscellaneous: a hunter with his

escopeta; a brace of shepherds with immense dogs, of that

species for which Estremadura is celebrated; a broken soldier,

just returned from the wars; and a beggar, who, after demanding

charity for the seven wounds of Maria Santissima, took a seat

amidst us, and made himself quite comfortable.  The hostess was

an active bustling woman, and busied herself in cooking my

supper, which consisted of the game which I had purchased at

Jaraicejo, and which, on my taking leave of the Gypsy, he had

counselled me to take with me.  In the meantime, I sat by the

fire listening to the conversation of the company.



"I would I were a wolf," said one of the shepherds; "or,

indeed, anything rather than what I am.  A pretty life is this

of ours, out in the campo, among the carascales, suffering heat

and cold for a peseta a day.  I would I were a wolf; he fares

better and is more respected than the wretch of a shepherd."



"But he frequently fares scurvily," said I; "the shepherd

and dogs fall upon him, and then he pays for his temerity with

the loss of his head."



"That is not often the case, senor traveller," said the

shepherd; "he watches his opportunity, and seldom runs into

harm's way.  And as to attacking him, it is no very pleasant

task; he has both teeth and claws, and dog or man, who has once

felt them, likes not to venture a second time within his reach.

These dogs of mine will seize a bear singly with considerable

alacrity, though he is a most powerful animal, but I have seen

them run howling away from a wolf, even though there were two

or three of us at hand to encourage them."



"A dangerous person is the wolf," said the other

shepherd, "and cunning as dangerous; who knows more than he?

He knows the vulnerable point of every animal; see, for

example, how he flies at the neck of a bullock, tearing open

the veins with his grim teeth and claws.  But does he attack a

horse in this manner?  I trow not."



"Not he," said the other shepherd, "he is too good a

judge; but he fastens on the haunches, and hamstrings him in a

moment.  O the fear of the horse when he comes near the

dwelling of the wolf.  My master was the other day riding in

the despoblado, above the pass, on his fine Andalusian steed,

which had cost him five hundred dollars; suddenly the horse

stopped, and sweated and trembled like a woman in the act of

fainting; my master could not conceive the reason, but

presently he heard a squealing and growling in the bushes,

whereupon he fired off his gun and scared the wolves, who

scampered away; but he tells me, that the horse has not yet

recovered from his fright."



"Yet the mares know, occasionally, how to balk him,"

replied his companion; "there is great craft and malice in

mares, as there is in all females; see them feeding in the

campo with their young cria about them; presently the alarm is

given that the wolf is drawing near; they start wildly and run

about for a moment, but it is only for a moment - amain they

gather together, forming themselves into a circle, in the

centre of which they place the foals.  Onward comes the wolf,

hoping to make his dinner on horseflesh; he is mistaken,

however, the mares have balked him, and are as cunning as

himself: not a tail is to be seen - not a hinder quarter - but

there stands the whole troop, their fronts towards him ready to

receive him, and as he runs around them barking and howling,

they rise successively on their hind legs, ready to stamp him

to the earth, should he attempt to hurt their cria or

themselves."



"Worse than the he-wolf," said the soldier, "is the

female, for as the senor pastor has well observed, there is

more malice in women than in males: to see one of these she-

demons with a troop of the males at her heels is truly

surprising: where she turns, they turn, and what she does that

do they; for they appear bewitched, and have no power but to

imitate her actions.  I was once travelling with a comrade over

the hills of Galicia, when we heard a howl.  `Those are

wolves,' said my companion, `let us get out of the way;' so we

stepped from the path and ascended the side of the hill a

little way, to a terrace, where grew vines, after the manner of

Galicia: presently appeared a large grey she-wolf, DESHONESTA,

snapping and growling at a troop of demons, who followed close

behind, their tails uplifted, and their eyes like fire-brands.

What do you think the perverse brute did?  Instead of keeping

to the path, she turned in the very direction in which we were;

there was now no remedy, so we stood still.  I was the first

upon the terrace, and by me she passed so close that I felt her

hair brush against my legs; she, however, took no notice of me,

but pushed on, neither looking to the right nor left, and all

the other wolves trotted by me without offering the slightest

injury or even so much as looking at me.  Would that I could

say as much for my poor companion, who stood farther on, and

was, I believe, less in the demon's way than I was; she had

nearly passed him, when suddenly she turned half round and

snapped at him.  I shall never forget what followed: in a

moment a dozen wolves were upon him, tearing him limb from

limb, with howlings like nothing in this world; in a few

moments he was devoured; nothing remained but a skull and a few

bones; and then they passed on in the same manner as they came.

Good reason had I to be grateful that my lady wolf took less

notice of me than my poor comrade."



Listening to this and similar conversation, I fell into a

doze before the fire, in which I continued for a considerable

time, but was at length aroused by a voice exclaiming in a loud

tone, "All are captured!"  These were the exact words which,

when spoken by his daughter, confounded the Gypsy upon the

moor.  I looked around me, the company consisted of the same

individuals to whose conversation I had been listening before I

sank into slumber; but the beggar was now the spokesman, and he

was haranguing with considerable vehemence.



"I beg your pardon, Caballero," said I, "but I did not

hear the commencement of your discourse.  Who are those who

have been captured?"



"A band of accursed Gitanos, Caballero," replied the

beggar, returning the title of courtesy, which I had bestowed

upon him.  "During more than a fortnight they have infested the

roads on the frontier of Castile, and many have been the

gentleman travellers like yourself whom they have robbed and

murdered.  It would seem that the Gypsy canaille must needs

take advantage of these troublous times, and form themselves

into a faction.  It is said that the fellows of whom I am

speaking expected many more of their brethren to join them,

which is likely enough, for all Gypsies are thieves: but

praised be God, they have been put down before they became too

formidable.  I saw them myself conveyed to the prison at -.

Thanks be to God.  TODOS ESTAN PRESOS."



"The mystery is now solved," said I to myself, and

proceeded to despatch my supper, which was now ready.



The next day's journey brought me to a considerable town,

the name of which I have forgotten.  It is the first in New

Castile, in this direction.  I passed the night as usual in the

manger of the stable, close beside the Caballeria; for, as I

travelled upon a donkey, I deemed it incumbent upon me to be

satisfied with a couch in keeping with my manner of journeying,

being averse, by any squeamish and over delicate airs, to

generate a suspicion amongst the people with whom I mingled

that I was aught higher than what my equipage and outward

appearance might lead them to believe.  Rising before daylight,

I again proceeded on my way, hoping ere night to be able to

reach Talavera, which I was informed was ten leagues distant.

The way lay entirely over an unbroken level, for the most part

covered with olive trees.  On the left, however, at the

distance of a few leagues, rose the mighty mountains which I

have already mentioned.  They run eastward in a seemingly

interminable range, parallel with the route which I was

pursuing; their tops and sides were covered with dazzling snow,

and the blasts which came sweeping from them across the wide

and melancholy plains were of bitter keenness.



"What mountains are those?" I inquired of a barber-

surgeon, who, mounted like myself on a grey burra, joined me

about noon, and proceeded in my company for several leagues.

"They have many names, Caballero," replied the barber;

"according to the names of the neighbouring places so they are

called.  Yon portion of them is styled the Serrania of

Plasencia; and opposite to Madrid they are termed the Mountains

of Guadarama, from a river of that name, which descends from

them; they run a vast way, Caballero, and separate the two

kingdoms, for on the other side is Old Castile.  They are

mighty mountains, and though they generate much cold, I take

pleasure in looking at them, which is not to be wondered at,

seeing that I was born amongst them, though at present, for my

sins, I live in a village of the plain.  Caballero, there is

not another such range in Spain; they have their secrets too -

their mysteries - strange tales are told of those hills, and of

what they contain in their deep recesses, for they are a broad

chain, and you may wander days and days amongst them without

coming to any termino.  Many have lost themselves on those

hills, and have never again been heard of.  Strange things are

told of them: it is said that in certain places there are deep

pools and lakes, in which dwell monsters, huge serpents as long

as a pine tree, and horses of the flood, which sometimes come

out and commit mighty damage.  One thing is certain, that

yonder, far away to the west, in the heart of those hills,

there is a wonderful valley, so narrow that only at midday is

the face of the sun to be descried from it.  That valley lay

undiscovered and unknown for thousands of years; no person

dreamed of its existence, but at last, a long time ago, certain

hunters entered it by chance, and then what do you think they

found, Caballero?  They found a small nation or tribe of

unknown people, speaking an unknown language, who, perhaps, had

lived there since the creation of the world, without

intercourse with the rest of their fellow creatures, and

without knowing that other beings besides themselves existed!

Caballero, did you never hear of the valley of the Batuecas?

Many books have been written about that valley and those

people.  Caballero, I am proud of yonder hills; and were I

independent, and without wife or children, I would purchase a

burra like that of your own, which I see is an excellent one,

and far superior to mine, and travel amongst them till I knew

all their mysteries, and had seen all the wondrous things which

they contain."



Throughout the day I pressed the burra forward, only

stopping once in order to feed the animal; but, notwithstanding

that she played her part very well, night came on, and I was

still about two leagues from Talavera.  As the sun went down,

the cold became intense; I drew the old Gypsy cloak, which I

still wore, closer around me, but I found it quite inadequate

to protect me from the inclemency of the atmosphere.  The road,

which lay over a plain, was not very distinctly traced, and

became in the dusk rather difficult to find, more especially as

cross roads leading to different places were of frequent

occurrence.  I, however, proceeded in the best manner I could,

and when I became dubious as to the course which I should take,

I invariably allowed the animal on which I was mounted to

decide.  At length the moon shone out faintly, when suddenly by

its beams I beheld a figure moving before me at a slight

distance.  I quickened the pace of the burra, and was soon

close at its side.  It went on, neither altering its pace nor

looking round for a moment.  It was the figure of a man, the

tallest and bulkiest that I had hitherto seen in Spain, dressed

in a manner strange and singular for the country.  On his head

was a hat with a low crown and broad brim, very much resembling

that of an English waggoner; about his body was a long loose

tunic or slop, seemingly of coarse ticken, open in front, so as

to allow the interior garments to be occasionally seen; these

appeared to consist of a jerkin and short velveteen pantaloons.

I have said that the brim of the hat was broad, but broad as it

was, it was insufficient to cover an immense bush of coal-black

hair, which, thick and curly, projected on either side; over

the left shoulder was flung a kind of satchel, and in the right

hand was held a long staff or pole.



There was something peculiarly strange about the figure,

but what struck me the most was the tranquillity with which it

moved along, taking no heed of me, though of course aware of my

proximity, but looking straight forward along the road, save

when it occasionally raised a huge face and large eyes towards

the moon, which was now shining forth in the eastern quarter.



"A cold night," said I at last.  "Is this the way to

Talavera?"



"It is the way to Talavera, and the night is cold."



"I am going to Talavera," said I, "as I suppose you are

yourself."



"I am going thither, so are you, BUENO."



The tones of the voice which delivered these words were

in their way quite as strange and singular as the figure to

which the voice belonged; they were not exactly the tones of a

Spanish voice, and yet there was something in them that could

hardly be foreign; the pronunciation also was correct; and the

language, though singular, faultless.  But I was most struck

with the manner in which the last word, BUENO, was spoken.  I

had heard something like it before, but where or when I could

by no means remember.  A pause now ensued; the figure stalking

on as before with the most perfect indifference, and seemingly

with no disposition either to seek or avoid conversation.



"Are you not afraid," said I at last, "to travel these

roads in the dark?  It is said that there are robbers abroad."



"Are you not rather afraid," replied the figure, "to

travel these roads in the dark? - you who are ignorant of the

country, who are a foreigner, an Englishman!"



"How is it that you know me to be an Englishman?"

demanded I, much surprised.



"That is no difficult matter," replied the figure; "the

sound of your voice was enough to tell me that."



"You speak of voices," said I; "suppose the tone of your

own voice were to tell me who you are?"



"That it will not do," replied my companion; "you know

nothing about me - you can know nothing about me."



"Be not sure of that, my friend; I am acquainted with

many things of which you have little idea."



"Por exemplo," said the figure.



"For example," said I; "you speak two languages."



The figure moved on, seemed to consider a moment, and

then said slowly BUENO.



"You have two names," I continued; "one for the house and

the other for the street; both are good, but the one by which

you are called at home is the one which you like best."



The man walked on about ten paces, in the same manner as

he had previously done; all of a sudden he turned, and taking

the bridle of the burra gently in his hand, stopped her.  I had

now a full view of his face and figure, and those huge features

and Herculean form still occasionally revisit me in my dreams.

I see him standing in the moonshine, staring me in the face

with his deep calm eyes.  At last he said:



"Are you then one of us?"



* * * *



It was late at night when we arrived at Talavera.  We

went to a large gloomy house, which my companion informed me

was the principal posada of the town.  We entered the kitchen,

at the extremity of which a large fire was blazing.  "Pepita,"

said my companion to a handsome girl, who advanced smiling

towards us; "a brasero and a private apartment; this cavalier

is a friend of mine, and we shall sup together."  We were shown

to an apartment in which were two alcoves containing beds.

After supper, which consisted of the very best, by the order of

my companion, we sat over the brasero and commenced talking.



MYSELF. - Of course you have conversed with Englishmen

before, else you could not have recognized me by the tone of my

voice.



ABARBENEL. - I was a young lad when the war of the

Independence broke out, and there came to the village in which

our family lived an English officer in order to teach

discipline to the new levies.  He was quartered in my father's

house, where he conceived a great affection for me.  On his

departure, with the consent of my father, I attended him

through the Castiles, partly as companion, partly as domestic.

I was with him nearly a year, when he was suddenly summoned to

return to his own country.  He would fain have taken me with

him, but to that my father would by no means consent.  It is

now five-and-twenty years since I last saw an Englishman; but

you have seen how I recognized you even in the dark night.



MYSELF. - And what kind of life do you pursue, and by

what means do you obtain support?



ABARBENEL. - I experience no difficulty.  I live much in

the same way as I believe my forefathers lived; certainly as my

father did, for his course has been mine.  At his death I took

possession of the herencia, for I was his only child.  It was

not requisite that I should follow any business, for my wealth

was great; yet, to avoid remark, I followed that of my father,

who was a longanizero.  I have occasionally dealt in wool: but

lazily, lazily - as I had no stimulus for exertion.  I was,

however, successful in many instances, strangely so; much more

than many others who toiled day and night, and whose whole soul

was in the trade.



MYSELF. - Have you any children?  Are you married?



ABARBENEL. - I have no children though I am married.  I

have a wife and an amiga, or I should rather say two wives, for

I am wedded to both.  I however call one my amiga, for

appearance sake, for I wish to live in quiet, and am unwilling

to offend the prejudices of the surrounding people.



MYSELF. - You say you are wealthy.  In what does your

wealth consist?



ABARBENEL. - In gold and silver, and stones of price; for

I have inherited all the hoards of my forefathers.  The greater

part is buried under ground; indeed, I have never examined the

tenth part of it.  I have coins of silver and gold older than

the times of Ferdinand the Accursed and Jezebel; I have also

large sums employed in usury.  We keep ourselves close,

however, and pretend to be poor, miserably so; but on certain

occasions, at our festivals, when our gates are barred, and our

savage dogs are let loose in the court, we eat our food off

services such as the Queen of Spain cannot boast of, and wash

our feet in ewers of silver, fashioned and wrought before the

Americas were discovered, though our garments are at all times

coarse, and our food for the most part of the plainest

description.



MYSELF. - Are there more of you than yourself and your

two wives?



ABARBENEL. - There are my two servants, who are likewise

of us; the one is a youth, and is about to leave, being

betrothed to one at some distance; the other is old; he is now

upon the road, following me with a mule and car.



MYSELF. - And whither are you bound at present?



ABARBENEL. - To Toledo, where I ply my trade occasionally

of longanizero.  I love to wander about, though I seldom stray

far from home.  Since I left the Englishman my feet have never

once stepped beyond the bounds of New Castile.  I love to visit

Toledo, and to think of the times which have long since

departed; I should establish myself there, were there not so

many accursed ones, who look upon me with an evil eye.



MYSELF. - Are you known for what you are?  Do the

authorities molest you?



ABARBENEL. - People of course suspect me to be what I am;

but as I conform outwardly in most respects to their ways, they

do not interfere with me.  True it is that sometimes, when I

enter the church to hear the mass, they glare at me over the

left shoulder, as much as to say - "What do you here?"  And

sometimes they cross themselves as I pass by; but as they go no

further, I do not trouble myself on that account.  With respect

to the authorities, they are not bad friends of mine.  Many of

the higher class have borrowed money from me on usury, so that

I have them to a certain extent in my power, and as for the low

alguazils and corchetes, they would do any thing to oblige me

in consideration of a few dollars, which I occasionally give

them; so that matters upon the whole go on remarkably well.  Of

old, indeed, it was far otherwise; yet, I know not how it was,

though other families suffered much, ours always enjoyed a

tolerable share of tranquillity.  The truth is, that our family

has always known how to guide itself wonderfully.  I may say

there is much of the wisdom of the snake amongst us.  We have

always possessed friends; and with respect to enemies, it is by

no means safe to meddle with us; for it is a rule of our house

never to forgive an injury, and to spare neither trouble nor

expense in bringing ruin and destruction upon the heads of our

evil doers.



MYSELF. - Do the priests interfere with you?



ABARBENEL. - They let me alone, especially in our own

neighbourhood.  Shortly after the death of my father, one hot-

headed individual endeavoured to do me an evil turn, but I soon

requited him, causing him to be imprisoned on a charge of

blasphemy, and in prison he remained a long time, till he went

mad and died.



MYSELF. - Have you a head in Spain, in whom is rested the

chief authority?



ABARBENEL. - Not exactly.  There are, however, certain

holy families who enjoy much consideration; my own is one of

these - the chiefest, I may say.  My grandsire was a

particularly holy man; and I have heard my father say, that one

night an archbishop came to his house secretly, merely to have

the satisfaction of kissing his head.



MYSELF. - How can that be; what reverence could an

archbishop entertain for one like yourself or your grandsire?



ABARBENEL. - More than you imagine.  He was one of us, at

least his father was, and he could never forget what he had

learned with reverence in his infancy.  He said he had tried to

forget it, but he could not; that the RUAH was continually upon

him, and that even from his childhood he had borne its terrors

with a troubled mind, till at last he could bear himself no

longer; so he went to my grandsire, with whom he remained one

whole night; he then returned to his diocese, where he shortly

afterwards died, in much renown for sanctity.



MYSELF. - What you say surprises me.  Have you reason to

suppose that many of you are to be found amongst the

priesthood?



ABARBENEL. - Not to suppose, but to know it.  There are

many such as I amongst the priesthood, and not amongst the

inferior priesthood either; some of the most learned and famed

of them in Spain have been of us, or of our blood at least, and

many of them at this day think as I do.  There is one

particular festival of the year at which four dignified

ecclesiastics are sure to visit me; and then, when all is made

close and secure, and the fitting ceremonies have been gone

through, they sit down upon the floor and curse.



MYSELF. - Are you numerous in the large towns?



ABARBENEL. - By no means; our places of abode are seldom

the large towns; we prefer the villages, and rarely enter the

large towns but on business.  Indeed we are not a numerous

people, and there are few provinces of Spain which contain more

than twenty families.  None of us are poor, and those among us

who serve, do so more from choice than necessity, for by

serving each other we acquire different trades.  Not

unfrequently the time of service is that of courtship also, and

the servants eventually marry the daughters of the house.



We continued in discourse the greater part of the night;

the next morning I prepared to depart.  My companion, however,

advised me to remain where I was for that day.  "And if you

respect my counsel," said he, "you will not proceed farther in

this manner.  To-night the diligence will arrive from

Estremadura, on its way to Madrid.  Deposit yourself therein;

it is the safest and most speedy mode of travelling.  As for

your animal, I will myself purchase her.  My servant is here,

and has informed me that she will be of service to us.  Let us,

therefore, pass the day together in communion, like brothers,

and then proceed on our separate journeys."  We did pass the

day together; and when the diligence arrived I deposited myself

within, and on the morning of the second day arrived at Madrid.

