





CHAPTER XXI







Departure from Salamanca - Reception at Pitiegua - The Dilemma -

Sudden Inspiration - The Good Presbyter - Combat of Quadrupeds -

Irish Christians - Plains of Spain - The Catalans - Tha Fatal Pool -

Valladolid - Circulation of the Scriptures - Philippine Missions -

English College - A Conversation - The Gaoleress.





On Saturday, the tenth of June, I left Salamanca for

Valladolid.  As the village where we intended to rest was only

five leagues distant, we did not sally forth till midday was

past.  There was a haze in the heavens which overcast the sun,

nearly hiding his countenance from our view.  My friend, Mr.

Patrick Cantwell, of the Irish College, was kind enough to ride

with me part of the way.  He was mounted on a most sorry-

looking hired mule, which, I expected would be unable to keep

pace with the spirited horses of myself and man, for he seemed

to be twin brother of the mule of Gil Perez, on which his

nephew made his celebrated journey from Oviedo to Penaflor.  I

was, however, very much mistaken.  The creature on being

mounted instantly set off at that rapid walk which I have so

often admired in Spanish mules, and which no horse can emulate.

Our more stately animals were speedily left in the rear, and we

were continually obliged to break into a trot to follow the

singular quadruped, who, ever and anon, would lift his head

high in the air, curl up his lip, and show his yellow teeth, as

if he were laughing at us, as perhaps he was.  It chanced that

none of us was well acquainted with the road; indeed, I could

see nothing which was fairly entitled to that appellation.  The

way from Salamanca to Valladolid is amongst a medley of bridle-

paths and drift-ways, where discrimination is very difficult.

It was not long before we were bewildered, and travelled over

more ground than was strictly necessary.  However, as men and

women frequently passed on donkeys and little ponies, we were

not too proud to be set right by them, and by dint of diligent

inquiry we at length arrived at Pitiegua, four leagues from

Salamanca, a small village, containing about fifty families,

consisting of mud huts, and situated in the midst of dusty

plains, where corn was growing in abundance.  We asked for the

house of the cura, an old man whom I had seen the day before at

the Irish College, and who, on being informed that I was about

to depart for Valladolid, had exacted from me a promise that I

would not pass through his village without paying him a visit

and partaking of his hospitality.



A woman directed us to a cottage somewhat superior in

appearance to those contiguous.  It had a small portico, which,

if I remember well, was overgrown with a vine.  We knocked loud

and long at the door, but received no answer; the voice of man

was silent, and not even a dog barked.  The truth was, that the

old curate was taking his siesta, and so were his whole family,

which consisted of one ancient female and a cat.  The good man

was at last disturbed by our noise and vociferation, for we

were hungry, and consequently impatient.  Leaping from his

couch, he came running to the door in great hurry and

confusion, and perceiving us, he made many apologies for being

asleep at a period when, he said, he ought to have been on the

lookout for his invited guest.  He embraced me very

affectionately and conducted me into his parlour, an apartment

of tolerable size, hung round with shelves, which were crowded

with books.  At one end there was a kind of table or desk

covered with black leather, with a large easy chair, into which

he pushed me, as I, with the true eagerness of a bibliomaniac,

was about to inspect his shelves; saying, with considerable

vehemence, that there was nothing there worthy of the attention

of an Englishman, for that his whole stock consisted of

breviaries and dry Catholic treatises on divinity.



His care now was to furnish us with refreshments.  In a

twinkling, with the assistance of his old attendant, he placed

on the table several plates of cakes and confectionery, and a

number of large uncouth glass bottles, which I thought bore a

strong resemblance to those of Schiedam, and indeed they were

the very same.  "There," said he, rubbing his hands; "I thank

God that it is in my power to treat you in a way which will be

agreeable to you.  In those bottles there is Hollands thirty

years old"; and producing two large tumblers, he continued,

"fill, my friends, and drink, drink it every drop if you

please, for it is of little use to myself, who seldom drink

aught but water.  I know that you islanders love it, and cannot

live without it; therefore, since it does you good, I am only

sorry that there is no more."



Observing that we contented ourselves with merely tasting

it, he looked at us with astonishment, and inquired the reason

of our not drinking.  We told him that we seldom drank ardent

spirits; and I added, that as for myself, I seldom tasted even

wine, but like himself, was content with the use of water.  He

appeared somewhat incredulous, but told us to do exactly what

we pleased, and to ask for what was agreeable to us.  We told

him that we had not dined, and should be glad of some

substantial refreshment.  "I am afraid," said he, "that I have

nothing in the house which will suit you; however, we will go

and see."



Thereupon he led us through a small yard at the back part

of his house, which might have been called a garden, or

orchard, if it had displayed either trees or flowers; but it

produced nothing but grass, which was growing in luxuriance.

At one end was a large pigeon-house, which we all entered:

"for," said the curate, "if we could find some nice delicate

pigeons they would afford you an excellent dinner."  We were,

however, disappointed; for after rummaging the nests, we only

found very young ones, unfitted for our purpose.  The good man

became very melancholy, and said he had some misgivings that we

should have to depart dinnerless.  Leaving the pigeon-house, he

conducted us to a place where there were several skeps of bees,

round which multitudes of the busy insects were hovering,

filling the air with their music.  "Next to my fellow

creatures," said he, "there is nothing which I love so dearly

as these bees; it is one of my delights to sit watching them,

and listening to their murmur."  We next went to several

unfurnished rooms, fronting the yard, in one of which were

hanging several flitches of bacon, beneath which he stopped,

and looking up, gazed intently upon them.  We told him that if

he had nothing better to offer, we should be very glad to eat

some slices of this bacon, especially if some eggs were added.

"To tell the truth," said he, "I have nothing better, and if

you can content yourselves with such fare I shall be very

happy; as for eggs you can have as many as you wish, and

perfectly fresh, for my hens lay every day."



So, after every thing was prepared and arranged to our

satisfaction, we sat down to dine on the bacon and eggs, in a

small room, not the one to which he had ushered us at first,

but on the other side of the doorway.  The good curate, though

he ate nothing, having taken his meal long before, sat at the

head of the table, and the repast was enlivened by his chat.

"There, my friends," said he, "where you are now seated, once

sat Wellington and Crawford, after they had beat the French at

Arapiles, and rescued us from the thraldom of those wicked

people.  I never respected my house so much as I have done

since they honoured it with their presence.  They were heroes,

and one was a demigod."  He then burst into a most eloquent

panegyric of El Gran Lord, as he termed him, which I should be

very happy to translate, were my pen capable of rendering into

English the robust thundering sentences of his powerful

Castilian.  I had till then considered him a plain uninformed

old man, almost simple, and as incapable of much emotion as a

tortoise within its shell; but he had become at once inspired:

his eyes were replete with a bright fire, and every muscle of

his face was quivering.  The little silk skull-cap which he

wore, according to the custom of the Catholic clergy, moved up

and down with his agitation, and I soon saw that I was in the

presence of one of those remarkable men who so frequently

spring up in the bosom of the Romish church, and who to a

child-like simplicity unite immense energy and power of mind, -

equally adapted to guide a scanty flock of ignorant rustics in

some obscure village in Italy or Spain, as to convert millions

of heathens on the shores of Japan, China, and Paraguay.



He was a thin spare man, of about sixty-five, and was

dressed in a black cloak of very coarse materials, nor were his

other garments of superior quality.  This plainness, however,

in the appearance of his outward man was by no means the result

of poverty; quite the contrary.  The benefice was a very

plentiful one, and placed at his disposal annually a sum of at

least eight hundred dollars, of which the eighth part was more

than sufficient to defray the expenses of his house and

himself; the rest was devoted entirely to the purest acts of

charity.  He fed the hungry wanderer, and dispatched him

singing on his way, with meat in his wallet and a peseta in his

purse, and his parishioners, when in need of money, had only to

repair to his study and were sure of an immediate supply.  He

was, indeed, the banker of the village, and what he lent he

neither expected nor wished to be returned.  Though under the

necessity of making frequent journeys to Salamanca, he kept no

mule, but contented himself with an ass, borrowed from the

neighbouring miller.  "I once kept a mule," said he, "but some

years since it was removed without my permission by a traveller

whom I had housed for the night: for in that alcove I keep two

clean beds for the use of the wayfaring, and I shall be very

much pleased if yourself and friend will occupy them, and tarry

with me till the morning."



But I was eager to continue my journey, and my friend was

no less anxious to return to Salamanca.  Upon taking leave of

the hospitable curate, I presented him with a copy of the New

Testament.  He received it without uttering a single word, and

placed it on one of the shelves of his study; but I observed

him nodding significantly to the Irish student, perhaps as much

as to say, "Your friend loses no opportunity of propagating his

book"; for he was well aware who I was.  I shall not speedily

forget the truly good presbyter, Anthonio Garcia de Aguilar,

Cura of Pitiegua.



We reached Pedroso shortly before nightfall.  It was a

small village containing about thirty houses, and intersected

by a rivulet, or as it is called a regata.  On its banks women

and maidens were washing their linen and singing couplets; the

church stood lone and solitary on the farther side.  We

inquired for the posada, and were shown a cottage differing

nothing from the rest in general appearance.  We called at the

door in vain, as it is not the custom of Castile for the people

of these halting places to go out to welcome their visitors: at

last we dismounted and entered the house, demanding of a

sullen-looking woman where we were to place the horses.  She

said there was a stable within the house, but we could not put

the animals there as it contained malos machos (SAVAGE MULES)

belonging to two travellers who would certainly fight with our

horses, and then there would be a funcion, which would tear the

house down.  She then pointed to an outhouse across the way,

saying that we could stable them there.  We entered this place,

which we found full of filth and swine, with a door without a

lock.  I thought of the fate of the cura's mule, and was

unwilling to trust the horses in such a place, abandoning them

to the mercy of any robber in the neighbourhood.  I therefore

entered the house, and said resolutely, that I was determined

to place them in the stable.  Two men were squatted on the

ground, with an immense bowl of stewed hare before them, on

which they were supping; these were the travelling merchants,

the masters of the mutes.  I passed on to the stable, one of

the men saying softly, "Yes, yes, go in and see what will

befall."  I had no sooner entered the stable than I heard a

horrid discordant cry, something between a bray and a yell, and

the largest of the machos, tearing his head from the manger to

which he was fastened, his eyes shooting flames, and breathing

a whirlwind from his nostrils, flung himself on my stallion.

The horse, as savage as himself, reared on his hind legs, and

after the fashion of an English pugilist, repaid the other with

a pat on the forehead, which nearly felled him.  A combat

instantly ensued, and I thought that the words of the sullen

woman would be verified by the house being torn to pieces.  It

ended by my seizing the mute by the halter, at the risk of my

limbs, and hanging upon him with all my weight, whilst Antonio,

with much difficulty, removed the horse.  The man who had been

standing at the entrance now came forward, saying, "This would

not have happened if you had taken good advice."  Upon my

stating to him the unreasonableness of expecting that I would

risk horses in a place where they would probably be stolen

before the morning, he replied, "True, true, you have perhaps

done right."  He then refastened his macho, adding for

additional security a piece of whipcord, which he said rendered

escape impossible.



After supper I roamed about the village.  I addressed two

or three labourers whom I found standing at their doors; they

appeared, however, exceedingly reserved, and with a gruff

"BUENAS NOCHES" turned into their houses without inviting me to

enter.  I at last found my way to the church porch, where I

continued some time in meditation.  At last I bethought myself

of retiring to rest; before departing, however, I took out and

affixed to the porch of the church an advertisement to the

effect that the New Testament was to be purchased at Salamanca.

On returning to the house, I found the two travelling merchants

enjoying profound slumber on various mantas or mule-cloths

stretched on the floor.  "You are a French merchant, I suppose,

Caballero," said a man, who it seemed was the master of the

house, and whom I had not before seen.  "You are a French

merchant, I suppose, and are on the way to the fair of Medina."

"I am neither Frenchman nor merchant," I replied, "and though I

purpose passing through Medina, it is not with the view of

attending the fair."  "Then you are one of the Irish Christians

from Salamanca, Caballero," said the man; "I hear you come from

that town."  "Why do you call them IRISH CHRISTIANS?" I

replied.  "Are there pagans in their country?"  "We call them

Christians," said the man, "to distinguish them from the Irish

English, who are worse than pagans, who are Jews and heretics."

I made no answer, but passed on to the room which had been

prepared for me, and from which, the door being ajar, I heard

the following conversation passing between the innkeeper and

his wife:-



INNKEEPER. - Muger, it appears to me that we have evil

guests in the house.



WIFE. - You mean the last comers, the Caballero and his

servant.  Yes, I never saw worse countenances in my life.



INNKEEPER. - I do not like the servant, and still less

the master.  He has neither formality nor politeness: he tells

me that he is not French, and when I spoke to him of the Irish

Christians, he did not seem to belong to them.  I more than

suspect that he is a heretic or a Jew at least.



WIFE. - Perhaps they are both.  Maria Santissima! what

shall we do to purify the house when they are gone?



INNKEEPER. - O, as for that matter, we must of course

charge it in the cuenta.



I slept soundly, and rather late in the morning arose and

breakfasted, and paid the bill, in which, by its extravagance,

I found the purification had not been forgotten.  The

travelling merchants had departed at daybreak.  We now led

forth the horses, and mounted; there were several people at the

door staring at us.  "What is the meaning of this?" said I to

Antonio.



"It is whispered that we are no Christians," said

Antonio; "they have come to cross themselves at our departure."



In effect, the moment that we rode forward a dozen hands

at least were busied in this evil-averting ceremony.  Antonio

instantly turned and crossed himself in the Greek fashion, -

much more complex and difficult than the Catholic.



"MIRAD QUE SANTIGUO! QUE SANTIGUO DE LOS DEMONIOS!" *

exclaimed many voices, whilst for fear of consequences we

hastened away.



* "See the crossing! see what devilish crossing!"



The day was exceedingly hot, and we wended our way slowly

along the plains of Old Castile.  With all that pertains to

Spain, vastness and sublimity are associated: grand are its

mountains, and no less grand are its plains, which seem of

boundless extent, but which are not tame unbroken flats, like

the steppes of Russia.  Rough and uneven ground is continually

occurring: here a deep ravine and gully worn by the wintry

torrent; yonder an eminence not unfrequently craggy and savage,

at whose top appears the lone solitary village.  There is

little that is blithesome and cheerful, but much that is

melancholy.  A few solitary rustics are occasionally seen

toiling in the fields - fields without limit or boundary, where

the green oak, the elm or the ash are unknown; where only the

sad and desolate pine displays its pyramid-like form, and where

no grass is to be found.  And who are the travellers of these

districts?  For the most part arrieros, with their long trains

of mules hung with monotonous tinkling bells.  Behold them with

their brown faces, brown dresses, and broad slouched hats; -

the arrieros, the true lords of the roads of Spain, and to whom

more respect is paid in these dusty ways than to dukes and

condes; - the arrieros, sullen, proud, and rarely courteous,

whose deep voices may be sometimes heard at the distance of a

mile, either cheering the sluggish animals, or shortening the

dreary way with savage and dissonant songs.



Late in the afternoon, we reached Medina del Campo,

formerly one of the principal cities of Spain, though at

present an inconsiderable place.  Immense ruins surround it in

every direction, attesting the former grandeur of this "city of

the plain."  The great square or market-place is a remarkable

spot, surrounded by a heavy massive piazza, over which rise

black buildings of great antiquity.  We found the town crowded

with people awaiting the fair, which was to be held in a day or

two.  We experienced some difficulty in obtaining admission

into the posada, which was chiefly occupied by Catalans from

Valladolid.  These people not only brought with them their

merchandise but their wives and children.  Some of them

appeared to be people of the worst description: there was one

in particular, a burly savage-looking fellow, of about forty,

whose conduct was atrocious; he sat with his wife, or perhaps

concubine, at the door of a room which opened upon the court:

he was continually venting horrible and obscene oaths, both in

Spanish and Catalan.  The woman was remarkably handsome, but

robust and seemingly as savage as himself; her conversation

likewise was as frightful as his own.  Both seemed to be under

the influence of an incomprehensible fury.  At last, upon some

observation from the woman, he started up, and drawing a long

knife from his girdle, stabbed at her naked bosom; she,

however, interposed the palm of her hand, which was much cut.

He stood for a moment viewing the blood trickling upon the

ground, whilst she held up her wounded hand, then with an

astounding oath he hurried up the court to the Plaza.  I went

up to the woman and said, "What is the cause of this?  I hope

the ruffian has not seriously injured you."  She turned her

countenance upon me with the glance of a demon, and at last

with a sneer of contempt exclaimed, "CARALS, QUE ES ESO?

Cannot a Catalan gentleman be conversing with his lady upon

their own private affairs without being interrupted by you?"

She then bound up her hand with a handkerchief, and going into

the room brought a small table to the door, on which she placed

several things as if for the evening's repast, and then sat

down on a stool: presently returned the Catalan, and without a

word took his seat on the threshold; then, as if nothing had

occurred, the extraordinary couple commenced eating and

drinking, interlarding their meal with oaths and jests.



We spent the night at Medina, and departing early next

morning, passed through much the same country as the day

before, until about noon we reached a small venta, distant half

a league from the Duero; here we reposed ourselves during the

heat of the day, and then remounting, crossed the river by a

handsome stone bridge, and directed our course to Valladolid.

The banks of the Duero in this place have much beauty: they

abound with trees and brushwood, amongst which, as we passed

along, various birds were singing melodiously.  A delicious

coolness proceeded from the water, which in some parts brawled

over stones or rippled fleetly over white sand, and in others

glided softly over blue pools of considerable depth.  By the

side of one of these last, sat a woman of about thirty, neatly

dressed as a peasant; she was gazing upon the water into which

she occasionally flung flowers and twigs of trees.  I stopped

for a moment to ask a question; she, however, neither looked up

nor answered, but continued gazing at the water as if lost to

consciousness of all beside.  "Who is that woman?" said I to a

shepherd, whom I met the moment after.  "She is mad, LA

POBRECITA," said he; "she lost her child about a month ago in

that pool, and she has been mad ever since; they are going to

send her to Valladolid, to the Casa de los Locos.  There are

many who perish every year in the eddies of the Duero; it is a

bad river; VAYA USTED CON LA VIRGEN, CABALLERO."  So I rode on

through the pinares, or thin scanty pine forests, which skirt

the way to Valladolid in this direction.



Valladolid is seated in the midst of an immense valley,

or rather hollow which seems to have been scooped by some

mighty convulsion out of the plain ground of Castile.  The

eminences which appear in the neighbourhood are not properly

high grounds, but are rather the sides of this hollow.  They

are jagged and precipitous, and exhibit a strange and uncouth

appearance.  Volcanic force seems at some distant period to

have been busy in these districts.  Valladolid abounds with

convents, at present deserted, which afford some of the finest

specimens of architecture in Spain.  The principal church,

though rather ancient, is unfinished: it was intended to be a

building of vast size, but the means of the founders were

insufficient to carry out their plan: it is built of rough

granite.  Valladolid is a manufacturing town, but the commerce

is chiefly in the hands of the Catalans, of whom there is a

colony of nearly three hundred established here.  It possesses

a beautiful alameda, or public walk, through which flows the

river Escurva.  The population is said to amount to sixty

thousand souls.



We put up at the Posada de las Diligencias, a very

magnificent edifice: this posada, however, we were glad to quit

on the second day after our arrival, the accommodation being of

the most wretched description, and the incivility of the people

great; the master of the house, an immense tall fellow, with

huge moustaches and an assumed military air, being far too high

a cavalier to attend to the wants of his guests, with whom, it

is true, he did not appear to be overburdened, as I saw no one

but Antonio and myself.  He was a leading man amongst the

national guards of Valladolid, and delighted in parading about

the city on a clumsy steed, which he kept in a subterranean

stable.



Our next quarters were at the Trojan Horse, an ancient

posada, kept by a native of the Basque provinces, who at least

was not above his business.  We found everything in confusion

at Valladolid, a visit from the factious being speedily

expected.  All the gates were blockaded, and various forts had

been built to cover the approaches to the city.  Shortly after

our departure the Carlists actually did arrive, under the

command of the Biscayan chief, Zariategui.  They experienced no

opposition; the staunchest nationals retiring to the principal

fort, which they, however, speedily surrendered, not a gun

being fired throughout the affair.  As for my friend the hero

of the inn, on the first rumour of the approach of the enemy,

he mounted his horse and rode off, and was never subsequently

heard of.  On our return to Valladolid, we found the inn in

other and better hands, those of a Frenchman from Bayonne, from

whom we received as much civility as we had experienced

rudeness from his predecessor.



In a few days I formed the acquaintance of the book-

seller of the place, a kind-hearted simple man, who willingly

undertook the charge of vending the Testaments which I brought.



I found literature of every description at the lowest ebb

at Valladolid.  My newly-acquired friend merely carried on

bookselling in connexion with other business; it being, as he

assured me, in itself quite insufficient to afford him a

livelihood.  During the week, however, that I continued in this

city, a considerable number of copies were disposed of, and a

fair prospect opened that many more would be demanded.  To call

attention to my books, I had recourse to the same plan which I

had adopted at Salamanca, the affixing of advertisements to the

walls.  Before leaving the city, I gave orders that these

should be renewed every week; from pursuing which course I

expected that much manifold good would accrue, as the people

would have continual opportunities of learning that a book

which contains the living word was in existence, and within

their reach, which might induce them to secure it and consult

it even unto salvation.



In Valladolid I found both an English and Scotch College.

From my obliging friends, the Irish at Salamanca, I bore a

letter of introduction to the rector of the latter.  I found

this college an old gloomy edifice, situated in a retired

street.  The rector was dressed in the habiliments of a Spanish

ecclesiastic, a character which he was evidently ambitious of

assuming.  There was something dry and cold in his manner, and

nothing of that generous warmth and eager hospitality which had

so captivated me in the fine Irish rector of Salamanca; he was,

however, civil and polite, and offered to show me the

curiosities of the place.  He evidently knew who I was, and on

that account was, perhaps, more reserved than he otherwise

would have been: not a word passed between us on religious

matters, which we seemed to avoid by common consent.  Under the

auspices of this gentleman, I visited the college of the

Philippine Missions, which stands beyond the gate of the city,

where I was introduced to the superior, a fine old man of

seventy, very stout, in the habiliments of a friar.  There was

an air of placid benignity on his countenance which highly

interested me: his words were few and simple, and he seemed to

have bid adieu to all worldly passions.  One little weakness

was, however, still clinging to him.



MYSELF. - This is a noble edifice in which you dwell,

Father; I should think it would contain at least two hundred

students.



RECTOR. - More, my son; it is intended for more hundreds

than it now contains single individuals.



MYSELF. - I observe that some rude attempts have been

made to fortify it; the walls are pierced with loopholes in

every direction.



RECTOR. - The nationals of Valladolid visited us a few

days ago, and committed much useless damage; they were rather

rude, and threatened me with their clubs: poor men, poor men.



MYSELF. - I suppose that even these missions, which are

certainly intended for a noble end, experience the sad effects

of the present convulsed state of Spain?



RECTOR. - But too true: we at present receive no

assistance from the government, and are left to the Lord and

ourselves.



MYSELF. - How many aspirants for the mission are you at

present instructing?



RECTOR. - Not one, my son; not one.  They are all fled.

The flock is scattered and the shepherd left alone.



MYSELF. - Your reverence has doubtless taken an active

part in the mission abroad?



RECTOR. - I was forty years in the Philippines, my son,

forty years amongst the Indians.  Ah me! how I love those

Indians of the Philippines.



MYSELF. - Can your reverence discourse in the language of

the Indians?



RECTOR. - No, my son.  We teach the Indians Castilian.

There is no better language, I believe.  We teach them

Castilian, and the adoration of the Virgin.  What more need

they know?



MYSELF. - And what did your reverence think of the

Philippines as a country?



RECTOR. - I was forty years in the Philippines, but I

know little of the country.  I do not like the country.  I love

the Indians.  The country is not very bad; it is, however, not

worth Castile.



MYSELF. - Is your reverence a Castilian?



RECTOR. - I am an OLD Castilian, my son.



From the house of the Philippine Missions my friend

conducted me to the English college; this establishment seemed

in every respect to be on a more magnificent scale than its

Scottish sister.  In the latter there were few pupils, scarcely

six or seven, I believe, whilst in the English seminary I was

informed that between thirty and forty were receiving their

education.  It is a beautiful building, with a small but

splendid church, and a handsome library.  The situation is

light and airy: it stands by itself in an unfrequented part of

the city, and, with genuine English exclusiveness, is

surrounded by a high wall, which encloses a delicious garden.

This is by far the most remarkable establishment of the kind in

the Peninsula, and I believe the most prosperous.  From the

cursory view which I enjoyed of its interior, I of course

cannot be expected to know much of its economy.  I could not,

however, fall to be struck with the order, neatness, and system

which pervaded it.  There was, however, an air of severe

monastic discipline, though I am far from asserting that such

actually existed.  We were attended throughout by the sub-

rector, the principal being absent.  Of all the curiosities of

this college, the most remarkable is the picture gallery, which

contains neither more nor less than the portraits of a variety

of scholars of this house who eventually suffered martyrdom in

England, in the exercise of their vocation in the angry times

of the Sixth Edward and fierce Elizabeth.  Yes, in this very

house were many of those pale smiling half-foreign priests

educated, who, like stealthy grimalkins, traversed green

England in all directions; crept into old halls beneath

umbrageous rookeries, fanning the dying embers of Popery, with

no other hope nor perhaps wish than to perish disembowelled by

the bloody hands of the executioner, amongst the yells of a

rabble as bigoted as themselves: priests like Bedingfield and

Garnet, and many others who have left a name in English story.

Doubtless many a history, only the more wonderful for being

true, could be wrought out of the archives of the English

Popish seminary at Valladolid.



There was no lack of guests at the Trojan Horse, where we

had taken up our abode at Valladolid.  Amongst others who

arrived during my sojourn was a robust buxom dame, exceedingly

well dressed in black silk, with a costly mantilla.  She was

accompanied by a very handsome, but sullen and malicious-

looking urchin of about fifteen, who appeared to be her son.

She came from Toro, a place about a day's journey from

Valladolid, and celebrated for its wine.  One night, as we were

seated in the court of the inn enjoying the fresco, the

following conversation ensued between us.



LADY. - Vaya, vaya, what a tiresome place is Valladolid!

How different from Toro.



MYSELF. - I should have thought that it is at least as

agreeable as Toro, which is not a third part so large.



LADY. - As agreeable as Toro!  Vaya, vaya!  Were you ever

in the prison of Toro, Sir Cavalier?



MYSELF. - I have never had that honour; the prison is

generally the last place which I think of visiting.



LADY. - See the difference of tastes: I have been to see

the prison of Valladolid, and it seems as tiresome as the town.



MYSELF. - Of course, if grief and tediousness exist

anywhere, you will find them in the prison.



LADY. - Not in that of Toro.



MYSELF. - What does that of Toro possess to distinguish

it from all others?



LADY. - What does it possess?  Vaya!  Am I not the

carcelera?  Is not my husband the alcayde?  Is not that son of

mine a child of the prison?



MYSELF. - I beg your pardon, I was not aware of that

circumstance; it of course makes much difference.



LADY. - I believe you.  I am a daughter of that prison,

my father was alcayde, and my son might hope to be so, were he

not a fool.



MYSELF. - His countenance then belies him strangely: I

should be loth to purchase that youngster for a fool.



GAOLERESS. - You would have a fine bargain if you did; he

has more picardias than any Calabozero in Toro.  What I mean

is, that he does not take to the prison as he ought to do,

considering what his fathers were before him.  He has too much

pride - too many fancies; and he has at length persuaded me to

bring him to Valladolid, where I have arranged with a merchant

who lives in the Plaza to take him on trial.  I wish he may not

find his way to the prison: if he do, he will find that being a

prisoner is a very different thing from being a son of the

prison.



MYSELF. - As there is so much merriment at Toro, you of

course attend to the comfort of your prisoners.



GAOLERESS. - Yes, we are very kind to them; I mean to

those who are caballeros; but as for those with vermin and

miseria, what can we do?  It is a merry prison that of Toro; we

allow as much wine to enter as the prisoners can purchase and

pay duty for.  This of Valladolid is not half so gay: there is

no prison like Toro.  I learned there to play on the guitar.

An Andalusian cavalier taught me to touch the guitar and to

sing a la Gitana.  Poor fellow, he was my first novio.

Juanito, bring me the guitar, that I may play this gentleman a

tune of Andalusia.



The carcelera had a fine voice, and touched the favourite

instrument of the Spaniards in a truly masterly manner.  I

remained listening to her performance for nearly an hour, when

I retired to my apartment and my repose.  I believe that she

continued playing and singing during the greater part of the

night, for as I occasionally awoke I could still hear her; and,

even in my slumbers, the strings were ringing in my ears.

