






CHAPTER XLIII







Villa Seca - Moorish House - The Puchera - The Rustic Council -

Polite Ceremonial - The Flower of Spain - The Bridge of Azeca -

The Ruined Castle - Taking the Field - Demand for the Word -

he Old Peasant - The Curate and Blacksmith -

Cheapness of the Scriptures.





It was one of the most fiercely hot days in which I ever

braved the sun, when I arrived at Villa Seca.  The heat in the

shade must have amounted at least to one hundred degrees, and

the entire atmosphere seemed to consist of flickering flame.

At a place called Leganez, six leagues from Madrid, and about

half way to Toledo, we diverged from the highway, bending our

course seemingly towards the south-east.  We rode over what are

called plains in Spain, but which, in any other part of the

world, would be called undulating and broken ground.  The crops

of corn and barley had already disappeared.  The last vestiges

discoverable being here and there a few sheaves, which the

labourers were occupied in removing to their garners in the

villages.  The country could scarcely be called beautiful,

being perfectly naked, exhibiting neither trees nor verdure.

It was not, however, without its pretensions to grandeur and

magnificence, like every part of Spain.  The most prominent

objects were two huge calcareous hills or rather one cleft in

twain, which towered up on high; the summit of the nearest

being surmounted by the ruins of an ancient castle, that of

Villaluenga.  About an hour past noon we reached Villa Seca.



We found it a large village, containing about seven

hundred inhabitants, and surrounded by a mud wall.  A plaza, or

market-place, stood in the midst, one side of which is occupied

by what is called a palace, a clumsy quadrangular building of

two stories, belonging to some noble family, the lords of the

neighbouring soil.  It was deserted, however, being only

occupied by a kind of steward, who stored up in its chambers

the grain which he received as rent from the tenants and

villanos who farmed the surrounding district.



The village stands at the distance of about a quarter of

a league from the bank of the Tagus, which even here, in the

heart of Spain, is a beautiful stream, not navigable, however,

on account of the sand-banks, which in many places assume the

appearance of small islands, and are covered with trees and

brushwood.  The village derives its supply of water entirely

from the river, having none of its own; such at least as is

potable, the water of its wells being all brackish, on which

account it is probably termed Villa Seca, which signifies "the

dry hamlet."  The inhabitants are said to have been originally

Moors; certain it is, that various customs are observable here

highly favourable to such a supposition.  Amongst others, a

very curious one; it is deemed infamous for a woman of Villa

Seca to go across the market-place, or to be seen there, though

they have no hesitation in showing themselves in the streets

and lanes.  A deep-rooted hostility exists between the

inhabitants of this place and those of a neighbouring village,

called Vargas; they rarely speak when they meet, and never

intermarry.  There is a vague tradition that the people of the

latter place are old Christians, and it is highly probable that

these neighbours were originally of widely different blood;

those of Villa Seca being of particularly dark complexions,

whilst the indwellers of Vargas are light and fair.  Thus the

old feud between Moor and Christian is still kept up in the

nineteenth century in Spain.



Drenched in perspiration, which fell from our brows like

rain, we arrived at the door of Juan Lopez, the husband of

Maria Diaz.  Having heard of our intention to pay him a visit,

he was expecting us, and cordially welcomed us to his

habitation, which, like a genuine Moorish house, consisted only

of one story.  It was amply large, however, with a court and

stable.  All the apartments were deliciously cool.  The floors

were of brick or stone, and the narrow and trellised windows,

which were without glass, scarcely permitted a ray of sun to

penetrate into the interior.



A puchera had been prepared in expectation of our

arrival; the heat had not taken away my appetite, and it was

not long before I did full justice to this the standard dish of

Spain.  Whilst I ate, Lopez played upon the guitar, singing

occasionally snatches of Andalusian songs.  He was a short,

merry-faced, active fellow, whom I had frequently seen at

Madrid, and was a good specimen of the Spanish labrador or

yeoman.  Though far from possessing the ability and intellect

of his wife, Maria Diaz, he was by no means deficient in

shrewdness and understanding.  He was, moreover, honest and

disinterested, and performed good service in the Gospel cause,

as will presently appear.



When the repast was concluded, Lopez thus addressed me:-

"Senor Don Jorge, your arrival in our village has already

caused a sensation, more especially as these are times of war

and tumult, and every person is afraid of another, and we dwell

here close on the confines of the factious country; for, as you

well know, the greater part of La Mancha is in the hands of the

Carlinos and thieves, parties of whom frequently show

themselves on the other side of the river: on which account the

alcalde of this city, with the other grave and notable people

thereof, are desirous of seeing your worship, and conversing

with you, and of examining your passport."  "It is well," said

I; "let us forthwith pay a visit to these worthy people."

Whereupon he conducted me across the plaza, to the house of the

alcalde, where I found the rustic dignitary seated in the

passage, enjoying the refreshing coolness of a draught of air

which rushed through.  He was an elderly man, of about sixty,

with nothing remarkable in his appearance or his features,

which latter were placid and good-humoured.  There were several

people with him, amongst whom was the surgeon of the place, a

tall and immensely bulky man, an Alavese by birth, from the

town of Vitoria.  There was also a red fiery-faced individual,

with a nose very much turned on one side, who was the

blacksmith of the village, and was called in general El Tuerto,

from the circumstance of his having but one eye.  Making the

assembly a low bow, I pulled out my passport, and thus

addressed them:-



"Grave men and cavaliers of this city of Villa Seca, as I

am a stranger, of whom it is not possible that you should know

anything, I have deemed it my duty to present myself before

you, and to tell you who I am.  Know, then, that I am an

Englishman of good blood and fathers, travelling in these

countries for my own profit and diversion, and for that of

other people also.  I have now found my way to Villa Seca,

where I propose to stay some time, doing that which may be

deemed convenient; sometimes riding across the plain, and

sometimes bathing myself in the waters of the river, which are

reported to be of advantage in times of heat, I therefore beg

that, during my sojourn in this capital, I may enjoy such

countenance and protection from its governors as they are in

the habit of affording to those who are of quiet and well-

ordered life, and are disposed to be buxom and obedient to the

customs and laws of the republic."



"He speaks well," said the alcalde, glancing around.



"Yes, he speaks well," said the bulky Alavese; "there is

no denying it."



"I never heard any one speak better," cried the

blacksmith, starting up from a stool on which he was seated.

"Vaya! he is a big man and a fair complexioned like myself.  I

like him, and have a horse that will just suit him; one that is

the flower of Spain, and is eight inches above the mark."



I then, with another bow, presented my passport to the

alcalde, who, with a gentle motion of his hand, appeared to

decline taking it, at the same time saying, "It is not

necessary."  "Oh, not at all," exclaimed the surgeon.  "The

housekeepers of Villa Seca know how to comport themselves with

formality," observed the blacksmith.  "They would be very loth

to harbour any suspicion against a cavalier so courteous and

well spoken."  Knowing, however, that this refusal amounted to

nothing, and that it merely formed part of a polite ceremonial,

I proffered the passport a second time, whereupon it was

instantly taken, and in a moment the eyes of all present were

bent upon it with intense curiosity.  It was examined from top

to bottom, and turned round repeatedly, and though it is not

probable that an individual present understood a word of it, it

being written in French, it gave nevertheless universal

satisfaction; and when the alcalde, carefully folding it up,

returned it to me, they all observed that they had never seen a

better passport in their lives, or one which spake in higher

terms of the bearer.



 Who was it said that "Cervantes sneered Spain's chivalry

away?"  I know not; and the author of such a line scarcely

deserves to be remembered.  How the rage for scribbling tempts

people at the present day to write about lands and nations of

which they know nothing, or worse than nothing.  Vaya!  It is

not from having seen a bull-fight at Seville or Madrid, or

having spent a handful of ounces at a posada in either of those

places, kept perhaps by a Genoese or a Frenchman, that you are

competent to write about such a people as the Spaniards, and to

tell the world how they think, how they speak, and how they

act!  Spain's chivalry sneered away!  Why, there is every

probability that the great body of the Spanish nation speak,

think, and live precisely as their forefathers did six

centuries ago.



In the evening the blacksmith, or, as he would be called

in Spanish, El Herrador, made his appearance at the door of

Lopez on horseback.  "Vamos, Don Jorge," he shouted.  "Come

with me, if your worship is disposed for a ride.  I am going to

bathe my horse in the Tagus by the bridge of Azeca."  I

instantly saddled my jaca Cordovesa, and joining him, we rode

out of the village, directing our course across the plain

towards the river.  "Did you ever see such a horse as this of

mine, Don Jorge?" he demanded.  "Is he not a jewel - an alaja?"

And in truth the horse was a noble and gallant creature, in

height at least sixteen hands, broad-chested, but of clean and

elegant limbs.  His neck was superbly arched, and his head

towered on high like that of a swan.  In colour he was a bright

chestnut, save his flowing mane and tail, which were almost

black.  I expressed my admiration, whereupon the herrador, in

high spirits, pressed his heels to the creature's sides, and

flinging the bridle on its neck, speeded over the plain with

prodigious swiftness, shouting the old Spanish cry, Cierra!  I

attempted to keep up with him, but had not a chance.  "I call

him the flower of Spain," said the herrador, rejoining me.

"Purchase him, Don Jorge, his price is but three thousand

reals. * I would not sell him for double that sum, but the

Carlist thieves have their eyes upon him, and I am apprehensive

that they will some day make a dash across the river and break

into Villa Seca, all to get possession of my horse, `The Flower

of Spain.'"



* About thirty pounds.



It may be as well to observe here, that within a month

from this period, my friend the herrador, not being able to

find a regular purchaser for his steed, entered into

negotiations with the aforesaid thieves respecting him, and

finally disposed of the animal to their leader, receiving not

the three thousand reals he demanded, but an entire herd of

horned cattle, probably driven from the plains of La Mancha.

For this transaction, which was neither more nor less than high

treason, he was cast into the prison of Toledo, where, however,

he did not continue long; for during a short visit to Villa

Seca, which I made in the spring of the following year, I found

him alcalde of that "republic."



We arrived at the bridge of Azeca, which is about half a

league from Villa Seca; close beside it is a large water-mill,

standing upon a dam which crosses the river.  Dismounting from

his steed, the herrador proceeded to divest it of the saddle,

then causing it to enter the mill-pool, he led it by means of a

cord to a particular spot, where the water reached half way up

its neck, then fastening a cord to a post on the bank, he left

the animal standing in the pool.  I thought I could do no

better than follow his example, and accordingly procuring a

rope from the mill, I led my own horse into the water.  "It

will refresh their blood, Don Jorge," said the herrador; "let

us leave them there for an hour, whilst we go and divert

ourselves."



Near the bridge, on the side of the river on which we

were, was a kind of guard-house, where were three carbineers of

the revenue, who collected the tolls of the bridge; we entered

into conversation with them: "Is not this a dangerous position

of yours," said I to one of them, who was a Catalan; "close

beside the factious country?  Surely it would not be difficult

for a body of the Carlinos or bandits to dash across the bridge

and make prisoners of you all."



"It would be easy enough at any moment, Cavalier,"

replied the Catalan; "we are, however, all in the hands of God,

and he has preserved us hitherto, and perhaps still will.  True

it is that one of our number, for there were four of us

originally, fell the other day into the hands of the canaille:

he had wandered across the bridge amongst the thickets with his

gun in search of a hare or rabbit, when three or four of them

fell upon him and put him to death in a manner too horrible to

relate.  But patience! every man who lives must die.  I shall

not sleep the worse tonight because I may chance to be hacked

by the knives of these malvados to-morrow.  Cavalier, I am from

Barcelona, and have seen there mariners of your nation; this is

not so good a country as Barcelona.  Paciencia!  Cavalier, if

you will step into our house, I will give you a glass of water;

we have some that is cool, for we dug a deep hole in the earth

and buried there our pitcher; it is cool, as I told you, but

the water of Castile is not like that of Catalonia."



The moon had arisen when we mounted our horses to return

to the village, and the rays of the beauteous luminary danced

merrily on the rushing waters of the Tagus, silvered the plain

over which we were passing, and bathed in a flood of brightness

the bold sides of the calcareous hill of Villaluenga and the

antique ruins which crowned its brow.  "Why is that place

called the Castle of Villaluenga?" I demanded.



"From a village of that name, which stands on the other

side of the hill, Don Jorge," replied the herrador.  "Vaya! it

is a strange place, that castle; some say it was built by the

Moors in the old times, and some by the Christians when they

first laid siege to Toledo.  It is not inhabited now, save by

rabbits, which breed there in abundance amongst the long grass

and broken stones, and by eagles and vultures, which build on

the tops of the towers; I occasionally go there with my gun to

shoot a rabbit.  On a fine day you may descry both Toledo and

Madrid from its walls.  I cannot say I like the place, it is so

dreary and melancholy.  The hill on which it stands is all of

chalk, and is very difficult of ascent.  I heard my grandame

say that once, when she was a girl, a cloud of smoke burst from

that hill, and that flames of fire were seen, just as if it

contained a volcano, as perhaps it does, Don Jorge."



The grand work of Scripture circulation soon commenced in

the Sagra.  Notwithstanding the heat of the weather, I rode

about in all directions.  It was well that heat agrees with my

constitution, otherwise it would have been impossible to effect

anything in this season, when the very arrieros frequently fall

dead from their mules, smitten by sun-stroke.  I had an

excellent assistant in Antonio, who, disregarding the heat like

myself, and afraid of nothing, visited several villages with

remarkable success.  "Mon maitre," said he, "I wish to show you

that nothing is beyond my capacity."  But he who put the

labours of us both to shame, was my host, Juan Lopez, whom it

had pleased the Lord to render favourable to the cause.  "Don

Jorge," said he, "IO QUIERO ENGANCHARME CON USTED (I wish to

enlist with you); I am a liberal, and a foe to superstition; I

will take the field, and, if necessary, will follow you to the

end of the world; VIVA INGALATERRA; VIVA EL EVANGELIO."  Thus

saying, he put a large bundle of Testaments into a satchel, and

springing upon the crupper of his grey donkey, he cried "ARRHE

BURRA," and hastened away.  I sat down to my journal.



Ere I had finished writing, I heard the voice of the

burra in the courtyard, and going out, I found my host

returned.  He had disposed of his whole cargo of twenty

Testaments at the village of Vargas, distant from Villa Seca

about a league.  Eight poor harvest men, who were refreshing

themselves at the door of a wine-house, purchased each a copy,

whilst the village schoolmaster secured the rest for the little

ones beneath his care, lamenting, at the same time, the great

difficulty he had long experienced in obtaining religious

books, owing to their scarcity and extravagant price.  Many

other persons were also anxious to purchase Testaments, but

Lopez was unable to supply them: at his departure, they

requested him to return within a few days.



I was aware that I was playing rather a daring game, and

that it was very possible that, when I least expected it, I

might be seized, tied to the tail of a mule, and dragged either

to the prison of Toledo or Madrid.  Yet such a prospect did not

discourage me in the least, but rather urged me to persevere;

for at this time, without the slightest wish to gratify myself,

I could say that I was eager to lay down my life for the cause,

and whether a bandit's bullet, or the gaol fever brought my

career to a close, was a matter of indifference to me; I was

not then a stricken man: "Ride on because of the word of

righteousness," was my cry.



The news of the arrival of the book of life soon spread

like wildfire through the villages of the Sagra of Toledo, and

wherever my people and myself directed our course we found the

inhabitants disposed to receive our merchandize; it was even

called for where not exhibited.  One night as I was bathing

myself and horse in the Tagus, a knot of people gathered on the

bank, crying, "Come out of the water, Englishman, and give us

books; we have got our money in our hands."  The poor creatures

then held out their hands, filled with cuartos, a copper coin

of the value of the farthing, but unfortunately I had no

Testaments to give them.  Antonio, however, who was at a short

distance, having exhibited one, it was instantly torn from his

hands by the people, and a scuffle ensued to obtain possession

of it.  It very frequently occurred, that the poor labourers in

the neighbourhood, being eager to obtain Testaments, and having

no money to offer us in exchange, brought various articles to

our habitation as equivalents; for example, rabbits, fruit and

barley, and I made a point never to disappoint them, as such

articles were of utility either for our own consumption or that

of the horses.



In Villa Seca there was a school in which fifty-seven

children were taught the first rudiments of education.  One

morning the schoolmaster, a tall slim figure of about sixty,

bearing on his head one of the peaked hats of Andalusia, and

wrapped, notwithstanding the excessive heat of the weather, in

a long cloak, made his appearance; and having seated himself,

requested to be shown one of our books.  Having delivered it to

him, he remained examining it for nearly half an hour, without

uttering a word.  At last he laid it down with a sigh, and said

that he should be very happy to purchase some of these books

for his school, but from their appearance, especially from the

quality of the paper and binding, he was apprehensive that to

pay for them would exceed the means of the parents of his

pupils, as they were almost destitute of money, being poor

labourers.  He then commenced blaming the government, which he

said established schools without affording the necessary books,

adding that in his school there were but two books for the use

of all his pupils, and these he confessed contained but little

good.  I asked him what he considered the Testaments were

worth?  He said, "Senor Cavalier, to speak frankly, I have in

other times paid twelve reals for books inferior to yours in

every respect, but I assure you that my poor pupils would be

utterly unable to pay the half of that sum."  I replied, "I

will sell you as many as you please for three reals each, I am

acquainted with the poverty of the land, and my friends and

myself, in affording the people the means of spiritual

instruction have no wish to curtail their scanty bread."  He

replied: "Bendito sea Dios," (BLESSED BE GOD,) and could

scarcely believe his ears.  He instantly purchased a dozen,

expending, as he said, all the money he possessed, with the

exception of a few cuartos.  The introduction of the word of

God into the country schools of Spain is therefore begun, and I

humbly hope that it will prove one of those events, which the

Bible Society, after the lapse of years, will have most reason

to remember with joy and gratitude to the Almighty.



An old peasant is reading in the portico.  Eighty-four

years have passed over his head, and he is almost entirely

deaf; nevertheless he is reading aloud the second of Matthew:

three days since he bespoke a Testament, but not being able to

raise the money, he has not redeemed it until the present

moment.  He has just brought thirty farthings; as I survey the

silvery hair which overshadows his sunburnt countenance, the

words of the song occurred to me, "Lord, now lettest thou thy

servant depart in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes

have seen thy salvation."



I experienced much grave kindness and simple hospitality

from the good people of Villa Seca during my sojourn amongst

them.  I had at this time so won their hearts by the

"formality" of my behaviour and language, that I firmly believe

they would have resisted to the knife any attempt which might

have been made to arrest or otherwise maltreat me.  He who

wishes to become acquainted with the genuine Spaniard, must

seek him not in sea-ports and large towns, but in lone and

remote villages, like those of the Sagra.  There he will find

all that gravity of deportment and chivalry of disposition

which Cervantes is said to have sneered away; and there he will

hear, in everyday conversation, those grandiose expressions,

which, when met with in the romances of chivalry, are scoffed

at as ridiculous exaggerations.



I had one enemy in the village - it was the curate.



"The fellow is a heretic and a scoundrel," said he one

day in the conclave.  "He never enters the church, and is

poisoning the minds of the people with his Lutheran books.  Let

him be bound and sent to Toledo, or turned out of the village

at least."



"I will have nothing of the kind," said the alcalde, who

was said to be a Carlist.  "If he has his opinions, I have mine

too.  He has conducted himself with politeness.  Why should I

interfere with him?  He has been courteous to my daughter, and

has presented her with a volume.  Que viva! and with respect to

his being a Lutheran, I have heard say that amongst the

Lutherans there are sons of as good fathers as here.  He

appears to me a caballero.  He speaks well."



"There is no denying it," said the surgeon.



"Who speaks SO well?" shouted the herrador.  "And, who

has more formality?  Vaya! did he not praise my horse, `The

Flower of Spain'?  Did he not say that in the whole of

Ingalaterra there was not a better?  Did he not assure me,

moreover, that if he were to remain in Spain he would purchase

it, giving me my own price?  Turn him out, indeed!  Is he not

of my own blood, is he not fair-complexioned?  Who shall turn

him out when I, `the one-eyed,' say no?"



In connection with the circulation of the Scriptures I

will now relate an anecdote not altogether divested of

singularity.  I have already spoken of the water-mill by the

bridge of Azeca.  I had formed acquaintance with the tenant of

this mill, who was known in the neighbourhood by the name of

Don Antero.  One day, taking me into a retired place, he asked

me, to my great astonishment, whether I would sell him a

thousand Testaments at the price at which I was disposing of

them to the peasantry; saying, if I would consent he would pay

me immediately.  In fact, he put his hand into his pocket, and

pulled it out filled with gold ounces.  I asked him what was

his reason for wishing to make so considerable a purchase.

Whereupon he informed me that he had a relation in Toledo whom

he wished to establish, and that he was of opinion that his

best plan would be to hire him a shop there and furnish it with

Testaments.  I told him that he must think of nothing of the

kind, as probably the books would be seized on the first

attempt to introduce them into Toledo, as the priests and

canons were much averse to their distribution.



He was not disconcerted, however, and said his relation

could travel, as I myself was doing, and dispose of them to the

peasants with profit to himself.  I confess I was inclined at

first to accept his offer, but at length declined it, as I did

not wish to expose a poor man to the risk of losing money,

goods, and perhaps liberty and life.  I was likewise averse to

the books being offered to the peasantry at an advanced price,

being aware that they could not afford it, and the books, by

such an attempt, would lose a considerable part of that

influence which they then enjoyed; for their cheapness struck

the minds of the people, and they considered it almost as much

in the light of a miracle as the Jews the manna which dropped

from heaven at the time they were famishing, or the spring

which suddenly gushed from the flinty rocks to assuage their

thirst in the wilderness.



At this time a peasant was continually passing and

repassing between Villa Seca and Madrid, bringing us cargoes of

Testaments on a burrico.  We continued our labours until the

greater part of the villages of the Sagra were well supplied

with books, more especially those of Vargas, Coveja, Mocejon,

Villaluenga, Villa Seca, and Yungler.  Hearing at last that our

proceedings were known at Toledo, and were causing considerable

alarm, we returned to Madrid.

