






CHAPTER XXVI







Lugo - The Baths - A Family History - Miguelets - The Three Heads -

A Farrier - English Squadron - Sale of Testaments - Coruna -

The Recognition - Luigi Piozzi - The Speculation - A Blank Prospect -

John Moore.





At Lugo I found a wealthy bookseller, to whom I brought a

letter of recommendation from Madrid.  He willingly undertook

the sale of my books.  The Lord deigned to favour my feeble

exertions in his cause at Lugo.  I brought thither thirty

Testaments, all of which were disposed of in one day; the

bishop of the place, for Lugo is an episcopal see, purchasing

two copies for himself, whilst several priests and ex-friars,

instead of following the example of their brethren at Leon, by

persecuting the work, spoke well of it and recommended its

perusal.  I was much grieved that my stock of these holy books

was exhausted, there being a great demand; and had I been able

to supply them, quadruple the quantity might have been sold

during the few days that I continued at Lugo.



Lugo contains about six thousand inhabitants.  It is

situated on lofty ground, and is defended by ancient walls.  It

possesses no very remarkable edifice, and the cathedral church

itself is a small mean building.  In the centre of the town is

the principal square, a light cheerful place, not surrounded by

those heavy cumbrous buildings with which the Spaniards both in

ancient and modern times have encircled their plazas.  It is

singular enough that Lugo, at present a place of very little

importance, should at one period have been the capital of

Spain: yet such it was in the time of the Romans, who, as they

were a people not much guided by caprice, had doubtless very

excellent reasons for the preference which they gave to the

locality.



There are many Roman remains in the vicinity of this

place, the most remarkable of which are the ruins of the

ancient medicinal baths, which stand on the southern side of

the river Minho, which creeps through the valley beneath the

town.  The Minho in this place is a dark and sullen stream,

with high, precipitous, and thickly wooded banks.



One evening I visited the baths, accompanied by my friend

the bookseller.  They had been built over warm springs which

flow into the river.  Notwithstanding their ruinous condition,

they were crowded with sick, hoping to derive benefit from the

waters, which are still famed for their sanative power.  These

patients exhibited a strange spectacle as, wrapped in flannel

gowns much resembling shrouds, they lay immersed in the tepid

waters amongst disjointed stones, and overhung with steam and

reek.



Three or four days after my arrival I was seated in the

corridor which, as I have already observed, occupied the entire

front of the house.  The sky was unclouded, and the sun shone

most gloriously, enlivening every object around.  Presently the

door of the apartment in which the strangers were lodged

opened, and forth walked the whole family, with the exception

of the father, who, I presumed, was absent on business.  The

shabby domestic brought up the rear, and on leaving the

apartment, carefully locked the door, and secured the key in

his pocket.  The one son and the eleven daughters were all

dressed remarkably well: the boy something after the English

fashion, in jacket and trousers, the young ladies in spotless

white: they were, upon the whole, a very good-looking family,

with dark eyes and olive complexions, but the eldest daughter

was remarkably handsome.  They arranged themselves upon the

benches of the corridor, the shabby domestic sitting down

amongst them without any ceremony whatever.  They continued for

some time in silence, gazing with disconsolate looks upon the

houses of the suburb and the dark walls of the town, until the

eldest daughter, or senorita as she was called, broke silence

with an "AY DIOS MIO!"



DOMESTIC. - AY DIOS MIO! we have found our way to a

pretty country.



MYSELF. - I really can see nothing so very bad in the

country, which is by nature the richest in all Spain, and the

most abundant.  True it is that the generality of the

inhabitants are wretchedly poor, but they themselves are to

blame, and not the country.



DOMESTIC. - Cavalier, the country is a horrible one, say

nothing to the contrary.  We are all frightened, the young

ladies, the young gentleman, and myself; even his worship is

frightened, and says that we are come to this country for our

sins.  It rains every day, and this is almost the first time

that we have seen the sun since our arrival, it rains

continually, and one cannot step out without being up to the

ankles in fango; and then, again, there is not a house to be

found.



MYSELF. - I scarcely understand you.  There appears to be

no lack of houses in this neighbourhood.



DOMESTIC. - Excuse me, sir.  His worship hired yesterday

a house, for which he engaged to pay fourteen pence daily; but

when the senorita saw it, she wept, and said it was no house,

but a hog-sty, so his worship paid one day's rent and renounced

his bargain.  Fourteen pence a day! why, in our country, we can

have a palace for that money.



MYSELF. - From what country do you come?



DOMESTIC. - Cavalier, you appear to be a decent

gentleman, and I will tell you our history.  We are from

Andalusia, and his worship was last year receiver-general for

Granada: his salary was fourteen thousand rials, with which we

contrived to live very commodiously - attending the bull

funcions regularly, or if there were no bulls, we went to see

the novillos, and now and then to the opera.  In a word, sir,

we had our diversions and felt at our ease; so much so, that

his worship was actually thinking of purchasing a pony for the

young gentleman, who is fourteen, and must learn to ride now or

never.  Cavalier, the ministry was changed, and the new

corners, who were no friends to his worship, deprived him of

his situation.  Cavalier, they removed us from that blessed

country of Granada, where our salary was fourteen thousand

rials, and sent us to Galicia, to this fatal town of Lugo,

where his worship is compelled to serve for ten thousand, which

is quite insufficient to maintain us in our former comforts.

Good-bye, I trow, to bull funcions, and novillos, and the

opera.  Good-bye to the hope of a horse for the young

gentleman.  Cavalier, I grow desperate: hold your tongue, for

God's sake! for I can talk no more."



On hearing this history I no longer wondered that the

receiver-general was eager to save a cuarto in the purchase of

the oil for the gaspacho of himself and family of eleven

daughters, one son, and a domestic.



We staid one week at Lugo, and then directed our steps to

Coruna, about twelve leagues distant.  We arose before daybreak

in order to avail ourselves of the escort of the general post,

in whose company we travelled upwards of six leagues.  There

was much talk of robbers, and flying parties of the factious,

on which account our escort was considerable.  At the distance

of five or six leagues from Lugo, our guard, in lieu of regular

soldiers, consisted of a body of about fifty Miguelets.  They

had all the appearance of banditti, but a finer body of

ferocious fellows I never saw.  They were all men in the prime

of life, mostly of tall stature, and of Herculean brawn and

limbs.  They wore huge whiskers, and walked with a

fanfaronading air, as if they courted danger, and despised it.

In every respect they stood in contrast to the soldiers who had

hitherto escorted us, who were mere feeble boys from sixteen to

eighteen years of age, and possessed of neither energy nor

activity.  The proper dress of the Miguelet, if it resembles

anything military, is something akin to that anciently used by

the English marines.  They wear a peculiar kind of hat, and

generally leggings, or gaiters, and their arms are the gun and

bayonet.  The colour of their dress is mostly dark brown.  They

observe little or no discipline whether on a march or in the

field of action.  They are excellent irregular troops, and when

on actual service are particularly useful as skirmishers.

Their proper duty, however, is to officiate as a species of

police, and to clear the roads of robbers, for which duty they

are in one respect admirably calculated, having been generally

robbers themselves at one period of their lives.  Why these

people are called Miguelets it is not easy to say, but it is

probable that they have derived this appellation from the name

of their original leader.  I regret that the paucity of my own

information will not allow me to enter into farther particulars

with respect to this corps, concerning which I have little

doubt that many remarkable things might be said.



Becoming weary of the slow travelling of the post, I

determined to brave all risk, and to push forward.  In this,

however, I was guilty of no slight imprudence, as by so doing I

was near falling into the hands of robbers.  Two fellows

suddenly confronted me with presented carbines, which they

probably intended to discharge into my body, but they took

fright at the noise of Antonio's horse, who was following a

little way behind.  The affair occurred at the bridge of

Castellanos, a spot notorious for robbery and murder, and well

adapted for both, for it stands at the bottom of a deep dell

surrounded by wild desolate hills.  Only a quarter of an hour

previous I had passed three ghastly heads stuck on poles

standing by the way-side; they were those of a captain of

banditti and two of his accomplices, who had been seized and

executed about two months before.  Their principal haunt was

the vicinity of the bridge, and it was their practice to cast

the bodies of the murdered into the deep black water which runs

rapidly beneath.  Those three heads will always live in my

remembrance, particularly that of the captain, which stood on a

higher pole than the other two: the long hair was waving in the

wind, and the blackened, distorted features were grinning in

the sun.  The fellows whom I met wore the relics of the band.



We arrived at Betanzos late in the afternoon.  This town

stands on a creek at some distance from the sea, and about

three leagues from Coruna.  It is surrounded on three sides by

lofty hills.  The weather during the greater part of the day

had been dull and lowering, and we found the atmosphere of

Betanzos insupportably close and heavy.  Sour and disagreeable

odours assailed our olfactory organs from all sides.  The

streets were filthy - so were the houses, and especially the

posada.  We entered the stable; it was strewed with rotten sea-

weeds and other rubbish, in which pigs were wallowing; huge and

loathsome flies were buzzing around.  "What a pest-house!" I

exclaimed.  But we could find no other stable, and were

therefore obliged to tether the unhappy animals to the filthy

mangers.  The only provender that could be obtained was Indian

corn.  At nightfall I led them to drink at a small river which

passes through Betanzos.  My entero swallowed the water

greedily; but as we returned towards the inn, I observed that

he was sad, and that his head drooped.  He had scarcely reached

the stall, when a deep hoarse cough assailed him.  I remembered

the words of the ostler in the mountains, "the man must be mad

who brings a horse to Galicia, and doubly so he who brings an

entero."  During the greater part of the day the animal had

been much heated, walking amidst a throng of at least a hundred

pony mares.  He now began to shiver violently.  I procured a

quart of anise brandy, with which, assisted by Antonio, I

rubbed his body for nearly an hour, till his coat was covered

with a white foam; but his cough increased perceptibly, his

eyes were becoming fixed, and his members rigid.  "There is no

remedy but bleeding," said I.  "Run for a farrier."  The

farrier came.  "You must bleed the horse," I shouted; "take

from him an azumbre of blood."  The farrier looked at the

animal, and made for the door.  "Where are you going?" I

demanded.  "Home," he replied.  "But we want you here."  "I

know you do," was his answer; "and on that account I am going."

"But you must bleed the horse, or he will die."  "I know he

will," said the farrier, "but I will not bleed him."  "Why?" I

demanded.  "I will not bleed him, but under one condition."

"What is that?"  "What is it! - that you pay me an ounce of

gold."  "Run for the red morocco case," said I to Antonio.  It

was brought; I took out a large fleam, and with the assistance

of a stone, drove it into the principal artery horse's leg.

The blood at first refused to flow; with much rubbing, it began

to trickle, and then to stream; it continued so for half an

hour.  "The horse is fainting, mon maitre," said Antonio.

"Hold him up," said I, "and in another ten minutes we will stop

the vein."



I closed the vein, and whilst doing so I looked up into

the farrier's face, arching my eyebrows.



"Carracho! what an evil wizard," muttered the farrier, as

he walked away.  "If I had my knife here I would stick him."

We bled the horse again, during the night, which second

bleeding I believe saved him.  Towards morning he began to eat

his food.



The next day we departed for Coruna, leading our horses

by the bridle: the day was magnificent, and our walk

delightful.  We passed along beneath tall umbrageous trees,

which skirted the road from Betanzos to within a short distance

of Coruna.  Nothing could be more smiling and cheerful than the

appearance of the country around.  Vines were growing in

abundance in the vicinity of the villages through which we

passed, whilst millions of maize plants upreared their tall

stalks and displayed their broad green leaves in the fields.

After walking about three hours, we obtained a view of the bay

of Coruna, in which, even at the distance of a league, we could

distinguish three or four immense ships riding at anchor.  "Can

these vessels belong to Spain?"  I demanded of myself.  In the

very next village, however, we were informed that the preceding

evening an English squadron had arrived, for what reason nobody

could say.  "However," continued our informant, "they have

doubtless some design upon Galicia.  These foreigners are the

ruin of Spain."



We put up in what is called the Calle Real, in an

excellent fonda, or posada, kept by a short, thick, comical-

looking person, a Genoese by birth.  He was married to a tall,

ugly, but good-tempered Basque woman, by whom he had been

blessed with a son and daughter.  His wife, however, had it

seems of late summoned all her female relations from Guipuscoa,

who now filled the house to the number of nine, officiating as

chambermaids, cooks, and scullions: they were all very ugly,

but good-natured, and of immense volubility of tongue.

Throughout the whole day the house resounded with their

excellent Basque and very bad Castilian.  The Genoese, on the

contrary, spoke little, for which he might have assigned a good

reason; he had lived thirty years in Spain, and had forgotten

his own language without acquiring Spanish, which he spoke very

imperfectly.



We found Coruna full of bustle and life, owing to the

arrival of the English squadron.  On the following day,

however, it departed, being bound for the Mediterranean on a

short cruise, whereupon matters instantly returned to their

usual course.



I had a depot of five hundred Testaments at Coruna, from

which it was my intention to supply the principal towns of

Galicia.  Immediately on my arrival I published advertisements,

according to my usual practice, and the book obtained a

tolerable sale - seven or eight copies per day on the average.

Some people, perhaps, on perusing these details, will be

tempted to exclaim, "These are small matters, and scarcely

worthy of being mentioned."  But let such bethink them, that

till within a few months previous to the time of which I am

speaking, the very existence of the gospel was almost unknown

in Spain, and that it must necessarily be a difficult task to

induce a people like the Spaniards, who read very little, to

purchase a work like the New Testament, which, though of

paramount importance to the soul, affords but slight prospect

of amusement to the frivolous and carnally minded.  I hoped

that the present was the dawning of better and more enlightened

times, and rejoiced in the idea that Testaments, though but few

in number, were being sold in unfortunate benighted Spain, from

Madrid to the furthermost parts of Galicia, a distance of

nearly four hundred miles.



Coruna stands on a peninsula, having on one side the sea,

and on the other the celebrated bay, generally called the

Groyne.  It is divided into the old and new town, the latter of

which was at one time probably a mere suburb.  The old town is

a desolate ruinous place, separated from the new by a wide

moat.  The modern town is a much more agreeable spot, and

contains one magnificent street, the Calle Real, where the

principal merchants reside.  One singular feature of this

street is, that it is laid entirely with flags of marble, along

which troop ponies and cars as if it were a common pavement.



It is a saying amongst the inhabitants of Coruna, that in

their town there is a street so clean, that puchera may be

eaten off it without the slightest inconvenience.  This may

certainly be the fact after one of those rains which so

frequently drench Galicia, when the appearance of the pavement

of the street is particularly brilliant.  Coruna was at one

time a place of considerable commerce, the greater part of

which has latterly departed to Santander, a town which stands a

considerable distance down the Bay of Biscay.



"Are you going to Saint James, Giorgio?  If so, you will

perhaps convey a message to my poor countryman," said a voice

to me one morning in broken English, as I was standing at the

door of my posada, in the royal street of Coruna.



I looked round and perceived a man standing near me at

the door of a shop contiguous to the inn.  He appeared to be

about sixty-five, with a pale face and remarkably red nose.  He

was dressed in a loose green great coat, in his mouth was a

long clay pipe, in his hand a long painted stick.



"Who are you, and who is your countryman?" I demanded; "I

do not know you."



"I know you, however," replied the man; "you purchased

the first knife that I ever sold in the marketplace of N-."



MYSELF. - Ah, I remember you now, Luigi Piozzi; and well

do I remember also, how, when a boy, twenty years ago, I used

to repair to your stall, and listen to you and your countrymen

discoursing in Milanese.



LUIGI. - Ah, those were happy times to me.  Oh, how they

rushed back on my remembrance when I saw you ride up to the

door of the posada.  I instantly went in, closed my shop, lay

down upon my bed and wept.



MYSELF. - I see no reason why you should so much regret

those times.  I knew you formerly in England as an itinerant

pedlar, and occasionally as master of a stall in the market-

place of a country town.  I now find you in a seaport of Spain,

the proprietor, seemingly, of a considerable shop.  I cannot

see why you should regret the difference.



LUIGI (dashing his pipe on the ground). - Regret the

difference!  Do you know one thing?  England is the heaven of

the Piedmontese and Milanese, and especially those of Como.  We

never lie down to rest but we dream of it, whether we are in

our own country or in a foreign land, as I am now.  Regret the

difference, Giorgio!  Do I hear such words from your lips, and

you an Englishman?  I would rather be the poorest tramper on

the roads of England, than lord of all within ten leagues of

the shore of the lake of Como, and much the same say all my

countrymen who have visited England, wherever they now be.

Regret the difference!  I have ten letters, from as many

countrymen in America, who say they are rich and thriving, and

principal men and merchants; but every night, when their heads

are reposing on their pillows, their souls AUSLANDRA, hurrying

away to England, and its green lanes and farm-yards.  And there

they are with their boxes on the ground, displaying their

looking-glasses and other goods to the honest rustics and their

dames and their daughters, and selling away and chaffering and

laughing just as of old.  And there they are again at nightfall

in the hedge alehouses, eating their toasted cheese and their

bread, and drinking the Suffolk ale, and listening to the

roaring song and merry jest of the labourers.  Now, if they

regret England so who are in America, which they own to be a

happy country, and good for those of Piedmont and of Como, how

much more must I regret it, when, after the lapse of so many

years, I find myself in Spain, in this frightful town of

Coruna, driving a ruinous trade, and where months pass by

without my seeing a single English face, or hearing a word of

the blessed English tongue.



MYSELF. - With such a predilection for England, what

could have induced you to leave it and come to Spain?



LUIGI. - I will tell you: about sixteen years ago a

universal desire seized our people in England to become

something more than they had hitherto been, pedlars and

trampers; they wished, moreover, for mankind are never

satisfied, to see other countries: so the greater part forsook

England.  Where formerly there had been ten, at present

scarcely lingers one.  Almost all went to America, which, as I

told you before, is a happy country, and specially good for us

men of Como.  Well, all my comrades and relations passed over

the sea to the West.  I, too, was bent on travelling; but

whither?  Instead of going towards the West with the rest, to a

country where they have all thriven, I must needs come by

myself to this land of Spain; a country in which no foreigner

settles without dying of a broken heart sooner or later.  I had

an idea in my head that I could make a fortune at once, by

bringing a cargo of common English goods, like those which I

had been in the habit of selling amongst the villagers of

England.  So I freighted half a ship with such goods, for I had

been successful in England in my little speculations, and I

arrived at Coruna.  Here at once my vexations began:

disappointment followed disappointment.  It was with the utmost

difficulty that I could obtain permission to land my goods, and

this only at a considerable sacrifice in bribes and the like;

and when I had established myself here, I found that the place

was one of no trade, and that my goods went off very slowly,

and scarcely at prime cost.  I wished to remove to another

place, but was informed that, in that case, I must leave my

goods behind, unless I offered fresh bribes, which would have

ruined me; and in this way I have gone on for fourteen years,

selling scarcely enough to pay for my shop and to support

myself.  And so I shall doubtless continue till I die, or my

goods are exhausted.  In an evil day I left England and came to

Spain.



MYSELF. - Did you not say that you had a countryman at

St. James?



LUIGI. - Yes, a poor honest fellow, who, like myself, by

some strange chance found his way to Galicia.  I sometimes

contrive to send him a few goods, which he sells at St. James

at a greater profit than I can here.  He is a happy fellow, for

he has never been in England, and knows not the difference

between the two countries.  Oh, the green English hedgerows!

and the alehouses! and, what is much more, the fair dealing and

security.  I have travelled all over England and never met with

ill usage, except once down in the north amongst the Papists,

upon my telling them to leave all their mummeries and go to the

parish church as I did, and as all my countrymen in England

did; for know one thing, Signor Giorgio, not one of us who have

lived in England, whether Piedmontese or men of Como, but

wished well to the Protestant religion, if he had not actually

become a member of it.



MYSELF. - What do you propose to do at present, Luigi?

What are your prospects?



LUIGI. - My prospects are a blank, Giorgio; my prospects

are a blank.  I propose nothing but to die in Coruna, perhaps

in the hospital, if they will admit me.  Years ago I thought of

fleeing, even if I left all behind me, and either returning to

England, or betaking myself to America; but it is too late now,

Giorgio, it is too late.  When I first lost all hope, I took to

drinking, to which I was never before inclined, and I am now

what I suppose you see.



"There is hope in the Gospel," said I, "even for you.  I

will send you one."



There is a small battery of the old town which fronts the

east, and whose wall is washed by the waters of the bay.  It is

a sweet spot, and the prospect which opens from it is

extensive.  The battery itself may be about eighty yards

square; some young trees are springing up about it, and it is

rather a favourite resort of the people of Coruna.



In the centre of this battery stands the tomb of Moore,

built by the chivalrous French, in commemoration of the fall of

their heroic antagonist.  It is oblong and surmounted by a

slab, and on either side bears one of the simple and sublime

epitaphs for which our rivals are celebrated, and which stand

in such powerful contrast with the bloated and bombastic

inscriptions which deform the walls of Westminster Abbey:





"JOHN MOORE,

LEADER OF THE ENGLISH ARMIES,

SLAIN IN BATTLE,

1809."





The tomb itself is of marble, and around it is a

quadrangular wall, breast high, of rough Gallegan granite;

close to each corner rises from the earth the breech of an

immense brass cannon, intended to keep the wall compact and

close.  These outer erections are, however, not the work of the

French, but of the English government.



Yes, there lies the hero, almost within sight of the

glorious hill where he turned upon his pursuers like a lion at

bay and terminated his career.  Many acquire immortality

without seeking it, and die before its first ray has gilded

their name; of these was Moore.  The harassed general, flying

through Castile with his dispirited troops before a fierce and

terrible enemy, little dreamed that he was on the point of

attaining that for which many a better, greater, though

certainly not braver man, had sighed in vain.  His very

misfortunes were the means which secured him immortal fame; his

disastrous route, bloody death, and finally his tomb on a

foreign strand, far from kin and friends.  There is scarcely a

Spaniard but has heard of this tomb, and speaks of it with a

strange kind of awe.  Immense treasures are said to have been

buried with the heretic general, though for what purpose no one

pretends to guess.  The demons of the clouds, if we may trust

the Gallegans, followed the English in their flight, and

assailed them with water-spouts as they toiled up the steep

winding paths of Fuencebadon; whilst legends the most wild are

related of the manner in which the stout soldier fell.  Yes,

even in Spain, immortality has already crowned the head of

Moore; - Spain, the land of oblivion, where the Guadalete *

flows.



* The ancient LETHE.

