






CHAPTER XXXV







Departure from Santander - The Night Alarm - The Black Pass.





I had ordered two hundred Testaments to be sent to

Santander from Madrid: I found, however, to my great sorrow,

that they had not arrived, and I supposed that they had either

been seized on the way by the Carlists, or that my letter had

miscarried.  I then thought of applying to England for a

supply, but I abandoned the idea for two reasons.  In the first

place, I should have to remain idly loitering, at least a

month, before I could receive them, at a place where every

article was excessively dear; and, secondly, I was very unwell,

and unable to procure medical advice at Santander.  Ever since

I left Coruna, I had been afflicted with a terrible dysentery,

and latterly with an ophthalmia, the result of the other

malady.  I therefore determined on returning to Madrid.  To

effect this, however, seemed no very easy task.  Parties of the

army of Don Carlos, which, in a partial degree, had been routed

in Castile, were hovering about the country through which I

should have to pass, more especially in that part called "The

Mountains," so that all communication had ceased between

Santander and the southern districts.  Nevertheless, I

determined to trust as usual in the Almighty and to risk the

danger.  I purchased, therefore, a small horse, and sallied

forth with Antonio.



Before departing, however, I entered into conference with

the booksellers as to what they should do in the event of my

finding an opportunity of sending them a stock of Testaments

from Madrid; and, having arranged matters to my satisfaction, I

committed myself to Providence.  I will not dwell long on this

journey of three hundred miles.  We were in the midst of the

fire, yet, strange to say, escaped without a hair of our heads

being singed.  Robberies, murders, and all kinds of atrocities

were perpetrated before, behind, and on both sides of us, but

not so much as a dog barked at us, though in one instance a

plan had been laid to intercept us.  About four leagues from

Santander, whilst we were baiting our horses at a village

hostelry, I saw a fellow run off after having held a whispering

conversation with a boy who was dealing out barley to us.  I

instantly inquired of the latter what the man had said to him,

but only obtained an evasive answer.  It appeared afterwards

that the conversation was about ourselves.  Two or three

leagues farther there was an inn and village where we had

proposed staying, and indeed had expressed our intention of

doing so; but on arriving there, finding that the sun was still

far from its bourne, I determined to proceed farther, expecting

to meet with a resting-place at the distance of a league;

though I was mistaken, as we found none until we reached

Montaneda, nine leagues and a half from Santander, where was

stationed a small detachment of soldiers.  At the dead of night

we were aroused from our sleep by a cry that the factious were

not far off.  A messenger had arrived from the alcalde of the

village where we had previously intended staying, who stated

that a party of Carlists had just surprised that place, and

were searching for an English spy, whom they supposed to be at

the inn.  The officer commanding the soldiers upon hearing

this, not deeming his own situation a safe one, instantly drew

off his men, falling back on a stronger party stationed in a

fortified village near at hand.  As for ourselves, we saddled

our horses and continued our way in the dark.  Had the Carlists

succeeded in apprehending me, I should instantly have been

shot, and my body cast on the rocks to feed the vultures and

wolves.  But "it was not so written," said Antonio, who, like

many of his countrymen, was a fatalist.  The next night we had

another singular escape: we had arrived near the entrance of a

horrible pass called "El puerto de la puente de las tablas," or

the pass of the bridge of planks, which wound through a black

and frightful mountain, on the farther side of which was the

town of Onas, where we meant to tarry for the night.  The sun

had set about a quarter of an hour.  Suddenly a man, with his

face covered with blood, rushed out of the pass.  "Turn back,

sir," he said, "in the name of God; there are murderers in that

pass; they have just robbed me of my mule and all I possess,

and I have hardly escaped with life from their hands."  I

scarcely know why, but I made him no answer and proceeded;

indeed I was so weary and unwell that I cared not what became

of me.  We entered; the rocks rose perpendicularly, right and

left, entirely intercepting the scanty twilight, so that the

darkness of the grave, or rather the blackness of the valley of

the shadow of death reigned around us, and we knew not where we

went, but trusted to the instinct of the horses, who moved on

with their heads close to the ground.  The only sound which we

heard was the plash of a stream, which tumbled down the pass.

I expected every moment to feel a knife at my throat, but "IT

WAS NOT SO WRITTEN."  We threaded the pass without meeting a

human being, and within three quarters of an hour after the

time we entered it, we found ourselves within the posada of the

town of Onas, which was filled with troops and armed peasants

expecting an attack from the grand Carlist army, which was near

at hand.



Well, we reached Burgos in safety; we reached Valladolid

in safety; we passed the Guadarama in safety; and were at

length safely housed in Madrid.  People said we had been very

lucky; Antonio said, "It was so written"; but I say, Glory be

to the Lord for his mercies vouchsafed to us.

