





CHAPTER XII







Lodging at Madrid - My Hostess - British Ambassador -

Mendizabal - Baltasar - Duties of a National - Young Blood -

The Execution - Population of Madrid - The Higher Orders -

The Lower Classes - The Bull-fighter - The Crabbed Gitano.





It was the commencement of February when I reached

Madrid.  After staying a few days at a posada, I removed to a

lodging which I engaged at No. 3, in the Calle de la Zarza, a

dark dirty street, which, however, was close to the Puerta del

Sol, the most central point of Madrid, into which four or five

of the principal streets debouche, and which is, at all times

of the year, the great place of assemblage for the idlers of

the capital, poor or rich.



It was rather a singular house in which I had taken up my

abode.  I occupied the front part of the first floor; my

apartments consisted of an immense parlour, and a small chamber

on one side in which I slept; the parlour, notwithstanding its

size, contained very little furniture: a few chairs, a table,

and a species of sofa, constituted the whole.  It was very cold

and airy, owing to the draughts which poured in from three

large windows, and from sundry doors.  The mistress of the

house, attended by her two daughters, ushered me in.  "Did you

ever see a more magnificent apartment?" demanded the former;

"is it not fit for a king's son?  Last winter it was occupied

by the great General Espartero."



The hostess was an exceedingly fat woman, a native of

Valladolid, in Old Castile.  "Have you any other family," I

demanded, "besides these daughters?"  "Two sons," she replied;

"one of them an officer in the army, father of this urchin,"

pointing to a wicked but clever looking boy of about twelve,

who at that moment bounded into the room; "the other is the

most celebrated national in Madrid: he is a tailor by trade,

and his name is Baltasar.  He has much influence with the other

nationals, on account of the liberality of his opinions, and a

word from him is sufficient to bring them all out armed and

furious to the Puerta del Sol.  He is, however, at present

confined to his bed, for he is very dissipated and fond of the

company of bull-fighters and people still worse."



As my principal motive for visiting the Spanish capital

was the hope of obtaining permission from the government to

print the New Testament in the Castilian language, for

circulation in Spain, I lost no time, upon my arrival, in

taking what I considered to be the necessary steps.



I was an entire stranger at Madrid, and bore no letters

of introduction to any persons of influence, who might have

assisted me in this undertaking, so that, notwithstanding I

entertained a hope of success, relying on the assistance of the

Almighty, this hope was not at all times very vivid, but was

frequently overcast with the clouds of despondency.



Mendizabal was at this time prime minister of Spain, and

was considered as a man of almost unbounded power, in whose

hands were placed the destinies of the country.  I therefore

considered that if I could by any means induce him to favour my

views, I should have no reason to fear interruption from other

quarters, and I determined upon applying to him.



Before talking this step, however, I deemed it advisable

to wait upon Mr. Villiers, the British ambassador at Madrid;

and with the freedom permitted to a British subject, to ask his

advice in this affair.  I was received with great kindness, and

enjoyed a conversation with him on various subjects before I

introduced the matter which I had most at heart.  He said that

if I wished for an interview with Mendizabal, he would

endeavour to procure me one, but, at the same time, told me

frankly that he could not hope that any good would arise from

it, as he knew him to be violently prejudiced against the

British and Foreign Bible Society, and was far more likely to

discountenance than encourage any efforts which they might be

disposed to make for introducing the Gospel into Spain.  I,

however, remained resolute in my desire to make the trial, and

before I left him, obtained a letter of introduction to

Mendizabal.



Early one morning I repaired to the palace, in a wing of

which was the office of the Prime Minister; it was bitterly

cold, and the Guadarama, of which there is a noble view from

the palace-plain, was covered with snow.  For at least three

hours I remained shivering with cold in an ante-room, with

several other aspirants for an interview with the man of power.

At last his private secretary made his appearance, and after

putting various questions to the others, addressed himself to

me, asking who I was and what I wanted.  I told him that I was

an Englishman, and the bearer of a letter from the British

Minister.  "If you have no objection, I will myself deliver it

to His Excellency," said he; whereupon I handed it to him and

he withdrew.  Several individuals were admitted before me; at

last, however, my own turn came, and I was ushered into the

presence of Mendizabal.



He stood behind a table covered with papers, on which his

eyes were intently fixed.  He took not the slightest notice

when I entered, and I had leisure enough to survey him: he was

a huge athletic man, somewhat taller than myself, who measure

six feet two without my shoes; his complexion was florid, his

features fine and regular, his nose quite aquiline, and his

teeth splendidly white: though scarcely fifty years of age, his

hair was remarkably grey; he was dressed in a rich morning

gown, with a gold chain round his neck, and morocco slippers on

his feet.



His secretary, a fine intellectual looking man, who, as I

was subsequently informed, had acquired a name both in English

and Spanish literature, stood at one end of the table with

papers in his hands.



After I had been standing about a quarter of an hour,

Mendizabal suddenly lifted up a pair of sharp eyes, and fixed

them upon me with a peculiarly scrutinizing glance.



"I have seen a glance very similar to that amongst the

Beni Israel," thought I to myself. . . .





My interview with him lasted nearly an hour.  Some

singular discourse passed between us: I found him, as I had

been informed, a bitter enemy to the Bible Society, of which he

spoke in terms of hatred and contempt, and by no means a friend

to the Christian religion, which I could easily account for.  I

was not discouraged, however, and pressed upon him the matter

which brought me thither, and was eventually so far successful,

as to obtain a promise, that at the expiration of a few months,

when he hoped the country would be in a more tranquil state, I

should be allowed to print the Scriptures.



As I was going away he said, "Yours is not the first

application I have had; ever since I have held the reins of

government I have been pestered in this manner, by English

calling themselves Evangelical Christians, who have of late

come flocking over into Spain.  Only last week a hunchbacked

fellow found his way into my cabinet whilst I was engaged in

important business, and told me that Christ was coming. . . .

And now you have made your appearance, and almost persuaded me

to embroil myself yet more with the priesthood, as if they did

not abhor me enough already.  What a strange infatuation is

this which drives you over lands and waters with Bibles in your

hands.  My good sir, it is not Bibles we want, but rather guns

and gunpowder, to put the rebels down with, and above all,

money, that we may pay the troops; whenever you come with these

three things you shall have a hearty welcome, if not, we really

can dispense with your visits, however great the honour."



MYSELF. - There will be no end to the troubles of this

afflicted country until the gospel have free circulation.



MENDIZABAL. - I expected that answer, for I have not

lived thirteen years in England without forming some

acquaintance with the phraseology of you good folks.  Now, now,

pray go; you see how engaged I am.  Come again whenever you

please, but let it not be within the next three months.



"Don Jorge," said my hostess, coming into my apartment

one morning, whilst I sat at breakfast with my feet upon the

brasero, "here is my son Baltasarito, the national; he has

risen from his bed, and hearing that there is an Englishman in

the house, he has begged me to introduce him, for he loves

Englishmen on account of the liberality of their opinions;

there he is, what do you think of him?"



I did not state to his mother what I thought; it appeared

to me, however, that she was quite right calling him

Baltasarito, which is the diminutive of Baltasar, forasmuch as

that ancient and sonorous name had certainly never been

bestowed on a more diminutive personage: he might measure about

five feet one inch, though he was rather corpulent for his

height; his face looked yellow and sickly, he had, however, a

kind of fanfaronading air, and his eyes, which were of dark

brown, were both sharp and brilliant.  His dress, or rather his

undress, was somewhat shabby: he had a foraging cap on his

head, and in lieu of a morning gown, he wore a sentinel's old

great coat.



"I am glad to make your acquaintance, senor nacional,"

said I to him, after his mother had departed, and Baltasar had

taken his seat, and of course lighted a paper cigar at the

brasero.  "I am glad to have made your acquaintance, more

especially as your lady mother has informed me that you have

great influence with the nationals.  I am a stranger in Spain,

and may want a friend; fortune has been kind to me in procuring

me one who is a member of so powerful a body."



BALTASAR. - Yes, I have a great deal to say with the

other nationals; there is none in Madrid better known than

Baltasar, or more dreaded by the Carlists.  You say you may

stand in need of a friend; there is no fear of my failing you

in any emergency.  Both myself and any of the other nationals

will be proud to go out with you as padrinos, should you have

any affair of honour on your hands.  But why do you not become

one of us?  We would gladly receive you into our body.



MYSELF. - Is the duty of a national particularly hard?



BALTASAR. - By no means; we have to do duty about once

every fifteen days, and then there is occasionally a review,

which does not last long.  No! the duties of a national are by

no means onerous, and the privileges are great.  I have seen

three of my brother nationals walk up and down the Prado of a

Sunday, with sticks in their hands, cudgelling all the

suspicious characters, and it is our common practice to scour

the streets at night, and then if we meet any person who is

obnoxious to us, we fall upon him, and with a knife or a

bayonet generally leave him wallowing in his blood on the

pavement: no one but a national would be permitted to do that.



MYSELF. - Of course none but persons of liberal opinions

are to be found amongst the nationals?



BALTASAR. - Would it were so!  There are some amongst us,

Don Jorge, who are no better than they should be; they are few,

however, and for the most part well known.  Theirs is no

pleasant life, for when they mount guard with the rest they are

scouted, and not unfrequently cudgelled.  The law compels all

of a certain age either to serve in the army or to become

national soldiers on which account some of these Godos are to

be found amongst us.



MYSELF. - Are there many in Madrid of the Carlist

opinion?



BALTASAR. - Not among the young people; the greater part

of the Madrilenian Carlists capable of bearing arms departed

long ago to join the ranks of the factious in the Basque

provinces.  Those who remain are for the most part grey-beards

and priests, good for nothing but to assemble in private

coffee-houses, and to prate treason together.  Let them prate,

Don Jorge; let them prate; the destinies of Spain do not depend

on the wishes of ojalateros and pasteleros, but on the hands of

stout gallant nationals like myself and friends, Don Jorge.



MYSELF. - I am sorry to learn from your lady mother, that

you are strangely dissipated.



BALTASAR. - Ho, ho, Don Jorge, she has told you that, has

she; what would you have, Don Jorge?  I am young, and young

blood will have its course.  I am called Baltasar the gay by

all the other nationals, and it is on account of my gaiety and

the liberality of my opinions that I am so popular among them.

When I mount guard I invariably carry my guitar with me, and

then there is sure to be a function at the guardhouse.  We send

for wine, Don Jorge, and the nationals become wild, Don Jorge,

dancing and drinking through the night, whilst Baltasarito

strums the guitar and sings them songs of Germania:





"Una romi sin pachi

Le peno a su chindomar," &c., &c.





That is Gitano, Don Jorge; I learnt it from the toreros

of Andalusia, who all speak Gitano, and are mostly of Gypsy

blood.  I learnt it from them; they are all friends of mine,

Montes Sevilla and Poquito Pan.  I never miss a function of

bulls, Don Jorge.  Baltasar is sure to be there with his amiga.

Don Jorge, there are no bull-functions in the winter, or I

would carry you to one, but happily to-morrow there is an

execution, a funcion de la horca; and there we will go, Don

Jorge.



We did go to see this execution, which I shall long

remember.  The criminals were two young men, brothers; they

suffered for a most atrocious murder, having in the dead of

night broke open the house of an aged man, whom they put to

death, and whose property they stole.  Criminals in Spain are

not hanged as they are in England, or guillotined as in France,

but strangled upon a wooden stage.  They sit down on a kind of

chair with a post behind, to which is affixed an iron collar

with a screw; this iron collar is made to clasp the neck of the

prisoner, and on a certain signal it is drawn tighter and

tighter by means of the screw, until life becomes extinct.

After we had waited amongst the assembled multitude a

considerable time, the first of the culprits appeared; he was

mounted on an ass, without saddle or stirrups, his legs being

allowed to dangle nearly to the ground.  He was dressed in

yellow sulphur-coloured robes, with a high-peaked conical red

hat on his head, which was shaven.  Between his hands he held a

parchment, on which was written something, I believe the

confession of faith.  Two priests led the animal by the bridle;

two others walked on either side, chanting litanies, amongst

which I distinguished the words of heavenly peace and

tranquillity, for the culprit had been reconciled to the

church, had confessed and received absolution, and had been

promised admission to heaven.  He did not exhibit the least

symptom of fear, but dismounted from the animal and was led,

not supported, up the scaffold, where he was placed on the

chair, and the fatal collar put round his neck.  One of the

priests then in a loud voice commenced saying the Belief, and

the culprit repeated the words after him.  On a sudden, the

executioner, who stood behind, commenced turning the screw,

which was of prodigious force, and the wretched man - was

almost instantly a corpse; but, as the screw went round, the

priest began to shout, "PAX ET MISERICORDIA ET TRANQUILLITAS,"

and still as he shouted, his voice became louder and louder,

till the lofty walls of Madrid rang with it: then stooping

down, he placed his mouth close to the culprit's ear, still

shouting, just as if he would pursue the spirit through its

course to eternity, cheering it on its way.  The effect was

tremendous.  I myself was so excited that I involuntarily

shouted "MISERICORDIA," and so did many others.  God was not

thought of; Christ was not thought of; only the priest was

thought of, for he seemed at that moment to be the first being

in existence, and to have the power of opening and shutting the

gates of heaven or of hell, just as he should think proper.  A

striking instance of the successful working of the Popish

system, whose grand aim has ever been to keep people's minds as

far as possible from God, and to centre their hopes and fears

in the priesthood.  The execution of the second culprit was

precisely similar; he ascended the scaffold a few minutes after

his brother had breathed his last.



I have visited most of the principal capitals of the

world, but upon the whole none has ever so interested me as

this city of Madrid, in which I now found myself.  I will not

dwell upon its streets, its edifices, its public squares, its

fountains, though some of these are remarkable enough: but

Petersburg has finer streets, Paris and Edinburgh more stately

edifices, London far nobler squares, whilst Shiraz can boast of

more costly fountains, though not cooler waters.  But the

population!  Within a mud wall, scarcely one league and a half

in circuit, are contained two hundred thousand human beings,

certainly forming the most extraordinary vital mass to be found

in the entire world; and be it always remembered that this mass

is strictly Spanish.  The population of Constantinople is

extraordinary enough, but to form it twenty nations have

contributed; Greeks, Armenians, Persians, Poles, Jews, the

latter, by the by, of Spanish origin, and speaking amongst

themselves the old Spanish language; but the huge population of

Madrid, with the exception of a sprinkling of foreigners,

chiefly French tailors, glove-makers and peruquiers, is

strictly Spanish, though a considerable portion are not natives

of the place.  Here are no colonies of Germans, as at Saint

Petersburg; no English factories, as at Lisbon; no multitudes

of insolent Yankees lounging through the streets as at the

Havannah, with an air which seems to say, the land is our own

whenever we choose to take it; but a population which, however

strange and wild, and composed of various elements, is Spanish,

and will remain so as long as the city itself shall exist.

Hail, ye aguadores of Asturia! who, in your dress of coarse

duffel and leathern skull-caps, are seen seated in hundreds by

the fountain sides, upon your empty water-casks, or staggering

with them filled to the topmost stories of lofty houses.  Hail,

ye caleseros of Valencia! who, lolling lazily against your

vehicles, rasp tobacco for your paper cigars whilst waiting for

a fare.  Hail to you, beggars of La Mancha! men and women, who,

wrapped in coarse blankets, demand charity indifferently at the

gate of the palace or the prison.  Hail to you, valets from the

mountains, mayordomos and secretaries from Biscay and

Guipuscoa, toreros from Andalusia, riposteros from Galicia,

shopkeepers from Catalonia!  Hail to ye, Castilians,

Estremenians and Aragonese, of whatever calling!  And lastly,

genuine sons of the capital, rabble of Madrid, ye twenty

thousand manolos, whose terrible knifes, on the second morning

of May, worked such grim havoc amongst the legions of Murat!



And the higher orders - the ladies and gentlemen, the

cavaliers and senoras; shall I pass them by in silence?  The

truth is I have little to say about them; I mingled but little

in their society, and what I saw of them by no means tended to

exalt them in my imagination.  I am not one of those who,

wherever they go, make it a constant practice to disparage the

higher orders, and to exalt the populace at their expense.

There are many capitals in which the high aristocracy, the

lords and ladies, the sons and daughters of nobility,

constitute the most remarkable and the most interesting part of

the population.  This is the case at Vienna, and more

especially at London.  Who can rival the English aristocrat in

lofty stature, in dignified bearing, in strength of hand, and

valour of heart?  Who rides a nobler horse?  Who has a firmer

seat?  And who more lovely than his wife, or sister, or

daughter?  But with respect to the Spanish aristocracy, the

ladies and gentlemen, the cavaliers and senoras, I believe the

less that is said of them on the points to which I have just

alluded the better.  I confess, however, that I know little

about them; they have, perhaps, their admirers, and to the pens

of such I leave their panegyric.  Le Sage has described them as

they were nearly two centuries ago.  His description is

anything but captivating, and I do not think that they have

improved since the period of the sketches of the immortal

Frenchman.  I would sooner talk of the lower class, not only of

Madrid but of all Spain.  The Spaniard of the lower class has

much more interest for me, whether manolo, labourer, or

muleteer.  He is not a common being; he is an extraordinary

man.  He has not, it is true, the amiability and generosity of

the Russian mujik, who will give his only rouble rather than

the stranger shall want; nor his placid courage, which renders

him insensible to fear, and at the command of his Tsar, sends

him singing to certain death. * There is more hardness and less

self-devotion in the disposition of the Spaniard; he possesses,

however, a spirit of proud independence, which it is impossible

but to admire.  He is ignorant, of course; but it is singular

that I have invariably found amongst the low and slightly

educated classes far more liberality of sentiment than amongst

the upper.  It has long been the fashion to talk of the bigotry

of the Spaniards, and their mean jealousy of foreigners.  This

is true to a certain extent: but it chiefly holds good with

respect to the upper classes.  If foreign valour or talent has

never received its proper meed in Spain, the great body of the

Spaniards are certainly not in fault.  I have heard Wellington

calumniated in this proud scene of his triumphs, but never by

the old soldiers of Aragon and the Asturias, who assisted to

vanquish the French at Salamanca and the Pyrenees.  I have

heard the manner of riding of an English jockey criticized, but

it was by the idiotic heir of Medina Celi, and not by a picador

of the Madrilenian bull ring.



* At the last attack on Warsaw, when the loss of the

Russians amounted to upwards of twenty thousand men, the

soldiery mounted the breach, repeating in measured chant, one

of their popular songs: "Come, let us cut the cabbage," &c.



Apropos of bull-fighters:- Shortly after my arrival, I

one day entered a low tavern in a neighbourhood notorious for

robbery and murder, and in which for the last two hours I had

been wandering on a voyage of discovery.  I was fatigued, and

required refreshment.  I found the place thronged with people,

who had all the appearance of ruffians.  I saluted them, upon

which they made way for me to the bar, taking off their

sombreros with great ceremony.  I emptied a glass of val de

penas, and was about to pay for it and depart, when a horrible

looking fellow, dressed in a buff jerkin, leather breeches, and

jackboots, which came half way up his thighs, and having on his

head a white hat, the rims of which were at least a yard and a

half in circumference, pushed through the crowd, and

confronting me, roared:-



"OTRA COPITA! VAMOS INGLESITO: OTRA COPITA!"



"Thank you, my good sir, you are very kind, you appear to

know me, but I have not the honour of knowing you."



"Not know me!" replied the being.  "I am Sevilla, the

torero.  I know you well; you are the friend of Baltasarito,

the national, who is a friend of mine, and a very good

subject."



Then turning to the company, he said in a sonorous tone,

laying a strong emphasis on the last syllable of every word,

according to the custom of the gente rufianesca throughout

Spain:



"Cavaliers, and strong men, this cavalier is the friend

of a friend of mine.  ES MUCHO HOMBRE.  There is none like him

in Spain.  He speaks the crabbed Gitano though he is an

Inglesito."



"We do not believe it," replied several grave voices.

"It is not possible."



"It is not possible, say you?  I tell you it is.  Come

forward, Balseiro, you who have been in prison all your life,

and are always boasting that you can speak the crabbed Gitano,

though I say you know nothing of it - come forward and speak to

his worship in the crabbed Gitano."



A low, slight, but active figure stepped forward.  He was

in his shirt sleeves, and wore a montero cap; his features were

handsome, but they were those of a demon.



He spoke a few words in the broken Gypsy slang of the

prison, inquiring of me whether I had ever been in the

condemned cell, and whether I knew what a Gitana * was?



* Twelve ounces of bread, small pound, as given in the

prison.



"Vamos Inglesito," shouted Sevilla in a voice of thunder;

"answer the monro in the crabbed Gitano."



I answered the robber, for such he was, and one, too,

whose name will live for many a year in the ruffian histories

of Madrid; I answered him in a speech of some length, in the

dialect of the Estremenian Gypsies.



"I believe it is the crabbed Gitano," muttered Balseiro.

"It is either that or English, for I understand not a word of

it."



"Did I not say to you," cried the bull-fighter, "that you

knew nothing of the crabbed Gitano?  But this Inglesito does.

I understood all he said.  Vaya, there is none like him for the

crabbed Gitano.  He is a good ginete, too; next to myself,

there is none like him, only he rides with stirrup leathers too

short.  Inglesito, if you have need of money, I will lend you

my purse.  All I have is at your service, and that is not a

little; I have just gained four thousand chules by the lottery.

Courage, Englishman!  Another cup.  I will pay all.  I,

Sevilla!"



And he clapped his hand repeatedly on his breast,

reiterating "I, Sevilla!  I - "
