






CHAPTER I







Man Overboard - The Tagus - Foreign Languages - Gesticulation -

Streets of Lisbon - The Aqueduct - Bible tolerated in Portugal -

Cintra - Don Sebastian - John de Castro - Conversation with a Priest -

Colhares - Mafra - Its Palace - The Schoolmaster - The Portuguese -

Their Ignorance of Scripture - Rural Priesthood - The Alemtejo.





On the morning of the tenth of November, 1835, I found

myself off the coast of Galicia, whose lofty mountains, gilded

by the rising sun, presented a magnificent appearance.  I was

bound for Lisbon; we passed Cape Finisterre, and standing

farther out to sea, speedily lost sight of land.  On the

morning of the eleventh the sea was very rough, and a

remarkable circumstance occurred.  I was on the forecastle,

discoursing with two of the sailors: one of them, who had but

just left his hammock, said, "I have had a strange dream, which

I do not much like, for," continued he, pointing up to the

mast, "I dreamt that I fell into the sea from the cross-trees."

He was heard to say this by several of the crew besides myself.

A moment after, the captain of the vessel perceiving that the

squall was increasing, ordered the topsails to be taken in,

whereupon this man with several others instantly ran aloft; the

yard was in the act of being hauled down, when a sudden gust of

wind whirled it round with violence, and a man was struck down

from the cross-trees into the sea, which was working like yeast

below.  In a short time he emerged; I saw his head on the crest

of a billow, and instantly recognised in the unfortunate man

the sailor who a few moments before had related his dream.  I

shall never forget the look of agony he cast whilst the steamer

hurried past him.  The alarm was given, and everything was in

confusion; it was two minutes at least before the vessel was

stopped, by which time the man was a considerable way astern; I

still, however, kept my eye upon him, and could see that he was

struggling gallantly with the waves.  A boat was at length

lowered, but the rudder was unfortunately not at hand, and only

two oars could be procured, with which the men could make but

little progress in so rough a sea.  They did their best,

however, and had arrived within ten yards of the man, who still

struggled for his life, when I lost sight of him, and the men

on their return said that they saw him below the water, at

glimpses, sinking deeper and deeper, his arms stretched out and

his body apparently stiff, but that they found it impossible to

save him; presently after, the sea, as if satisfied with the

prey which it had acquired, became comparatively calm.  The

poor fellow who perished in this singular manner was a fine

young man of twenty-seven, the only son of a widowed mother; he

was the best sailor on board, and was beloved by all who were

acquainted with him.  This event occurred on the eleventh of

November, 1835; the vessel was the LONDON MERCHANT steamship.

Truly wonderful are the ways of Providence!



That same night we entered the Tagus, and dropped anchor

before the old tower of Belem; early the next morning we

weighed, and, proceeding onward about a league, we again

anchored at a short distance from the Caesodre, or principal

quay of Lisbon.  Here we lay for some hours beside the enormous

black hulk of the RAINHA NAO, a man-of-war, which in old times

so captivated the eye of Nelson, that he would fain have

procured it for his native country.  She was, long

subsequently, the admiral's ship of the Miguelite squadron, and

had been captured by the gallant Napier about three years

previous to the time of which I am speaking.



The RAINHA NAO is said to have caused him more trouble

than all the other vessels of the enemy; and some assert that,

had the others defended themselves with half the fury which the

old vixen queen displayed, the result of the battle which

decided the fate of Portugal would have been widely different.



I found disembarkation at Lisbon to be a matter of

considerable vexation; the custom-house officers were

exceedingly uncivil, and examined every article of my little

baggage with most provocating minuteness.



My first impression on landing in the Peninsula was by no

means a favourable one; and I had scarcely pressed the soil one

hour before I heartily wished myself back in Russia, a country

which I had quitted about one month previous, and where I had

left cherished friends and warm affections.



After having submitted to much ill-usage and robbery at

the custom-house, I proceeded in quest of a lodging, and at

last found one, but dirty and expensive.  The next day I hired

a servant, a Portuguese, it being my invariable custom on

arriving in a country to avail myself of the services of a

native; chiefly with the view of perfecting myself in the

language; and being already acquainted with most of the

principal languages and dialects of the east and the west, I am

soon able to make myself quite intelligible to the inhabitants.

In about a fortnight I found myself conversing in Portuguese

with considerable fluency.



Those who wish to make themselves understood by a

foreigner in his own language, should speak with much noise and

vociferation, opening their mouths wide.  Is it surprising that

the English are, in general, the worst linguists in the world,

seeing that they pursue a system diametrically opposite?  For

example, when they attempt to speak Spanish, the most sonorous

tongue in existence, they scarcely open their lips, and putting

their hands in their pockets, fumble lazily, instead of

applying them to the indispensable office of gesticulation.

Well may the poor Spaniards exclaim, THESE ENGLISH TALK SO

CRABBEDLY, THAT SATAN HIMSELF WOULD NOT BE ABLE TO UNDERSTAND

THEM.



Lisbon is a huge ruinous city, still exhibiting in almost

every direction the vestiges of that terrific visitation of

God, the earthquake which shattered it some eighty years ago.

It stands on seven hills, the loftiest of which is occupied by

the castle of Saint George, which is the boldest and most

prominent object to the eye, whilst surveying the city from the

Tagus.  The most frequented and busy parts of the city are

those comprised within the valley to the north of this

elevation.



Here you find the Plaza of the Inquisition, the principal

square in Lisbon, from which run parallel towards the river

three or four streets, amongst which are those of the gold and

silver, so designated from being inhabited by smiths cunning in

the working of those metals; they are upon the whole very

magnificent; the houses are huge and as high as castles;

immense pillars defend the causeway at intervals, producing,

however, rather a cumbrous effect.  These streets are quite

level, and are well paved, in which respect they differ from

all the others in Lisbon.  The most singular street, however,

of all is that of the Alemcrin, or Rosemary, which debouches on

the Caesodre.  It is very precipitous, and is occupied on

either side by the palaces of the principal Portuguese

nobility, massive and frowning, but grand and picturesque,

edifices, with here and there a hanging garden, overlooking the

streets at a great height.



With all its ruin and desolation, Lisbon is

unquestionably the most remarkable city in the Peninsula, and,

perhaps, in the south of Europe.  It is not my intention to

enter into minute details concerning it; I shall content myself

with remarking, that it is quite as much deserving the

attention of the artist as even Rome itself.  True it is that

though it abounds with churches it has no gigantic cathedral,

like St. Peter's, to attract the eye and fill it with wonder,

yet I boldly say that there is no monument of man's labour and

skill, pertaining either to ancient or modern Rome, for

whatever purpose designed, which can rival the water-works of

Lisbon; I mean the stupendous aqueduct whose principal arches

cross the valley to the north-east of Lisbon, and which

discharges its little runnel of cool and delicious water into

the rocky cistern within that beautiful edifice called the

Mother of the Waters, from whence all Lisbon is supplied with

the crystal lymph, though the source is seven leagues distant.

Let travellers devote one entire morning to inspecting the

Arcos and the Mai das Agoas, after which they may repair to the

English church and cemetery, Pere-la-chaise in miniature,

where, if they be of England, they may well be excused if they

kiss the cold tomb, as I did, of the author of AMELIA, the most

singular genius which their island ever produced, whose works

it has long been the fashion to abuse in public and to read in

secret.  In the same cemetery rest the mortal remains of

Doddridge, another English author of a different stamp, but

justly admired and esteemed.  I had not intended, on

disembarking, to remain long in Lisbon, nor indeed in Portugal;

my destination was Spain, whither I shortly proposed to direct

my steps, it being the intention of the Bible Society to

attempt to commence operations in that country, the object of

which should be the distribution of the Word of God, for Spain

had hitherto been a region barred against the admission of the

Bible; not so Portugal, where, since the revolution, the Bible

had been permitted both to be introduced and circulated.

Little, however, had been accomplished; therefore, finding

myself in the country, I determined, if possible, to effect

something in the way of distribution, but first of all to make

myself acquainted as to how far the people were disposed to

receive the Bible, and whether the state of education in

general would permit them to turn it to much account.  I had

plenty of Bibles and Testaments at my disposal, but could the

people read them, or would they?  A friend of the Society to

whom I was recommended was absent from Lisbon at the period of

my arrival; this I regretted, as he could have afforded me

several useful hints.  In order, however, that no time might be

lost, I determined not to wait for his arrival, but at once

proceed to gather the best information I could upon those

points to which I have already alluded.  I determined to

commence my researches at some slight distance from Lisbon,

being well aware of the erroneous ideas that I must form of the

Portuguese in general, should I judge of their character and

opinions from what I saw and heard in a city so much subjected

to foreign intercourse.



My first excursion was to Cintra.  If there be any place

in the world entitled to the appellation of an enchanted

region, it is surely Cintra; Tivoli is a beautiful and

picturesque place, but it quickly fades from the mind of those

who have seen the Portuguese Paradise.  When speaking of

Cintra, it must not for a moment be supposed that nothing more

is meant than the little town or city; by Cintra must be

understood the entire region, town, palace, quintas, forests,

crags, Moorish ruin, which suddenly burst on the view on

rounding the side of a bleak, savage, and sterile-looking

mountain.  Nothing is more sullen and uninviting than the

south-western aspect of the stony wall which, on the side of

Lisbon, seems to shield Cintra from the eye of the world, but

the other side is a mingled scene of fairy beauty, artificial

elegance, savage grandeur, domes, turrets, enormous trees,

flowers and waterfalls, such as is met with nowhere else

beneath the sun.  Oh! there are strange and wonderful objects

at Cintra, and strange and wonderful recollections attached to

them.  The ruin on that lofty peak, and which covers part of

the side of that precipitous steep, was once the principal

stronghold of the Lusitanian Moors, and thither, long after

they had disappeared, at a particular moon of every year, were

wont to repair wild santons of Maugrabie, to pray at the tomb

of a famous Sidi, who slumbers amongst the rocks.  That grey

palace witnessed the assemblage of the last cortes held by the

boy king Sebastian, ere he departed on his romantic expedition

against the Moors, who so well avenged their insulted faith and

country at Alcazarquibir, and in that low shady quinta,

embowered amongst those tall alcornoques, once dwelt John de

Castro, the strange old viceroy of Goa, who pawned the hairs of

his dead son's beard to raise money to repair the ruined wall

of a fortress threatened by the heathen of Ind; those crumbling

stones which stand before the portal, deeply graven, not with

"runes," but things equally dark, Sanscrit rhymes from the

Vedas, were brought by him from Goa, the most brilliant scene

of his glory, before Portugal had become a base kingdom; and

down that dingle, on an abrupt rocky promontory, stand the

ruined halls of the English Millionaire, who there nursed the

wayward fancies of a mind as wild, rich, and variegated as the

scenes around.  Yes, wonderful are the objects which meet the

eye at Cintra, and wonderful are the recollections attached to

them.



The town of Cintra contains about eight hundred

inhabitants.  The morning subsequent to my arrival, as I was

about to ascend the mountain for the purpose of examining the

Moorish ruins, I observed a person advancing towards me whom I

judged by his dress to be an ecclesiastic; he was in fact one

of the three priests of the place.  I instantly accosted him,

and had no reason to regret doing so; I found him affable and

communicative.



After praising the beauty of the surrounding scenery, I

made some inquiry as to the state of education amongst the

people under his care.  He answered, that he was sorry to say

that they were in a state of great ignorance, very few of the

common people being able either to read or write; that with

respect to schools, there was but one in the place, where four

or five children were taught the alphabet, but that even this

was at present closed; he informed me, however, that there was

a school at Colhares, about a league distant.  Amongst other

things, he said that nothing more surprised him than to see

Englishmen, the most learned and intelligent people in the

world, visiting a place like Cintra, where there was no

literature, science, nor anything of utility (COISA QUE

PRESTA).  I suspect that there was some covert satire in the

last speech of the worthy priest; I was, however, Jesuit enough

to appear to receive it as a high compliment, and, taking off

my hat, departed with an infinity of bows.



That same day I visited Colhares, a romantic village on

the side of the mountain of Cintra, to the north-west.  Seeing

some peasants collected round a smithy, I inquired about the

school, whereupon one of the men instantly conducted me

thither.  I went upstairs into a small apartment, where I found

the master with about a dozen pupils standing in a row; I saw

but one stool in the room, and to that, after having embraced

me, he conducted me with great civility.  After some discourse,

he showed me the books which he used for the instruction of the

children; they were spelling books, much of the same kind as

those used in the village schools in England.  Upon my asking

him whether it was his practice to place the Scriptures in the

hands of the children, he informed me that long before they had

acquired sufficient intelligence to understand them they were

removed by their parents, in order that they might assist in

the labours of the field, and that the parents in general were

by no means solicitous that their children should learn

anything, as they considered the time occupied in learning as

so much squandered away.  He said, that though the schools were

nominally supported by the government, it was rarely that the

schoolmasters could obtain their salaries, on which account

many had of late resigned their employments.  He told me that

he had a copy of the New Testament in his possession, which I

desired to see, but on examining it I discovered that it was

only the epistles by Pereira, with copious notes.  I asked him

whether he considered that there was harm in reading the

Scriptures without notes: he replied that there was certainly

no harm in it, but that simple people, without the help of

notes, could derive but little benefit from Scripture, as the

greatest part would be unintelligible to them; whereupon I

shook hands with him, and on departing said that there was no

part of Scripture so difficult to understand as those very

notes which were intended to elucidate it, and that it would

never have been written if not calculated of itself to illume

the minds of all classes of mankind.



In a day or two I made an excursion to Mafra, distant

about three leagues from Cintra; the principal part of the way

lay over steep hills, somewhat dangerous for horses; however, I

reached the place in safety.



Mafra is a large village in the neighbourhood of an

immense building, intended to serve as a convent and palace,

and which is built somewhat after the fashion of the Escurial.

In this edifice exists the finest library in Portugal,

containing books on all sciences and in all languages, and well

suited to the size and grandeur of the edifice which contains

it.  There were no monks, however, to take care of it, as in

former times; they had been driven forth, some to beg their

bread, some to serve under the banners of Don Carlos, in Spain,

and many, as I was informed, to prowl about as banditti.  I

found the place abandoned to two or three menials, and

exhibiting an aspect of solitude and desolation truly

appalling.  Whilst I was viewing the cloisters, a fine

intelligent-looking lad came up and asked (I suppose in the

hope of obtaining a trifle) whether I would permit him to show

me the village church, which he informed me was well worth

seeing; I said no, but added, that it he would show me the

village school I should feel much obliged to him.  He looked at

me with astonishment, and assured me that there was nothing to

be seen at the school, which did not contain more than half a

dozen boys, and that he himself was one of the number.  On my

telling him, however, that he should show me no other place, he

at length unwillingly attended me.  On the way I learned from

him that the schoolmaster was one of the friars who had lately

been expelled from the convent, that he was a very learned man,

and spoke French and Greek.  We passed a stone cross, and the

boy bent his head and crossed himself with much devotion.  I

mention this circumstance, as it was the first instance of the

kind which I had observed amongst the Portuguese since my

arrival.  When near the house where the schoolmaster resided,

he pointed it out to me, and then hid himself behind a wall,

where he awaited my return.



On stepping over the threshold I was confronted by a

short stout man, between sixty and seventy years of age,

dressed in a blue jerkin and grey trousers, without shirt or

waistcoat; he looked at me sternly, and enquired in the French

language what was my pleasure.  I apologised for intruding upon

him, and stated that, being informed he occupied the situation

of schoolmaster, I had come to pay my respects to him and to

beg permission to ask a few questions respecting the seminary.

He answered that whoever told me he was a schoolmaster lied,

for that he was a friar of the convent and nothing else.  "It

is not then true," said I, "that all the convents have been

broken up and the monks dismissed?"  "Yes, yes," said he with a

sigh, "it is true; it is but too true."  He then was silent for

a minute, and his better nature overcoming his angry feelings,

he produced a snuffbox and offered it to me.  The snuff-box is

the olive-branch of the Portuguese, and he who wishes to be on

good terms with them must never refuse to dip his finger and

thumb into it when offered.  I took therefore a huge pinch,

though I detest the dust, and we were soon on the best possible

terms.  He was eager to obtain news, especially from Lisbon and

Spain.  I told him that the officers of the troops at Lisbon

had, the day before I left that place, gone in a body to the

queen and insisted upon her either receiving their swords or

dismissing her ministers; whereupon he rubbed his hands and

said that he was sure matters would not remain tranquil at

Lisbon.  On my saying, however, that I thought the affairs of

Don Carlos were on the decline (this was shortly after the

death of Zumalacarregui), he frowned, and cried that it could

not possibly be, for that God was too just to suffer it.  I

felt for the poor man who had been driven out of his home in

the noble convent close by, and from a state of affluence and

comfort reduced in his old age to indigence and misery, for his

present dwelling scarcely seemed to contain an article of

furniture.  I tried twice or thrice to induce him to converse

about the school, but he either avoided the subject or said

shortly that he knew nothing about it.  On my leaving him, the

boy came from his hiding-place and rejoined me; he said that he

had hidden himself through fear of his master's knowing that he

had brought me to him, for that he was unwilling that any

stranger should know that he was a schoolmaster.



I asked the boy whether he or his parents were acquainted

with the Scripture and ever read it; he did not, however, seem

to understand me.  I must here observe that the boy was fifteen

years of age, that he was in many respects very intelligent,

and had some knowledge of the Latin language; nevertheless he

knew not the Scripture even by name, and I have no doubt, from

what I subsequently observed, that at least two-thirds of his

countrymen are on that important point no wiser than himself.

At the doors of village inns, at the hearths of the rustics, in

the fields where they labour, at the stone fountains by the

wayside where they water their cattle, I have questioned the

lower class of the children of Portugal about the Scripture,

the Bible, the Old and New Testament, and in no one instance

have they known what I was alluding to, or could return me a

rational answer, though on all other matters their replies were

sensible enough; indeed, nothing surprised me more than the

free and unembarrassed manner in which the Portuguese peasantry

sustain a conversation, and the purity of the language in which

they express their thoughts, and yet few of them can read or

write; whereas the peasantry of England, whose education is in

general much superior, are in their conversation coarse and

dull almost to brutality, and absurdly ungrammatical in their

language, though the English tongue is upon the whole more

simple in its structure than the Portuguese.



On my return to Lisbon I found our friend -, who received

me very kindly.  The next ten days were exceedingly rainy,

which prevented me from making any excursions into the country:

during this time I saw our friend frequently, and had long

conversations with him concerning the best means of

distributing the gospel.  He thought we could do no better for

the present than put part of our stock into the hands of the

booksellers of Lisbon, and at the same time employ colporteurs

to hawk the books about the streets, receiving a certain profit

off every copy they sold.  This plan was agreed upon and

forthwith put in practice, and with some success.  I had

thought of sending colporteurs into the neighbouring villages,

but to this our friend objected.  He thought the attempt

dangerous, as it was very possible that the rural priesthood,

who still possessed much influence in their own districts, and

who were for the most part decided enemies to the spread of the

gospel, might cause the men employed to be assassinated or ill-

treated.



I determined, however, ere leaving Portugal, to establish

depots of Bibles in one or two of the provincial towns.  I

wished to visit the Alemtejo, which I had heard was a very

benighted region.  The Alemtejo means the province beyond the

Tagus.  This province is not beautiful and picturesque, like

most other parts of Portugal: there are few hills and

mountains, the greater part consists of heaths broken by

knolls, and gloomy dingles, and forests of stunted pine; these

places are infested with banditti.  The principal city is Evora,

one of the most ancient in Portugal, and formerly the  seat of

a branch of the Inquisition, yet more cruel and baneful than the

terrible one of Lisbon.  Evora lies about sixty miles from Lisbon,


and to Evora I determined on going with twenty  Testaments

and two Bibles.  How I fared there will presently be seen.

