





CHAPTER XXXIII







Oviedo - The Ten Gentlemen - The Swiss again - Modest Request -

The Robbers - Episcopal Benevolence - The Cathedral - Portrait of Feijoo.





I must now take a considerable stride in my journey, no

less than from Muros to Oviedo, contenting myself with

observing, that we proceeded from Muros to Velez, and from

thence to Giyon, where our guide Martin bade us farewell, and

returned with his mare to Rivadeo.  The honest fellow did not

part without many expressions of regret, indeed he even

expressed a desire that I should take him and his mare into my

service; "for," said he, "I have a great desire to run through

all Spain, and even the world; and I am sure I shall never have

a better opportunity than by attaching myself to your worship's

skirts."  On my reminding him, however, of his wife and family,

for he had both, he said, "True, true, I had forgotten them:

happy the guide whose only wife and family are a mare and

foal."



Oviedo is about three leagues from Giyon.  Antonio rode

the horse, whilst I proceeded thither in a kind of diligence

which runs daily between the two towns.  The road is good, but

mountainous.  I arrived safely at the capital of the Asturias,

although at a rather unpropitious season, for the din of war

was at the gate, and there was the cry of the captains and the

shouting.  Castile, at the time of which I am writing, was in

the hands of the Carlists, who had captured and plundered

Valladolid in much the same manner as they had Segovia some

time before.  They were every day expected to march on Oviedo,

in which case they might perhaps have experienced some

resistance, a considerable body of troops being stationed

there, who had erected some redoubts, and strongly fortified

several of the convents, especially that of Santa Clara de la

Vega.  All minds were in a state of feverish anxiety and

suspense, more especially as no intelligence arrived from

Madrid, which by the last accounts was said to be occupied by

the bands of Cabrera and Palillos.



So it came to pass that one night I found myself in the

ancient town of Oviedo, in a very large, scantily-furnished,

and remote room in an ancient posada, formerly a palace of the

counts of Santa Cruz.  It was past ten, and the rain was

descending in torrents.  I was writing, but suddenly ceased on

hearing numerous footsteps ascending the creaking stairs which

led to my apartment.  The door was flung open, and in walked

nine men of tall stature, marshalled by a little hunchbacked

personage.  They were all muffled in the long cloaks of Spain,

but I instantly knew by their demeanour that they were

caballeros, or gentlemen.  They placed themselves in a rank

before the table where I was sitting.  Suddenly and

simultaneously they all flung back their cloaks, and I

perceived that every one bore a book in his hand; a book which

I knew full well.  After a pause, which I was unable to break,

for I sat lost in astonishment, and almost conceived myself to

be visited by apparitions, the hunchback, advancing somewhat

before the rest, said in soft silvery tones, "Senor Cavalier,

was it you who brought this book to the Asturias?"  I now

supposed that they were the civil authorities of the place come

to take me into custody, and, rising from my seat, I exclaimed,

"It certainly was I, and it is my glory to have done so; the

book is the New Testament of God: I wish it was in my power to

bring a million."  "I heartily wish so too," said the little

personage with a sigh.  "Be under no apprehension, Sir

Cavalier, these gentlemen are my friends; we have just

purchased these books in the shop where you placed them for

sale, and have taken the liberty of calling upon you, in order

to return you our thanks for the treasure you have brought us.

I hope you can furnish us with the Old Testament also."  I

replied that I was sorry to inform him that at present it was

entirely out of my power to comply with his wish, as I had no

Old Testaments in my possession, but did not despair of

procuring some speedily from England.  He then asked me a great

many questions concerning my biblical travels in Spain, and my

success, and the views entertained by the Society, with respect

to Spain, adding that he hoped we should pay particular

attention to the Asturias, which he assured me was the best

ground in the Peninsula for our labour.  After about half an

hour's conversation, he suddenly said, in the English language,

"Good night, Sir," wrapped his cloak around him, and walked out

as he had come.  His companions, who had hitherto not uttered a

word, all repeated "Good night, Sir," and, adjusting their

cloaks, followed him.



In order to explain this strange scene, I must state that

in the morning I had visited the petty bookseller of the place,

Longoria, and having arranged preliminaries with him, I sent

him in the evening a package of forty Testaments, all I

possessed, with some advertisements.  At the time he assured me

that, though he was willing to undertake the sale, there was,

nevertheless, not a prospect of success, as a whole month had

elapsed since he had sold a book of any description, on account

of the uncertainty of the times, and the poverty which pervaded

the land; I therefore felt much dispirited.  This incident,

however, admonished me not to be cast down when things look

gloomiest, as the hand of the Lord is generally then most busy;

that men may learn to perceive, that whatever good is

accomplished is not their work but his.



Two or three days after this adventure, I was once more

seated in my large scantily-furnished room; it was about ten,

of a dark melancholy morning, and the autumnal rain was again

falling.  I had just breakfasted, and was about to sit down to

my journal, when the door was flung open and in bounded

Antonio.



"Mon maitre," said he, quite breathless, "who do you

think has arrived?"



"The pretender, I suppose," said I, in some trepidation;

"if so, we are prisoners."



"Bah, bah!" said Antonio, "it is not the pretender, but

one worth twenty of him; it is the Swiss of Saint James."



"Benedict Mol, the Swiss!" said I, "What! has he found

the treasure?  But how did he come?  How is he dressed?"



"Mon maitre," said Antonio, "he came on foot if we may

judge by his shoes, through which his toes are sticking; and as

for his dress, he is in most villainous apparel."



"There must be some mystery in this," said I; "where is

he at present?"



"Below, mon maitre," replied Antonio; "he came in quest

of us.  But I no sooner saw him, than I hurried away to let you

know."



In a few minutes Benedict Mol found his way up stairs; he

was, as Antonio had remarked, in most villainous apparel, and

nearly barefooted; his old Andalusian hat was dripping with

rain.



"Och, lieber herr," said Benedict, "how rejoiced I am to

see you again.  Oh, the sight of your countenance almost repays

me for all the miseries I have undergone since I parted with

you at Saint James."



MYSELF. - I can scarcely believe that I really see you

here at Oviedo.  What motive can have induced you to come to

such an out-of-the-way place from such an immense distance?



BENEDICT. - Lieber herr, I will sit down and tell you all

that has befallen me.  Some few days after I saw you last, the

canonigo persuaded me to go to the captain-general to apply for

permission to disinter the schatz, and also to crave

assistance.  So I saw the captain-general, who at first

received me very kindly, asked me several questions, and told

me to come again.  So I continued visiting him till he would

see me no longer, and do what I might I could not obtain a

glance of him.  The canon now became impatient, more especially

as he had given me a few pesetas out of the charities of the

church.  He frequently called me a bribon and impostor.  At

last, one morning I went to him, and said that I had proposed

to return to Madrid, in order to lay the matter before the

government, and requested that he would give me a certificate

to the effect that I had performed a pilgrimage to Saint James,

which I imagined would be of assistance to me upon the way, as

it would enable me to beg with some colour of authority.  He no

sooner heard this request, than, without saying a word or

allowing me a moment to put myself on my defence, he sprang

upon me like a tiger, grasping my throat so hard that I thought

he would have strangled me.  I am a Swiss, however, and a man

of Lucerne, and when I had recovered myself a little, I had no

difficulty in flinging him off; I then threatened him with my

staff and went away.  He followed me to the gate with the most

horrid curses, saying that if I presumed to return again, he

would have me thrown at once into prison as a thief and a

heretic.  So I went in quest of yourself, lieber herr, but they

told me that you were departed for Coruna; I then set out for

Coruna after you.



MYSELF. - And what befell you on the road?



BENEDICT. - I will tell you: about half-way between Saint

James and Coruna, as I was walking along, thinking of the

schatz, I heard a loud galloping, and looking around me I saw

two men on horseback coming across the field with the swiftness

of the wind, and making directly for me.  Lieber Gott, said I,

these are thieves, these are factious; and so they were.  They

came up to me in a moment and bade me stand, so I flung down my

staff, took off my hat and saluted them.  "Good day,

caballeros," said I to them.  "Good day, countryman," said they

to me, and then we stood staring at each other for more than a

minute.  Lieber himmel, I never saw such robbers; so finely

dressed, so well armed, and mounted so bravely on two fiery

little hakkas, that looked as if they could have taken wing and

flown up into the clouds!  So we continued staring at each

other, till at last one asked me who I was, whence I came, and

where I was going.  "Gentlemen," said I, "I am a Swiss, I have

been to Saint James to perform a religious vow, and am now

returning to my own country."  I said not a word about the

treasure, for I was afraid that they would have shot me at

once, conceiving that I carried part of it about me.  "Have you

any money?" they demanded.  "Gentlemen," I replied, "you see

how I travel on foot, with my shoes torn to pieces; I should

not do so if I had money.  I will not deceive you, however, I

have a peseta and a few cuartos," and thereupon I took out what

I had and offered it to them.  "Fellow," said they, "we are

caballeros of Galicia, and do not take pesetas, much less

cuartos.  Of what opinion are you?  Are you for the queen?"

"No, gentlemen," said I, "I am not for the queen, but, at the

same time, allow me to tell you that I am not for the king

either; I know nothing about the matter; I am a Swiss, and

fight neither for nor against anybody unless I am paid."  This

made them laugh, and then they questioned me about Saint James,

and the troops there, and the captain-general; and not to

disoblige them, I told them all I knew and much more.  Then one

of them, who looked the fiercest and most determined, took his

trombone in his hand, and pointing it at me, said, "Had you

been a Spaniard, we would have blown your head to shivers, for

we should have thought you a spy, but we see you are a

foreigner, and believe what you have said; take, therefore,

this peseta and go your way, but beware that you tell nobody

any thing about us, for if you do, carracho!"  He then

discharged his trombone just over my head, so that for a moment

I thought myself shot, and then with an awful shout, they both

galloped away, their horses leaping over the barrancos, as if

possessed with many devils.



MYSELF. - And what happened to you on your arrival at

Coruna?



BENEDICT. - When I arrived at Coruna, I inquired after

yourself, lieber herr, and they informed me that, only the day

before my arrival, you had departed for Oviedo: and when I

heard that, my heart died within me, for I was now at the far

end of Galicia, without a friend to help me.  For a day or two

I knew not what to do; at last I determined to make for the

frontier of France, passing through Oviedo in the way, where I

hoped to see you and ask counsel of you.  So I begged and

bettled among the Germans of Coruna.  I, however, got very

little from them, only a few cuarts, less than the thieves had

given me on the road from Saint James, and with these I

departed for the Asturias by the way of Mondonedo.  Och, what a

town is that, full of canons, priests, and pfaffen, all of them

more Carlist than Carlos himself.



One day I went to the bishop's palace and spoke to him,

telling him I was a pilgrim from Saint James, and requesting

assistance.  He told me, however, that he could not relieve me,

and as for my being a pilgrim from Saint James, he was glad of

it, and hoped that it would be of service to my soul.  So I

left Mondonedo, and got amongst the wild mountains, begging and

betting at the door of every choza that I passed, telling all I

saw that I was a pilgrim from Saint James, and showing my

passport in proof that I had been there.  Lieber herr, no

person gave me a cuart, nor even a piece of broa, and both

Gallegans and Asturians laughed at Saint James, and told me

that his name was no longer a passport in Spain.  I should have

starved if I had not sometimes plucked an ear or two out of the

maize fields; I likewise gathered grapes from the parras and

berries from the brambles, and in this manner I subsisted till

I arrived at the bellotas, where I slaughtered a stray kid

which I met, and devoured part of the flesh raw, so great was

my hunger.  It made me, however, very ill, and for two days I

lay in a barranco half dead and unable to help myself; it was a

mercy that I was not devoured by the wolves.  I then struck

across the country for Oviedo: how I reached it I do not know;

I was like one walking in a dream.  Last night I slept in an

empty hogsty about two leagues from here, and ere I left it, I

fell down on my knees and prayed to God that I might find you,

lieber herr, for you were my last hope.



MYSELF. - And what do you propose to do at present?



BENEDICT. - What can I say, lieber herr?  I know not what

to do.  I will be guided in everything by your counsel.



MYSELF. - I shall remain at Oviedo a few days longer,

during which time you can lodge at this posada, and endeavour

to recover from the fatigue of your disastrous journeys;

perhaps before I depart, we may hit on some plan to extricate

you from your present difficulties.



Oviedo contains about fifteen thousand inhabitants.  It

is picturesquely situated between two mountains, Morcin and

Naranco; the former is very high and rugged, and during the

greater part of the year is covered with snow; the sides of the

latter are cultivated and planted with vines.  The principal

ornament of the town is the cathedral, the tower of which is

exceedingly lofty, and is perhaps one of the purest specimens

of Gothic architecture at present in existence.  The interior

of the cathedral is neat and appropriate, but simple and

unadorned.  I observed but one picture, the Conversion of Saint

Paul.  One of the chapels is a cemetery, in which rest the

bones of eleven Gothic kings; to whose souls be peace.




I bore a letter of recommendation from Coruna to a

merchant of Oviedo.  This person received me very courteously,

and generally devoted some portion of every day to showing me

the remarkable things of Oviedo.



One morning he thus addressed me: "You have doubtless

heard of Feijoo, the celebrated philosophic monk of the order

of Saint Benedict, whose writings have so much tended to remove

the popular fallacies and superstitions so long cherished in

Spain; he is buried in one of our convents, where he passed a

considerable portion of his life.  Come with me and I will show

you his portrait.  Carlos Tercero, our great king, sent his own

painter from Madrid to execute it.  It is now in the possession

of a friend of mine, Don Ramon Valdez, an advocate."



Thereupon he led me to the house of Don Ramon Valdez, who

very politely exhibited the portrait of Feijoo.  It was

circular in shape, about a foot in diameter, and was surrounded

by a little brass frame, something like the rim of a barber's

basin.  The countenance was large and massive but fine, the

eyebrows knit, the eyes sharp and penetrating, nose aquiline.

On the head was a silken skull-cap; the collar of the coat or

vest was just perceptible.  The painting was decidedly good,

and struck me as being one of the very best specimens of modern

Spanish art which I had hitherto seen.



A day or two after this I said to Benedict Mol, "to-

morrow I start from hence for Santander.  It is therefore high

time that you decide upon some course, whether to return to

Madrid or to make the best of your way to France, and from

thence proceed to your own country."



"Lieber herr," said Benedict, "I will follow you to

Santander by short journeys, for I am unable to make long ones

amongst these hills; and when I am there, peradventure I may

find some means of passing into France.  It is a great comfort,

in my horrible journeys, to think that I am travelling over the

ground which yourself have trodden, and to hope that I am

proceeding to rejoin you once more.  This hope kept me alive in

the bellotas, and without it I should never have reached

Oviedo.  I will quit Spain as soon as possible, and betake me

to Lucerne, though it is a hard thing to leave the schatz

behind me in the land of the Gallegans."



Thereupon I presented him with a few dollars.



"A strange man is this Benedict," said Antonio to me next

morning, as, accompanied by a guide, we sallied forth from

Oviedo; "a strange man, mon maitre, is this same Benedict.  A

strange life has he led, and a strange death he will die, - it

is written on his countenance.  That he will leave Spain I do

not believe, or if he leave it, it will be only to return, for

he is bewitched about this treasure.  Last night he sent for a

sorciere, whom he consulted in my presence; and she told him

that he was doomed to possess it, but that first of all he must

cross water.  She cautioned him likewise against an enemy,

which he supposes must be the canon of Saint James.  I have

often heard people speak of the avidity of the Swiss for money,

and here is a proof of it.  I would not undergo what Benedict

has suffered in these last journeys of his, to possess all the

treasures in Spain."

