





CHAPTER XLIX







The Solitary House - The Dehesa - Johannes Chrysostom -

Manuel - Bookselling at Seville - Dionysius and the Priests -

Athens and Rome - Proselytism - Seizure of Testaments -

Departure from Seville.





I have already stated, that I had hired an empty house in

Seville, wherein I proposed to reside for some months.  It

stood in a solitary situation, occupying one side of a small

square.  It was built quite in the beautiful taste of

Andalusia, with a court paved with small slabs of white and

blue marble.  In the middle of this court was a fountain well

supplied with the crystal lymph, the murmur of which, as it

fell from its slender pillar into an octangular basin, might be

heard in every apartment.  The house itself was large and

spacious, consisting of two stories, and containing room

sufficient for at least ten times the number of inmates which

now occupied it.  I generally kept during the day in the lower

apartments, on account of the refreshing coolness which

pervaded them.  In one of these was an immense stone water-

trough, ever overflowing with water from the fountain, in which

I immersed myself every morning.  Such were the premises to

which, after having provided myself with a few indispensable

articles of furniture, I now retreated with Antonio and my two

horses.



I was fortunate in the possession of these quadrupeds,

inasmuch as it afforded me an opportunity of enjoying to a

greater extent the beauties of the surrounding country.  I know

of few things in this life more delicious than a ride in the

spring or summer season in the neighbourhood of Seville.  My

favourite one was in the direction of Xerez, over the wide

Dehesa, as it is called, which extends from Seville to the

gates of the former town, a distance of nearly fifty miles,

with scarcely a town or village intervening.  The ground is

irregular and broken, and is for the most part covered with

that species of brushwood called carrasco, amongst which winds

a bridle-path, by no means well defined, chiefly trodden by the

arrieros, with their long train of mules and borricos.  It is

here that the balmy air of beautiful Andalusia is to be inhaled

in full perfection.  Aromatic herbs and flowers are growing in

abundance, diffusing their perfume around.  Here dark and

gloomy cares are dispelled as if by magic from the bosom, as

the eyes wander over the prospect, lighted by unequalled

sunshine, in which gaily-painted butterflies wanton, and green

and golden Salamanquesas lie extended, enjoying the luxurious

warmth, and occasionally startling the traveller, by springing

up and making off with portentous speed to the nearest coverts,

whence they stare upon him with their sharp and lustrous eyes.

I repeat, that it is impossible to continue melancholy in

regions like these, and the ancient Greeks and Romans were

right in making them the site of their Elysian fields.  Most

beautiful they are even in their present desolation, for the

hand of man has not cultivated them since the fatal era of the

expulsion of the Moors, which drained Andalusia of at least two

thirds of its population.



Every evening it was my custom to ride along the Dedesa,

until the topmost towers of Seville were no longer in sight.  I

then turned about, and pressing my knees against the sides of

Sidi Habismilk, my Arabian, the fleet creature, to whom spur or

lash had never been applied, would set off in the direction of

the town with the speed of a whirlwind, seeming in his headlong

course to devour the ground of the waste, until he had left it

behind, then dashing through the elm-covered road of the

Delicias, his thundering hoofs were soon heard beneath the

vaulted archway of the Puerta de Xerez, and in another moment

he would stand stone still before the door of my solitary house

in the little silent square of the Pila Seca.



It is eight o'clock at night, I am returned from the

Dehesa, and am standing on the sotea, or flat roof of my house,

enjoying the cool breeze.  Johannes Chrysostom has just arrived

from his labour.  I have not spoken to him, but I hear him

below in the court-yard, detailing to Antonio the progress he

has made in the last two days.  He speaks barbarous Greek,

plentifully interlarded with Spanish words; but I gather from

his discourse, that he has already sold twelve Testaments among

his fellow labourers.  I hear copper coin falling on the

pavement, and Antonio, who is not of a very Christian temper,

reproving him for not having brought the proceeds of the sale

in silver.  He now asks for fifteen more, as he says the demand

is becoming great, and that he shall have no difficulty in

disposing of them in the course of the morrow, whilst pursuing

his occupations.  Antonio goes to fetch them, and he now stands

alone by the marble fountain, singing a wild song, which I

believe to be a hymn of his beloved Greek church.  Behold one

of the helpers which the Lord has sent me in my Gospel labours

on the shores of the Guadalquivir.



I lived in the greatest retirement during the whole time

that I passed at Seville, spending the greater part of each day

in study, or in that half-dreamy state of inactivity which is

the natural effect of the influence of a warm climate.  There

was little in the character of the people around to induce me

to enter much into society.  The higher class of the

Andalusians are probably upon the whole the most vain and

foolish of human beings, with a taste for nothing but sensual

amusements, foppery in dress, and ribald discourse.  Their

insolence is only equalled by their meanness, and their

prodigality by their avarice.  The lower classes are a shade or

two better than their superiors in station: little, it is true,

can be said for the tone of their morality; they are

overreaching, quarrelsome, and revengeful, but they are upon

the whole more courteous, and certainly not more ignorant.



The Andalusians are in general held in the lowest

estimation by the rest of the Spaniards, even those in opulent

circumstances finding some difficulty at Madrid in procuring

admission into respectable society, where, if they find their

way, they are invariably the objects of ridicule, from the

absurd airs and grimaces in which they indulge, - their

tendency to boasting and exaggeration, their curious accent,

and the incorrect manner in which they speak and pronounce the

Castilian language.



In a word, the Andalusians, in all estimable traits of

character, are as far below the other Spaniards as the country

which they inhabit is superior in beauty and fertility to the

other provinces of Spain.



Yet let it not for a moment be supposed that I have any

intention of asserting, that excellent and estimable

individuals are not to be found amongst the Andalusians; it was

amongst THEM that I myself discovered one, whom I have no

hesitation in asserting to be the most extraordinary character

that has ever come within my sphere of knowledge; but this was

no scion of a noble or knightly house, "no wearer of soft

clothing," no sleek highly-perfumed personage, none of the

romanticos who walk in languishing attitudes about the streets

of Seville, with long black hair hanging upon their shoulders

in luxuriant curls; but one of those whom the proud and

unfeeling style the dregs of the populace, a haggard,

houseless, penniless man, in rags and tatters: I allude to

Manuel, the - what shall I call him? - seller of lottery

tickets, driver of death carts, or poet laureate in Gypsy

songs?  I wonder whether thou art still living, my friend

Manuel; thou gentleman of Nature's forming - honest, pure-

minded, humble, yet dignified being!  Art thou still wandering

through the courts of beautiful Safacoro, or on the banks of

the Len Baro, thine eyes fixed in vacancy, and thy mind

striving to recall some half-forgotten couplet of Luis Lobo; or

art thou gone to thy long rest, out beyond the Xeres gate

within the wall of the Campo Santo, to which in times of pest

and sickness thou wast wont to carry so many, Gypsy and

Gentile, in thy cart of the tinkling bell?  Oft in the REUNIONS

of the lettered and learned in this land of universal

literature, when weary of the display of pedantry and egotism,

have I recurred with yearning to our Gypsy recitations at the

old house in the Pila Seca.  Oft, when sickened by the high-

wrought professions of those who bear the cross in gilded

chariots, have I thought on thee, thy calm faith, without

pretence, - thy patience in poverty, and fortitude in

affliction; and as oft, when thinking of my speedily

approaching end, have I wished that I might meet thee once

again, and that thy hands might help to bear me to "the dead

man's acre" yonder on the sunny plain, O Manuel!



My principal visitor was Dionysius, who seldom failed to

make his appearance every forenoon: the poor fellow came for

sympathy and conversation.  It is difficult to imagine a

situation more forlorn and isolated than that of this man, - a

Greek at Seville, with scarcely a single acquaintance, and

depending for subsistence on the miserable pittance to be

derived from selling a few books, for the most part hawked

about from door to door.  "What could have first induced you to

commence bookselling in Seville?" said I to him, as he arrived

one sultry day, heated and fatigued, with a small bundle of

books secured together by a leather strap.



DIONYSIUS. - For want of a better employment, Kyrie, I

have adopted this most unprofitable and despised one.  Oft have

I regretted not having been bred up as a shoe-maker, or having

learnt in my youth some other useful handicraft, for gladly

would I follow it now.  Such, at least, would procure me the

respect of my fellow-creatures inasmuch as they needed me; but

now all avoid me and look upon me with contempt; for what have

I to offer in this place that any one cares about?  Books in

Seville! where no one reads, or at least nothing but new

romances, translated from the French, and obscenity.  Books!

Would I were a Gypsy and could trim donkeys, for then I were at

least independent and were more respected than I am at present.



MYSELF. - Of what kind of books does your stock in trade

consist?



DIONYSIUS. - Of those not likely to suit the Seville

market, Kyrie; books of sterling and intrinsic value; many of

them in ancient Greek, which I picked up upon the dissolution

of the convents, when the contents of the libraries were hurled

into the courtyards, and there sold by the arrobe.  I thought

at first that I was about to make a fortune, and in fact my

books would be so in any other place; but here I have offered

an Elzevir for half a dollar in vain.  I should starve were it

not for the strangers who occasionally purchase of me.



MYSELF. - Seville is a large cathedral city, abounding

with priests and canons; surely one of these occasionally visit

you to make purchases of classic works, and books connected

with ecclesiastical literature.



DIONYSIUS. - If you think so, Kyrie, you know little

respecting the ecclesiastics of Seville.  I am acquainted with

many of them, and can assure you that a tribe of beings can

scarcely be found with a more confirmed aversion to

intellectual pursuits of every kind.  Their reading is confined

to newspapers, which they take up in the hope of seeing that

their friend Don Carlos is at length reinstated at Madrid; but

they prefer their chocolate and biscuits, and nap before

dinner, to the wisdom of Plato and the eloquence of Tully.

They occasionally visit me, but it is only to pass away a heavy

hour in chattering nonsense.  Once on a time, three of them

came, in the hope of making me a convert to their Latin

superstition.  "Signior Donatio," said they, (for so they

called me,) "how is it that an unprejudiced person like

yourself, a man really with some pretension to knowledge, can

still cling to this absurd religion of yours?  Surely, after

having resided so many years in a civilised country like this

of Spain, it is high time to abandon your half-pagan form of

worship, and to enter the bosom of the church; now pray be

advised, and you shall be none the worse for it."  "Thank you,

gentlemen," I replied, "for the interest you take in my

welfare; I am always open to conviction; let us proceed to

discuss the subject.  What are the points of my religion which

do not meet your approbation?  You are of course well

acquainted with all our dogmas and ceremonies."  "We know

nothing about your religion, Signior Donatio, save that it is a

very absurd one, and therefore it is incumbent upon you, as an

unprejudiced and well-informed man, to renounce it."  "But,

gentlemen, if you know nothing of my religion, why call it

absurd?  Surely it is not the part of unprejudiced people to

disparage that of which they are ignorant."  "But, Signior

Donatio, it is not the Catholic Apostolic Roman religion, is

it?"  "It may be, gentlemen, for what you appear to know of it;

for your information, however, I will tell you that it is not;

it is the Greek Apostolic religion.  I do not call it catholic,

for it is absurd to call that catholic which is not universally

acknowledged."  "But, Signior Donatio, does not the matter

speak for itself?  What can a set of ignorant Greek barbarians

know about religion?  If they set aside the authority of Rome,

whence should they derive any rational ideas of religion?

whence should they get the gospel?"  "The Gospel, gentlemen?

Allow me to show you a book, here it is, what is your opinion

of it?"  "Signior Donatio, what does this mean?  What

characters of the devil are these, are they Moorish?  Who is

able to understand them?"  "I suppose your worships, being

Roman priests, know something of Latin; if you inspect the

title-page to the bottom, you will find, in the language of

your own church, the Gospel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus

Christ,' in the original Greek, of which your vulgate is merely

a translation, and not a very correct one.  With respect to the

barbarism of Greece, it appears that you are not aware that

Athens was a city, and a famed one, centuries before the first

mud cabin of Rome was thatched, and the Gypsy vagabonds who

first peopled it, had escaped from the hands of justice."

"Signior Donatio, you are an ignorant heretic, and insolent

withal, WHAT NONSENSE IS THIS! . . . ."  But I will not weary

your ears, Kyrie, with all the absurdities which the poor Latin

PAPAS poured into mine; the burden of their song being

invariably, WHAT NONSENSE IS THIS! which was certainly

applicable enough to what they themselves were saying.  Seeing,

however, that I was more than their match in religious

controversy, they fell foul of my country.  "Spain is a better

country than Greece," said one.  "You never tasted bread before

you came to Spain," cried another.  "And little enough since,"

thought I.  "You never before saw such a city as Seville," said

the third.  But then ensued the best part of the comedy: my

visitors chanced to be natives of three different places; one

was of Seville, another of Utrera, and the third of Miguel

Turra, a miserable village in La Mancha.  At the mention of

Seville, the other two instantly began to sing the praises of

their respective places of birth; this brought on comparisons,

and a violent dispute was the consequence.  Much abuse passed

between them, whilst I stood by, shrugged my shoulders, and

said TIPOTAS. * At last, as they were leaving the house, I

said, "Who would have thought, gentlemen, that the polemics of

the Greek and Latin churches were so closely connected with the

comparative merits of Seville, Utrera, and Miguel Turra?"



* Nothing at all.



MYSELF. - Is the spirit of proselytism very prevalent

here?  Of what description of people do their converts

generally consist?



DIONYSIUS. - I will tell you, Kyrie: the generality of

their converts consist of German or English Protestant

adventurers, who come here to settle, and in course of time

take to themselves wives from among the Spanish, prior to which

it is necessary to become members of the Latin church.  A few

are vagabond Jews, from Gibraltar or Tangier, who have fled for

their crimes into Spain, and who renounce their faith to escape

from starvation.  These gentry, however, it is necessary to

pay, on which account the priests procure for them padrinos or

godfathers; these generally consist of rich devotees over whom

the priests have influence, and who esteem it a glory and a

meritorious act to assist in bringing back lost souls to the

church.  The neophyte allows himself to be convinced on the

promise of a peseta a day, which is generally paid by the

godfathers for the first year, but seldom for a longer period.

About forty years ago, however, they made a somewhat notable

convert.  A civil war arose in Morocco, caused by the separate

pretensions of two brothers to the throne.  One of these being

worsted, fled over to Spain, imploring the protection of

Charles the Fourth.  He soon became an object of particular

attention to the priests, who were not slow in converting him,

and induced Charles to settle upon him a pension of a dollar

per day.  He died some few years since in Seville, a despised

vagabond.  He left behind him a son, who is at present a

notary, and outwardly very devout, but a greater hypocrite and

picaroon does not exist.  I would you could see his face,

Kyrie, it is that of Judas Iscariot.  I think you would say so,

for you are a physiognomist.  He lives next door to me, and

notwithstanding his pretensions to religion, is permitted to

remain in a state of great poverty.



And now nothing farther for the present about Dionysius.



About the middle of July our work was concluded at

Seville, and for the very efficient reason, that I had no more

Testaments to sell; somewhat more than two hundred having been

circulated since my arrival.



About ten days before the time of which I am speaking, I

was visited by various alguazils, accompanied by a kind of

headborough, who made a small seizure of Testaments and Gypsy

Gospels, which happened to be lying about.  This visit was far

from being disagreeable to me, as I considered it to be a very

satisfactory proof of the effect of our exertions in Seville.

I cannot help here relating an anecdote - A day or two

subsequent, having occasion to call at the house of the

headborough respecting my passport, I found him lying on his

bed, for it was the hour of siesta, reading intently one of the

Testaments which he had taken away, all of which, if he had

obeyed his orders, would have been deposited in the office of

the civil governor.  So intently, indeed, was he engaged in

reading, that he did not at first observe my entrance; when he

did, however, he sprang up in great confusion, and locked the

book up in his cabinet, whereupon I smiled, and told him to be

under no alarm, as I was glad to see him so usefully employed.

Recovering himself, he said that he had read the book nearly

through, and that he had found no harm in it, but, on the

contrary, everything to praise.  Adding, he believed that the

clergy must be possessed with devils (ENDEMONIADOS) to

persecute it in the manner they did.



It was Sunday when the seizure was made, and I happened

to be reading the Liturgy.  One of the alguazils, when going

away, made an observation respecting the very different manner

in which the Protestants and Catholics keep the Sabbath; the

former being in their own houses reading good books, and the

latter abroad in the bull-ring, seeing the wild bulls tear out

the gory bowels of the poor horses.  The bull amphitheatre at

Seville is the finest in all Spain, and is invariably on a

Sunday (the only day on which it is open) filled with

applauding multitudes.



I now made preparations for leaving Seville for a few

months, my destination being the coast of Barbary.  Antonio,

who did not wish to leave Spain, in which were his wife and

children, returned to Madrid, rejoicing in a handsome gratuity

with which I presented him.  As it was my intention to return

to Seville, I left my house and horses in charge of a friend in

whom I could confide, and departed.  The reasons which induced

me to visit Barbary will be seen in the following chapters.
