






CHAPTER XXIX







Arrival at Padron - Projected Enterprise - The Alquilador

- Breach of Promise - An Odd Companion - A Plain Story -

Rugged Paths - The Desertion - The Pony - A Dialogue -

Unpleasant Situation - The Estadea - Benighted -

The Hut - The Traveller's Pillow.





I arrived at Padron late in the evening, on my return

from Pontevedra and Vigo.  It was my intention at this place to

send my servant and horses forward to Santiago, and to hire a

guide to Cape Finisterra.  It would be difficult to assign any

plausible reason for the ardent desire which I entertained to

visit this place; but I remembered that last year I had escaped

almost by a miracle from shipwreck and death on the rocky sides

of this extreme point of the Old World, and I thought that to

convey the Gospel to a place so wild and remote, might perhaps

be considered an acceptable pilgrimage in the eyes of my Maker.

True it is that but one copy remained of those which I had

brought with me on this last journey, but this reflection, far

from discouraging me in my projected enterprise, produced the

contrary effect, as I called to mind that ever since the Lord

revealed himself to man, it has seemed good to him to

accomplish the greatest ends by apparently the most

insufficient means; and I reflected that this one copy might

serve as an instrument of more good than the four thousand nine

hundred and ninety-nine copies of the edition of Madrid.



I was aware that my own horses were quite incompetent to

reach Finisterra, as the roads or paths lie through stony

ravines, and over rough and shaggy hills, and therefore

determined to leave them behind with Antonio, whom I was

unwilling to expose to the fatigues of such a journey.  I lost

no time in sending for an alquilador, or person who lets out

horses, and informing him of my intention.  He said he had an

excellent mountain pony at my disposal, and that he himself

would accompany me, but at the same time observed, that it was

a terrible journey for man and horse, and that he expected to

be paid accordingly.  I consented to give him what he demanded,

but on the express condition that he would perform his promise

of attending me himself, as I was unwilling to trust myself

four or five days amongst the hills with any low fellow of the

town whom he might select, and who it was very possible might

play me some evil turn.  He replied by the term invariably used

by the Spaniards when they see doubt or distrust exhibited.

"NO TENGA USTED CUIDAO," I will go myself.  Having thus

arranged the matter perfectly satisfactorily, as I thought, I

partook of a slight supper, and shortly afterwards retired to

repose.



I had requested the alquilador to call me the next

morning at three o'clock; he however did not make his

appearance till five, having, I suppose, overslept himself,

which was indeed my own case.  I arose in a hurry, dressed, put

a few things in a bag, not forgetting the Testament which I had

resolved to present to the inhabitants of Finisterra.  I then

sallied forth and saw my friend the alquilador, who was holding

by the bridle the pony or jaco which was destined to carry me

in my expedition.  It was a beautiful little animal, apparently

strong and full of life, without one single white hair in its

whole body, which was black as the plumage of the crow.



Behind it stood a strange-looking figure of the biped

species, to whom, however, at the moment, I paid little

attention, but of whom I shall have plenty to say in the

sequel.



Having asked the horse-lender whether he was ready to

proceed, and being answered in the affirmative, I bade adieu to

Antonio, and putting the pony in motion, we hastened out of the

town, taking at first the road which leads towards Santiago.

Observing that the figure which I have previously alluded to

was following close at our heels, I asked the alquilador who it

was, and the reason of its following us; to which he replied

that it was a servant of his, who would proceed a little way

with us and then return.  So on we went at a rapid rate, till

we were within a quarter of a mile of the Convent of the

Esclavitud, a little beyond which he had informed me that we

should have to turn off from the high road; but here he

suddenly stopped short, and in a moment we were all at a

standstill.  I questioned the guide as to the reason of this,

but received no answer.  The fellow's eyes were directed to the

ground, and he seemed to be counting with the most intense

solicitude the prints of the hoofs of the oxen, mules, and

horses in the dust of the road.  I repeated my demand in a

louder voice; when, after a considerable pause, he somewhat

elevated his eyes, without however looking me in the face, and

said that he believed that I entertained the idea that he

himself was to guide me to Finisterra, which if I did, he was

very sorry for, the thing being quite impossible, as he was

perfectly ignorant of the way, and, moreover, incapable of

performing such a journey over rough and difficult ground, as

he was no longer the man he had been, and over and above all

that, he was engaged that day to accompany a gentleman to

Pontevedra, who was at that moment expecting him.  "But,"

continued he, "as I am always desirous of behaving like a

caballero to everybody, I have taken measures to prevent your

being disappointed.  This person," pointing to the figure, "I

have engaged to accompany you.  He is a most trustworthy

person, and is well acquainted with the route to Finisterra,

having been thither several times with this very jaco on which

you are mounted.  He will, besides, be an agreeable companion

to you on the way, as he speaks French and English very well,

and has been all over the world."  The fellow ceased speaking

at last; and I was so struck with his craft, impudence, and

villainy, that some time elapsed before I could find an answer.

I then reproached him in the bitterest terms for his breach of

promise, and said that I was much tempted to return to the town

instantly, complain of him to the alcalde, and have him

punished at any expense.  To which he replied, "Sir Cavalier,

by so doing you will be nothing nearer Finisterra, to which you

seem so eager to get.  Take my advice, spur on the jaco, for

you see it is getting late, and it is twelve long leagues from

hence to Corcuvion, where you must pass the night; and from

thence to Finisterra is no trifle.  As for the man, NO TENGA

USTED CUIDAO, he is the best guide in all Galicia, speaks

English and French, and will bear you pleasant company."



By this time I had reflected that by returning to Padron

I should indeed be only wasting time, and that by endeavouring

to have the fellow punished, no benefit would accrue to me;

moreover, as he seemed to be a scoundrel in every sense of the

word, I might as well proceed in the company of any person as

in his.  I therefore signified my intention of proceeding, and

told him to go back in the Lord's name, and repent of his sins.

But having gained one point, he thought he had best attempt

another; so placing himself about a yard before the jaco, he

said that the price which I had agreed to pay him for the loan

of his horse (which by the by was the full sum he had demanded)

was by no means sufficient, and that before I proceeded I must

promise him two dollars more, adding that he was either drunk

or mad when he had made such a bargain.  I was now thoroughly

incensed, and without a moment's reflection, spurred the jaco,

which flung him down in the dust, and passed over him.  Looking

back at the distance of a hundred yards, I saw him standing in

the same place, his hat on the ground, gazing after us, and

crossing himself most devoutly.  His servant, or whatever he

was, far from offering any assistance to his principal, no

sooner saw the jaco in motion than he ran on by its side,

without word or comment, farther than striking himself lustily

on the thigh with his right palm.  We soon passed the

Esclavitud, and presently afterwards turned to the left into a

stony broken path leading to fields of maze.  We passed by

several farm-houses, and at last arrived at a dingle, the sides

of which were plentifully overgrown with dwarf oaks, and which

slanted down to a small dark river shaded with trees, which we

crossed by a rude bridge.  By this time I had had sufficient

time to scan my odd companion from head to foot.  His utmost

height, had he made the most of himself, might perhaps have

amounted to five feet one inch; but he seemed somewhat inclined

to stoop.  Nature had gifted him with an immense head and

placed it clean upon his shoulders, for amongst the items of

his composition it did not appear that a neck had been

included.  Arms long and brawny swung at his sides, and the

whole of his frame was as strong built and powerful as a

wrestler's; his body was supported by a pair of short but very

nimble legs.  His face was very long, and would have borne some

slight resemblance to a human countenance, had the nose been

more visible, for its place seemed to have been entirely

occupied by a wry mouth and large staring eyes.  His dress

consisted of three articles: an old and tattered hat of the

Portuguese kind, broad at the crown and narrow at the eaves,

something which appeared to be a shirt, and dirty canvas

trousers.  Willing to enter into conversation with him, and

remembering that the alquilador had informed me that he spoke

languages, I asked him, in English, if he had always acted in

the capacity of guide?  Whereupon he turned his eyes with a

singular expression upon my face, gave a loud laugh, a long

leap, and clapped his hands thrice above his head.  Perceiving

that he did not understand me, I repeated my demand in French,

and was again answered by the laugh, leap, and clapping.  At

last he said in broken Spanish, "Master mine, speak Spanish in

God's name, and I can understand you, and still better if you

speak Gallegan, but I can promise no more.  I heard what the

alquilador told you, but he is the greatest embustero in the

whole land, and deceived you then as he did when he promised to

accompany you.  I serve him for my sins; but it was an evil

hour when I left the deep sea and turned guide."  He then

informed me that he was a native of Padron, and a mariner by

profession, having spent the greater part of his life in the

Spanish navy, in which service he had visited Cuba and many

parts of the Spanish Americas, adding, "when my master told you

that I should bear you pleasant company by the way, it was the

only word of truth that has come from his mouth for a month;

and long before you reach Finisterra you will have rejoiced

that the servant, and not the master, went with you: he is dull

and heavy, but I am what you see."  He then gave two or three

first-rate summersets, again laughed loudly, and clapped his

hands.  "You would scarcely think," he continued, "that I drove

that little pony yesterday heavily laden all the way from

Coruna.  We arrived at Padron at two o'clock this morning; but

we are nevertheless both willing and able to undertake a fresh

journey.  NO TENGA USTED CUIDAO, as my master said, no one ever

complains of that pony or of me."  In this kind of discourse we

proceeded a considerable way through a very picturesque

country, until we reached a beautiful village at the skirt of a

mountain.  "This village," said my guide, "is called Los

Angeles, because its church was built long since by the angels;

they placed a beam of gold beneath it, which they brought down

from heaven, and which was once a rafter of God's own house.

It runs all the way under the ground from hence to the

cathedral of Compostella."



Passing through the village, which he likewise informed

me possessed baths, and was much visited by the people of

Santiago, we shaped our course to the north-west, and by so

doing doubled a mountain which rose majestically over our

heads, its top crowned with bare and broken rocks, whilst on

our right, on the other side of a spacious valley, was a high

range, connected with the mountains to the northward of Saint

James.  On the summit of this range rose high embattled towers,

which my guide informed me were those of Altamira, an ancient

and ruined castle, formerly the principal residence in this

province of the counts of that name.  Turning now due west, we

were soon at the bottom of a steep and rugged pass, which led

to more elevated regions.  The ascent cost us nearly half an

hour, and the difficulties of the ground were such, that I more

than once congratulated myself on having left my own horses

behind, and being mounted on the gallant little pony which,

accustomed to such paths, scrambled bravely forward, and

eventually brought us in safety to the top of the ascent.



Here we entered a Gallegan cabin, or choza, for the

purpose of refreshing the animal and ourselves.  The quadruped

ate some maize, whilst we two bipeds regaled ourselves on some

broa and aguardiente, which a woman whom we found in the hut

placed before us.  I walked out for a few minutes to observe

the aspect of the country, and on my return found my guide fast

asleep on the bench where I had left him.  He sat bolt upright,

his back supported against the wall, and his legs pendulous,

within three inches of the ground, being too short to reach it.

I remained gazing upon him for at least five minutes, whilst he

enjoyed slumbers seemingly as quiet and profound as those of

death itself.  His face brought powerfully to my mind some of

those uncouth visages of saints and abbots which are

occasionally seen in the niches of the walls of ruined

convents.  There was not the slightest gleam of vitality in his

countenance, which for colour and rigidity might have been of

stone, and which was as rude and battered as one of the stone

heads at Icolmkill, which have braved the winds of twelve

hundred years.  I continued gazing on his face till I became

almost alarmed, concluding that life might have departed from

its harassed and fatigued tenement.  On my shaking him rather

roughly by the shoulder he slowly awoke, opening his eyes with

a stare and then closing them again.  For a few moments he was

evidently unconscious of where he was.  On my shouting to him,

however, and inquiring whether he intended to sleep all day

instead of conducting me to Finisterra, he dropped upon his

legs, snatched up his hat, which lay on the table, and

instantly ran out of the door, exclaiming, "Yes, yes, I

remember - follow me, captain, and I will lead you to

Finisterra in no time."  I looked after him, and perceived that

he was hurrying at a considerable pace in the direction in

which we had hitherto been proceeding.  "Stop," said I, "stop!

will you leave me here with the pony?  Stop, we have not paid

the reckoning.  Stop!"  He, however, never turned his head for

a moment, and in less than a minute was out of sight.  The

pony, which was tied to a crib at one end of the cabin, began

now to neigh terrifically, to plunge, and to erect its tail and

mane in a most singular manner.  It tore and strained at the

halter till I was apprehensive that strangulation would ensue.

"Woman," I exclaimed, "where are you, and what is the meaning

of all this?"  But the hostess had likewise disappeared, and

though I ran about the choza, shouting myself hoarse, no answer

was returned.  The pony still continued to scream and to strain

at the halter more violently than ever.  "Am I beset with

lunatics?" I cried, and flinging down a peseta on the table,

unloosed the halter, and attempted to introduce the bit into

the mouth of the animal.  This, however, I found impossible to

effect.  Released from the halter, the pony made at once for

the door, in spite of all the efforts which I could make to

detain it.  "If you abandon me," said I, "I am in a pretty

situation; but there is a remedy for everything!" with which

words I sprang into the saddle, and in a moment more the

creature was bearing me at a rapid gallop in the direction, as

I supposed, of Finisterra.  My position, however diverting to

the reader, was rather critical to myself.  I was on the back

of a spirited animal, over which I had no control, dashing

along a dangerous and unknown path.  I could not discover the

slightest vestige of my guide, nor did I pass anyone from whom

I could derive any information.  Indeed, the speed of the

animal was so great, that even in the event of my meeting or

overtaking a passenger, I could scarcely have hoped to exchange

a word with him.  "Is the pony trained to this work?" said I

mentally.  "Is he carrying me to some den of banditti, where my

throat will be cut, or does he follow his master by instinct?"

Both of these suspicions I however soon abandoned; the pony's

speed relaxed, he appeared to have lost the road.  He looked

about uneasily: at last, coming to a sandy spot, he put his

nostrils to the ground, and then suddenly flung himself down,

and wallowed in true pony fashion.  I was not hurt, and

instantly made use of this opportunity to slip the bit into his

mouth, which previously had been dangling beneath his neck; I

then remounted in quest of the road.



This I soon found, and continued my way for a

considerable time.  The path lay over a moor, patched heath and

furze, and here and there strewn with large stones, or rather

rocks.  The sun had risen high in the firmament, and burned

fiercely.  I passed several people, men and women, who gazed at

me with surprise, wondering, probably, what a person of my

appearance could be about without a guide in so strange a

place.  I inquired of two females whom I met whether they had

seen my guide; but they either did not or would not understand

me, and exchanging a few words with each other, in one of the

hundred dialects of the Gallegan, passed on.  Having crossed

the moor, I came rather abruptly upon a convent, overhanging a

deep ravine, at the bottom of which brawled a rapid stream.



It was a beautiful and picturesque spot: the sides of the

ravine were thickly clothed with wood, and on the other side a

tall, black hill uplifted itself.  The edifice was large, and

apparently deserted.  Passing by it, I presently reached a

small village, as deserted, to all appearance, as the convent,

for I saw not a single individual, nor so much as a dog to

welcome me with his bark.  I proceeded, however, until I

reached a fountain, the waters of which gushed from a stone

pillar into a trough.  Seated upon this last, his arms folded,

and his eyes fixed upon the neighbouring mountain, I beheld a

figure which still frequently recurs to my thoughts, especially

when asleep and oppressed by the nightmare.  This figure was my

runaway guide.



MYSELF. - Good day to you, my gentleman.  The weather is

hot, and yonder water appears delicious.  I am almost tempted

to dismount and regale myself with a slight draught.



GUIDE. - Your worship can do no better.  The day is, as

you say, hot; you can do no better than drink a little of this

water.  I have myself just drunk.  I would not, however, advise

you to give that pony any, it appears heated and blown.



MYSELF. - It may well be so.  I have been galloping at

least two leagues in pursuit of a fellow who engaged to guide

me to Finisterra, but who deserted me in a most singular

manner, so much so, that I almost believe him to be a thief,

and no true man.  You do not happen to have seen him?



GUIDE. - What kind of a man might he be?



MYSELF. - A short, thick fellow, very much like yourself,

with a hump upon his back, and, excuse me, of a very ill-

favoured countenance.



GUIDE. - Ha, ha!  I know him.  He ran with me to this

fountain, where he has just left me.  That man, Sir Cavalier,

is no thief.  If he is any thing at all, he is a Nuveiro, - a

fellow who rides upon the clouds, and is occasionally whisked

away by a gust of wind.  Should you ever travel with that man

again, never allow him more than one glass of anise at a time,

or he will infallibly mount into the clouds and leave you, and

then he will ride and run till he comes to a water brook, or

knocks his head against a fountain - then one draught, and he

is himself again.  So you are going to Finisterra, Sir

Cavalier.  Now it is singular enough, that a cavalier much of

your appearance engaged me to conduct him there this morning.

I however lost him on the way.  So it appears to me our best

plan to travel together until you find your own guide and I

find my own master.



It might be about two o'clock in the afternoon, that we

reached a long and ruinous bridge, seemingly of great

antiquity, and which, as I was informed by my guide, was called

the bridge of Don Alonzo.  It crossed a species of creek, or

rather frith, for the sea was at no considerable distance, and

the small town of Noyo lay at our right.  "When we have crossed

that bridge, captain," said my guide, "we shall be in an

unknown country, for I have never been farther than Noyo, and

as for Finisterra, so far from having been there, I never heard

of such a place; and though I have inquired of two or three

people since we have been upon this expedition, they know as

little about it as I do.  Taking all things, however, into

consideration, it appears to me that the best thing we can do

is to push forward to Corcuvion, which is five mad leagues from

hence, and which we may perhaps reach ere nightfall, if we can

find the way or get any one to direct us; for, as I told you

before, I know nothing about it."  "To fine hands have I

confided myself," said I: "however, we had best, as you say,

push forward to Corcuvion, where, peradventure, we may hear

something of Finisterra, and find a guide to conduct us."

Whereupon, with a hop, skip, and a jump, he again set forward

at a rapid pace, stopping occasionally at a choza, for the

purpose, I suppose, of making inquiries, though I understood

scarcely anything of the jargon in which he addressed the

people, and in which they answered him.



We were soon in an extremely wild and hilly country,

scrambling up and down ravines, wading brooks, and scratching

our hands and faces with brambles, on which grew a plentiful

crop of wild mulberries, to gather some of which we

occasionally made a stop.  Owing to the roughness of the way we

made no great progress.  The pony followed close at the back of

the guide, so near, indeed, that its nose almost touched his

shoulder.  The country grew wilder and wilder, and since we had

passed a water mill, we had lost all trace of human habitation.

The mill stood at the bottom of a valley shaded by large trees,

and its wheels were turning with a dismal and monotonous noise.

"Do you think we shall reach Corcuvion to-night?" said I to the

guide, as we emerged from this valley to a savage moor, which

appeared of almost boundless extent.



GUIDE. - I do not, I do not.  We shall in no manner reach

Corcuvion to-night, and I by no means like the appearance of

this moor.  The sun is rapidly sinking, and then, if there come

on a haze, we shall meet the Estadea.



MYSELF. - What do you mean by the Estadea?



GUIDE. - What do I mean by the Estadea?  My master asks

me what I mean by the Estadinha. * I have met the Estadinha but

once, and it was upon a moor something like this.  I was in

company with several women, and a thick haze came on, and

suddenly a thousand lights shone above our heads in the haze,

and there was a wild cry, and the women fell to the ground

screaming Estadea!  Estadea! and I myself fell to the ground

crying out Estadinha!  The Estadea are the spirits of the dead

which ride upon the haze, bearing candles in their hands.  I

tell you frankly, my master, that if we meet the assembly of

the souls, I shall leave you at once, and then I shall run and

run till I drown myself in the sea, somewhere about Muros.  We

shall not reach Corcuvion this night; my only hope is that we

may find some choza upon these moors, where we may hide our

heads from the Estadinha.



* INHA, when affixed to words, serves as a diminutive.

It is much in use amongst the Gallegans.



The night overtook us ere we had traversed the moor;

there was, however, no haze, to the great joy of my guide, and

a corner of the moon partially illumined our steps.  Our

situation, however, was dreary enough: we were upon the wildest

heath of the wildest province of Spain, ignorant of our way,

and directing our course we scarcely knew whither, for my guide

repeatedly declared to me, that he did not believe that such a

place as Finisterra existed, or if it did exist, it was some

bleak mountain pointed out in a map.  When I reflected on the

character of this guide, I derived but little comfort or

encouragement: he was at best evidently half witted, and was by

his own confession occasionally seized with paroxysms which

differed from madness in no essential respect; his wild

escapade in the morning of nearly three leagues, without any

apparent cause, and lastly his superstitious and frantic fears

of meeting the souls of the dead upon this heath, in which

event he intended, as he himself said, to desert me and make

for the sea, operated rather powerfully upon my nerves.  I

likewise considered that it was quite possible that we might be

in the route neither of Finisterra nor Corcuvion, and I

therefore determined to enter the first cabin at which we

should arrive, in preference to running the risk of breaking

our necks by tumbling down some pit or precipice.  No cabin,

however, appeared in sight: the moor seemed interminable, and

we wandered on until the moon disappeared, and we were left in

almost total darkness.



At length we arrived at the foot of a steep ascent, up

which a rough and broken pathway appeared to lead.



"Can this be our way?" said I to the guide.



"There appears to be no other for us, captain," replied

the man; "let us ascend it by all means, and when we are it the

top, if the sea be in the neighbourhood we shall see it."



I then dismounted, for to ride up such a pass in such

darkness would have been madness.  We clambered up in a line,

first the guide, next the pony, with his nose as usual on his

master's shoulder, of whom he seemed passionately fond, and I

bringing up the rear, with my left hand grasping the animal's

tail.  We had many a stumble, and more than one fall: once,

indeed, we were all rolling down the side of the hill together.

In about twenty minutes we reached the summit, and looked

around us, but no sea was visible: a black moor, indistinctly

seen, seemed to spread on every side.



"We shall have to take up our quarters here till

morning," said I.



Suddenly my guide seized me by the hand: "There is lume,

Senhor," said he, "there is lume."  I looked in the direction

in which he pointed, and, after straining my eyes for some

time, imagined that I perceived, far below and at some

distance, a faint glow.  "That is lume," shouted the guide,

"and it proceeds from the chimney of a choza."



On descending the eminence, we roamed about for a

considerable time, until we at last found ourselves in the

midst of about six or eight black huts.  "Knock at the door of

one of these," said I to the guide, "and inquire of the people

whether they can shelter us for the night."  He did so, and a

man presently made his appearance, bearing in his hand a

lighted firebrand.



"Can you shelter a Cavalheiro from the night and the

Estadea?" said my guide.



"From both, I thank God," said the man, who was an

athletic figure, without shoes and stockings, and who, upon the

whole, put me much in mind of a Munster peasant from the bogs.

"Pray enter, gentlemen, we can accommodate you both and your

cavalgadura besides."



We entered the choza, which consisted of three

compartments; in the first we found straw, in the second cattle

and ponies, and in the third the family, consisting of the

father and mother of the man who admitted us, and his wife and

children.



"You are a Catalan, sir Cavalier, and are going to your

countryman at Corcuvion," said the man in tolerable Spanish.

"Ah, you are brave people, you Catalans, and fine

establishments you have on the Gallegan shores; pity that you

take all the money out of the country."



Now, under all circumstances, I had not the slightest

objection to pass for a Catalan; and I rather rejoiced that

these wild people should suppose that I had powerful friends

and countrymen in the neighbourhood who were, perhaps,

expecting me.  I therefore favoured their mistake, and began

with a harsh Catalan accent to talk of the fish of Galicia, and

the high duties on salt.  The eye of my guide was upon me for

an instant, with a singular expression, half serious, half

droll; he however said nothing, but slapped his thigh as usual,

and with a spring nearly touched the roof of the cabin with his

grotesque head.  Upon inquiry, I discovered that we were still

two long leagues distant from Corcuvion, and that the road lay

over moor and hill, and was hard to find.  Our host now

demanded whether we were hungry, and upon being answered in the

affirmative, produced about a dozen eggs and some bacon.

Whilst our supper was cooking, a long conversation ensued

between my guide and the family, but as it was carried on in

Gallegan, I tried in vain to understand it.  I believe,

however, that it principally related to witches and witchcraft,

as the Estadea was frequently mentioned.  After supper I

demanded where I could rest: whereupon the host pointed to a

trap-door in the roof, saying that above there was a loft where

I could sleep by myself, and have clean straw.  For curiosity's

sake, I asked whether there was such a thing as a bed in the

cabin.



"No," replied the man; "nor nearer than Corcuvion.  I

never entered one in my life, nor any one of my family: we

sleep around the hearth, or among the straw with the cattle."



I was too old a traveller to complain, but forthwith

ascended by a ladder into a species of loft, tolerably large

and nearly empty, where I placed my cloak beneath my head, and

lay down on the boards, which I preferred to the straw, for

more reasons than one.  I heard the people below talking in

Gallegan for a considerable time, and could see the gleams of

the fire through the interstices of the floor.  The voices,

however, gradually died away, the fire sank low and could no

longer be distinguished.  I dozed, started, dozed again, and

dropped finally into a profound sleep, from which I was only

roused by the crowing of the second cock.

