






CHAPTER IV







Vexatious Delays - Drunken Driver - The Murdered Mule -

The Lamentation - Adventure on the Heath - Fear of Darkness -

Portuguese Fidalgo - The Escort - Return to Lisbon.





I rose at four, and after having taken some refreshment,

I descended and found the strange man and his wife sleeping in

the chimney corner by the fire, which was still burning; they

soon awoke and began preparing their breakfast, which consisted

of salt sardinhas, broiled upon the embers.  In the meantime

the woman sang snatches of the beautiful hymn, very common in

Spain, which commences thus:-





"Once of old upon a mountain, shepherds overcome with

sleep,

Near to Bethlem's holy tower, kept at dead of night their

sheep;

Round about the trunk they nodded of a huge ignited oak,

Whence the crackling flame ascending bright and clear the

darkness broke."





On hearing that I was about to depart, she said, "You

shall have some of my husband's rosemary, which will keep you

from danger, and prevent any misfortune occurring."  I was

foolish enough to permit her to put some of it in my hat; and

the man having by this time arrived with his mules, I bade

farewell to my friendly hostesses, and entered the chaise with

my servant.



I remarked at the time, that the mules which drew us were

the finest I had ever seen; the largest could be little short

of sixteen hands high; and the fellow told me in his bad French

that he loved them better than his wife and children.  We

turned round the corner of the convent and proceeded down the

street which leads to the south-western gate.  The driver now

stopped before the door of a large house, and having alighted,

said that it was yet very early, and that he was afraid to

venture forth, as it was very probable we should be robbed, and

himself murdered, as the robbers who resided in the town would

be apprehensive of his discovering them, but that the family

who lived in this house were going to Lisbon, and would depart

in about a quarter of an hour, when we might avail ourselves of

an escort of soldiers which they would take with them, and in

their company we should run no danger.  I told him I had no

fear, and commanded him to drive on; but he said he would not,

and left us in the street.  We waited an hour, when two

carriages came to the door of the house, but it seems the

family were not yet ready, whereupon the coachman likewise got

down and went away.  At the expiration of about half an hour

the family came out, and when their luggage had been arranged

they called for the coachman, but he was nowhere to be found.

Search was made for him, but ineffectually, and an hour more

was spent before another driver could be procured; but the

escort had not yet made its appearance, and it was not before a

servant had been twice despatched to the barracks that it

arrived.  At last everything was ready, and they drove off.



All this time I had seen nothing of our own coachman, and

I fully expected that he had abandoned us altogether.  In a few

minutes I saw him staggering up the street in a state of

intoxication, attempting to sing the Marseillois hymn.  I said

nothing to him, but sat observing him.  He stood for some time

staring at the mules and talking incoherent nonsense in French.

At last he said, "I am not so drunk but I can ride," and

proceeded to lead his mules towards the gate.  When out of the

town he made several ineffectual attempts to mount the smallest

mule which bore the saddle; he at length succeeded, and

instantly commenced spurring at a furious rate down the road.

We arrived at a place where a narrow rocky path branched off,

by taking which we should avoid a considerable circuit round

the city wall, which otherwise it would be necessary to make

before we could reach the road to Lisbon, which lay at the

north-east; he now said, "I shall take this path, for by so

doing we shall overtake the family in a minute"; so into the

path we went; it was scarcely wide enough to admit the

carriage, and exceedingly steep and broken; we proceeded;

ascending and descending, the wheels cracked, and the motion

was so violent that we were in danger of being cast out as from

a sling.  I saw that if we remained in the carriage it must be

broken in pieces, as our weight must insure its destruction.  I

called to him in Portuguese to stop, but he flogged and spurred

the beasts the more.  My man now entreated me for God's sake to

speak to him in French, for, if anything would pacify him, that

would.  I did so, and entreated him to let us dismount and

walk, till we had cleared this dangerous way.  The result

justified Antonio's anticipation.  He instantly stopped and

said, "Sir, you are master, you have only to command and I

shall obey."  We dismounted and walked on till we reached the

great road, when we once more seated ourselves.



The family were about a quarter of a mile in advance, and

we were no sooner reseated, than he lashed the mules into full

gallop for the purpose of overtaking it; his cloak had fallen

from his shoulder, and, in endeavouring to readjust it, he

dropped the string from his hand by which he guided the large

mule, it became entangled in the legs of the poor animal, which

fell heavily on its neck, it struggled for a moment, and then

lay stretched across the way, the shafts over its body.  I was

pitched forward into the dirt, and the drunken driver fell upon

the murdered mule.



I was in a great rage, and cried, "You drunken renegade,

who are ashamed to speak the language of your own country, you

have broken the staff of your existence, and may now starve."

"Paciencia," said he, and began kicking the head of the mule,

in order to make it rise; but I pushed him down, and taking his

knife, which had fallen from his pocket, cut the bands by which

it was attached to the carriage, but life had fled, and the

film of death had begun to cover its eyes.



The fellow, in the recklessness of intoxication, seemed

at first disposed to make light of his loss, saying, "The mule

is dead, it was God's will that she should die, what more can

be said?  Paciencia."  Meanwhile, I despatched Antonio to the

town for the purpose of hiring mules, and, having taken my

baggage from the chaise, waited on the roadside until he should

arrive.



The fumes of the liquor began now to depart from the

fellow's brain; he clasped his hands and exclaimed, "Blessed

Virgin, what is to become of me?  How am I to support myself?

Where am I to get another mule!  For my mule, my best mule is

dead, she fell upon the road, and died of a sudden!  I have

been in France, and in other countries, and have seen beasts of

all kinds, but such a mule as that I have never seen; but she

is dead - my mule is dead - she fell upon the road and died of

a sudden!"  He continued in this strain for a considerable

time, and the burden of his lamentation was always, "My mule is

dead, she fell upon the road, and died of a sudden."  At length

he took the collar from the creature's neck, and put it upon

the other, which with some difficulty he placed in the shafts.



A beautiful boy of about thirteen now came from the

direction of the town, running along the road with the velocity

of a hare: he stopped before the dead mule and burst into

tears: it was the man's son, who had heard of the accident from

Antonio.  This was too much for the poor fellow: he ran up to

the boy, and said, "Don't cry, our bread is gone, but it is

God's will; the mule is dead!"  He then flung himself on the

ground, uttering fearful cries.  "I could have borne my loss,"

said he, "but when I saw my child cry, I became a fool."  I

gave him two or three crowns, and added some words of comfort;

assuring him I had no doubt that, if he abandoned drink, the

Almighty God would take compassion on him and repair his loss.

At length he became more composed, and placing my baggage in

the chaise, we returned to the town, where I found two

excellent riding mules awaiting my arrival at the inn.  I did

not see the Spanish woman, or I should have told her of the

little efficacy of rosemary in this instance.



I have known several drunkards amongst the Portuguese,

but, without one exception, they have been individuals who,

having travelled abroad, like this fellow, have returned with a

contempt for their own country, and polluted with the worst

vices of the lands which they have visited.



I would strongly advise any of my countrymen who may

chance to read these lines, that, if their fate lead them into

Spain or Portugal, they avoid hiring as domestics, or being

connected with, individuals of the lower classes who speak any

other language than their own, as the probability is that they

are heartless thieves and drunkards.  These gentry are

invariably saying all they can in dispraise of their native

land; and it is my opinion, grounded upon experience, that an

individual who is capable of such baseness would not hesitate

at the perpetration of any villainy, for next to the love of

God, the love of country is the best preventive of crime.  He

who is proud of his country, will be particularly cautious not

to do anything which is calculated to disgrace it.



We now journeyed towards Lisbon, and reached Monte Moro

about two o'clock.  After taking such refreshment as the place

afforded, we pursued our way till we were within a quarter of a

league of the huts which stand on the edge of the savage

wilderness we had before crossed.  Here we were overtaken by a

horseman; he was a powerful, middle-sized man, and was mounted

on a noble Spanish horse.  He had a broad, slouching sombrero

on his head, and wore a jerkin of blue cloth, with large bosses

of silver for buttons, and clasps of the same metal; he had

breeches of yellow leather, and immense jack-boots: at his

saddle was slung a formidable gun.  He inquired if I intended

to pass the night at Vendas Novas, and on my replying in the

affirmative, he said that he would avail himself of our

company.  He now looked towards the sun, whose disk was rapidly

sinking beneath the horizon, and entreated us to spur on and

make the most of its light, for that the moor was a horrible

place in the dusk.  He placed himself at our head, and we

trotted briskly on, the boy or muleteer who attended us running

behind without exhibiting the slightest symptom of fatigue.



We entered upon the moor, and had advanced about a mile

when dark night fell around us; we were in a wild path, with

high brushwood on either side, when the rider said that he

could not confront the darkness, and begged me to ride on

before, and he would follow after: I could hear him trembling.

I asked the reason of his terror, and he replied that at one

time darkness was the same thing to him as day, but that of

late years he dreaded it, especially in wild places.  I

complied with his request, but I was ignorant of the way, and

as I could scarcely see my hand, was continually going wrong.

This made the man impatient, and he again placed himself at our

head.  We proceeded so for a considerable way, when he again

stopped, and said that the power of the darkness was too much

for him.  His horse seemed to be infected with the same panic,

for it shook in every limb.  I now told him to call on the name

of the Lord Jesus, who was able to turn the darkness into

light, but he gave a terrible shout, and, brandishing his gun

aloft, discharged it in the air.  His horse sprang forward at

full speed, and my mule, which was one of the swiftest of its

kind, took fright and followed at the heels of the charger.

Antonio and the boy were left behind.  On we flew like a

whirlwind, the hoofs of the animals illuming the path with the

sparks of fire they struck from the stones.  I knew not whither

we were going, but the dumb creatures were acquainted with the

way, and soon brought us to Vendas Novas, where we were

rejoined by our companions.



I thought this man was a coward, but I did him injustice,

for during the day he was as brave as a lion, and feared no

one.  About five years since, he had overcome two robbers who

had attacked him on the moors, and, after tying their hands

behind them, had delivered them up to justice; but at night the

rustling of a leaf filled him with terror.  I have known

similar instances of the kind in persons of otherwise

extraordinary resolution.  For myself, I confess I am not a

person of extraordinary resolution, but the dangers of the

night daunt me no more than those of midday.  The man in

question was a farmer from Evora, and a person of considerable

wealth.



I found the inn at Vendas Novas thronged with people, and

had some difficulty in obtaining accommodation and refreshment.

It was occupied by the family of a certain Fidalgo, from

Estremoz; he was on the way to Lisbon, conveying a large sum of

money, as was said - probably the rents of his estates.  He had

with him a body guard of four-and-twenty of his dependants,

each armed with a rifle; they consisted of his swineherds,

shepherds, cowherds, and hunters, and were commanded by two

youths, his son and nephew, the latter of whom was in

regimentals; nevertheless, notwithstanding the number of his

troop, it appeared that the Fidalgo laboured under considerable

apprehension of being despoiled upon the waste which lay

between Vendas Novas and Pegoens, as he had just requested a

guard of four soldiers from the officer who commanded a

detachment stationed here: there were many females in his

company, who, I was told, were his illegitimate daughters - for

he bore an infamous moral character, and was represented to me

as a staunch friend of Don Miguel.  It was not long before he

came up to me and my new acquaintance, as we sat by the kitchen

fire: he was a tall man of about sixty, but stooped much.  His

countenance was by no means pleasing: he had a long hooked

nose, small twinkling cunning eyes, and, what I liked worst of

all, a continual sneering smile, which I firmly believe to be

the index of a treacherous and malignant heart.  He addressed

me in Spanish, which, as he resided not far from the frontier,

he spoke with fluency, but contrary to my usual practice, I was

reserved and silent.



On the following morning I rose at seven, and found that

the party from Estremoz had started several hours previously.

I breakfasted with my acquaintance of the preceding night, and

we set out to accomplish what remained of our journey.  The sun

had now arisen; and all his fears had left him - he breathed

defiance against all the robbers of the Alemtejo.  When we had

advanced about a league, the boy who attended us said he saw

heads of men amongst the brushwood.  Our cavalier instantly

seized his gun, and causing his horse to make two or three

lofty bounds, held it in one hand, the muzzle pointed in the

direction indicated, but the heads did not again make their

appearance, and it was probably but a false alarm.



We resumed our way, and the conversation turned, as might

be expected, upon robbers.  My companion, who seemed to be

acquainted with every inch of ground over which we passed, had

a legend to tell of every dingle and every pine-clump.  We

reached a slight eminence, on the top of which grew three

stately pines: about half a league farther on was another

similar one: these two eminences commanded a view of the road

from Pegoens and Vendas Novas, so that all people going and

coming could be descried, whilst yet at a distance.  My friend

told me that these heights were favourite stations of robbers.

Some two years since, a band of six mounted banditti remained

there three days, and plundered whomsoever approached from

either quarter: their horses, saddled and bridled, stood

picqueted at the foot of the trees, and two scouts, one for

each eminence, continually sat in the topmost branches and gave

notice of the approach of travellers: when at a proper distance

the robbers below sprang upon their horses, and putting them to

full gallop, made at their prey, shouting RENDETE, PICARO!

RENDETE, PICARO! (Surrender, scoundrel, surrender!)  We,

however, passed unmolested, and, about a quarter of a mile

before we reached Pegoens, overtook the family of the Fidalgo.



Had they been conveying the wealth of Ind through the

deserts of Arabia, they could not have travelled with more

precaution.  The nephew, with drawn sabre, rode in front;

pistols at his holsters, and the usual Spanish gun slung at his

saddle.  Behind him tramped six men in a rank, with muskets

shouldered, and each of them wore at his girdle a hatchet,

which was probably intended to cleave the thieves to the

brisket should they venture to come to close quarters.  There

were six vehicles, two of them calashes, in which latter rode

the Fidalgo and his daughters; the others were covered carts,

and seemed to be filled with household furniture; each of these

vehicles had an armed rustic on either side; and the son, a lad

about sixteen, brought up the rear with a squad equal to that

of his cousin in the van.  The soldiers, who by good fortune

were light horse, and admirably mounted, were galloping about

in all directions, for the purpose of driving the enemy from

cover, should they happen to be lurking in the neighbourhood.



I could not help thinking as I passed by, that this

martial array was very injudicious, for though it was

calculated to awe plunderers, it was likewise calculated to

allure them, as it seemed to hint that immense wealth was

passing through their territories.  I do not know how the

soldiers and rustics would have behaved in case of an attack;

but am inclined to believe that if three such men as Richard

Turpin had suddenly galloped forth from behind one of the bush-

covered knolls, neither the numbers nor resistance opposed to

them would have prevented them from bearing away the contents

of the strong box jingling in their saddle-bags.



From this moment nothing worthy of relating occurred till

our arrival at Aldea Gallega, where we passed the night, and

next morning at three o'clock embarked in the passage-boat for

Lisbon, where we arrived at eight - and thus terminates my

first wandering in the Alemtejo.

