





CHAPTER XLVIII







Projected Journey - A Scene of Blood - The Friar -

Seville - Beauties of Seville - Orange Trees and Flowers -

Murillo - The Guardian Angel - Dionysius - My Coadjutors -

Demand for the Bible.





By the middle of April I had sold as many Testaments as I

thought Madrid would bear; I therefore called in my people, for

I was afraid to overstock the market, and to bring the book

into contempt by making it too common.  I had, indeed, by this

time, barely a thousand copies remaining of the edition which I

had printed two years previously; and with respect to Bibles,

every copy was by this time disposed of, though there was still

a great demand for them, which, of course, I was unable to

satisfy.



With the remaining copies of the Testament, I now

determined to betake myself to Seville, where little had

hitherto been effected in the way of circulation: my

preparations were soon made.  The roads were at this time in a

highly dangerous state, on which account I thought to go along

with a convoy, which was about to start for Andalusia.  Two

days, however, before its departure, understanding that the

number of people who likewise proposed to avail themselves of

it was likely to be very great, and reflecting on the slowness

of this way of travelling, and moreover the insults to which

civilians were frequently subjected from the soldiers and petty

officers, I determined to risk the journey with the mail.  This

resolutions I carried into effect.  Antonio, whom I had

resolved to take with me, and my two horses, departed with the

convoy, whilst in a few days I followed with the mail courier.

We travelled all the way without the slightest accident, my

usual wonderful good fortune accompanying us.  I might well

call it wonderful, for I was running into the den of the lion;

the whole of La Mancha, with the exception of a few fortified

places, being once more in the hands of Palillos and his

banditti, who, whenever it pleased them, stopped the courier,

burnt the vehicle and letters, murdered the paltry escort, and

carried away any chance passenger to the mountains, where an

enormous ransom was demanded, the alternative being four shots

through the head, as the Spaniards say.



The upper part of Andalusia was becoming rapidly nearly

as bad as La Mancha.  The last time the mail had passed, it was

attacked at the defile of La Rumblar by six mounted robbers; it

was guarded by an escort of as many soldiers, but the former

suddenly galloped from behind a solitary venda, and dashed the

soldiers to the ground, who were taken quite by surprise, the

hoofs of the robbers' horses making no noise on account of the

sandy nature of the ground.  The soldiers were instantly

disarmed and bound to olive trees, with the exception of two,

who escaped amongst the rocks; they were then mocked and

tormented by the robbers, or rather fiends, for nearly half an

hour, when they were shot; the head of the corporal who

commanded being blown to fragments with a blunderbuss.  The

robbers then burned the coach, which they accomplished by

igniting the letters by means of the tow with which they light

their cigars.  The life of the courier was saved by one of

them, who had formerly been his postillion; he was, however,

robbed and stripped.  As we passed by the scene of the

butchery, the poor fellow wept, and, though a Spaniard, cursed

Spain and the Spaniards, saying that he intended shortly to

pass over to the Moreria, to confess Mahomet, and to learn the

law of the Moors, for that any country and religion were better

than his own.  He pointed to the tree where the corporal had

been tied; though much rain had fallen since, the ground around

was still saturated with blood, and a dog was gnawing a piece

of the unfortunate wretch's skull.  A friar travelled with us

the whole way from Madrid to Seville; he was of the

missionaries, and was going to the Philippine islands, to

conquer (PARA CONQUISTAR), for such was his word, by which I

suppose he meant preaching to the Indians.  During the whole

journey he exhibited every symptom of the most abject fear,

which operated upon him so that he became deadly sick, and we

were obliged to stop twice in the road and lay him amongst the

green corn.  He said that if he fell into the hands of the

factious, he was a lost priest, for that they would first make

him say mass, and then blow him up with gunpowder.  He had been

professor of philosophy, as he told me, in one of the convents

(I think it was San Thomas) of Madrid before their suppression,

but appeared to be grossly ignorant of the Scriptures, which he

confounded with the works of Virgil.



We stopped at Manzanares as usual; it was Sunday morning,

and the market-place was crowded with people.  I was recognised

in a moment, and twenty pair of legs instantly hurried away in

quest of the prophetess, who presently made her appearance in

the house to which we had retired to breakfast.  After many

greetings on both sides, she proceeded, in her Latin, to give

me an account of all that had occurred in the village since I

had last been there, and of the atrocities of the factious in

the neighbourhood.  I asked her to breakfast, and introduced

her to the friar, whom she addressed in this manner: "ANNE

DOMINE REVERENDISSIME FACIS ADHUC SACRIFICIUM?"  But the friar

did not understand her, and waxing angry, anathematized her for

a witch, and bade her begone.  She was, however, not to be

disconcerted, and commenced singing, in extemporary Castilian

verse, the praises of friars and religious houses in general.

On departing I gave her a peseta, upon which she burst into

tears, and intreated that I would write to her if I reached

Seville in safety.



We did arrive at Seville in safety, and I took leave of

the friar, telling him that I hoped to meet him again at

Philippi.  As it was my intention to remain at Seville for some

months, I determined to hire a house, in which I conceived I

could live with more privacy, and at the same time more

economically than in a posada.  It was not long before I found

one in every respect suited to me.  It was situated in the

Plazuela de la Pila Seca, a retired part of the city, in the

neighbourhood of the cathedral, and at a short distance from

the gate of Xeres; and in this house, on the arrival of Antonio

and the horses, which occurred within a few days, I took up my

abode.



I was now once more in beautiful Seville and had soon

ample time and leisure to enjoy its delights and those of the

surrounding country; unfortunately, at the time of my arrival,

and indeed for the next ensuing fortnight, the heaven of

Andalusia, in general so glorious, was overcast with black

clouds, which discharged tremendous showers of rain, such as

few of the Sevillians, according to their own account, had ever

seen before.  This extraordinary weather had wrought no little

damage in the neighbourhood, causing the Guadalquivir, which,

during the rainy season, is a rapid and furious stream, to

overflow its banks and to threaten an inundation.  It is true

that intervals were occurring when the sun made his appearance

from his cloudy tabernacle, and with his golden rays caused

everything around to smile, enticing the butterfly forth from

the bush, and the lizard from the hollow tree, and I invariably

availed myself of these intervals to take a hasty promenade.



O how pleasant it is, especially in springtide, to stray

along the shores of the Guadalquivir.  Not far from the city,

down the river, lies a grove called Las Delicias, or the

Delights.  It consists of trees of various kinds, but more

especially of poplars and elms, and is traversed by long shady

walks.  This grove is the favourite promenade of the

Sevillians, and there one occasionally sees assembled whatever

the town produces of beauty or gallantry.  There wander the

black-eyed Andalusian dames and damsels, clad in their graceful

silken mantillas; and there gallops the Andalusian cavalier, on

his long-tailed thick-maned steed of Moorish ancestry.  As the

sun is descending, it is enchanting to glance back from this

place in the direction of the city; the prospect is

inexpressibly beautiful.  Yonder in the distance, high and

enormous, stands the Golden Tower, now used as a toll-house,

but the principal bulwark of the city in the time of the Moors.

It stands on the shore of the river, like a giant keeping

watch, and is the first edifice which attracts the eye of the

voyager as he moves up the stream to Seville.  On the other

side, opposite the tower, stands the noble Augustine convent,

the ornament of the faubourg of Triana, whilst between the two

edifices rolls the broad Guadalquivir, bearing on its bosom a

flotilla of barks from Catalonia and Valencia.  Farther up is

seen the bridge of boats which traverses the water.  The

principal object of this prospect, however, is the Golden

Tower, where the beams of the setting sun seem to be

concentrated as in a focus, so that it appears built of pure

gold, and probably from that circumstance received the name

which it now bears.  Cold, cold must the heart be which can

remain insensible to the beauties of this magic scene, to do

justice to which the pencil of Claude himself were barely

equal.  Often have I shed tears of rapture whilst I beheld it,

and listened to the thrush and the nightingale piping forth

their melodious songs in the woods, and inhaled the breeze

laden with the perfume of the thousand orange gardens of

Seville:





"Kennst du das land wo die citronem bluhen?"





The interior of Seville scarcely corresponds with the

exterior: the streets are narrow, badly paved, and full of

misery and beggary.  The houses are for the most part built in

the Moorish fashion, with a quadrangular patio or court in the

centre, where stands a marble fountain, constantly distilling

limpid water.  These courts, during the time of the summer

heats, are covered over with a canvas awning, and beneath this

the family sit during the greater part of the day.  In many,

especially those belonging to the houses of the wealthy, are to

be found shrubs, orange trees, and all kinds of flowers, and

perhaps a small aviary, so that no situation can be conceived

more delicious than to lie here in the shade, hearkening to the

song of the birds and the voice of the fountain.



Nothing is more calculated to interest the stranger as he

wanders through Seville, than a view of these courts obtained

from the streets, through the iron-grated door.  Oft have I

stopped to observe them, and as often sighed that my fate did

not permit me to reside in such an Eden for the remainder of my

days.  On a former occasion, I have spoken of the cathedral of

Seville, but only in a brief and cursory manner.  It is perhaps

the most magnificent cathedral in all Spain, and though not so

regular in its architecture as those of Toledo and Burgos, is

far more worthy of admiration when considered as a whole.  It

is utterly impossible to wander through the long aisles, and to

raise one's eyes to the richly inlaid roof, supported by

colossal pillars, without experiencing sensations of sacred

awe, and deep astonishment.  It is true that the interior, like

those of the generality of the Spanish cathedrals, is somewhat

dark and gloomy; yet it loses nothing by this gloom, which, on

the contrary, rather increases the solemnity of the effect.

Notre Dame of Paris is a noble building, yet to him who has

seen the Spanish cathedrals, and particularly this of Seville,

it almost appears trivial and mean, and more like a town-hall

than a temple of the Eternal.  The Parisian cathedral is

entirely destitute of that solemn darkness and gloomy pomp

which so abound in the Sevillian, and is thus destitute of the

principal requisite to a cathedral.



In most of the chapels are to be found some of the very

best pictures of the Spanish school; and in particular many of

the master-pieces of Murillo, a native of Seville.  Of all the

pictures of this extraordinary man, one of the least celebrated

is that which has always wrought on me the most profound

impression.  I allude to the Guardian Angel (ANGEL DE LA

GUARDIA), a small picture which stands at the bottom of the

church, and looks up the principal aisle.  The angel, holding a

flaming sword in his right hand, is conducting the child.  This

child is, in my opinion, the most wonderful of all the

creations of Murillo; the form is that of an infant about five

years of age, and the expression of the countenance is quite

infantine, but the tread - it is the tread of a conqueror, of a

God, of the Creator of the universe; and the earthly globe

appears to tremble beneath its majesty.



The service of the cathedral is in general well attended,

especially when it is known that a sermon is to be preached.

All these sermons are extemporaneous; some of them are edifying

and faithful to the Scriptures.  I have often listened to them

with pleasure, though I was much surprised to remark, that when

the preachers quoted from the Bible, their quotations were

almost invariably taken from the apocryphal writings.  There is

in general no lack of worshippers at the principal shrines -

women for the most part - many of whom appear to be animated

with the most fervent devotion.



I had flattered myself, previous to my departure from

Madrid, that I should experience but little difficulty in the

circulation of the Gospel in Andalusia, at least for a time, as

the field was new, and myself and the object of my mission less

known and dreaded than in New Castile.  It appeared, however,

that the government at Madrid had fulfilled its threat,

transmitting orders throughout Spain for the seizure of my

books wherever found.  The Testaments that arrived from Madrid

were seized at the custom-house, to which place all goods on

their arrival, even from the interior, are carried, in order

that a duty be imposed upon them.  Through the management of

Antonio, however, I procured one of the two chests, whilst the

other was sent down to San Lucar, to be embarked for a foreign

land as soon as I could make arrangements for that purpose.



I did not permit myself to be discouraged by this slight

CONTRETEMPS, although I heartily regretted the loss of the

books which had been seized, and which I could no longer hope

to circulate in these parts, where they were so much wanted;

but I consoled myself with the reflection, that I had still

several hundred at my disposal, from the distribution of which,

if it pleased the Lord, a blessed harvest might still proceed.



I did not commence operations for some time, for I was in

a strange place, and scarcely knew what course to pursue.  I

had no one to assist me but poor Antonio, who was as ignorant

of the place as myself.  Providence, however, soon sent me a

coadjutor, in rather a singular manner.  I was standing in the

courtyard of the Reyna Posada, where I occasionally dined, when

a man, singularly dressed and gigantically tall, entered.  My

curiosity was excited, and I inquired of the master of the

house who he was.  He informed me that he was a foreigner, who

had resided a considerable time in Seville, and he believed a

Greek.  Upon hearing this, I instantly went up to the stranger,

and accosted him in the Greek language, in which, though I

speak it very ill, I can make myself understood.  He replied in

the same idiom, and, flattered by the interest which I, a

foreigner, expressed for his nation, was not slow in

communicating to me his history.  He told me that his name was

Dionysius, that he was a native of Cephalonia, and had been

educated for the church, which, not suiting his temper, he had

abandoned, in order to follow the profession of the sea, for

which he had an early inclination.  That after many adventures

and changes of fortune, he found himself one morning on the

coast of Spain, a shipwrecked mariner, and that, ashamed to

return to his own country in poverty and distress, he had

remained in the Peninsula, residing chiefly at Seville, where

he now carried on a small trade in books.  He said that he was

of the Greek religion, to which he professed strong attachment,

and soon discovering that I was a Protestant, spoke with

unbounded abhorrence of the papal system; nay of its followers

in general, whom he called Latins, and whom he charged with the

ruin of his own country, inasmuch as they sold it to the Turk.

It instantly struck me, that this individual would be an

excellent assistant in the work which had brought me to

Seville, namely, the propagation of the eternal Gospel, and

accordingly, after some more conversation, in which he

exhibited considerable learning, I explained myself to him.  He

entered into my views with eagerness, and in the sequel I had

no reason to regret my confidence, he having disposed of a

considerable number of New Testaments, and even contrived to

send a certain number of copies to two small towns at some

distance from Seville.



Another helper in the circulation of the Gospel I found

in an aged professor of music, who, with much stiffness and

ceremoniousness, united much that was excellent and admirable.

This venerable individual, only three days after I had made his

acquaintance, brought me the price of six Testaments and a

Gypsy Gospel, which he had sold under the heat of an Andalusian

sun.  What was his motive?  A Christian one truly.  He said

that his unfortunate countrymen, who were then robbing and

murdering each other, might probably be rendered better by the

reading of the Gospel, but could never be injured.  Adding,

that many a man had been reformed by the Scriptures, but that

no one ever yet became a thief or assassin from its perusal.



But my most extraordinary agent, was one whom I

occasionally employed in circulating the Scriptures amongst the

lower classes.  I might have turned the services of this

individual to far greater account had the quantity of books at

my disposal been greater; but they were now diminishing

rapidly, and as I had no hopes of a fresh supply, I was almost

tempted to be niggard of the few which remained.  This agent

was a Greek bricklayer, by name Johannes Chrysostom, who had

been introduced to me by Dionysius.  He was a native of the

Morea, but had been upwards of thirty-five years in Spain, so

that he had almost entirely lost his native language.

Nevertheless, his attachment to his own country was so strong

that he considered whatever was not Greek as utterly barbarous

and bad.  Though entirely destitute of education, he had, by

his strength of character, and by a kind of rude eloquence

which he possessed, obtained such a mastery over the minds of

the labouring classes of Seville, that they assented to almost

everything he said, notwithstanding the shocks which their

prejudices were continually receiving.  So that, although he

was a foreigner, he could at any time have become the

Massaniello of Seville.  A more honest creature I never saw,

and I soon found that if I employed him, notwithstanding his

eccentricities, I might entertain perfect confidence that his

actions would be no disparagement to the book he vended.



We were continually pressed for Bibles, which of course

we could not supply.  Testaments were held in comparatively

little esteem.  I had by this time made the discovery of a fact

which it would have been well had I been aware of three years

before; but we live and learn.  I mean the inexpediency of

printing Testaments, and Testaments alone, for Catholic

countries.  The reason is plain: the Catholic, unused to

Scripture reading, finds a thousand things which he cannot

possibly understand in the New Testament, the foundation of

which is the Old.  "Search the Scriptures, for they bear

witness of me," may well be applied to this point.  It may be

replied, that New Testaments separate are in great demand, and

of infinite utility in England, but England, thanks be to the

Lord, is not a papal country; and though an English labourer

may read a Testament, and derive from it the most blessed

fruit, it does not follow that a Spanish or Italian peasant

will enjoy similar success, as he will find many dark things

with which the other is well acquainted, and competent to

understand, being versed in the Bible history from his

childhood.  I confess, however, that in my summer campaign of

the preceding year, I could not have accomplished with Bibles

what Providence permitted me to effect with Testaments, the

former being far too bulky for rural journeys.

