





CHAPTER XXXIV







Departure from Oviedo - Villa Viciosa - The Young Man of the Inn -

Antonio's Tale - The General and his Family - Woful Tidings -

To-morrow we Die - San Vincente - Santander - An Harangue -

Flinter the Irishman.





So we left Oviedo and directed our course towards

Santander.  The man who accompanied us as guide, and from whom

I hired the pony on which I rode, had been recommended to me by

my friend the merchant of Oviedo.  He proved, however, a lazy

indolent fellow; he was generally loitering two or three

hundred yards in our rear, and instead of enlivening the way

with song and tale, like our late guide, Martin of Rivadeo, he

scarcely ever opened his lips, save to tell us not to go so

fast, or that I should burst his pony if I spurred him so.  He

was thievish withal, and though he had engaged to make the

journey SECO, that is, to defray the charges of himself and

beast, he contrived throughout to keep both at our expense.

When journeying in Spain, it is invariably the cheapest plan to

agree to maintain the guide and his horse or mule, for by so

doing the hire is diminished at least one third, and the bills

upon the road are seldom increased: whereas, in the other case,

he pockets the difference, and yet goes shot free, and at the

expense of the traveller, through the connivance of the

innkeepers, who have a kind of fellow feeling with the guides.



Late in the afternoon we reached Villa Viciosa, a small

dirty town, at the distance of eight leagues from Oviedo: it

stands beside a creek which communicates with the Bay of

Biscay.  It is sometimes called La Capital de las Avellanas, or

the capital of the Filberts, from the immense quantity of this

fruit which is grown in the neighbourhood; and the greatest

part of which is exported to England.  As we drew nigh we

overtook numerous cars laden with avellanas proceeding in the

direction of the town.  I was informed that several small

English vessels were lying in the harbour.  Singular as it may

seem, however, notwithstanding we were in the capital of the

Avellanas, it was with the utmost difficulty that I procured a

scanty handful for my dessert, and of these more than one half

were decayed.  The people of the house informed me that the

nuts were intended for exportation, and that they never dreamt

either of partaking of them themselves or of offering them to

their guests.



At an early hour on the following day we reached Colunga,

a beautiful village on a rising ground, thickly planted with

chestnut trees.  It is celebrated, at least in the Asturias, as

being the birthplace of Arguelles, the father of the Spanish

constitution.



As we dismounted at the door of the posada, where we

intended to refresh ourselves, a person who was leaning out of

an upper window uttered an exclamation and disappeared.  We

were yet at the door, when the same individual came running

forth and cast himself on the neck of Antonio.  He was a good-

looking young man, apparently about five and twenty, genteelly

dressed, with a Montero cap on his head.  Antonio looked at him

for a moment, and then with a AH, MONSIEUR, EST CE BIEN VOUS?

shook him affectionately by the hand.  The stranger then

motioned him to follow him, and they forthwith proceeded to the

room above.



Wondering what this could mean, I sat down to my morning

repast.  Nearly an hour elapsed, and still Antonio did not make

his appearance; through the boards, however, which composed the

ceiling of the kitchen where I sat, I could hear the voices of

himself and his acquaintance, and thought that I could

occasionally distinguish the sound of broken sobs and groans;

at last there was a long pause.  I became impatient, and was

about to summon Antonio, when he made his appearance, but

unaccompanied by the stranger.  "What, in the name of all that

is singular," I demanded, "have you been about?  Who is that

man?"  "Mon maitre," said Antonio, "C'EST UN MONSIEUR DE MA

CONNOISSANCE.  With your permission I will now take a mouthful,

and as we journey along I will tell you all that I know of

him."



"Monsieur," said Antonio, as we rode out of Colunga, "you

are anxious to know the history of the gentleman whom you saw

embrace me at the inn.  Know, mon maitre, that these Carlist

and Christino wars have been the cause of much misery and

misfortune in this country, but a being so thoroughly

unfortunate as that poor young gentleman of the inn, I do not

believe is to be found in Spain, and his misfortunes proceed

entirely from the spirit of party and faction which for some

time past has been so prevalent.



"Mon maitre, as I have often told you, I have lived in

many houses and served many masters, and it chanced that about

ten years ago I served the father of this gentleman, who was

then a mere boy.  It was a very high family, for monsieur the

father was a general in the army, and a man of large

possessions.  The family consisted of the general, his lady,

and two sons; the youngest of whom is the person you have just

seen, the other was several years older.  Pardieu! I felt

myself very comfortable in that house, and every individual of

the family had all kind of complaisance for me.  It is singular

enough, that though I have been turned out of so many families,

I was never turned out of that; and though I left it thrice, it

was of my own free will.  I became dissatisfied with the other

servants or with the dog or the cat.  The last time I left was

on account of the quail which was hung out of the window of

madame, and which waked me in the morning with its call.  EH

BIEN, MON MAITRE, things went on in this way during the three

years that I continued in the family, out and in; at the end of

which time it was determined that the young gentleman should

travel, and it was proposed that I should attend him as valet;

this I wished very much to do.  However, par malheur, I was at

this time very much dissatisfied with madame his mother about

the quail, and I insisted that before I accompanied him the

bird should be slaughtered for the kitchen.  To this madame

would by no means consent; and even the young gentleman, who

had always taken my part on other occasions, said that I was

unreasonable: so I left the house in a huff, and never entered

it again.



"EH BIEN, MON MAITRE, the young gentleman went upon his

travels, and continued abroad several years; and from the time

of his departure until we met him at Colunga, I have not set

eyes upon, nor indeed heard of him.  I have heard enough,

however, of his family; of monsieur the father, of madame, and

of the brother, who was an officer of cavalry.  A short time

before the troubles, I mean before the death of Ferdinand,

monsieur the father was appointed captain-general of Coruna.

Now monsieur, though a good master, was rather a proud man, and

fond of discipline and all that kind of thing, and of

obedience.  He was, moreover, no friend to the populace, to the

canaille, and he had a particular aversion to the nationals.

So when Ferdinand died, it was whispered about at Coruna, that

the general was no liberal, and that he was a better friend to

Carlos than to Christina.  EH BIEN, it chanced that there was a

grand fete, or festival at Coruna, on the water; and the

nationals were there, and the soldiers.  And I know not how it

befell, but there was an emeute, and the nationals laid hands

on monsieur the general, and tying a rope round his neck, flung

him overboard from the barge in which he was, and then dragged

him astern about the harbour until he was drowned.  They then

went to his house and pillaged it, and so ill-treated madame,

who at that time happened to be enceinte, that in a few hours

she expired.



"I tell you what, mon maitre, when I heard of the

misfortune of madame and the general, you would scarcely

believe it, but I actually shed tears, and was sorry that I had

parted with them in unkindness on account of that pernicious

quail.



"EH BIEN, MON MAITRE, NOUS POURSUIVRONS NOTRE HISTOIRE.

The eldest son, as I told you before, was a cavalry officer and

a man of resolution, and when he heard of the death of his

father and mother, he vowed revenge.  Poor fellow! but what

does he do but desert, with two or three discontented spirits

of his troop, and going to the frontier of Galicia, he raised a

small faction, and proclaimed Don Carlos.  For some little time

he did considerable damage to the liberals, burning and

destroying their possessions, and putting to death several

nationals that fell into his hands.  However, this did not last

long, his faction was soon dispersed, and he himself taken and

hanged, and his head stuck on a pole.



"NOUS SOMMES DEJA PRESQUE AU BOUT.  When we arrived at

the inn, the young man took me above, as you saw, and there for

some time he could do nothing but weep and sob.  His story is

soon told:- he returned from his travels, and the first

intelligence which awaited him on his arrival in Spain was,

that his father was drowned, his mother dead, and his brother

hanged, and, moreover, all the possessions of his family

confiscated.  This was not all: wherever he went, he found

himself considered in the light of a factious and discontented

person, and was frequently assailed by the nationals with blows

of sabres and cudgels.  He applied to his relations, and some

of these, who were of the Carlist persuasion, advised him to

betake himself to the army of Don Carlos, and the Pretender

himself, who was a friend of his father, and remembered the

services of his brother, offered to give him a command in his

army.  But, mon maitre, as I told you before, he was a pacific

young gentleman, and as mild as a lamb, and hated the idea of

shedding blood.  He was, moreover, not of the Carlist opinion,

for during his studies he had read books written a long time

ago by countrymen of mine, all about republics and liberties,

and the rights of man, so that he was much more inclined to the

liberal than the Carlist system; he therefore declined the

offer of Don Carlos, whereupon all his relations deserted him,

whilst the liberals hunted him from one place to another like a

wild beast.  At last, he sold some little property which still

remained to him, and with the proceeds he came to this remote

place of Colunga, where no one knew him, and where he has been

residing for several months, in a most melancholy manner, with

no other amusement than that which he derives from a book or

two, or occasionally hunting a leveret with his spaniel.



"He asked me for counsel, but I had none to give him, and

could only weep with him.  At last he said, `Dear Antonio, I

see there is no remedy.  You say your master is below, beg him,

I pray, to stay till to-morrow, and we will send for the

maidens of the neighbourhood, and for a violin and a bagpipe,

and we will dance and cast away care for a moment.'  And then

he said something in old Greek, which I scarcely understood,

but which I think was equivalent to, `Let us eat, drink, and be

merry, for to-morrow we die!'



"EH BIEN, MON MAITRE, I told him that you were a serious

gentleman who never took any amusement, and that you were in a

hurry.  Whereupon he wept again, and embraced me and bade me

farewell.  And now, mon maitre, I have told you the history of

the young man of the inn."



We slept at Ribida de Sela, and the next day, at noon,

arrived at Llanes.  Our route lay between the coast and an

immense range of mountains, which rose up like huge ramparts at

about a league's distance from the sea.  The ground over which

we passed was tolerably level, and seemingly well cultivated.

There was no lack of vines and trees, whilst at short intervals

rose the cortijos of the proprietors, - square stone buildings

surrounded with an outer wall.  Llanes is an old town, formerly

of considerable strength.  In its neighbourhood is the convent

of San Cilorio, one of the largest monastic edifices in all

Spain.  It is now deserted, and stands lone and desolate upon

one of the peninsulas of the Cantabrian shore.  Leaving Llanes,

we soon entered one of the most dreary and barren regions

imaginable, a region of rock and stone, where neither grass nor

trees were to be seen.  Night overtook us in these places.  We

wandered on, however, until we reached a small village, termed

Santo Colombo.  Here we passed the night, in the house of a

carabineer of the revenue, a tall athletic figure who met us at

the gate armed with a gun.  He was a Castilian, and with all

that ceremonious formality and grave politeness for which his

countrymen were at one time so celebrated.  He chid his wife

for conversing with her handmaid about the concerns of the

house before us.  "Barbara," said he, "this is not conversation

calculated to interest the strange cavaliers; hold your peace,

or go aside with the muchacha."  In the morning he refused any

remuneration for his hospitality.  "I am a caballero," said he,

"even as yourselves.  It is not my custom to admit people into

my house for the sake of lucre.  I received you because you

were benighted and the posada distant."



Rising early in the morning, we pursued our way through a

country equally stony and dreary as that which we had entered

upon the preceding day.  In about four hours we reached San

Vincente, a large dilapidated town, chiefly inhabited by

miserable fishermen.  It retains, however, many remarkable

relics of former magnificence: the bridge, which bestrides the

broad and deep firth, on which stands the town, has no less

than thirty-two arches, and is built of grey granite.  It is

very ancient, and in some part in so ruinous a condition as to

be dangerous.



Leaving San Vincente behind us, we travelled for some

leagues on the sea-shore, crossing occasionally a narrow inlet

or firth.  The country at last began to improve, and in the

neighbourhood of Santillana was both beautiful and fertile.

About a league before we reached the country of Gil Blas, we

passed through an extensive wood, in which were rocks and

precipices; it was exactly such a place as that in which the

cave of Rolando was situated, as described in the novel.  This

wood has an evil name, and our guide informed us that robberies

were occasionally committed in it.  No adventure, however,

befell us, and we reached Santillana at about six in the

evening.



We did not enter the town, but halted at a large venta or

posada at the entrance, before which stood an immense ash tree.

We had scarcely housed ourselves when a tremendous storm of

rain and wind commenced, accompanied with thunder and

lightning, which continued without much interruption for

several hours, and the effects of which were visible in our

journey of the following day, the streams over which we passed

being much swollen, and several trees lying uptorn by the

wayside.  Santillana contains four thousand inhabitants, and is

six short leagues' distance from Santander, where we arrived

early the next day.



Nothing could exhibit a stronger contrast to the desolate

tracts and the half ruined towns through which we had lately

passed, than the bustle and activity of Santander, which,

though it stands on the confines of the Basque provinces, the

stronghold of the Pretender, is almost the only city in Spain

which has not suffered by the Carlist wars.  Till the close of

the last century it was little better than an obscure fishing

town, but it has of late years almost entirely engrossed the

commerce of the Spanish transatlantic possessions, especially

of the Havannah.  The consequence of which has been, that

whilst Santander has rapidly increased in wealth and

magnificence, both Coruna and Cadiz have been as rapidly

hastening to decay.  At present it possesses a noble quay, on

which stands a line of stately edifices, far exceeding in

splendour the palaces of the aristocracy at Madrid.  These are

built in the French style, and are chiefly occupied by the

merchants.  The population of Santander is estimated at sixty

thousand souls.



On the day of my arrival I dined at the table d'hote of

the principal inn, kept by a Genoese.  The company was very

miscellaneous, French, Germans, and Spaniards, all speaking in

their respective languages, whilst at the ends of the table,

confronting each other, sat two Catalan merchants, one of whom

weighed nearly twenty stone, grunting across the board in their

harsh dialect.  Long, however, before dinner was concluded, the

conversation was entirely engrossed and the attention of all

present directed to an individual who sat on one side of the

bulky Catalan.  He was a thin man of about the middle height,

with a remarkably red face, and something in his eyes which, if

not a squint, bore a striking resemblance to it.  He was

dressed in a blue military frock, and seemed to take much more

pleasure in haranguing than in the fare which was set before

him.  He spoke perfectly good Spanish, yet his voice betrayed

something of a foreign accent.  For a long time he descanted

with immense volubility on war and all its circumstances,

freely criticising the conduct of the generals, both Carlists

and Christinos, in the present struggle, till at last he

exclaimed, "Had I but twenty thousand men allowed me by the

government, I would bring the war to a conclusion in six

months."



"Pardon me, Sir," said a Spaniard who sat at the table,

"the curiosity which induces me to request the favour of your

distinguished name."



"I am Flinter," replied the individual in the military

frock, "a name which is in the mouth of every man, woman, and

child in Spain.  I am Flinter the Irishman, just escaped from

the Basque provinces and the claws of Don Carlos.  On the

decease of Ferdinand I declared for Isabella, esteeming it the

duty of every good cavalier and Irishman in the Spanish service

to do so.  You have all heard of my exploits, and permit me to

tell you they would have been yet more glorious had not

jealousy been at work and cramped my means.  Two years ago I

was despatched to Estremadura, to organize the militias.  The

bands of Gomez and Cabrera entered the province and spread

devastation around.  They found me, however, at my post; and

had I been properly seconded by those under my command, the two

rebels would never have returned to their master to boast of

their success.  I stood behind my intrenchments.  A man

advanced and summoned us to surrender.  `Who are you?' I

demanded.  `I am Cabrera,' he replied; `and I am Flinter,' I

retorted, flourishing my sabre; `retire to your battalions or

you will forthwith die the death.'  He was awed and did as I

commanded.  In an hour we surrendered.  I was led a prisoner to

the Basque provinces; and the Carlists rejoiced in the capture

they had made, for the name of Flinter had long sounded amongst

the Carlist ranks.  I was flung into a loathsome dungeon, where

I remained twenty months.  I was cold; I was naked; but I did

not on that account despond, my spirit was too indomitable for

such weakness.  My keeper at last pitied my misfortunes.  He

said that `it grieved him to see so valiant a man perish in

inglorious confinement.'  We laid a plan to escape together;

disguises were provided, and we made the attempt.  We passed

unobserved till we arrived at the Carlist lines above Bilbao;

there we were stopped.  My presence of mind, however, did not

desert me.  I was disguised as a carman, as a Catalan, and the

coolness of my answers deceived my interrogators.  We were

permitted to pass, and soon were safe within the walls of

Bilbao.  There was an illumination that night in the town, for

the lion had burst his toils, Flinter had escaped, and was once

more returned to re-animate a drooping cause.  I have just

arrived at Santander on my way to Madrid, where I intend to ask

of the government a command, with twenty thousand men."



Poor Flinter! a braver heart and a move gasconading mouth

were surely never united in the same body.  He proceeded to

Madrid, and through the influence of the British ambassador,

who was his friend, he obtained the command of a small

division, with which he contrived to surprise and defeat, in

the neighbourhood of Toledo, a body of the Carlists, commanded

by Orejita, whose numbers more than trebled his own.  In reward

for this exploit he was persecuted by the government, which, at

that time, was the moderado or juste milieu, with the most

relentless animosity; the prime minister, Ofalia, supporting

with all his influence numerous and ridiculous accusations of

plunder and robbery brought against the too-successful general

by the Carlist canons of Toledo.  He was likewise charged with

a dereliction of duty, in having permitted, after the battle of

Valdepenas, which he likewise won in the most gallant manner,

the Carlist force to take possession of the mines of Almaden,

although the government, who were bent on his ruin, had done

all in their power to prevent him from following up his

successes by denying him the slightest supplies and

reinforcements.  The fruits of victory thus wrested from him,

his hopes blighted, a morbid melancholy seized upon the

Irishman; he resigned his command, and in less than ten months

from the period when I saw him at Santander, afforded his

dastardly and malignant enemies a triumph which satisfied even

them, by cutting his own throat with a razor.



Ardent spirits of foreign climes, who hope to distinguish

yourselves in the service of Spain, and to earn honours and

rewards, remember the fate of Columbus, and of another as brave

and as ardent - Flinter!
