






CHAPTER LII







The Jolly Hosteler - Aspirants for Glory - A Portrait -

Hamalos - Solomons - An Expedition - The Yeoman Soldier -

The Excavations - The Pull by the Skirt - Judah and his Father -

Judah's Pilgrimage - The Bushy Beard - The False Moors -

Judah and the King's Son - Premature Old Age.





Perhaps it would have been impossible to have chosen a

situation more adapted for studying at my ease Gibraltar and

its inhabitants, than that which I found myself occupying about

ten o'clock on the following morning.  Seated on a small bench

just opposite the bar, close by the door, in the passage of the

hostelry at which I had taken up my temporary abode, I enjoyed

a view of the square of the exchange and all that was going on

there, and by merely raising my eyes, could gaze at my leisure

on the stupendous hill which towers above the town to an

altitude of some thousand feet.  I could likewise observe every

person who entered or left the house, which is one of great

resort, being situated in the most-frequented place of the

principal thoroughfare of the town.  My eyes were busy and so

were my ears.  Close beside me stood my excellent friend

Griffiths, the jolly hosteler, of whom I take the present

opportunity of saying a few words, though I dare say he has

been frequently described before, and by far better pens.  Let

those who know him not figure to themselves a man of about

fifty, at least six feet in height, and weighing some eighteen

stone, an exceedingly florid countenance and good features,

eyes full of quickness and shrewdness, but at the same time

beaming with good nature.  He wears white pantaloons, white

frock, and white hat, and is, indeed, all white, with the

exception of his polished Wellingtons and rubicund face.  He

carries a whip beneath his arm, which adds wonderfully to the

knowingness of his appearance, which is rather more that of a

gentleman who keeps an inn on the Newmarket road, "purely for

the love of travellers, and the money which they carry about

them," than of a native of the rock.  Nevertheless, he will

tell you himself that he is a rock lizard; and you will

scarcely doubt it when, besides his English, which is broad and

vernacular, you hear him speak Spanish, ay, and Genoese too,

when necessary, and it is no child's play to speak the latter,

which I myself could never master.  He is a good judge of

horse-flesh, and occasionally sells a "bit of a blood," or a

Barbary steed to a young hand, though he has no objection to do

business with an old one; for there is not a thin, crouching,

liver-faced lynx-eyed Jew of Fez capable of outwitting him in a

bargain: or cheating him out of one single pound of the fifty

thousand sterling which he possesses; and yet ever bear in mind

that he is a good-natured fellow to those who are disposed to

behave honourably to him, and know likewise that he will lend

you money, if you are a gentleman, and are in need of it; but

depend upon it, if he refuse you, there is something not

altogether right about you, for Griffiths knows HIS WORLD, and

is not to be made a fool of.



There was a prodigious quantity of porter consumed in my

presence during the short hour that I sat on the bench of that

hostelry of the rock.  The passage before the bar was

frequently filled with officers, who lounged in for a

refreshment which the sultry heat of the weather rendered

necessary, or at least inviting; whilst not a few came

galloping up to the door on small Barbary horses, which are to

be found in great abundance at Gibraltar.  All seemed to be on

the best terms with the host, with whom they occasionally

discussed the merits of particular steeds, and whose jokes they

invariably received with unbounded approbation.  There was much

in the demeanour and appearance of these young men, for the

greater part were quite young, which was highly interesting and

agreeable.  Indeed, I believe it may be said of English

officers in general, that in personal appearance, and in

polished manners, they bear the palm from those of the same

class over the world.  True it is, that the officers of the

royal guard of Russia, especially of the three noble regiments

styled the Priberjensky, Simeonsky, and Finlansky polks might

fearlessly enter into competition in almost all points with the

flower of the British army; but it must be remembered, that

those regiments are officered by the choicest specimens of the

Sclavonian nobility, young men selected expressly for the

splendour of their persons, and for the superiority of their

mental endowments; whilst, probably, amongst all the fair-

haired Angle-Saxons youths whom I now saw gathered near me,

there was not a single one of noble ancestry, nor of proud and

haughty name; and certainly, so far from having been selected

to flatter the pride and add to the pomp of a despot, they had

been taken indiscriminately from a mass of ardent aspirants for

military glory, and sent on their country's service to a remote

and unhealthy colony.  Nevertheless, they were such as their

country might be proud of, for gallant boys they looked, with

courage on their brows, beauty and health on their cheeks, and

intelligence in their hazel eyes.



Who is he who now stops before the door without entering,

and addresses a question to my host, who advances with a

respectful salute?  He is no common man, or his appearance

belies him strangely.  His dress is simple enough; a Spanish

hat, with a peaked crown and broad shadowy brim - the veritable

sombrero - jean pantaloons and blue hussar jacket; - but how

well that dress becomes one of the most noble-looking figures I

ever beheld.  I gazed upon him with strange respect and

admiration as he stood benignantly smiling and joking in good

Spanish with an impudent rock rascal, who held in his hand a

huge bogamante, or coarse carrion lobster, which he would fain

have persuaded him to purchase.  He was almost gigantically

tall, towering nearly three inches above the burly host

himself, yet athletically symmetrical, and straight as the pine

tree of Dovrefeld.  He must have counted eleven lustres, which

cast an air of mature dignity over a countenance which seemed

to have been chiseled by some Grecian sculptor, and yet his

hair was black as the plume of the Norwegian raven, and so was

the moustache which curled above his well-formed lip.  In the

garb of Greece, and in the camp before Troy, I should have

taken him for Agamemnon.  "Is that man a general?" said I to a

short queer-looking personage, who sat by my side, intently

studying a newspaper.  "That gentleman," he whispered in a

lisping accent, "is, sir, the Lieutenant-Governor of

Gibraltar."



On either side outside the door, squatting on the ground,

or leaning indolently against the walls, were some half dozen

men of very singular appearance.  Their principal garment was a

kind of blue gown, something resembling the blouse worn by the

peasants of the north of France, but not so long; it was

compressed around their waists by a leathern girdle, and

depended about half way down their thighs.  Their legs were

bare, so that I had an opportunity of observing the calves,

which appeared unnaturally large.  Upon the head they wore

small skull-caps of black wool.  I asked the most athletic of

these men, a dark-visaged fellow of forty, who they were.  He

answered, "hamalos."  This word I knew to be Arabic, in which

tongue it signifies a porter; and, indeed, the next moment, I

saw a similar fellow staggering across the square under an

immense burden, almost sufficient to have broken the back of a

camel.  On again addressing my swarthy friend, and enquiring

whence he came, he replied, that he was born at Mogadore, in

Barbary, but had passed the greatest part of his life at

Gibraltar.  He added, that he was the "capitaz," or head man of

the "hamalos" near the door.  I now addressed him in the Arabic

of the East, though with scarcely the hope of being understood,

more especially as he had been so long from his own country.

He however answered very pertinently, his lips quivering with

eagerness, and his eyes sparkling with joy, though it was easy

to perceive that the Arabic, or rather the Moorish, was not the

language in which he was accustomed either to think or speak.

His companions all gathered round and listened with avidity,

occasionally exclaiming, when anything was said which they

approved of: "WAKHUD RAJIL SHEREEF HADA, MIN BELED BEL

SCHARKI."  (A holy man this from the kingdoms of the East.)  At

last I produced the shekel, which I invariably carry about me

as a pocket-piece, and asked the capitaz whether he had ever

seen that money before.  He surveyed the censer and olive-

branch for a considerable time, and evidently knew not what to

make of it.  At length he fell to inspecting the characters

round about it on both sides, and giving a cry, exclaimed to

the other hamalos: "Brothers, brothers, these are the letters

of Solomon.  This silver is blessed.  We must kiss this money."

He then put it upon his head, pressed it to his eyes, and

finally kissed it with enthusiasm as did successively all his

brethren.  Then regaining it, he returned it to me, with a low

reverence.  Griffiths subsequently informed me, that the fellow

refused to work during all the rest of the day, and did nothing

but smile, laugh, and talk to himself.



"Allow me to offer you a glass of bitters, sir," said the

queer-looking personage before mentioned; he was a corpulent

man, very short, and his legs particularly so.  His dress

consisted of a greasy snuff-coloured coat, dirty white

trousers, and dirtier stockings.  On his head he wore a rusty

silk hat, the eaves of which had a tendency to turn up before

and behind.  I had observed that, during my conversation with

the hamalos, he had several times uplifted his eyes from the

newspaper, and on the production of the shekel had grinned very

significantly, and had inspected it when in the hand of the

capitaz.  "Allow me to offer you a glass of bitters," said he;

"I guessed you was one of our people before you spoke to the

hamalos.  Sir, it does my heart good to see a gentleman of your

appearance not above speaking to his poor brethren.  It is what

I do myself not unfrequently, and I hope God will blot out my

name, and that is Solomons, when I despise them.  I do not

pretend to much Arabic myself, yet I understood you tolerably

well, and I liked your discourse much.  You must have a great

deal of shillam eidri, nevertheless you startled me when you

asked the hamalo if he ever read the Torah; of course you meant

with the meforshim; poor as he is, I do not believe him

becoresh enough to read the Torah without the commentators.  So

help me, sir, I believe you to be a Salamancan Jew; I am told

there are still some of the old families to be found there.

Ever at Tudela, sir? not very far from Salamanca, I believe;

one of my own kindred once lived there: a great traveller, sir,

like yourself; went over all the world to look for the Jews, -

went to the top of Sinai.  Anything that I can do for you at

Gibraltar, sir?  Any commission; will execute it as reasonably,

and more expeditiously than any one else.  My name is Solomons.

I am tolerably well known at Gibraltar; yes, sir, and in the

Crooked Friars, and, for that matter, in the Neuen Stein Steg,

at Hamburgh; so help me, sir, I think I once saw your face at

the fair at Bremen.  Speak German, sir? though of course you

do.  Allow me, sir, to offer you a glass of bitters.  I wish,

sir, they were mayim, hayim for your sake, I do indeed, sir, I

wish they were living waters.  Now, sir, do give me your

opinion as to this matter (lowering his voice and striking the

newspaper).  Do you not think it is very hard that one Yudken

should betray the other?  When I put my little secret beyad

peluni, - you understand me, sir? - when I entrust my poor

secret to the custody of an individual, and that individual a

Jew, a Yudken, sir, I do not wish to be blown, indeed, I do not

expect it.  In a word, what do you think of the GOLD DUST

ROBBERY, and what will be done to those unfortunate people, who

I see are convicted?"



That same day I made enquiry respecting the means of

transferring myself to Tangier, having no wish to prolong my

stay at Gibraltar, where, though it is an exceedingly

interesting place to an observant traveller, I had no

particular business to detain me.  In the evening I was visited

by a Jew, a native of Barbary, who informed me that he was

secretary to the master of a small Genoese bark which plied

between Tangier and Gibraltar.  Upon his assuring me that the

vessel would infallibly start for the former place on the

following evening, I agreed with him for my passage.  He said

that as the wind was blowing from the Levant quarter, the

voyage would be a speedy one.  Being desirous now of disposing

to the most advantage of the short time which I expected to

remain at Gibraltar, I determined upon visiting the

excavations, which I had as yet never seen, on the following

morning, and accordingly sent for and easily obtained the

necessary permission.



About six on Tuesday morning, I started on this

expedition, attended by a very intelligent good-looking lad of

the Jewish persuasion, one of two brothers who officiated at

the inn in the capacity of valets de place.



The morning was dim and hazy, yet sultry to a degree.  We

ascended a precipitous street, and proceeding in an easterly

direction, soon arrived in the vicinity of what is generally

known by the name of the Moorish Castle, a large tower, but so

battered by the cannon balls discharged against it in the

famous siege, that it is at present little better than a ruin;

hundreds of round holes are to be seen in its sides, in which,

as it is said, the shot are still imbedded; here, at a species

of hut, we were joined by an artillery sergeant, who was to be

our guide.  After saluting us, he led the way to a huge rock,

where he unlocked a gate at the entrance of a dark vaulted

passage which passed under it, emerging from which passage we

found ourselves in a steep path, or rather staircase, with

walls on either side.



We proceeded very leisurely, for hurry in such a

situation would have been of little avail, as we should have

lost our breath in a minute's time.  The soldier, perfectly

well acquainted with the locality, stalked along with measured

steps, his eyes turned to the ground.



I looked fully as much at that man as at the strange

place where we now were, and which was every moment becoming

stranger.  He was a fine specimen of the yeoman turned soldier;

indeed, the corps to which he belonged consists almost entirely

of that class.  There he paces along, tall, strong, ruddy, and

chestnut-haired, an Englishman every inch; behold him pacing

along, sober, silent, and civil, a genuine English soldier.  I

prize the sturdy Scot, I love the daring and impetuous

Irishman; I admire all the various races which constitute the

population of the British isles; yet I must say that, upon the

whole, none are so well adapted to ply the soldier's hardy

trade as the rural sons of old England, so strong, so cool,

yet, at the same time, animated with so much hidden fire.  Turn

to the history of England and you will at once perceive of what

such men are capable; even at Hastings, in the grey old time,

under almost every disadvantage, weakened by a recent and

terrible conflict, without discipline, comparatively speaking,

and uncouthly armed, they all but vanquished the Norman

chivalry.  Trace their deeds in France, which they twice

subdued; and even follow them to Spain, where they twanged the

yew and raised the battle-axe, and left behind them a name of

glory at Inglis Mendi, a name that shall last till fire

consumes the Cantabrian hills.  And, oh, in modern times, trace

the deeds of these gallant men all over the world, and

especially in France and Spain, and admire them, even as I did

that sober, silent, soldier-like man who was showing me the

wonders of a foreign mountain fortress, wrested by his

countrymen from a powerful and proud nation more than a century

before, and of which he was now a trusty and efficient

guardian.



We arrived close to the stupendous precipice, which rises

abruptly above the isthmus called the neutral ground, staring

gauntly and horridly at Spain, and immediately entered the

excavations.  They consist of galleries scooped in the living

rock at the distance of some twelve feet from the outside,

behind which they run the whole breadth of the hill in this

direction.  In these galleries, at short distances, are ragged

yawning apertures, all formed by the hand of man, where stand

the cannon upon neat slightly-raised pavements of small flint

stones, each with its pyramid of bullets on one side, and on

the other a box, in which is stowed the gear which the gunner

requires in the exercise of his craft.  Everything was in its

place, everything in the nicest English order, everything ready

to scathe and overwhelm in a few moments the proudest and most

numerous host which might appear marching in hostile array

against this singular fortress on the land side.



There is not much variety in these places, one cavern and

one gun resembling the other.  As for the guns, they are not of

large calibre, indeed, such are not needed here, where a pebble

discharged from so great an altitude would be fraught with

death.  On descending a shaft, however, I observed, in one cave

of special importance, two enormous carronades looking with

peculiar wickedness and malignity down a shelving rock, which

perhaps, although not without tremendous difficulty, might be

scaled.  The mere wind of one of these huge guns would be

sufficient to topple over a thousand men.  What sensations of

dread and horror must be awakened in the breast of a foe when

this hollow rock, in the day of siege, emits its flame, smoke,

and thundering wind from a thousand yawning holes; horror not

inferior to that felt by the peasant of the neighbourhood when

Mongibello belches forth from all its orifices its sulphureous

fires.



Emerging from the excavations, we proceeded to view

various batteries.  I asked the sergeant whether his companions

and himself were dexterous at the use of the guns.  He replied

that these cannons were to them what the fowling-piece is to

the fowler, that they handled them as easily, and, he believed,

pointed them with more precision, as they seldom or never

missed an object within range of the shot.  This man never

spoke until he was addressed, and then the answers which he

gave were replete with good sense, and in general well worded.

After our excursion, which lasted at least two hours, I made

him a small present, and took leave with a hearty shake of the

hand.



In the evening I prepared to go on board the vessel bound

for Tangier, trusting in what the Jewish secretary had told me

as to its sailing.  Meeting him, however, accidentally in the

street, he informed me that it would not start until the

following morning, advising me at the same time to be on board

at an early hour.  I now roamed about the streets until night

was beginning to set in, and becoming weary, I was just about

to direct my steps to the inn, when I felt myself gently pulled

by the skirt.  I was amidst a concourse of people who were

gathered around some Irish soldiers who were disputing, and I

paid no attention; but I was pulled again more forcibly than

before, and I heard myself addressed in a language which I had

half forgotten, and which I scarcely expected ever to hear

again.  I looked round, and lo! a tall figure stood close to me

and gazed in my face with anxious inquiring eyes.  On its head

was the kauk or furred cap of Jerusalem; depending from its

shoulders, and almost trailing on the ground, was a broad blue

mantle, whilst kandrisa or Turkish trousers enveloped its

nether limbs.  I gazed on the figure as wistfully as it gazed

upon me.  At first the features appeared perfectly strange, and

I was about to exclaim, I know you not, when one or two

lineaments struck me, and I cried, though somewhat

hesitatingly, "Surely this is Judah Lib."



I was in a steamer in the Baltic in the year `34, if I

mistake not.  There was a drizzling rain and a high sea, when I

observed a young man of about two and twenty leaning in a

melancholy attitude against the side of the vessel.  By his

countenance I knew him to be one of the Hebrew race,

nevertheless there was something very singular in his

appearance, something which is rarely found amongst that

people, a certain air of nobleness which highly interested me.

I approached him, and in a few minutes we were in earnest

conversation.  He spoke Polish and Jewish German

indiscriminately.  The story which he related to me was highly

extraordinary, yet I yielded implicit credit to all his words,

which came from his mouth with an air of sincerity which

precluded doubt; and, moreover, he could have no motive for

deceiving me.  One idea, one object, engrossed him entirely:

"My father," said he, in language which strongly marked his

race, "was a native of Galatia, a Jew of high caste, a learned

man, for he knew Zohar, * and he was likewise skilled in

medicine.  When I was a child of some eight years, he left

Galatia, and taking his wife, who was my mother, and myself

with him, he bent his way unto the East, even to Jerusalem;

there he established himself as a merchant, for he was

acquainted with trade and the arts of getting money.  He was

much respected by the Rabbins of Jerusalem, for he was a Polish

man, and he knew more Zohar and more secrets than the wisest of

them.  He made frequent journeys, and was absent for weeks and

for months, but he never exceeded six moons.  My father loved

me, and he taught me part of what he knew in the moments of his

leisure.  I assisted him in his trade, but he took me not with

him in his journeys.  We had a shop at Jerusalem, even a shop

of commerce, where we sold the goods of the Nazarene, and my

mother and myself, and even a little sister who was born

shortly after our arrival at Jerusalem, all assisted my father

in his commerce.  At length it came to pass, that on a

particular time he told us that he was going on a journey, and

he embraced us and bade us farewell, and he departed, whilst we

continued at Jerusalem attending to the business.  We awaited

his return, but months passed, even six months, and he came

not, and we wondered; and months passed, even other six passed,

but still he came not, nor did we hear any tidings of him, and

our hearts were filled with heaviness and sorrow.  But when

years, even two years, were expired, I said to my mother, `I

will go and seek my father'; and she said, `Do so,' and she

gave me her blessing, and I kissed my little sister, and I went

forth as far as Egypt, and there I heard tidings of my father,

for people told me he had been there, and they named the time,

and they said that he had passed from thence to the land of the

Turk; so I myself followed to the land of the Turk, even unto

Constantinople.  And when I arrived there I again heard of my

father, for he was well known amongst the Jews, and they told

me the time of his being there, and they added that he had

speculated and prospered, and departed from Constantinople, but

whither he went they knew not.  So I reasoned within myself and

said, perhaps he may have gone to the land of his fathers, even

unto Galatia, to visit his kindred; so I determined to go there

myself, and I went, and I found our kindred, and I made myself

known to them, and they rejoiced to see me; but when I asked

them for my father, they shook their heads and could give me no

intelligence; and they would fain have had me tarry with them,

but I would not, for the thought of my father was working

strong within me, and I could not rest.  So I departed and went

to another country, even unto Russia, and I went deep into that

country, even as far as Kazan, and of all I met, whether Jew,

or Russ, or Tartar, I inquired for my father; but no one knew

him, nor had heard of him.  So I turned back and here thou

seest me; and I now purpose going through all Germany and

France, nay, through all the world, until I have received

intelligence of my father, for I cannot rest until I know what

is become of my father, for the thought of him burneth in my

brain like fire, even like the fire of Jehinnim."



* A Rabbinical book, very difficult to be understood,

though written avowedly for the purpose of elucidating many

points connected with the religious ceremonies of the Hebrews.



Such was the individual whom I now saw again, after a

lapse of five years, in the streets of Gibraltar, in the dusk

of the evening.  "Yes," he replied, "I am Judah, surnamed the

Lib.  Thou didst not recognise me, but I knew thee at once.  I

should have known thee amongst a million, and not a day has

passed since I last saw thee, but I have thought on thee."  I

was about to reply, but he pulled me out of the crowd and led

me into a shop where, squatted on the floor, sat six or seven

Jews cutting leather; he said something to them which I did not

understand, whereupon they bowed their heads and followed their

occupation, without taking any notice of us.  A singular figure

had followed us to the door; it was a man dressed in

exceedingly shabby European garments, which exhibited

nevertheless the cut of a fashionable tailor.  He seemed about

fifty; his face, which was very broad, was of a deep bronze

colour; the features were rugged, but exceedingly manly, and,

notwithstanding they were those of a Jew, exhibited no marks of

cunning, but, on the contrary, much simplicity and good nature.

His form was about the middle height, and tremendously

athletic, the arms and back were literally those of a Hercules

squeezed into a modern surtout; the lower part of his face was

covered with a bushy beard, which depended half way down his

breast.  This figure remained at the door, his eyes fixed upon

myself and Judah.



The first inquiry which I now addressed was "Have you

heard of your father?"



"I have," he replied.  "When we parted, I proceeded

through many lands, and wherever I went I inquired of the

people respecting my father, but still they shook their heads,

until I arrived at the land of Tunis; and there I went to the

head rabbi, and he told me that he knew my father well, and

that he had been there, even at Tunis, and he named the time,

and he said that from thence he departed for the land of Fez;

and he spoke much of my father and of his learning, and he

mentioned the Zohar, even that dark book which my father loved

so well; and he spoke yet more of my father's wealth and his

speculations, in all of which it seems he had thriven.  So I

departed and I mounted a ship, and I went into the land of

Barbary, even unto Fez, and when I arrived there I heard much

intelligence of my father, but it was intelligence which

perhaps was worse than ignorance.  For the Jews told me that my

father had been there, and had speculated and had thriven, and

that from thence he departed for Tafilaltz, which is the

country of which the Emperor, even Muley Abderrahman, is a

native; and there he was still prosperous, and his wealth in

gold and silver was very great; and he wished to go to a not

far distant town, and he engaged certain Moors, two in number,

to accompany him and defend him and his treasures: and the

Moors were strong men, even makhasniah or soldiers; and they

made a covenant with my father, and they gave him their right

hands, and they swore to spill their blood rather than his

should be shed.  And my father was encouraged and he waxed

bold, and he departed with them, even with the two false Moors.

And when they arrived in the uninhabited place, they smote my

father, and they prevailed against him, and they poured out his

blood in the way, and they robbed him of all he had, of his

silks and his merchandise, and of the gold and silver which he

had made in his speculations, and they went to their own

villages, and there they sat themselves down and bought lands

and houses, and they rejoiced and they triumphed, and they made

a merit of their deed, saying, `We have killed an infidel, even

an accursed Jew'; and these things were notorious in Fez.  And

when I heard these tidings my heart was sad, and I became like

a child, and I wept; but the fire of Jehinnim burned no longer

in my brain, for I now knew what was become of my father.  At

last I took comfort and I reasoned with myself, saying, `Would

it not be wise to go unto the Moorish king and demand of him

vengeance for my father's death, and that the spoilers be

despoiled, and the treasure, even my father's treasure, be

wrested from their hands and delivered up to me who am his

son?'  And the king of the Moors was not at that time in Fez,

but was absent in his wars; and I arose and followed him, even

unto Arbat, which is a seaport, and when I arrived there, lo!

I found him not, but his son was there, and men said unto me

that to speak unto the son was to speak unto the king, even

Muley Abderrahman; so I went in unto the king's son, and I

kneeled before him, and I lifted up my voice and I said unto

him what I had to say, and he looked courteously upon me and

said, `Truly thy tale is a sorrowful one, and it maketh me sad;

and what thou asketh, that will I grant, and thy father's death

shall be avenged and the spoilers shall be despoiled; and I

will write thee a letter with my own hand unto the Pasha, even

the Pasha of Tafilaltz, and I will enjoin him to make inquiry

into thy matter, and that letter thou shalt thyself carry and

deliver unto him.'  And when I heard these words, my heart died

within my bosom for very fear, and I replied, `Not so, my lord;

it is good that thou write a letter unto the Pasha, even unto

the Pasha of Tafilaltz, but that letter will I not take,

neither will I go to Tafilaltz, for no sooner should I arrive

there, and my errand be known, than the Moors would arise and

put me to death, either privily or publicly, for are not the

murderers of my father Moors; and am I aught but a Jew, though

I be a Polish man?'  And he looked benignantly, and he said,

`Truly, thou speakest wisely; I will write the letter, but thou

shalt not take it, for I will send it by other hands; therefore

set thy heart at rest, and doubt not that, if thy tale be true,

thy father's death shall be avenged, and the treasure, or the

value thereof, be recovered and given up to thee; tell me,

therefore, where wilt thou abide till then?'  And I said unto

him, `My lord, I will go into the land of Suz and will tarry

there.'  And he replied: `Do so, and thou shalt hear speedily

from me.'  So I arose and departed and went into the land of

Suz, even unto Sweerah, which the Nazarenes call Mogadore; and

waited with a troubled heart for intelligence from the son of

the Moorish king, but no intelligence came, and never since

that day have I heard from him, and it is now three years since

I was in his presence.  And I sat me down at Mogadore, and I

married a wife, a daughter of our nation, and I wrote to my

mother, even to Jerusalem, and she sent me money, and with that

I entered into commerce, even as my father had done, and I

speculated, and I was not successful in my speculations, and I

speedily lost all I had.  And now I am come to Gibraltar to

speculate on the account of another, a merchant of Mogadore,

but I like not my occupation, he has deceived me; I am going

back, when I shall again seek the presence of the Moorish king

and demand that the treasure of my father be taken from the

spoilers and delivered up to me, even to me his son."



I listened with mute attention to the singular tale of

this singular man, and when he had concluded I remained a

considerable time without saying a word; at last he inquired

what had brought me to Gibraltar.  I told him that I was merely

a passer through on my way to Tangier, for which place I

expected to sail the following morning.  Whereupon he observed,

that in the course of a week or two he expected to be there

also, when he hoped that we should meet, as he had much more to

tell me.  "And peradventure," he added, "you can afford me

counsel which will be profitable, for you are a person of

experience, versed in the ways of many nations; and when I look

in your countenance, heaven seems to open to me, for I think I

see the countenance of a friend, even of a brother."  He then

bade me farewell, and departed; the strange bearded man, who

during our conversation had remained patiently waiting at the

door, following him.  I remarked that there was less wildness

in his look than on the former occasion, but at the same time,

more melancholy, and his features were wrinkled like those of

an aged man, though he had not yet passed the prime of youth.
