





CHAPTER XXIV







Departure from Astorga - The Venta - The By-path - Narrow Escape -

The Cup of Water - Sun and Shade - Bembibre - Convent  of the Rocks -

Sunset - Cacabelos - Midnight Adventure - Villafrancs.





It was four o'clock of a beautiful morning when we

sallied from Astorga, or rather from its suburbs, in which we

had been lodged: we directed our course to the north, in the

direction of Galicia.  Leaving the mountain Telleno on our

left, we passed along the eastern skirts of the land of the

Maragatos, over broken uneven ground, enlivened here and there

by small green valleys and runnels of water.  Several of the

Maragatan women, mounted on donkeys, passed us on their way to

Astorga, whither they were carrying vegetables.  We saw others

in the fields handling their rude ploughs, drawn by lean oxen.

We likewise passed through a small village, in which we,

however, saw no living soul.  Near this village we entered the

high road which leads direct from Madrid to Coruna, and at

last, having travelled near four leagues, we came to a species

of pass, formed on our left by a huge lumpish hill (one of

those which descend from the great mountain Telleno), and on

our right by one of much less altitude.  In the middle of this

pass, which was of considerable breadth, a noble view opened

itself to us.  Before us, at the distance of about a league and

a half, rose the mighty frontier chain, of which I have spoken


before; its blue sides and broken and picturesque peaks still

wearing a thin veil of the morning mist, which the fierce rays

of the sun were fast dispelling.  It seemed an enormous

barrier, threatening to oppose our farther progress, and it

reminded me of the fables respecting the children of Magog, who

are said to reside in remotest Tartary, behind a gigantic wall

of rocks, which can only be passed by a gate of steel a

thousand cubits in height.



We shortly after arrived at Manzanal, a village

consisting of wretched huts, and exhibiting every sign of

poverty and misery.  It was now time to refresh ourselves and

horses, and we accordingly put up at a venta, the last

habitation in the village, where, though we found barley for

the animals, we had much difficulty in procuring anything for

ourselves.  I was at length fortunate enough to obtain a large

jug of milk, for there were plenty of cows in the

neighbourhood, feeding in a picturesque valley which we had

passed by, where was abundance of grass, and trees, and a

rivulet broken by tiny cascades.  The jug might contain about

half a gallon, but I emptied it in a few minutes, for the

thirst of fever was still burning within me, though I was

destitute of appetite.  The venta had something the appearance

of a German baiting-house.  It consisted of an immense stable,

from which was partitioned a kind of kitchen and a place where

the family slept.  The master, a robust young man, lolled on a

large solid stone bench, which stood within the door.  He was

very inquisitive respecting news, but I could afford him none;

whereupon he became communicative, and gave me the history of

his life, the sum of which was, that he had been a courier in

the Basque provinces, but about a year since had been

dispatched to this village, where he kept the post-house.  He

was an enthusiastic liberal, and spoke in bitter terms of the

surrounding population, who, he said, were all Carlists and

friends of the friars.  I paid little attention to his

discourse, for I was looking at a Maragato lad of about

fourteen, who served in the house as a kind of ostler.  I asked

the master if we were still in the land of the Maragatos; but

he told me that we had left it behind nearly a league, and that

the lad was an orphan and was serving until he could rake up a

sufficient capital to become an arriero.  I addressed several

questions to the boy, but the urchin looked sullenly in my

face, and either answered by monosyllables or was doggedly

silent.  I asked him if he could read.  "Yes," said he, "as

much as that brute of yours who is tearing down the manger."



Quitting Manzanal, we continued our course.  We soon

arrived at the verge of a deep valley amongst mountains, not

those of the chain which we had seen before us, and which we

now left to the right, but those of the Telleno range, just

before they unite with that chain.  Round the sides of this

valley, which exhibited something of the appearance of a horse-

shoe, wound the road in a circuitous manner; just before us,

however, and diverging from the road, lay a footpath which

seemed, by a gradual descent, to lead across the valley, and to

rejoin the road on the other side, at the distance of about a

furlong; and into this we struck in order to avoid the circuit.



We had not gone far before we met two Galicians, on their

way to cut the harvests of Castile.  One of them shouted,

"Cavalier, turn back: in a moment you will be amongst

precipices, where your horses will break their necks, for we

ourselves could scarcely climb them on foot."  The other cried,

"Cavalier, proceed, but be careful, and your horses, if sure-

footed, will run no great danger: my comrade is a fool."  A

violent dispute instantly ensued between the two mountaineers,

each supporting his opinion with loud oaths and curses; but

without stopping to see the result, I passed on, but the path

was now filled with stones and huge slaty rocks, on which my

horse was continually slipping.  I likewise heard the sound of

water in a deep gorge, which I had hitherto not perceived, and

I soon saw that it would be worse than madness to proceed.  I

turned my horse, and was hastening to regain the path which I

had left, when Antonio, my faithful Greek, pointed out to me a

meadow by which, he said, we might regain the high road much

lower down than if we returned on our steps.  The meadow was

brilliant with short green grass, and in the middle there was a

small rivulet of water.  I spurred my horse on, expecting to be

in the high road in a moment; the horse, however, snorted and

stared wildly, and was evidently unwilling to cross the

seemingly inviting spot.  I thought that the scent of a wolf,

or some other wild animal might have disturbed him, but was

soon undeceived by his sinking up to the knees in a bog.  The

animal uttered a shrill sharp neigh, and exhibited every sign

of the greatest terror, making at the same time great efforts

to extricate himself, and plunging forward, but every moment

sinking deeper.  At last he arrived where a small vein of rock

showed itself: on this he placed his fore feet, and with one

tremendous exertion freed himself, from the deceitful soil,

springing over the rivulet and alighting on comparatively firm

ground, where he stood panting, his heaving sides covered with

a foamy sweat.  Antonio, who had observed the whole scene,

afraid to venture forward, returned by the path by which we

came, and shortly afterwards rejoined me.  This adventure

brought to my recollection the meadow with its footpath which

tempted Christian from the straight road to heaven, and finally

conducted him to the dominions of the giant Despair.



We now began to descend the valley by a broad and

excellent carretera or carriage road, which was cut out of the

steep side of the mountain on our right.  On our left was the

gorge, down which tumbled the runnel of water which I have

before mentioned.  The road was tortuous, and at every turn the

scene became more picturesque.  The gorge gradually widened,

and the brook at its bottom, fed by a multitude of springs,

increased in volume and in sound, but it was soon far beneath

us, pursuing its headlong course till it reached level ground,

where it flowed in the midst of a beautiful but confined

prairie.  There was something sylvan and savage in the

mountains on the farther side, clad from foot to pinnacle with

trees, so closely growing that the eye was unable to obtain a

glimpse of the hill sides, which were uneven with ravines and

gulleys, the haunts of the wolf, the wild boar, and the corso,

or mountain-stag; the latter of which, as I was informed by a

peasant who was driving a car of oxen, frequently descended to

feed in the prairie, and were there shot for the sake of their

skins, for their flesh, being strong and disagreeable, is held

in no account.



But notwithstanding the wildness of these regions, the

handiworks of man were visible.  The sides of the gorge, though

precipitous, were yellow with little fields of barley, and we

saw a hamlet and church down in the prairie below, whilst merry

songs ascended to our ears from where the mowers were toiling

with their scythes, cutting the luxuriant and abundant grass.

I could scarcely believe that I was in Spain, in general so

brown, so arid and cheerless, and I almost fancied myself in

Greece, in that land of ancient glory, whose mountain and

forest scenery Theocritus has so well described.



At the bottom of the valley we entered a small village,

washed by the brook, which had now swelled almost to a stream.

A more romantic situation I had never witnessed.  It was

surrounded, and almost overhung by mountains, and embowered in

trees of various kinds; waters sounded, nightingales sang, and

the cuckoo's full note boomed from the distant branches, but

the village was miserable.  The huts were built of slate

stones, of which the neighbouring hills seemed to be

principally composed, and roofed with the same, but not in the

neat tidy manner of English houses, for the slates were of all

sizes, and seemed to be flung on in confusion.  We were spent

with heat and thirst, and sitting down on a stone bench, I

entreated a woman to give me a little water.  The woman said

she would, but added that she expected to be paid for it.

Antonio, on hearing this, became highly incensed, and speaking

Greek, Turkish, and Spanish, invoked the vengeance of the

Panhagia on the heartless woman, saying, "If I were to offer a

Mahometan gold for a draught of water he would dash it in my

face; and you are a Catholic, with the stream running at your

door."  I told him to be silent, and giving the woman two

cuartos, repeated my request, whereupon she took a pitcher, and

going to the stream filled it with water.  It tasted muddy and

disagreeable, but it drowned the fever which was devouring me.



We again remounted and proceeded on our way, which, for a

considerable distance, lay along the margin of the stream,

which now fell in small cataracts, now brawled over stones, and

at other times ran dark and silent through deep pools overhung

with tall willows, - pools which seemed to abound with the

finny tribe, for large trout frequently sprang from the water,

catching the brilliant fly which skimmed along its deceitful

surface.  The scene was delightful.  The sun was rolling high

in the firmament, casting from its orb of fire the most

glorious rays, so that the atmosphere was flickering with their

splendour, but their fierceness was either warded off by the

shadow of the trees or rendered innocuous by the refreshing

coolness which rose from the waters, or by the gentle breezes

which murmured at intervals over the meadows, "fanning the

cheek or raising the hair" of the wanderer.  The hills

gradually receded, till at last we entered a plain where tall

grass was waving, and mighty chestnut trees, in full blossom,

spread out their giant and umbrageous boughs.  Beneath many

stood cars, the tired oxen prostrate on the ground, the

crossbar of the poll which they support pressing heavily on

their heads, whilst their drivers were either employed in

cooking, or were enjoying a delicious siesta in the grass and

shade.  I went up to one of the largest of these groups and

demanded of the individuals whether they were in need of the

Testament of Jesus Christ.  They stared at one another, and

then at me, till at last a young man, who was dangling a long

gun in his hands as he reclined, demanded of me what it was, at

the same time inquiring whether I was a Catalan, "for you speak

hoarse," said he, "and are tall and fair like that family."  I

sat down amongst them and said that I was no Catalan, but that

I came from a spot in the Western Sea, many leagues distant, to

sell that book at half the price it cost; and that their souls'

welfare depended on their being acquainted with it.  I then

explained to them the nature of the New Testament, and read to

them the parable of the Sower.  They stared at each other

again, but said that they were poor, and could not buy books.

I rose, mounted, and was going away, saying to them: "Peace

bide with you."  Whereupon the young man with the gun rose, and

saying, "CASPITA! this is odd," snatched the book from my hand

and gave me the price I had demanded.



Perhaps the whole world might be searched in vain for a

spot whose natural charms could rival those of this plain or

valley of Bembibre, as it is called, with its wall of mighty

mountains, its spreading chestnut trees, and its groves of oaks

and willows, which clothe the banks of its stream, a tributary

to the Minho.  True it is, that when I passed through it, the

candle of heaven was blazing in full splendour, and everything

lighted by its rays looked gay, glad, and blessed.  Whether it

would have filled me with the same feelings of admiration if

viewed beneath another sky, I will not pretend to determine;

but it certainly possesses advantages which at no time could

fail to delight, for it exhibits all the peaceful beauties of

an English landscape blended with something wild and grand, and

I thought within myself that he must be a restless dissatisfied

man, who, born amongst those scenes, would wish to quit them.

At the time I would have desired no better fate than that of a

shepherd on the prairies, or a hunter in the hills of Bembibre.



Three hours passed away and we were in another situation.

We had halted and refreshed ourselves and horses at Bembibre, a

village of mud and slate, and which possessed little to attract

attention: we were now ascending, for the road was over one of

the extreme ledges of those frontier hills which I have before

so often mentioned; but the aspect of heaven had blackened,

clouds were rolling rapidly from the west over the mountains,

and a cold wind was moaning dismally.  "There is a storm

travelling through the air," said a peasant, whom we overtook,

mounted on a wretched mule; "and the Asturians had better be on

the look-out, for it is speeding in their direction."  He had

scarce spoken, when a light, so vivid and dazzling that it

seemed as if the whole lustre of the fiery element were

concentrated in it, broke around us, filling the whole

atmosphere, and covering rock, tree and mountain with a glare

not to be described.  The mule of the peasant tumbled

prostrate, while the horse I rode reared himself

perpendicularly, and turning round, dashed down the hill at

headlong speed, which for some time it was impossible to cheek.

The lightning was followed by a peal almost as terrible, but

distant, for it sounded hollow and deep; the hills, however,

caught up its voice, seemingly repeating it from summit to

summit, till it was lost in interminable space.  Other flashes

and peals succeeded, but slight in comparison, and a few drops

of rain descended.  The body of the tempest seemed to be over

another region.  "A hundred families are weeping where that

bolt fell," said the peasant when I rejoined him, "for its

blaze has blinded my mule at six leagues' distance."  He was

leading the animal by the bridle, as its sight was evidently

affected.  "Were the friars still in their nest above there,"

he continued, "I should say that this was their doing, for they

are the cause of all the miseries of the land."



I raised my eyes in the direction in which he pointed.

Half way up the mountain, over whose foot we were wending,

jutted forth a black frightful crag, which at an immense

altitude overhung the road, and seemed to threaten destruction.

It resembled one of those ledges of the rocky mountains in the

picture of the Deluge, up to which the terrified fugitives have

scrambled from the eager pursuit of the savage and tremendous

billows, and from whence they gaze down in horror, whilst above

them rise still higher and giddier heights, to which they seem

unable to climb.  Built on the very edge of this crag, stood an

edifice, seemingly devoted to the purposes of religion, as I

could discern the spire of a church rearing itself high over

wall and roof.  "That is the house of the Virgin of the Rocks,"

said the peasant, "and it was lately full of friars, but they

have been thrust out, and the only inmates now are owls and

ravens."  I replied, that their life in such a bleak exposed

abode could not have been very enviable, as in winter they must

have incurred great risk of perishing with cold.  "By no

means," said he; "they had the best of wood for their braseros

and chimneys, and the best of wine to warm them at their meals,

which were not the most sparing.  Moreover, they had another

convent down in the vale yonder, to which they could retire at

their pleasure."  On my asking him the reason of his antipathy

to the friars, he replied, that he had been their vassal, and

that they had deprived him every year of the flower of what he

possessed.  Discoursing in this manner, we reached a village

just below the convent, where he left me, having first pointed

out to me a house of stone, with an image over the door, which,

he said, once also belonged to the canalla (RABBLE) above.



The sun was setting fast, and eager to reach Villafranca,

where I had determined on resting, and which was still distant

three leagues and a half, I made no halt at this place.  The

road was now down a rapid and crooked descent, which terminated

in a valley, at the bottom of which was a long and narrow

bridge; beneath it rolled a river, descending from a wide pass

between two mountains, for the chain was here cleft, probably

by some convulsion of nature.  I looked up the pass, and on the

hills on both sides.  Far above, on my right, but standing

forth bold and clear, and catching the last rays of the sun,

was the Convent of the Precipices, whilst directly over against

it, on the farther side of the valley, rose the perpendicular

side of the rival hill, which, to a considerable extent

intercepting the light, flung its black shadow over the upper

end of the pass, involving it in mysterious darkness.  Emerging

from the centre of this gloom, with thundering sound, dashed a

river, white with foam, and bearing along with it huge stones

and branches of trees, for it was the wild Sil hurrying to the

ocean from its cradle in the heart of the Asturian hills, and

probably swollen by the recent rains.



Hours again passed away.  It was now night, and we were

in the midst of woodlands, feeling our way, for the darkness

was so great that I could scarcely see the length of a yard

before my horse's head.  The animal seemed uneasy, and would

frequently stop short, prick up his ears, and utter a low

mournful whine.  Flashes of sheet lightning frequently

illumined the black sky, and flung a momentary glare over our

path.  No sound interrupted the stillness of the night, except

the slow tramp of the horses' hoofs, and occasionally the

croaking of frogs from some pool or morass.  I now bethought me

that I was in Spain, the chosen land of the two fiends,

assassination and plunder, and how easily two tired and unarmed

wanderers might become their victims.



We at last cleared the woodlands, and after proceeding a

short distance, the horse gave a joyous neigh, and broke into a

smart trot.  A barking of dogs speedily reached my ears, and we

seemed to be approaching some town or village.  In effect we

were close to Cacabelos, a town about five miles distant from

Villafranca.



It was near eleven at night, and I reflected that it

would be far more expedient to tarry in this place till the

morning than to attempt at present to reach Villafranca,

exposing ourselves to all the horrors of darkness in a lonely

and unknown road.  My mind was soon made up on this point; but

I reckoned without my host, for at the first posada which I

attempted to enter, I was told that we could not be

accommodated, and still less our horses, as the stable was full

of water.  At the second, and there were but two, I was

answered from the window by a gruff voice, nearly in the words

of the Scripture: "Trouble me not; the door is now shut, and my

children are with me in bed; I cannot arise to let you in."

Indeed, we had no particular desire to enter, as it appeared a

wretched hovel, though the poor horses pawed piteously against

the door, and seemed to crave admittance.



We had now no choice but to resume our doleful way to

Villafranca, which, we were told, was a short league distant,

though it proved a league and a half.  We found it no easy

matter to quit the town, for we were bewildered amongst its

labyrinths, and could not find the outlet.  A lad about

eighteen was, however, persuaded, by the promise of a peseta,

to guide us: whereupon he led us by many turnings to a bridge,

which he told us to cross, and to follow the road, which was

that of Villafranca; he then, having received his fee, hastened

from us.



We followed his directions, not, however, without a

suspicion that he might be deceiving us.  The night had settled

darker down upon us, so that it was impossible to distinguish

any object, however nigh.  The lightning had become more faint

and rare.  We heard the rustling of trees, and occasionally the

barking of dogs, which last sound, however, soon ceased, and we

were in the midst of night and silence.  My horse, either from

weariness, or the badness of the road, frequently stumbled;

whereupon I dismounted, and leading him by the bridle, soon

left Antonio far in the rear.



I had proceeded in this manner a considerable way, when a

circumstance occurred of a character well suited to the time

and place.



I was again amidst trees and bushes, when the horse

stopping short, nearly pulled me back.  I know not how it was,

but fear suddenly came over me, which, though in darkness and

in solitude, I had not felt before.  I was about to urge the

animal forward, when I heard a noise at my right hand, and

listened attentively.  It seemed to be that of a person or

persons forcing their way through branches and brushwood.  It

soon ceased, and I heard feet on the road.  It was the short

staggering kind of tread of people carrying a very heavy

substance, nearly too much for their strength, and I thought I

heard the hurried breathing of men over-fatigued.  There was a

short pause, during which I conceived they were resting in the

middle of the road; then the stamping recommenced, until it

reached the other side, when I again heard a similar rustling

amidst branches; it continued for some time and died gradually

away.



I continued my road, musing on what had just occurred,

and forming conjectures as to the cause.  The lightning resumed

its flashing, and I saw that I was approaching tall black

mountains.



This nocturnal journey endured so long that I almost lost

all hope of reaching the town, and had closed my eyes in a

doze, though I still trudged on mechanically, leading the

horse.  Suddenly a voice at a slight distance before me roared

out, "QUIEN VIVE?" for I had at last found my way to

Villafranca.  It proceeded from the sentry in the suburb, one

of those singular half soldiers half guerillas, called

Miguelets, who are in general employed by the Spanish

government to clear the roads of robbers.  I gave the usual

answer, "ESPANA," and went up to the place where he stood.

After a little conversation, I sat down on a stone, awaiting

the arrival of Antonio, who was long in making his appearance.

On his arrival, I asked if any one had passed him on the road,

but he replied that he had seen nothing.  The night, or rather

the morning, was still very dark, though a small corner of the

moon was occasionally visible.  On our inquiring the way to the

gate, the Miguelet directed us down a street to the left, which

we followed.  The street was steep, we could see no gate, and

our progress was soon stopped by houses and wall.  We knocked

at the gates of two or three of these houses (in the upper

stories of which lights were burning), for the purpose of being

set right, but we were either disregarded or not heard.  A

horrid squalling of cats, from the tops of the houses and dark

corners, saluted our ears, and I thought of the night arrival

of Don Quixote and his squire at Toboso, and their vain search

amongst the deserted streets for the palace of Dulcinea.  At

length we saw light and heard voices in a cottage at the other

side of a kind of ditch.  Leading the horses over, we called at

the door, which was opened by an aged man, who appeared by his

dress to be a baker, as indeed he proved, which accounted for

his being up at so late an hour.  On begging him to show us the

way into the town, he led us up a very narrow alley at the end

of his cottage, saying that he would likewise conduct us to the

posada.



The alley led directly to what appeared to be the market-

place, at a corner house of which our guide stopped and

knocked.  After a long pause an upper window was opened, and a

female voice demanded who we were.  The old man replied, that

two travellers had arrived who were in need of lodging.  "I

cannot be disturbed at this time of night," said the woman;

"they will be wanting supper, and there is nothing in the

house; they must go elsewhere."  She was going to shut the

window, but I cried that we wanted no supper, but merely

resting place for ourselves and horses - that we had come that

day from Astorga, and were dying with fatigue.  "Who is that

speaking?" cried the woman.  "Surely that is the voice of Gil,

the German clockmaker from Pontevedra.  Welcome, old companion;

you are come at the right time, for my own is out of order.  I

am sorry I have kept you waiting, but I will admit you in a

moment."



The window was slammed to, presently a light shone

through the crevices of the door, a key turned in the lock, and

we were admitted.
