





CHAPTER XLVI







Work of Distribution resumed - Adventure at Cobenna -

Power of the Clergy - Rural Authorities - Fuente la Higuera -

Victoriano's Mishap - Village Prison - The Rope -

Antonio's Errand - Antonio at Mass.





In my last chapter, I stated that, immediately after my

arrival at Madrid, I proceeded to get everything in readiness

for commencing operations in the neighbourhood; and I soon

entered upon my labours in reality.  Considerable success

attended my feeble efforts in the good cause, for which at

present, after the lapse of some years, I still look back with

gratitude to the Almighty.



All the villages within the distance of four leagues to

the east of Madrid, were visited in less than a fortnight, and

Testaments to the number of nearly two hundred disposed of.

These villages for the most part are very small, some of them

consisting of not more than a dozen houses, or I should rather

say miserable cabins.  I left Antonio, my Greek, to superintend

matters in Madrid, and proceeded with Victoriano, the peasant

from Villa Seca, in the direction which I have already

mentioned.  We, however, soon parted company, and pursued

different routes.



The first village at which I made an attempt was Cobenna,

about three leagues from Madrid.  I was dressed in the fashion

of the peasants in the neighbourhood of Segovia, in Old

Castile; namely, I had on my head a species of leather helmet

or montera, with a jacket and trousers of the same material.  I

had the appearance of a person between sixty and seventy years

of age, and drove before me a borrico with a sack of Testaments

lying across its back.  On nearing the village, I met a

genteel-looking young woman leading a little boy by the hand:

as I was about to pass her with the customary salutation of

VAYA USTED CON DIOS, she stopped, and after looking at me for a

moment, she said: "Uncle (TIO), what is that you have got on

your borrico?  Is it soap?"



"Yes," I replied: "it is soap to wash souls clean."



She demanded what I meant; whereupon I told her that I

carried cheap and godly books for sale.  On her requesting to

see one, I produced a copy from my pocket and handed it to her.

She instantly commenced reading with a loud voice, and

continued so for at least ten minutes, occasionally exclaiming:

"QUE LECTURA TAN BONITA, QUE LECTURA TAN LINDA!"  What

beautiful, what charming readings!"  At last, on my informing

her that I was in a hurry, and could not wait any longer, she

said, "true, true," and asked me the price of the book: I told

her "but three reals," whereupon she said, that though what I

asked was very little, it was more than she could afford to

give, as there was little or no money in those parts.  I said I

was sorry for it, but that I could not dispose of the books for

less than I had demanded, and accordingly, resuming it, wished

her farewell, and left her.  I had not, however, proceeded

thirty yards, when the boy came running behind me, shouting,

out of breath: "Stop, uncle, the book, the book!"  Upon

overtaking me, he delivered the three reals in copper, and

seizing the Testament, ran back to her, who I suppose was his

sister, flourishing the book over his head with great glee.



On arriving at the village, I directed my steps to a

house, around the door of which I saw several people gathered,

chiefly women.  On my displaying my books, their curiosity was

instantly aroused, and every person had speedily one in his

hand, many reading aloud; however, after waiting nearly an

hour, I had disposed of but one copy, all complaining bitterly

of the distress of the times, and the almost total want of

money, though, at the same time, they acknowledged that the

books were wonderfully cheap, and appeared to be very good and

Christian-like.  I was about to gather up my merchandise and

depart, when on a sudden the curate of the place made his

appearance.  After having examined the book for some time with

considerable attention, he asked me the price of a copy, and

upon my informing him that it was three reals, he replied that

the binding was worth more, and that he was much afraid that I

had stolen the books, and that it was perhaps his duty to send

me to prison as a suspicious character; but added, that the

books were good books, however they might be obtained, and

concluded by purchasing two copies.  The poor people no sooner

heard their curate recommend the volumes, than all were eager

to secure one, and hurried here and there for the purpose of

procuring money, so that between twenty and thirty copies were

sold almost in an instant.  This adventure not only affords an

instance of the power still possessed by the Spanish clergy

over the minds of the people, but proves that such influence is

not always exerted in a manner favourable to the maintenance of

ignorance and superstition.



In another village, on my showing a Testament to a woman,

she said that she had a child at school for whom she would like

to purchase one, but that she must first know whether the book

was calculated to be of service to him.  She then went away,

and presently returned with the school-master, followed by all

the children under his care; she then, showing the schoolmaster

a book, inquired if it would answer for her son.  The

schoolmaster called her a simpleton for asking such a question,

and said that he knew the book well, and there was not its

equal in the world (NO HAY OTRO EN EL MUNDO).  He instantly

purchased five copies for his pupils, regretting that he had no

more money, "for if I had," said he, "I would buy the whole

cargo."  Upon hearing this, the woman purchased four copies,

namely, one for her living son, another for her DECEASED

HUSBAND, a third for herself, and a fourth for her brother,

whom she said she was expecting home that night from Madrid.



In this manner we proceeded; not, however, with uniform

success.  In some villages the people were so poor and needy,

that they had literally no money; even in these, however, we

managed to dispose of a few copies in exchange for barley or

refreshments.  On entering one very small hamlet, Victoriano

was stopped by the curate, who, on learning what he carried,

told him that unless he instantly departed, he would cause him

to be imprisoned, and would write to Madrid in order to give

information of what was going on.  The excursion lasted about

eight days.  Immediately after my return, I dispatched

Victoriano to Caramanchal, a village at a short distance from

Madrid, the only one towards the west which had not been

visited last year.  He staid there about an hour, and disposed

of twelve copies, and then returned, as he was exceedingly

timid, and was afraid of being met by the thieves who swarm on

that road in the evening.



Shortly after these events, a circumstance occurred which

will perhaps cause the English reader to smile, whilst, at the

same time, it will not fail to prove interesting, as affording

an example of the feeling prevalent in some of the lone

villages of Spain with respect to innovation and all that

savours thereof, and the strange acts which are sometimes

committed by the real authorities and the priests, without the

slightest fear of being called to account; for as they live

quite apart * from the rest of the world, they know no people

greater than themselves, and scarcely dream of a higher power

than their own.



* [Footnote in Greek text which cannot be reproduced]



I was about to make an excursion to Guadalajara, and the

villages of Alcarria, about seven leagues distant from Madrid;

indeed I merely awaited the return of Victoriano to sally

forth; I having dispatched him in that direction with a few

Testaments, as a kind of explorer, in order that, from his

report as to the disposition manifested by the people for

purchasing, I might form a tolerably accurate opinion as to the

number of copies which it might be necessary to carry with me.

However, I heard nothing of him for a fortnight, at the end of

which period a letter was brought to me by a peasant, dated

from the prison of Fuente la Higuera, a village eight leagues

from Madrid, in the Campina of Alcala: this letter, written, by

Victoriano, gave me to understand that he had been already

eight days imprisoned, and that unless I could find some means

to extricate him, there was every probability of his remaining

in durance until he should perish with hunger, which he had no

doubt would occur as soon as his money was exhausted.  From

what I afterwards learned, it appeared that, after passing the

town of Alcala, he had commenced distributing, and with

considerable success.  His entire stock consisted of sixty-one

Testaments, twenty-five of which he sold without the slightest

difficulty or interruption in the single village of Arganza;

the poor labourers showering blessings on his head for

providing them with such good books at an easy price.



Not more than eighteen of his books remained, when he

turned off the high road towards Fuente la Higuera.  This place

was already tolerably well known to him, he having visited it

of old, when he travelled the country in the capacity of a

vendor of cacharras or earthen pans.  He subsequently stated

that he felt some misgiving whilst on the way, as the village

had invariably borne a bad reputation.  On his arrival, after

having put up his cavallejo or little pony at a posada, he

proceeded to the alcalde for the purpose of asking permission

to sell the books, which that dignitary immediately granted.

He now entered a house and sold a copy, and likewise a second.

Emboldened by success, he entered a third, which, it appeared,

belonged to the barber-surgeon of the village.  This personage

having just completed his dinner, was seated in an arm chair

within his doorway, when Victoriano made his appearance.  He

was a man about thirty-five, of a savage truculent countenance.

On Victoriano's offering him a Testament, he took it in his

hand to examine it, but no sooner did his eyes glance over the

title-page than he burst out into a loud laugh, exclaiming:-

"Ha, ha, Don Jorge Borrow, the English heretic, we have

encountered you at last.  Glory to the Virgin and the Saints!

We have long been expecting you here, and at length you are

arrived."  He then inquired the price of the book, and on being

told three reals, he flung down two, and rushed out of the

house with the Testament in his hand.



Victoriano now became alarmed, and determined upon

leaving the place as soon as possible.  He therefore hurried

back to the posada, and having paid for the barley which his

pony had consumed, went into the stable, and placing the

packsaddle on the animal's back, was about to lead it forth,

when the alcalde of the village, the surgeon, and twelve other

men, some of whom were armed with muskets, suddenly presented

themselves.  They instantly made Victoriano prisoner, and after

seizing the books and laying an embargo on the pony, proceeded

amidst much abuse to drag the captive to what they denominated

their prison, a low damp apartment with a little grated window,

where they locked him up and left him.  At the expiration of

three quarters of an hour, they again appeared, and conducted

him to the house of the curate, where they sat down in

conclave; the curate, who was a man stone blind, presiding,

whilst the sacristan officiated as secretary.  The surgeon

having stated his accusation against the prisoner, namely, that

he had detected him in the fact of selling a version of the

Scriptures in the vulgar tongue, the curate proceeded to

examine Victoriano, asking him his name and place of residence,

to which he replied that his name was Victoriano Lopez, and

that he was a native of Villa Seca, in the Sagra of Toledo.

The curate then demanded what religion he professed? and

whether he was a Mohometan, or freemason? and received for

answer that he was a Roman Catholic.  I must here state, that

Victoriano, though sufficiently shrewd in his way, was a poor

old labourer of sixty-four; and until that moment had never

heard either of Mahometans or freemasons.  The curate becoming

now incensed, called him a TUNANTE or scoundrel, and added, you

have sold your soul to a heretic; we have long been aware of

your proceedings, and those of your master.  You are the same

Lopez, whom he last year rescued from the prison of Villallos,

in the province of Avila; I sincerely hope that he will attempt

to do the same thing here.  "Yes, yes," shouted the rest of the

conclave, "let him but venture here, and we will shed his

heart's blood on our stones."  In this manner they went on for

nearly half an hour.  At last they broke up the meeting, and

conducted Victoriano once more to his prison.



During his confinement he lived tolerably well, being in

possession of money.  His meals were sent him twice a day from

the posada, where his pony remained in embargo.  Once or twice

he asked permission of the alcalde, who visited him every night

and morning with his armed guard, to purchase pen and paper, in

order that he might write to Madrid; but this favour was

peremptorily refused him, and all the inhabitants of the

village were forbidden under terrible penalties to afford him

the means of writing, or to convey any message from him beyond

the precincts of the place, and two boys were stationed before

the window of his cell for the purpose of watching everything

which might be conveyed to him.



It happened one day that Victoriano, being in need of a

pillow, sent word to the people of the posada to send him his

alforjas or saddlebags, which they did.  In these bags there

chanced to be a kind of rope, or, as it is called in Spanish,

SOGA, with which he was in the habit of fastening his satchel

to the pony's back.  The urchins seeing an end of this rope,

hanging from the alforjas, instantly ran to the alcalde to give

him information.  Late at evening, the alcalde again visited

the prisoner at the head of his twelve men as usual.  "BUENAS

NOCHES," said the alcalde.  "BUENAS NOCHES TENGA USTED,"

replied Victoriano.  "For what purpose did you send for the

soga this afternoon?" demanded the functionary.  "I sent for no

soga," said the prisoner, "I sent for my alforjas to serve as a

pillow, and it was sent in them by chance."  "You are a false

malicious knave," retorted the alcalde; "you intend to hang

yourself, and by so doing ruin us all, as your death would be

laid at our door.  Give me the soga."  No greater insult can be

offered to a Spaniard than to tax him with an intention of

committing suicide.  Poor Victoriano flew into a violent rage,

and after calling the alcalde several very uncivil names, he

pulled the soga from his bags, flung it at his head, and told

him to take it home and use it for his own neck.



At length the people of the posada took pity on the

prisoner, perceiving that he was very harshly treated for no

crime at all; they therefore determined to afford him an

opportunity of informing his friends of his situation, and

accordingly sent him a pen and inkhorn, concealed in a loaf of

bread, and a piece of writing paper, pretending that the latter

was intended for cigars.  So Victoriano wrote the letter; but

now ensued the difficulty of sending it to its destination, as

no person in the village dare have carried it for any reward.

The good people, however, persuaded a disbanded soldier from

another village, who chanced to be at Fuente la Higuera in

quest of work, to charge himself with it, assuring him that I

would pay him well for his trouble.  The man, watching his

opportunity, received the letter from Victoriano at the window:

and it was he who, after travelling on foot all night,

delivered it to me in safety at Madrid.



I was now relieved from my anxiety, and had no fears for

the result.  I instantly went to a friend who is in possession

of large estates about Guadalajara, in which province Fuente la

Higuera is situated, who furnished me with letters to the civil

governor of Guadalajara and all the principal authorities;

these I delivered to Antonio, whom, at his own request, I

despatched on the errand of the prisoner's liberation.  He

first directed his course to Fuente la Higuera, where, entering

the alcalde's house, he boldly told him what he had come about.

The alcalde expecting that I was at hand, with an army of

Englishmen, for the purpose of rescuing the prisoner, became

greatly alarmed, and instantly despatched his wife to summon

his twelve men; however, on Antonio's assuring him that there

was no intention of having recourse to violence, he became more

tranquil.  In a short time Antonio was summoned before the

conclave and its blind sacerdotal president.  They at first

attempted to frighten him by assuming a loud bullying tone, and

talking of the necessity of killing all strangers, and

especially the detested Don Jorge and his dependents.  Antonio,

however, who was not a person apt to allow himself to be easily

terrified, scoffed at their threats, and showing them his

letters to the authorities of Guadalajara, said that he should

proceed there on the morrow and denounce their lawless conduct,

adding that he was a Turkish subject, and that should they dare

to offer him the slightest incivility, he would write to the

sublime Porte, in comparison with whom the best kings in the

world were but worms, and who would not fail to avenge the

wrongs of any of his children, however distant, in a manner too

terrible to be mentioned.  He then returned to his posada.  The

conclave now proceeded to deliberate amongst themselves, and at

last determined to send their prisoner on the morrow to

Guadalajara, and deliver him into the hands of the civil

governor.



Nevertheless, in order to keep up a semblance of

authority, they that night placed two men armed at the door of

the posada where Antonio was lodged, as if he himself were a

prisoner.  These men, as often as the clock struck the hour,

shouted "Ave Maria!  Death to the heretics."  Early in the

morning the alcalde presented himself at the posada, but before

entering he made an oration at the door to the people in the

street, saying, amongst other things, "Brethren, these are the

fellows who have come to rob us of our religion."  He then went

into Antonio's apartment, and after saluting him with great

politeness, said, that as a royal or high mass was about to be

celebrated that morning, he had come to invite him to go to

church with him.  Whereupon Antonio, though by no means a mass-

goer, rose and accompanied him, and remained two hours, as he

told me, on his knees on the cold stones, to his great

discomfort; the eyes of the whole congregation being fixed upon

him during the time.



After mass and breakfast, he departed for Guadalajara,

Victoriano having been already despatched under a guard.  On

his arrival, he presented his letters to the individuals for

whom they were intended.  The civil governor was convulsed with

merriment on hearing Antonio's account of the adventure.

Victoriano was set at liberty, and the books were placed in

embargo at Guadalajara; the governor stating, however, that

though it was his duty to detain them at present, they should

be sent to me whenever I chose to claim them; he moreover said

that he would do his best to cause the authorities of Fuente la

Higuera to be severely punished, as in the whole affair they

had acted in the most cruel tyrannical manner, for which they

had no authority.  Thus terminated this affair, one of those

little accidents which chequer missionary life in Spain.
