






CHAPTER VI







Cold of Portugal - Extortion prevented - Sensation of Loneliness -

The Dog - The Convent - Enchanting Landscape - Moorish Fortresses -

Prayer for the Sick.





About a fortnight after my return from Evora, having made

the necessary preparations, I set out on my journey for

Badajoz, from which town I intended to take the diligence to

Madrid.  Badajoz lies about a hundred miles distant from

Lisbon, and is the principal frontier town of Spain in the

direction of the Alemtejo.  To reach this place, it was

necessary to retravel the road as far as Monte More, which I

had already passed in my excursion to Evora; I had therefore

very little pleasure to anticipate from novelty of scenery.

Moreover, in this journey I should be a solitary traveller,

with no other companion than the muleteer, as it was my

intention to take my servant no farther than Aldea Gallega, for

which place I started at four in the afternoon.  Warned by

former experience, I did not now embark in a small boat, but in

one of the regular passage felouks, in which we reached Aldea

Gallega, after a voyage of six hours; for the boat was heavy,

there was no wind to propel it, and the crew were obliged to

ply their huge oars the whole way.  In a word, this passage was

the reverse of the first, - safe in every respect, - but so

sluggish and tiresome, that I a hundred times wished myself

again under the guidance of the wild lad, galloping before the

hurricane over the foaming billows.  From eight till ten the

cold was truly terrible, and though I was closely wrapped in an

excellent fur "shoob," with which I had braved the frosts of

Russian winters, I shivered in every limb, and was far more

rejoiced when I again set my foot on the Alemtejo, than when I

landed for the first time, after having escaped the horrors of

the tempest.



I took up my quarters for the night at a house to which

my friend who feared the darkness had introduced me on my

return from Evora, and where, though I paid mercilessly dear

for everything, the accommodation was superior to that of the

common inn in the square.  My first care now was to inquire for

mules to convey myself and baggage to Elvas, from whence there

are but three short leagues to the Spanish town of Badajoz.

The people of the house informed me that they had an excellent

pair at my disposal, but when I inquired the price, they were

not ashamed to demand four moidores.  I offered them three,

which was too much, but which, however, they did not accept,

for knowing me to be an Englishman, they thought they had an

excellent opportunity to practise imposition, not imagining

that a person so rich as an Englishman MUST be, would go out in

a cold night for the sake of obtaining a reasonable bargain.

They were, however, much mistaken, as I told them that rather

than encourage them in their knavery, I should be content to

return to Lisbon; whereupon they dropped their demand to three

and a half, but I made them no answer, and going out with

Antonio, proceeded to the house of the old man who had

accompanied us to Evora.  We knocked a considerable time, for

he was in bed; at length he arose and admitted us, but on

hearing our object, he said that his mules were again gone to

Evora, under the charge of the boy, for the purpose of

transporting some articles of merchandise.  He, however,

recommended us to a person in the neighbourhood who kept mules

for hire, and there Antonio engaged two fine beasts for two

moidores and a half.  I say he engaged them, for I stood aloof

and spoke not, and the proprietor, who exhibited them, and who

stood half-dressed, with a lamp in his hand and shivering with

cold, was not aware that they were intended for a foreigner

till the agreement was made, and he had received a part of the

sum in earnest.  I returned to the inn well pleased, and having

taken some refreshment went to rest, paying little attention to

the people, who glanced daggers at me from their small Jewish

eyes.



At five the next morning the mules were at the door; a

lad of some nineteen or twenty years of age attended them; he

was short but exceedingly strong built, and possessed the

largest head which I ever beheld upon mortal shoulders; neck he

had none, at least I could discern nothing which could be

entitled to that name.  His features were hideously ugly, and

upon addressing him I discovered that he was an idiot.  Such

was my intended companion in a journey of nearly a hundred

miles, which would occupy four days, and which lay over the

most savage and ill noted track in the whole kingdom.  I took

leave of my servant almost with tears, for he had always served

me with the greatest fidelity, and had exhibited an assiduity

and a wish to please which afforded me the utmost satisfaction.



We started, my uncouth guide sitting tailor-fashion on

the sumpter mule upon the baggage.  The moon had just gone

down, and the morning was pitchy dark, and, as usual,

piercingly cold.  He soon entered the dismal wood, which I had

already traversed, and through which we wended our way for some

time, slowly and mournfully.  Not a sound was to be heard save

the trampling of the animals, not a breath of air moved the

leafless branches, no animal stirred in the thickets, no bird,

not even the owl, flew over our heads, all seemed desolate and

dead, and during my many and far wanderings, I never

experienced a greater sensation of loneliness, and a greater

desire for conversation and an exchange of ideas than then.  To

speak to the idiot was useless, for though competent to show

the road, with which he was well acquainted, he had no other

answer than an uncouth laugh to any question put to him.  Thus

situated, like many other persons when human comfort is not at

hand, I turned my heart to God, and began to commune with Him,

the result of which was that my mind soon became quieted and

comforted.



We passed on our way uninterrupted; no thieves showed

themselves, nor indeed did we see a single individual until we

arrived at Pegoens, and from thence to Vendas Novas our fortune

was the same.  I was welcomed with great kindness by the people

of the hostelry of the latter place, who were well acquainted

with me on account of my having twice passed the night under

their roof.  The name of the keeper of this is, or was, Joze

Dias Azido, and unlike the generality of those of the same

profession as himself in Portugal, he is an honest man, and a

stranger and foreigner who takes up his quarters at his inn,

may rest assured that he will not be most unmercifully pillaged

and cheated when the hour of reckoning shall arrive, as he will

not be charged a single re more than a native Portuguese on a

similar occasion.  I paid at this place exactly one half of the

sum which was demanded from me at Arroyolos, where I passed the

ensuing night, and where the accommodation was in every respect

inferior.



At twelve next day we arrived at Monte More, and, as I

was not pressed for time, I determined upon viewing the ruins

which cover the top and middle part of the stately hill which

towers above the town.  Having ordered some refreshment at the

inn where we dismounted, I ascended till I arrived at a large

wall or rampart, which, at a certain altitude embraces the

whole hill.  I crossed a rude bridge of stones, which bestrides

a small hollow or trench; and passing by a large tower, entered

through a portal into the enclosed part of the hill.  On the

left hand stood a church, in good preservation, and still

devoted to the purposes of religion, but which I could not

enter, as the door was locked, and I saw no one at hand to open

it.



I soon found that my curiosity had led me to a most

extraordinary place, which quite beggars the scanty powers of

description with which I am gifted.  I stumbled on amongst

ruined walls, and at one time found I was treading over vaults,

as I suddenly started back from a yawning orifice into which my

next step, as I strolled musing along, would have precipitated

me.  I proceeded for a considerable way by the eastern wall,

till I heard a tremendous bark, and presently an immense dog,

such as those which guard the flocks in the neighbourhood

against the wolves, came bounding to attack me "with eyes that

glowed and fangs that grinned."  Had I retreated, or had

recourse to any other mode of defence than that which I

invariably practise under such circumstances, he would probably

have worried me; but I stooped till my chin nearly touched my

knee, and looked him full in the eyes, and as John Leyden says,

in the noblest ballad which the Land of Heather has produced:-





"The hound he yowled and back he fled,

As struck with fairy charm."





It is a fact known to many people, and I believe it has

been frequently stated, that no large and fierce dog or animal

of any kind, with the exception of the bull, which shuts its

eyes and rushes blindly forward, will venture to attack an

individual who confronts it with a firm and motionless

countenance.  I say large and fierce, for it is much easier to

repel a bloodhound or bear of Finland in this manner than a

dunghill cur or a terrier, against which a stick or a stone is

a much more certain defence.  This will astonish no one who

considers that the calm reproving glance of reason, which

allays the excesses of the mighty and courageous in our own

species, has seldom any other effect than to add to the

insolence of the feeble and foolish, who become placid as doves

upon the infliction of chastisements, which if attempted to be

applied to the former would only serve to render them more

terrible, and like gunpowder cast on a flame, cause them in mad

desperation to scatter destruction around them.



The barking of the dog brought out from a kind of alley

an elderly man, whom I supposed to be his master, and of whom I

made some inquiries respecting the place.  The man was civil,

and informed me that he served as a soldier in the British

army, under the "great lord," during the Peninsular war.  He

said that there was a convent of nuns a little farther on,

which he would show me, and thereupon led the way to the south-

east part of the wall, where stood a large dilapidated edifice.



We entered a dark stone apartment, at one corner of which

was a kind of window occupied by a turning table, at which

articles were received into the convent or delivered out.  He

rang the bell, and, without saying a word, retired, leaving me

rather perplexed; but presently I heard, though the speaker was

invisible, a soft feminine voice demanding who I was, and what

I wanted.  I replied that I was an Englishman travelling into

Spain, and that passing through Monte Moro I had ascended the

hill for the purpose of seeing the ruins.  The voice then said,

"I suppose you are a military man going to fight against the

king, like the rest of your countrymen."  "No," said I, "I am

not a military man, but a Christian, and I go not to shed blood

but to endeavour to introduce the gospel of Christ into a

country where it is not known;" whereupon there was a stifled

titter, I then inquired if there were any copies of the Holy

Scriptures in the convent, but the friendly voice could give me

no information on that point, and I scarcely believe that its

possessor understood the purport of my question.  It informed

me, that the office of lady abbess of the house was an annual

one, and that every year there was a fresh superior; on my

inquiring whether the nuns did not frequently find the time

exceedingly heavy on their hands, it stated that, when they had

nothing better to do, they employed themselves in making

cheesecakes, which were disposed of in the neighbourhood.  I

thanked the voice for its communications, and walked away.

Whilst proceeding under the wall of the house towards the

south-west, I heard a fresh and louder tittering above my head,

and looking up, saw three or four windows crowded with dusky

faces, and black waving hair; these belonged to the nuns,

anxious to obtain a view of the stranger.  After kissing my

hand repeatedly, I moved on, and soon arrived at the south-west

end of this mountain of curiosities.  There I found the remains

of a large building, which seemed to have been originally

erected in the shape of a cross.  A tower at its eastern

entrance was still entire; the western side was quite in ruins,

and stood on the verge of the hill overlooking the valley, at

the bottom of which ran the stream I have spoken of on a former

occasion.



The day was intensely hot, notwithstanding the coldness

of the preceding nights; and the brilliant sun of Portugal now

illumined a landscape of entrancing beauty.  Groves of cork

trees covered the farther side of the valley and the distant

acclivities, exhibiting here and there charming vistas, where

various flocks of cattle were feeding; the soft murmur of the

stream, which was at intervals chafed and broken by huge

stones, ascended to my ears and filled my mind with delicious

feelings.  I sat down on the broken wall and remained gazing,

and listening, and shedding tears of rapture; for, of all the

pleasures which a bountiful God permitteth his children to

enjoy, none are so dear to some hearts as the music of forests,

and streams, and the view of the beauties of his glorious

creation.  An hour elapsed, and I still maintained my seat on

the wall; the past scenes of my life flitting before my eyes in

airy and fantastic array, through which every now and then

peeped trees and hills and other patches of the real landscape

which I was confronting; the sun burnt my visage, but I heeded

it not; and I believe that I should have remained till night,

buried in these reveries, which, I confess, only served to

enervate the mind, and steal many a minute which might be most

profitably employed, had not the report of the gun of a fowler

in the valley, which awakened the echoes of the woods, hills,

and ruins, caused me to start on my feet, and remember that I

had to proceed three leagues before I could reach the hostelry

where I intended to pass the night.



I bent my steps to the inn, passing along a kind of

rampart: shortly before I reached the portal, which I have

already mentioned, I observed a kind of vault on my right hand,

scooped out of the side of the hill; its roof was supported by

three pillars, though part of it had given way towards the

farther end, so that the light was admitted through a chasm in

the top.  It might have been intended for a chapel, a dungeon,

or a cemetery, but I should rather think for the latter; one

thing I am certain of, that it was not the work of Moorish

hands, and indeed throughout my wanderings in this place I saw

nothing which reminded me of that most singular people.  The

hill on which the ruins stand was doubtless originally a strong

fortress of the Moors, who, upon their first irruption into the

peninsula, seized and fortified most of the lofty and naturally

strong positions, but they had probably lost it at an early

period, so that the broken walls and edifices, which at present

cover the hill, are probably remains of the labours of the

Christians after the place had been rescued from the hands of

the terrible enemies of their faith.  Monte Moro will perhaps

recall Cintra to the mind of the traveller, as it exhibits a

distant resemblance to that place; nevertheless, there is

something in Cintra wild and savage, to which Monte Moro has no

pretension; its scathed and gigantic crags are piled upon each

other in a manner which seems to menace headlong destruction to

whatever is in the neighbourhood; and the ruins which still

cling to those crags seem more like eagles' nests than the

remains of the habitations even of Moors; whereas those of

Monte Moro stand comparatively at their ease on the broad back

of a hill, which, though stately and commanding, has no crags

nor precipices, and which can be ascended on every side without

much difficulty: yet I was much gratified by my visit, and I

shall wander far indeed before I forget the voice in the

dilapidated convent, the ruined walls amongst which I strayed,

and the rampart where, sunk in dreamy rapture, I sat during a

bright sunny hour at Monte Moro.



I returned to the inn, where I refreshed myself with tea

and very sweet and delicious cheesecakes, the handiwork of the

nuns in the convent above.  Observing gloom and unhappiness on

the countenances of the people of the house, I inquired the

reason of the hostess, who sat almost motionless, on the hearth

by the fire; whereupon she informed me that her husband was

deadly sick with a disorder which, from her description, I

supposed to be a species of cholera; she added, that the

surgeon who attended him entertained no hopes of his recovery.

I replied that it was quite in the power of God to restore her

husband in a few hours from the verge of the grave to health

and vigour, and that it was her duty to pray to that Omnipotent

Being with all fervency.  I added, that if she did not know how

to pray upon such an occasion, I was ready to pray for her,

provided she would join in the spirit of the supplication.  I

then offered up a short prayer in Portuguese, in which I

entreated the Lord to remove, if he thought proper, the burden

of affliction under which the family was labouring.



The woman listened attentively, with her hands devoutly

clasped, until the prayer was finished, and then gazed at me

seemingly with astonishment, but uttered no word by which I

could gather that she was pleased or displeased with what I had

said.  I now bade the family farewell, and having mounted my

mule, set forward to Arroyolos.
