





CHAPTER XIV



IN THE GARDENS



She came out upon the stone terrace again rather early in the

morning.  She wanted to wander about in the first freshness

of the day, which was always an uplifting thing to her.  She

wanted to see the dew on the grass and on the ragged flower

borders and to hear the tender, broken fluting of birds in the

trees.  One cuckoo was calling to another in the park, and

she stopped and listened intently.  Until yesterday she had

never heard a cuckoo call, and its hollow mellowness gave

her delight.  It meant the spring in England, and nowhere else.



There was space enough to ramble about in the gardens. 

Paths and beds were alike overgrown with weeds, but some

strong, early-blooming things were fighting for life, refusing

to be strangled.  Against the beautiful old red walls, over

which age had stolen with a wonderful grey bloom, venerable

fruit trees were spread and nailed, and here and there showed

bloom, clumps of low-growing things sturdily advanced their

yellowness or whiteness, as if defying neglect.  In one place

a wall slanted and threatened to fall, bearing its nectarine

trees with it; in another there was a gap so evidently not of

to-day that the heap of its masonry upon the border bed was

already covered with greenery, and the roots of the fruit tree it

had supported had sent up strong, insistent shoots.



She passed down broad paths and narrow ones, sometimes

walking under trees, sometimes pushing her way between

encroaching shrubs; she descended delightful mossy and broken

steps and came upon dilapidated urns, in which weeds grew

instead of flowers, and over which rampant but lovely, savage

little creepers clambered and clung.



In one of the walled kitchen gardens she came upon an

elderly gardener at work.  At the sound of her approaching

steps he glanced round and then stood up, touching his forelock

in respectful but startled salute.  He was so plainly

amazed at the sight of her that she explained herself.



"Good-morning," she said.  "I am her ladyship's sister,

Miss Vanderpoel.  I came yesterday evening.  I am looking

over your gardens."



He touched his forehead again and looked round him.  His

manner was not cheerful.  He cast a troubled eye about him.



"They're not much to see, miss," he said.  "They'd ought to be,

but they're not.  Growing things has to be fed and took care of. 

A man and a boy can't do it--nor yet four or five of 'em."



"How many ought there to be?" Betty inquired, with business-like

directness.  It was not only the dew on the grass she had come

out to see.



"If there was eight or ten of us we might put it in order

and keep it that way.  It's a big place, miss."



Betty looked about her as he had done, but with a less

discouraged eye.



"It is a beautiful place, as well as a large one," she said. 

"I can see that there ought to be more workers."



"There's no one," said the gardener, "as has as many enemies as a

gardener, an' as many things to fight.  There's grubs an' there's

greenfly, an' there's drout', an' wet an' cold, an' mildew, an'

there's what the soil wants and starves without, an' if you

haven't got it nor yet hands an' feet an' tools enough, how's

things to feed, an' fight an' live--let alone bloom an' bear?"



"I don't know much about gardens," said Miss Vanderpoel,

"but I can understand that."



The scent of fresh bedewed things was in the air.  It was

true that she had not known much about gardens, but here

standing in the midst of one she began to awaken to a new,

practical interest.  A creature of initiative could not let such

a place as this alone.  It was beauty being slowly slain.  One

could not pass it by and do nothing.



"What is your name?" she asked



"Kedgers, miss.  I've only been here about a twelve-month. 

I was took on because I'm getting on in years an' can't ask

much wage."



"Can you spare time to take me through the gardens and

show me things?"



Yes, he could do it.  In truth, he privately welcomed an

opportunity offering a prospect of excitement so novel.  He

had shown more flourishing gardens to other young ladies in

his past years of service, but young ladies did not come to

Stornham, and that one having, with such extraordinary

unexpectedness arrived, should want to look over the desolation

of these, was curious enough to rouse anyone to a sense of a

break in accustomed monotony.  The young lady herself mystified

him by her difference from such others as he had seen. 

What the man in the shabby livery had felt, he felt also, and

added to this was a sense of the practicalness of the questions

she asked and the interest she showed and a way she had of

seeming singularly to suggest by the look in her eyes and the

tone of her voice that nothing was necessarily without remedy. 

When her ladyship walked through the place and looked at

things, a pale resignation expressed itself in the very droop of

her figure.  When this one walked through the tumbled-down

grape-houses, potting-sheds and conservatories, she saw where

glass was broken, where benches had fallen and where roofs

sagged and leaked.  She inquired about the heating apparatus

and asked that she might see it.  She asked about the village

and its resources, about labourers and their wages.



"As if," commented Kedgers mentally, "she was what

Sir Nigel is--leastways what he'd ought to be an' ain't."



She led the way back to the fallen wall and stood and

looked at it.



"It's a beautiful old wall," she said.  "It should be rebuilt

with the old brick.  New would spoil it."



"Some of this is broken and crumbled away," said Kedgers,

picking up a piece to show it to her.



"Perhaps old brick could be bought somewhere," replied

the young lady speculatively.  "One ought to be able to buy

old brick in England, if one is willing to pay for it."



Kedgers scratched his head and gazed at her in respectful

wonder which was almost trouble.  Who was going to pay for

things, and who was going to look for things which were not

on the spot?  Enterprise like this was not to be explained.



When she left him he stood and watched her upright figure

disappear through the ivy-grown door of the kitchen gardens

with a disturbed but elated expression on his countenance.  He

did not know why he felt elated, but he was conscious of

elation.  Something new had walked into the place.  He stopped

his work and grinned and scratched his head several times after

he went back to his pottering among the cabbage plants.



"My word," he muttered.  "She's a fine, straight young

woman.  If she was her ladyship things 'ud be different.  Sir

Nigel 'ud be different, too--or there'd be some fine upsets."



There was a huge stable yard, and Betty passed through

that on her way back.  The door of the carriage house was

open and she saw two or three tumbled-down vehicles.  One

was a landau with a wheel off, one was a shabby, old-fashioned,

low phaeton.  She caught sight of a patently venerable cob in

one of the stables.  The stalls near him were empty.



"I suppose that is all they have to depend upon," she

thought.  "And the stables are like the gardens."



She found Lady Anstruthers and Ughtred waiting for her upon the

terrace, each of them regarding her with an expression

suggestive of repressed curiosity as she approached.  Lady

Anstruthers flushed a little and went to meet her with an

eager kiss.



"You look like--I don't know quite what you look like,

Betty!" she exclaimed.



The girl's dimple deepened and her eyes said smiling things.



"It is the morning--and your gardens," she answered.  "I

have been round your gardens."



"They were beautiful once, I suppose," said Rosy deprecatingly.



"They are beautiful now.  There is nothing like them in

America at least."



"I don't remember any gardens in America," Lady

Anstruthers owned reluctantly, "but everything seemed so cheerful

and well cared for and--and new.  Don't laugh, Betty.  I

have begun to like new things.  You would if you had watched

old ones tumbling to pieces for twelve years."



"They ought not to be allowed to tumble to pieces," said

Betty.  She added her next words with simple directness.  She

could only discover how any advancing steps would be taken

by taking them.  "Why do you allow them to do it?"



Lady Anstruthers looked away, but as she looked her eyes

passed Ughtred's.



"I!" she said.  "There are so many other things to do. 

It would cost so much--such an enormity to keep it all in

order."



"But it ought to be done--for Ughtred's sake."



"I know that," faltered Rosy, "but I can't help it."



"You can," answered Betty, and she put her arm round her as they

turned to enter the house.  "When you have become more used to me

and my driving American ways I will show you how."



The lightness with which she said it had an odd effect on Lady

Anstruthers.  Such casual readiness was so full of the suggestion

of unheard of possibilities that it was a kind of shock.



"I have been twelve years in getting un-used to you--I feel as if

it would take twelve years more to get used again," she said.



"It won't take twelve weeks," said Betty.
